

[COURT OF APPEAL]
REGINA v. SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT, Ex parte DOODY
SAME v. SAME, Ex parte PEGG
SAME v. SAME, Ex parte PIERSON
SAME v. SAME, Ex parte SMART
1992 March 24, 25, 26, 27 30, 31;
Glidewell, Staughton and May 6
Farquharson L.JJ.
Prisons — Prisoners' rights — Release on licence — First review date for prisoner serving mandatory life sentence — Secretary of State fixing period for retribution and deterrence after consultation with judiciary — Whether Secretary of State entitled to depart from judicial recommendation — Whether prisoner to be informed of judicial recommendation — Whether prisoners entitled to make representations to Secretary of State before period fixed — Criminal Justice Act 1967 (c. 80), s. 61(1)
The four applicants each received the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment following their separate convictions of murder.
In the exercise of his power under section 61 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967the Secretary of State for the Home Department considered the date on which each applicant might be released upon licence.
In accordance with the adopted procedure the Secretary of State consulted the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge before determining when the date of the first review should occur after each applicant had served a term of imprisonment to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
The applicants were not consulted but they were told the minimum period of imprisonment they would have to serve before their cases would be reviewed.
They applied for judicial review of the Secretary of State's decisions and sought orders of certiorari to quash those decisions and declarations that the Secretary of State could not set a period for retribution and deterrence for a mandatory life sentence greater than that recommended by the judiciary, that he was required to tell the applicants the period recommended by the judiciary, and if he departed from it his reasons for so doing, and that the applicants were entitled to be given the opportunity to make representations to the Secretary of State before he determined the period and for that purpose to be told of any information upon which the Secretary of State would act which was not in the applicant's possession.
The Divisional Court dismissed the applications.
On appeal by the applicants:—
Held , allowing the appeals, that the Secretary of State was required to afford to a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence the opportunity to submit in writing representations as to the period that prisoner should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence before the Secretary of State in the exercise of his power under section 61 of the Act of 1967 set the date of the first review of the prisoner's sentence; that, before giving the prisoner the opportunity to make representations, the Secretary of State was required to inform him of the period recommended by the judiciary as the period he should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence and of any other opinion expressed by the judiciary which had not been disclosed at the trial and would be relevant to the Secretary of State's decision as to the appropriate period to be served for those purposes; but that the Secretary of State was not obliged to adopt that judicial view or, if he departed from it, to give reasons for doing so, and that he was entitled to delegate his powers for that purpose to a junior minister within the Home Department; and that, accordingly, the decisions made by the Secretary of State as to the length of the period each of the applicants should serve before the date of the first review of their sentences should be quashed and that each applicant should be given the opportunity to make written representations after he had been informed of the judicial opinion regarding the period he should serve before review (post, pp. 963B–C, 969A–C, 973F–H, 974A–B, 977B–D, 979C–F, 980E–G, 981F–G, 983C–D, 984C–E, 985B–C, 986H — 987A, F–G, 988C–E, G–H, 989B–C, D–E, 991B–C, 992F–H, 993B–E, F–G).
Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981]1 W.L.R. 754, C.A. considered.
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Handscomb (1987) 86 Cr.App.R. 59, D.C. disapproved in part.
The following cases are referred to in the judgments:
Bushell v. Secretary of State for the Environment [1981]A.C. 75;[1980]3 W.L.R. 22;[1980]2 All E.R.
608, H.L. (E.)
Carltona Ltd. v. Commissioners of Works [1943]2 All E.R.
560, C.A.
Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 C.B. N.S. 180
Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [1985]A.C. 374;[1984]3 W.L.R. 1174;[1984]3 All E.R.
935, H.L. (E.)
Findlay, In re [1985]A.C. 318;[1984]3 W.L.R. 1159;[1984]3 All E.R.
801, H.L. (E.)
Kanda v .Government of Malaya [1962]A.C. 322;[1962]2 W.L.R. 1153, P.C.
Leech v. Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison [1988]A.C. 533;[1988]2 W.L.R. 290;[1988]1 All E.R.
485, H.L. (E.)
Lloyd v. McMahon [1987]A.C. 625;[1987]2 W.L.R. 821;[1987]1 All E.R.
1118, H.L. (E.)
London Export Corporation Ltd. v. Jubilee Coffee Roasting Co.
Ltd. [1958]1 W.L.R. 271;[1958]1 All E.R.
494
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v. Peko-Wallsend Ltd. (1986) 162 C.L.R. 24
Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981]1 W.L.R. 754;[1981]2 All E.R.
842, C.A.
Public Service Board of New South Wales v. Osmond (1986) 159 C.L.R. 656
Raymond v. Honey [1983]1 A.C. 1;[1982]2 W.L.R. 465;[1982]1 All E.R.
756, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Board of Visitors of Hull Prison, Ex parte St. Germain [1979]Q.B.
425;[1979]2 W.L.R. 42;[1979]1 All E.R.
701, C.A.
Reg. v. Civil Service Appeal Board, Ex parte Cunningham [1991]4 All E.R.
310, C.A.
Reg. v. Commission for Racial Equality, Ex parte Hillingdon London Borough Council [1982]A.C. 779;[1982]3 W.L.R. 159, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Flemming [1973]2 All E.R.
401, C.A.
Reg. v. Gaming Board for Great Britain, Ex parte Benaim and Khaida [1970]2 Q.B.
417;[1970]2 W.L.R. 1009;[1970]2 All E.R.
528, C.A.
Reg. v. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Enahoro [1963]2 Q.B.
455;[1963]2 W.L.R. 1260;[1963]2 All E.R.
477, D.C.
Reg. v. Parole Board, Ex parte Wilson [1992]Q.B.
740;[1992]2 W.L.R. 707;[1992]2 All E.R.
576, C.A.
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Benson (No. 2), 9 November 1988; The Times, 21 November 1988, D.C.
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Handscomb (1987) 86 Cr.App.R.59, D.C.
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Oladehinde [1991]1 A.C. 254;[1990]2 W.L.R. 1195;[1990]2 All E.R.
367, D.C. and C.A.;[1991]1 A.C. 254;[1990]3 W.L.R. 797;[1990]3 All E.R.
393, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Walsh , 16 December 1991; The Times, 18 December 1991, D.C.
Reg. v. Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Ex parte Lonrho Plc. [1989]1 W.L.R. 525;[1989]2 All E.R.
609, H.L. (E.)
Russell v. Duke of Norfolk [1949]1 All E.R.
109, C.A.
Thynne, Wilson and Gunnell v. United Kingdom (1990) 13 E.H.R.R. 666, E.C.H.R.
Wiseman v. Borneman [1971]A.C. 297;[1969]3 W.L.R. 706;[1969]3 All E.R.
275, H.L. (E.)
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Air Canada v. Secretary of State for Trade [1983]2 A.C. 394;[1983]2 W.L.R. 494;[1983]1 All E.R.
910, H.L. (E.)
Alexander v. Home Office [1988]1 W.L.R. 968;[1988]2 All E.R.
118, C.A.
Board of Education v. Rice [1911]A.C. 179, H.L. (E.)
Campbell and Fell v. United Kingdom (1984) 7 E.H.R.R. 165, E.C.H.R.
de Freitas v. Benny [1976]A.C. 239;[1975]3 W.L.R. 388, P.C.
Derbyshire County Council v. Times Newspapers Ltd. [1992]Q.B.
770;[1992]3 W.L.R. 2;[1992]3 All E.R.
65, C.A.
Dunlop, Secretary of Labor v. Bachowski (1975) 421 U.S. 560
Golden Chemical Products Ltd., In re [1976]Ch. 300;[1976]3 W.L.R. 1;[1976]2 All E.R.
543
Liversidge v. Anderson [1942]A.C. 206;[1991]3 All E.R.
338, H.L. (E.)
McInnes v. Onslow Fane [1978]1 W.L.R. 1520;[1978]3 All E.R.
211
Newman v. Myers (1979) 1 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 252, C.A.
O'Reilly v. Mackman [1983]2 A.C. 237;[1982]3 W.L.R. 1096;[1982]3 All E.R.
1124, H.L. (E.)
Pearlberg v. Varty [1972]1 W.L.R. 534;[1972]2 All E.R.
6, H.L. (E.)
Pergamon Press Ltd., In re [1971]Ch. 388;[1970]3 W.L.R. 792;[1970]3 All E.R.
535, C.A.
Reg. v. Army Board of the Defence Council, Ex parte Anderson [1992]Q.B.
169;[1991]3 W.L.R. 42;[1991]3 All E.R.
375, D.C.
Reg. v. Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison, Ex parte Hague [1992]1 A.C. 58;[1991]3 W.L.R. 340;[1991]3 All E.R.
733, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Lancashire County Council, Ex parte Huddleston [1986]2 All E.R.
941, C.A.
Reg. v. Parole Board, Ex parte Bradley [1991]1 W.L.R. 134;[1990]3 All E.R.
828, D.C.
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Environment, Ex parte Nottinghamshire County Council [1986]A.C. 240;[1986]2 W.L.R. 1;[1986]1 All E.R.
199, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Brind [1991]1 A.C. 696;[1991]2 W.L.R. 588;[1991]1 All E.R.
720, H.L. (E.)
Rex v. Superintendent of Chiswick Police Station, Ex parte Sacksteder [1918]1 K.B.
578, C.A.
Ridge v. Baldwin [1964]A.C. 40;[1963]2 W.L.R. 935;[1963]2 All E.R.
66, H.L. (E.)
Weeks v. United Kingdom (1987) 10 E.H.R.R. 293, E.C.H.R.
Williams v. Home Office [1981]1 All E.R.
1151
The following cases, although not cited, were referred to in the skeleton arguments:
Amand v. Home Secretary and Minister of Defence of Royal Netherlands Government [1943]A.C. 147;[1942]2 All E.R.
381, H.L. (E.)
Creednz Inc. v. Governor-General [1981]1 N.Z.L.R. 172
Golder v. United Kingdom (1975) 1 E.H.R.R. 524, E.C.H.R.
H.K. (An Infant), In re [1967]2 Q.B.
617;[1967]2 W.L.R. 962;[1967]1 All E.R.
226, D.C.
Reg. v. Blandford Justices, Ex parte Pamment [1990]1 W.L.R. 1490;[1991]1 All E.R.
218, C.A.
Reg. v. Commission for Racial Equality, Ex parte Cottrell & Rothon [1980]1 W.L.R. 1580;[1980]3 All E.R.
265, D.C.
Reg. v. Gould [1968]2 Q.B.
65;[1968]2 W.L.R. 643;[1968]1 All E.R.
849, C.A.
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte G. , The Times, 26 June 1990; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 555 of 1990, C.A.
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Gunnell (unreported), 30 October 1984; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 391 of 1984, C.A.
Reg. v. Spencer [1985]Q.B.
771;[1985]2 W.L.R. 197;[1985]1 All E.R.
673, C.A.
Reg. v. Sutton London Borough Council, Ex parte Hamlet (unreported), 26 March 1986, Webster J.
Rex v. Housing Appeal Tribunal [1920]3 K.B.
334, D.C.
APPEALS from the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division.
Regina v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pegg
On 7 August 1989 Kenneth Stephen Pegg was convicted by a jury at St. Albans Crown Court of murder.
The trial judge, Caulfield J., imposed the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment.
Mr. Pegg was imprisoned in H.M.
Prison Wormwood Scrubs where he was informed of the decision by the Secretary of State, following consultations with the trial judge and with Lord Lane C.J., that his first review by the local review committee would be August 1993 and that 11 years was regarded by a junior minister on behalf of the Secretary of State as being the requisite time necessary for Mr. Pegg to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence for his offence.
By notice of motion dated 13 November 1990 Mr. Pegg applied for judicial review of those decisions but on 18 January the Divisional Court (Mann L.J.
and Macpherson of Cluny J.) refused the application.
By notice of appeal dated 26 February 1991 Mr. Pegg appealed against that refusal on the grounds that the Divisional Court had erred (1) in rejecting the proposition that it would be Wednesbury unreasonable for the Secretary of State to fix Mr. Pegg's tariff (as a person serving a mandatory term of life imprisonment) by reference to a period of retribution and deterrence which was higher than that recommended by the judiciary;(2) in rejecting submissions that the tariff procedure was in breach of procedural propriety in that the court considered itself bound by the wrong decision of Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981]1 W.L.R. 754; and (3) in rejecting submissions that the decision to refuse his petition should be quashed and viewing that the tariff belonged solely to the Secretary of State to determine.
Regina v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson
On 8 July 1985 John David Pierson was convicted by a jury at the Crown Court at Chester for the murder of his parents and the trial judge, Michael Davies J., imposed the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment.
In June 1988 Mr. Pierson serving his sentence at H.M.
Prison Wakefield was informed that the Secretary of State (following consultation with the trial judge and with Lord Lane C.J.) had decided that his case would not be reviewed by the local review committee until September 2001, indicating that the minimum period he should serve in custody to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence was 20 years.
By notice of motion dated 23 March 1990 Mr. Pierson applied for judicial review of that decision but on 18 January 1991 the Divisional Court (Mann L.J.
and Macpherson of Cluny J.) refused his application.
By notice of appeal dated 12 February 1991 Mr. Pierson appealed against that refusal on the grounds, inter alia, that the Divisional Court had erred (1) in ruling that it was not unlawful for the Secretary of State to increase the tariff recommended by the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge for the purposes of determining a prisoner's first parole review date and (2) in ruling that Mr. Pierson was not entitled to know in advance the factors which the Secretary of State proposed to take into account in fixing the tariff and to make informed representations in the light of that knowledge.
Regina v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Smart
On 31 October 1986 Elfed Wayne Smart was convicted by a jury at the Crown Court at Cardiff of the murder of a 16-year-old schoolboy and the trial judge imposed the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment upon him.
In June 1988 Mr. Smart in H.M.
Prison Channing Wood was informed that, following consultations with the trial judge and Lord Lane C.J., the Secretary of State had decided that the first review of his case by the local review committee would be in April 1995 at the nine-year point of his sentence.
By notice of motion dated 1 March 1990 Mr. Smart applied for judicial review of that decision but on 18 January 1991 the Divisional Court (Mann L.J.
and Macpherson of Cluny J.) refused to grant the application.
By notice of appeal dated 15 February 1991 Mr. Smart appealed against that refusal on the grounds that the Divisional Court had erred (1) in holding that the principles of natural justice did not endow a prisoner serving a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment with the right to know the factors (including the views of the trial judge and the Lord Chief Justice) which the Secretary of State took into account when fixing the tariff, the right to make informed representations to the Secretary of State about the length of the tariff to be applied and the right to be provided with the reasons for the period chosen by the Secretary of State as the tariff period; and (2) in holding that the practice of the Secretary of State in murder cases of fixing a tariff in excess of that recommended by the trial judge and/or the Lord Chief Justice was lawful.
The facts are set out in the judgment of Glidewell L.J.
Stephen Sedley Q.C.
and Edward Fitzgerald for Mr. Doody and Mr. Pierson.
Anthony Scrivener Q.C.
and Richard Gordon for Mr. Pegg.
Geoffrey Nice Q.C.
and Gregory Treverton-Jones for Mr. Smart.
David Pannick and Robert Jay for the Secretary of State.
6 May.
The following judgments were handed down.
GLIDEWELL L.J.
In these appeals we are concerned with issues arising out of the procedure by which the Secretary of State for the Home Department decides, in the exercise of his power under section 61 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, the date on which a person serving a sentence of imprisonment for life may be released on licence.
Messrs. Doody, Pierson, Smart and Pegg appeal against a decision of the Divisional Court (Mann L.J.
and Macpherson of Cluny J.) given on 18 January 1991 refusing them the relief claimed in their applications for judicial review of decisions made in relation to each of them by the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
The same issues arise in all four appeals and it is therefore convenient to consider them in one judgment.
However, Mr. Pegg raises a point which relates only to his own appeal, to which I shall refer later.
This court does not have jurisdiction to determine these appeals if they are appeals in a ‘criminal cause or matter’ within section 18(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
Counsel for all the appellants and for the Secretary of State were unanimous in their view that the appeals are not in a criminal cause or matter, and on a brief consideration of the relevant authorities I agree.
I note that in two of the main authorities to which we have been referred on the substantive issues,Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981]1 W.L.R. 754 and In re Findlay [1985]A.C. 318, it seems to have been assumed without argument that this court had jurisdiction.
Messrs. Doody, Pierson, Smart and Pegg have all been convicted of murder, and each in consequence is serving a sentence of imprisonment for life.
This is of course the mandatory sentence for a person convicted of murder.
Before setting out such facts and relating to the sentences on the individual offenders as are material for the purposes of these appeals, it is necessary first to describe the procedure followed by the Secretary of State in exercising his power under section 61 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, and the steps by which he came to adopt that procedure.
The statutory background
Section 1(1) of the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965 abolished the death penalty for murder and substituted for it imprisonment for life.
By section 27(1) of the Prison Act 1952, the Secretary of State was already empowered:
‘at any time if he thinks fit release on licence a person serving a term of imprisonment for life subject to compliance with such conditions, if any, as the Secretary of State may from time to time determine.
Section 1(2) of the Act of 1965 provided:
‘On sentencing any person convicted of murder to imprisonment for life the court may at the same time declare the period which it recommends to the Secretary of State as the minimum period which in its view should elapse before the Secretary of State orders the release of that person on licence under section 27 of the Prison Act 1952…
Moreover, section 2 of the Act of 1965 imposed a restraint on the power of the Secretary of State to release on licence a person convicted of murder, by providing that no such person should be released:
‘unless the Secretary of State has prior to such release consulted the Lord Chief Justice of England…together with the trial judge if available.
Presumably this provision had the effect of discouraging the Secretary of State from releasing a convicted murderer on licence at a date earlier than the judiciary thought appropriate.
The provisions of section 27 of the Act of 1952 and section 2 of the Act of 1965 were repealed by the Criminal Justice Act 1967, and replaced by section 61 of that Act.
Section 61(1) provides:
‘The Secretary of State may, if recommended to do so by the Parole Board, release on licence a person serving a sentence of imprisonment for life…but shall not do so in the case of a person sentenced to imprisonment for life…except after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice of England together with the trial judge if available.
This subsection applies both to mandatory life sentences for murder and to discretionary life sentences for other offences for which such a sentence may lawfully be imposed.
Section 62 of the Act of 1967 deals with the revocation of licences, a subject which has aroused much controversy but with which we are not concerned in any of these appeals.
It will be seen that section 61(1) does not require the Secretary of State to release any person serving a sentence of imprisonment for life on licence, but imposes two conditions which must be satisfied before he may do so, namely, that the release must first be recommended by the Parole Board (a body which was itself constituted by section 59 of the Act of 1967) and that the Secretary of State may not release on licence except after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice of England together with the trial judge if available.
The procedure adopted
Section 61 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 does not specify any procedure by which the Secretary of State should decide whether and when to release a prisoner serving a life sentence.
The choice of an appropriate procedure is therefore a matter within his discretion.
However, since he may not release a prisoner unless and until he is recommended to do so by the Parole Board, the stage in an individual prisoner's sentence at which the board considers whether to make a recommendation for his release is therefore very important.
The wording of section 61(1) of the Act of 1967 apparently envisages that, if and when the Parole Board (or a local review committee) recommends release, the judiciary will then be consulted.
For some years after the Act of 1967 came into force, the majority of life sentences were reviewed by local review committees seven years after the sentences were imposed.
A small number were reviewed earlier, usually after four years.
In many cases the local review committee at the seven year review considered it too early to set a release date, which no doubt dashed the hopes of the prisoners whose sentences were under review.
A new procedure was introduced in 1973.
A joint committee of members of the Parole Board and officials of the Home Office was formed, which included the vice-chairman of the board, a High Court judge.
This committee scrutinised the case of each prisoner serving a life sentence in order to set the date for the first review, which might be more than seven years after the date of sentence.
It was not the committee's function to recommend release, but inevitably the committee would attempt to set a date at which there would be a reasonable prospect that the local review committee and then the Parole Board might be able to recommend release.
This procedure remained in force for 10 years, until on 30 November 1983 the then Secretary of State, the Rt.
Hon.
Leon Brittan, made a statement in a written Parliamentary answer about the release of prisoners on parole licences.
The first part of the statement announced a specific policy relating to prisoners serving determinate sentences of over five years for offences of violence or drug trafficking.
The second part related to prisoners serving life sentences.
It read as follows (Hansard, Official Report, Sixth Series (1983), vol. 49, pp. 256–257, cols. 506–507):
‘Life sentence prisoners
‘The release of life sentence prisoners is at the discretion of the Home Secretary, subject to a favourable recommendation by the Parole Board and to consultation with the Lord Chief Justice and, if he is available, the trial judge.
Taking account again of the public concern about violent crime, in future I intend to exercise my discretion so that murderers of police or prison officers, terrorist murderers, sexual or sadistic murderers of children and murderers by firearm in the course of robbery can normally expect to serve at least 20 years in custody; and there will be cases where the gravity of the offence requires a still longer period.
Other murders, outside these categories, may merit no less punishment to mark the seriousness of the offence.
‘At present I look to the judiciary for advice on the time to be served to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence and to the Parole Board for advice on risk.
I shall continue to do so.
‘The Joint Parole Board/Home Office Committee was established in 1973 to give initial consideration, usually after a life sentence prisoner had been detained for about three years in custody, to the date for the first formal consideration of the case by the Parole Board machinery.
The Lord Chief Justice has agreed with me that this is the appropriate time to obtain an initial judicial view on the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
In future, therefore, I shall decide the date of the first reference of a case to a local review committee following the initial consultation with the judiciary.
The joint committee has therefore been disbanded.
‘The first local review committee will normally take place three years before the expiry of the period necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
This would give sufficient time for preparation for release if the Parole Board recommended it, having considered risk.
The judiciary will also be consulted when release is an actual possibility to meet fully the requirements of section 61 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967.
‘These new procedures will separate consideration of the requirements of retribution and deterrence from consideration of risk to the public, which always has been, and will continue to be, the pre-eminent factor determining release.
They will enable the prison and other staff responsible for considering and reporting on life sentence cases, the local review committees and the Parole Board, to concentrate on risk.
The judiciary will properly advise on retribution and deterrence.
But the ultimate discretion whether to release will remain with me.
I need not read the remainder of the statement.
So far as I am aware, this was the first occasion on which it was made clear that the period which elapses before a prisoner serving a life sentence is released is determined by consideration of two factors, namely:(i) the period necessary to satisfy retribution and deterrence, which has come to be called ‘the tariff;’ and (ii) a possible further period if it is thought by the Parole Board and/or the Secretary of State that the prisoner would pose an unacceptable risk of danger to the public were he to be released at the end of his tariff period.
In further Parliamentary answers given in March and October 1985, the Secretary of State made it clear:(i) that if the tariff was to be 20 years or more, there would be a local review committee review after 17 years; and (ii) that the procedure announced by Mr. Brittan in November 1983 applied to discretionary as well as to mandatory life sentences.
On 2 March 1987 the Divisional Court gave its decision in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Handscomb (1987) 86 Cr.App.R. 59.
Mr. Handscomb and the other applicants for judicial review were serving discretionary life sentences.
They challenged the procedure announced in Mr. Brittan's November 1983 statement.
The court granted declarations to the following effect:(a) that the Secretary of State is not entitled in relation to prisoners serving discretionary life sentences to postpone consultation with the judiciary to a date later than the earliest possible date after the imposition of the sentence; and (b) that in relation to all the applicants, the Secretary of State should fix the date of the first review by the local review committee and the Parole Board strictly in accordance with the period of detention recommended by the judiciary as necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
Following that decision, on 23 July 1987 the then Secretary of State, the Rt.
Hon. Douglas Hurd, made a further statement in a Parliamentary written answer.
After reviewing the procedure which had been in force since 1983, he referred to the decision of the Divisional Court in Ex parte Handscomb and said that he accepted the conclusion of that court: ‘that there are strong arguments for carrying out this consultation exercise as soon as practicable following the imposition of a discretionary life sentence.’
The Secretary of State then continued (Hansard, Official Report, Sixth Series (1987), vol. 120, pp. 746–749, cols. 348–349):
‘Following consultation with the Lord Chief Justice it has been agreed that the most satisfactory way of obtaining the judicial view is to ask the trial judge to write to me, through him, in every case where a discretionary life sentence is passed giving his view on the period necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
This view will be related to the determinate sentence that would have been passed but for the element of mental instability and/or public risk which led the judge to pass a life sentence and will also take account of the notional period of the sentence which a prisoner might expect to have been remitted for good behaviour had a determinate sentence been passed.
The date of the first formal review by the Parole Board machinery will then be fixed in accordance with the judicial view on the requirements of retribution and deterrence; and the review will, as before, normally take place three years before the expiry of that period.
I have agreed with the Lord Chief Justice that this new procedure will be introduced with effect from 1 October 1987.
‘Arrangements have also been made to consult the judiciary about those discretionary life sentence cases where the first formal review has not yet been set, with a view to fixing the date as soon as possible.
In addition to, I shall arrange for a review to be undertaken of all discretionary life sentence cases with a first formal review date of January 1988 or later.
Where account has been taken of factors other than the judicial view on the requirements of retribution and deterrence in fixing the date, the date will be adjusted to bring it into line with the judicial view.
‘Although the issues before the Divisional Court related only to prisoners serving discretionary life sentences, I have decided that the date of the first formal review of the cases of prisoners serving mandatory life sentences should also be fixed as soon as practicable after conviction and sentence.
The procedure under which the views of the trial judge and the Lord Chief Justice about the requirements of retribution and deterrence are obtained will be the same as that proposed for discretionary life sentence cases, and will be introduced at the same time.
A similar exercise will also be carried out to fix the first review date in outstanding mandatory life sentence cases where this has not already been done.
In view of the large number of cases involved (around 750) this will inevitably take some time.
‘In cases of prisoners serving life sentences for murder, where the sentence is not at the discretion of the court, the question of the notional equivalent determinate sentence does not arise.
I shall continue to take into account the view of the judiciary on the requirements of retribution and deterrence in such cases as a factor amongst others (including the need to maintain public confidence in the system of justice) to be weighed in the balance in setting the first review date.
I shall ensure that the timing of the first formal review in such cases is fixed in accordance with my overall policy for ensuring that the time served by prisoners serving life sentences for the worst offences of violence fully reflects public concern about violent crime.
‘As indicated in the November 1983 statement, the setting of the first review date under these arrangements will enable a life sentence prisoner to be released within three years of that date if the Parole Board so recommends, subject to the policy announced in reply to a question by the then Rt.
Hon. and learned Member for Warrington South, Mr. Mark Carlisle Q.C., on 1 March 1985 that no life sentence prisoner will be detained for more than 17 years without a formal review of his case even where the period thought necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence exceeds 20 years.
Ministers will continue to review every case where a life sentence prisoner has been detained for 10 years.
However, as was made clear by the Divisional Court, the release of a life sentence prisoner is solely at my discretion and it is for me to decide, after receiving the Parole Board's recommendation and after consulting the judiciary as required by section 61(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, when actual release should take place.
This statement defined the procedure which has been followed since October 1987, and which has been applied in the case of all four appellants.
The trial judge and the Lord Chief Justice express their views as to the proper period to be served by the prisoner for the purposes of retribution and deterrence voluntarily, in accordance with the agreement made by the Lord Chief Justice with the Home Secretary.
They are not the statutory consultations required by section 61(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, but are added to that consultation at an earlier stage.
From the Parliamentary answers to which I have referred, and from the other evidence before us in these appeals, it is clear that the procedure now followed can be summarised as follows.
(i) When a prisoner is sentenced to imprisonment for life, within a short time the trial judge and the Lord Chief Justice are invited by the Secretary of State to express their views on the period he should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence.
It is not said on the form containing the request that the judicial view will be treated as confidential, but it has always been so regarded by the Lord Chief Justice and the judges.
In Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Handscomb , 86 Cr.App.R. 59, 75, Watkins L.J.
said that the advice given by the judiciary:
‘is a matter of confidence between him (the Home Secretary) and the judiciary which we have not sought to breach because such consultation truly lies in my view within the realm of confidence, i.e. privilege.
(ii) The minister of state in charge of the Prison Department (not the Secretary of State himself) then sets the date for the first review by the local review committee.
(iii) If the tariff is less than 20 years, the date for the first review is three years before the end of the tariff.
If the tariff is 20 years or more, the first review is always 17 years after sentence.
(iv) If a discretionary life sentence is passed, the minister of state sets the date for the first review strictly in accordance with the views of the judiciary, thus following the decision in Ex parte Handscomb , 86 Cr.App.R. 59, and Mr. Hurd's 1987 statement.
In the case, however, of a mandatory life sentence for murder (into which category all the present appeals fall) the minister of state takes the judicial view into account but does not necessarily adopt it as the tariff.
The evidence shows that in many cases the minister of state has set a date for the first review later than would have been the case if he had adopted the views expressed by the judiciary.
(v) The prisoner is then informed of the date for the first review, and that this is three years less than the tariff if the first review is to be held less than 17 years before the date of his sentence.
Thus a prisoner with a tariff less than 20 years can immediately calculate the length of his tariff.
He is not told what recommendation the judiciary have made.
(vi) If the date for the first review is fixed 17 years after sentence, the prisoner is told that this does not necessarily mean that the period for retribution and deterrence has been set at 20 years.
However, it is apparently the practice that if the prisoner inquires in such a case whether the tariff has been set at 20 years, he will be told if it has been set at that period, but not if it has not.
(vii) In every case it is made clear to the prisoner from the information supplied to him that he may not be recommended for release at the end of his tariff period at the first or any subsequent review.
Release will depend upon whether he is thought to pose a danger to the public and therefore should be detained beyond the end of his tariff period.
(viii) The prisoner may make representations to the local review committee before the first review.
In the case of a prisoner whose tariff does not exceed 20 years, these representations will not be relevant to the tariff but only to the question whether he should be detained beyond the end of his tariff period because of the danger he is thought to pose.
The tariffs set for these appellants
Mr. Doody was convicted and sentenced on 29 July 1987.
The first review of his possible release is to take place in October 1998.
I assume that in each case time in custody before trial is counted as part of the period before the first review.
His first review date therefore implies a tariff of about 15 years.
Mr. Pierson was convicted and sentenced on 8 July 1985.
The first review is to take place in September 2001.
When he applied for judicial review he did not know whether his tariff exceeded 20 years, but on 10 April 1990 his solicitors were informed by the Home Office that it did not.
Criminal Justice Act 1967, s. 61(1): see post, pp. 962H — 963A.
Mr. Smart was convicted and sentenced on 31 October 1986.
The first review is to take place in Arpil 1995 which implies a tariff of about 12 years.
Mr. Pegg was convicted and sentenced on 25 March 1985.
The first review is to take place in August 1993 which implies a tariff of about 11 years.
The relief sought
For the most part the relief sought by each of these four appellants in their procedures for judicial review is the same, though somewhat differently expressed.
They all seek declarations to the following effect:(a) that as a matter of law in the case of a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence the Secretary of State is required to set a period for retribution and deterrence which does not exceed the tariff recommended by the judiciary;(b) that the Secretary of State is required by law to tell the prisoner what period the judiciary have recommended, and the reasons for that recommendation, and also if he has departed from that recommendation to tell the prisoner his reason for doing so;(c) that the prisoner is entitled to be given the opportunity to make representations to the Secretary of State before the tariff is set, and for this purpose to be told of any information upon which the Secretary of State will make his decision which is not in his, the prisoner's, possession.
This in particular goes back to the issue of being told what the judiciary have recommended.
All the appellants seek orders that, because of the Secretary of State's failure to comply with what are said to be the requirements as I have set them out, the decisions made in relation to each of the appellants as to their respective tariffs should be quashed.
On Mr. Pegg's behalf, a further more detailed submission is made to which I shall refer later.
The issues
I summarise the issues which have been argued before us on these appeals as follows.
1.
Is the Secretary of State obliged to make the decision on the period which a life sentence prisoner should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence personally, or may this task be performed by a junior minister on his behalf?
I shall describe this issue as ‘delegation.’
2.
Is the Secretary of State obliged to adopt the judicial view of the period to be served for retribution and deterrence by a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence? 3.
Is a prisoner serving a life sentence entitled to make representations before his tariff is set by the Secretary of State? 4.
Is the Secretary of State required to tell the prisoner what period the judiciary have recommended he should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence? 5.
If a prisoner is to be told the judicial view of his tariff, is the Secretary of State obliged to give reasons for departing from it if he does?
Delegation
I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Staughton L.J.
I agree with his conclusion that, although the power to release a life prisoner on licence is conferred by section 61(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 on the Secretary of State, the decisions leading to that release, including the decision as to the period to be served by the prisoner for the purposes of retribution and deterrence, may properly and lawfully be made by a junior minister in the Home Department.
I also agree with, and adopt, the reasoning which leads Staughton L.J.
to this conclusion, and I therefore need say no more about this subject.
General principles of decision-making
Before expressing my views about the remaining issues, I think it helpful to set out shortly the general principles of law which are applicable to the Secretary of State's decision-making process.
The Secretary of State may only exercise his power under section 61(1) of the Act of 1967 to release on licence a prisoner serving a life sentence if:(a) the Parole Board has recommended he should do so; and (b) he has consulted with the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge if available.
Subject to these constraints, the wording of the section gives the Secretary of State an unfettered discretion in deciding whether to release any particular prisoner and, if so, when.
However, it is a commonplace that a decision-maker who is given an apparently unfettered discretion must still exercise his power within the limits imposed by the law.
The principles within which the Secretary of State must operate, which in my view are relevant to these appeals, are as follows.
(1) He must not reach a decision which is irrational, that is:
‘so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it:’
see Lord Diplock in Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [1985]A.C. 374, 410G.
(2) If a decision-maker establishes a procedure or practice for the making of decisions, which gives advantages to those affected by them, he creates a legitimate expectation that he will follow that procedure or practice in relation to any particular case, unless or until he gives notice of intention to change the procedure and an opportunity for those affected to make representations: see again Lord Diplock in Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [1985]A.C. 374, 408G. (3) A decision-maker is required to adopt a procedure for decision-making which is fair in all the circumstances.
In a case very different on its facts,Reg. v. Commission for Racial Equality, Ex parte Hillingdon London Borough Council [1982]A.C. 779, 787, Lord Diplock said:
‘Where an Act of Parliament confers upon an administrative body functions which involve its making decisions which affect to their detriment the rights of other persons or curtail their liberty to do as they please, there is a presumption that Parliament intended that the administrative body should act fairly towards those persons who will be affected by their decision.
What is a fair procedure in relation to any particular decision depends upon all the circumstances, including the subject matter of the decision, its importance to the person particularly affected and the interests of the public in general.
That this principle applies even to a person convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment seems to me to emerge clearly from the decision in this court in Reg. v. Board of Visitors of Hull Prison, Ex parte St. Germain [1979]Q.B.
425, referred to by Lord Wilberforce in Raymond v. Honey [1983]1 A.C. 1, 10, when he said:
‘under English law, a convicted prisoner, in spite of his imprisonment, retains all civil rights which are not taken away expressly or by necessary implication…
The judgment of Shaw L.J.
in Ex parte St. Germain [1979]Q.B.
425 was quoted with approval by Lord Bridge of Harwich in Leech v. Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison [1988]A.C. 533, 554.
I remind myself, however, that in seeking to apply these principles, we must not overstep them.
Thus we must not, if we think that some other procedure than that adopted by the Secretary of State would be better or fairer, therefore conclude that the procedure he did adopt is necessarily unfair.
Moreover, it is not our function to form a view in relation to any one of these appellants of the proper period for him to serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence, and then if we disagree with the Secretary of State's tariff say that the Secretary of State was wrong and quash his decision.
We could only do so if in our view he was so clearly and outrageously wrong that his decision could properly be said to be irrational.
With these general observations I now turn to consider the remaining issues.
Is the Secretary of State required by law to adopt the judicial view of the tariff?
I start by observing that if the Lord Chief Justice does not agree with the view expressed by the trial judge as to the proper period to be served for retribution and deterrence, there are two judicial views.
Nevertheless, it has not been argued that the Secretary of State's decision on the tariff could properly be challenged if he adopted the opinion of the Lord Chief Justice where this differed from that of the trial judge.
Where there is such a difference, therefore, ‘the judicial view’ means that expressed by the Lord Chief Justice.
The argument for the appellants on this issue, expressed somewhat differently by their respective counsel, can be summarised as follows.
Since November 1983, the Secretary of State has sought the advice of the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge on the period necessary for retribution and deterrence.
The judges are, by their training and experience, the persons best equipped to form an opinion on this issue.
Neither the Secretary of State, nor his minister of state, nor any of their officials, have the judges' unique expertise in this respect.
Therefore it must necessarily be irrational, i.e. ‘Wednesbury unreasonable’ for the Secretary of State to set a tariff period longer than that recommended by the judiciary.
The argument is supported by reference to the decision of the Divisional Court in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Handscomb , 86 Cr.App.R. 59.
In that case the court was considering applications for judicial review by four prisoners serving sentences of imprisonment for life imposed in the discretion of the trial judges for offences other than murder (manslaughter by reason of diminished responsibility, false imprisonment of and sexual offences with boys, and arson by two of the appellants).
There were two main issues before the court.
The first arose out of the practice announced in Mr. Brittan's statement of 30 November 1983 of seeking the views of the judiciary on the tariff for a prisoner when he had been detained in custody for about three years.
The court decided that the adoption by the Secretary of State of this general policy, which had the result that the judicial views were not sought at the earliest opportunity after conviction and sentence, was unlawful.
As I have said, this decision was accepted by the then Secretary of State, Mr. Douglas Hurd, in his statement of 23 July 1987.
This issue does not arise in the present case.
The second issue in Ex parte Handscomb is, however, directly relevant to our decision.
All four applicants in that case sought a declaration that the Secretary of State was not entitled to set a date for the first review of his case on the basis of the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
The court rejected this proposition, but went on to consider whether the Secretary of State could justifiably depart from the judicial view on tariff.
As to this, Watkins L.J., in a judgment with which the other members of the court agreed, said, at p. 82:
‘If, as I am in no doubt, the inference must be from Mrs. Murray's affidavit that the Home Secretary is not obliged to accept the judicial view of tariff and may, as I have also said, impose his own view as to this, a prima facie case of irrationality and Wednesbury unreasonableness must surely arise.
If the Home Secretary is not to be guided by the judges on retribution and deterrence, where else can he look for guidance?
Mr. Atkinson's letter suggests that the initial judicial view is the only view on tariff which he thinks is relied upon for fixing the date of the first review.
In relation to Mr. Handscomb he added, at p. 83:
‘According to present arrangements, he will not be considered by anyone outside the prison service or the Home Office until 1991.
So an interval of 10 years will have gone by without his situation being looked at by the local review committee or the parole board.
That fact standing alone might be regarded as a not unjust consequence of the Home Secretary's policy.
But it must stand alongside other factors, the principal one of which is that the date of his first review should, in my view, relate strictly to the judicial view of the tariff.
If it does not — and Mrs. Murray states quite clearly that it does not — then I would regard the Home Secretary as having acted contrary to his policy.
The implication of it relating strictly to tariff involves an assumption that the tariff advised was 17 years' detention as punishment for retribution and deterrence.
In a case of manslaughter with diminished  responsibility , this is something I am not prepared to assume.
Handscomb has served the equivalent of a 15-year notional determinate sentence now, a sentence which, as I have already pointed out, is well in excess of the maximum fixed-term sentence passed for this offence in recent years.
I do not see how relief can be denied to Handscomb in consequence of this as well as other declaratory relief which will be later formulated.
In a later decision of the Divisional Court, in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Benson (No. 2), The Times, 21 November 1988, Lloyd L.J.
said:
‘As for the Handscomb case, the ratio decidendi was that a sentence of 27 years was so far beyond anything which the judiciary could have recommended as the appropriate tariff, that the decision to postpone the first review until 1991 was one which no reasonable Secretary of State could have reached.
The case does not decide that the Secretary of State is obliged to accept the judicial review on tariff; if it did so decide, I would respectfully disagree.
Nolan J. expressed no view on this, but said:
‘It must be remembered, however, that Handscomb was principally concerned with the fixing of the date at which the period of detention should be reviewed…
It seems, however, that Lloyd L.J.
had not seen the relevant declaration granted by the court in Handscomb , which was:
‘In respect of all the applicants, a declaration that in carrying out his announced policy under and in relation to section 61(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 in respect of persons serving sentences of life imprisonment imposed in the discretion of the trial judge, the Secretary of State for the Home Department, in determining for how long such a person ought to be detained for punitive purposes should fix the date of the first review by the local review committee and the Parole Board strictly in accordance with a period of detention (that is to say, the notional determinate sentence less one-third remission) recommended by the judiciary as necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
There was no appeal against the decision in Ex parte Handscomb so the Secretary of State was bound by this declaration, at least in relation to prisoners serving discretionary life sentences.
In his statement on 23 July 1987, Mr. Douglas Hurd therefore announced that for prisoners serving discretionary life sentences (Hansard, Sixth Series, vol. 120, p. 746, col. 348):
‘The date of the first formal review by the Parole Board machinery will then be fixed in accordance with the judicial view on the requirements of retribution and deterrence…
He also said that for prisoners serving mandatory life sentences for murder (Hansard, Sixth Series, vol. 120, p. 747, col. 349):
‘I shall continue to take into account the view of the judiciary on the requirements of retribution and deterrence in such cases as a factor amongst others (including the need to maintain public confidence in the system of justice) to be weighed in the balance in setting the first review date.
Counsel for the appellants argue that the Secretary of State is not entitled to make this distinction.
If he is bound by the judicial view in relation to the date of the first review for prisoners serving discretionary life sentences, he is also so bound in relation to those serving mandatory life sentences.
In his judgment in the Divisional Court in the present case, Mann L.J.
giving the judgment of the court rejected this argument:
‘In our judgment there is an important distinction to be drawn between discretionary and mandatory life sentences.
In the case of the discretionary sentence there is always a notional equivalent determinate sentence which could be imposed in accord with established sentencing practice but for the current mental state of the defendant which makes him a danger to the public.
There is truly a tariff.
As Mr. Hurd pointed out in his written answer, there is no equivalent determinate sentence for murder.
So soon as that is appreciated the force of the suggested analogy falls away.
Its collapse does no violence to the decision in Ex parte Handscomb .
That was a case concerning discretionary life sentences and the remarks in the case must be read in that context.
Watkins L.J.
said, 86 Cr.App.R. 59, 82: ‘If, as I am in no doubt, the inference must be from Mrs. Murray's affidavit that the Home Secretary is not obliged to accept the judicial view of tariff and may, as I have also said, impose his own view as to this, a prima facie case of irrationality and Wednesbury unreasonableness must surely arise.
If the Home Secretary is not to be guided by the judges on retribution and deterrence, where else can he look for guidance?’
We do not read that passage with its use of ‘prima facie’ as requiring that the Secretary of State must adopt the judicial view in all cases.
What was decided in regard to the applicant Handscomb was that where the first review date predicated an equivalent determinate sentence well in excess of that which could have been imposed under established sentencing practice, there was impugnable unreasonableness.
We do not think that the decision bears any wider interpretation, and that it does not was also the view of Lloyd L.J.
in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Benson (No. 2), The Times, 21 November 1988.
For my part, I think it is clear that the court in Ex parte Handscomb , 86 Cr.App.R. 59 did decide what Mr. Douglas Hurd understood it decided, namely, that in setting the tariff for prisoners serving discretionary life sentences, the Secretary of State is obliged to adopt the judicial view.
If we were bound by the decision in Handscomb , I would see force in the argument that this principle should apply equally to mandatory life sentences.
Of course, when sentencing for murder, a judge does not have any established guidelines to appropriate ranges of determinate sentences for similar offences.
Since the sentence is mandatory, there is no such tariff (using the word in its true sense).
But when the judge, and the Lord Chief Justice, express their views on the period a particular prisoner should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence, they are involved in part of the same consideration as they would be when deciding a proper determinate sentence for a serious offence other than murder.
I am therefore not convinced that the distinction is a sufficient basis for concluding that the Secretary of State is bound by the judicial view for one class of case, but not for the other.
If, as Lloyd L.J.
suggested in Ex parte Benson (No. 2), The Times, 21 November 1988, the decision in Handscomb had been that detention for a period equivalent to a determinate sentence of 27 years exceeded by such a wide margin any determinate sentence passed in recent years for the offence of manslaughter by reason of diminished responsibility, and was thus in the absence of reasons irrational, I would not disagree.
But the proposition that it was not lawful for the Secretary of State to adopt a tariff which differed from that of the judges was in my opinion wrong.
The ultimate decision on the period a life sentence prisoner should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence is that of the Secretary of State.
In making his decision, he seeks the advice of the judiciary, but if he has good reason for doing so, he is, as a matter of law, entitled to set a tariff period different from that recommended by the judges.
I would therefore hold that in this respect Handscomb was wrongly decided.
Nevertheless, since Mr. Hurd's July 1987 statement the Secretary of State has, for discretionary life sentence prisoners, adopted a policy of accepting the judicial view on tariff.
He has probably thus created a legitimate expectation that he will continue to apply this policy.
Since the same policy is now given statutory expression in section 34 of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, which will come into force on 1 October 1992, he will presumably not seek to depart from this policy in the meantime.
Procedural fairness
It is convenient to consider the third and fourth issues together: has the prisoner the right to make representations before the Secretary of State sets the date for the first review, and has he a right to be told the judicial view of his tariff?
As has frequently been said, the right to be heard or to make representations is worth little unless the person making the representations knows, at least in general terms, the case he has to meet: see, for example, Lord Denning in Kanda v. Government of Malaya [1962]A.C. 322, 337.
Mr. Pannick, for the Secretary of State, reminds us that a prisoner serving a sentence of life imprisonment has no right to be released on licence; he has at best a hope that the Secretary of State will release him in the exercise of his discretion under section 61(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967.
Moreover, in the case of a prisoner who has been released on licence under section 61, if his licence is revoked, he is entitled under section 62(3) to make representations in writing with respect to his recall and to be informed of the reasons for it.
No such rights are provided by section 61.
Thus Parliament clearly did not intend that a life sentence prisoner should have such rights in relation to the considerations of his release on licence.
The answer to this, at least in part, is that, over the years since the Act of 1967 came into force, the relatively elaborate procedure to which I have referred has been created.
A life prisoner cannot be certain that he ever will be released on licence, but he can be certain that he will be considered for release, at latest 17 years after his sentence and periodically thereafter.
Moreover, he is told that the date of the first review is related to the length of time the Secretary of State decides he must serve for retribution and deterrence, and that the judicial view as to this period is a factor taken into account in making the decision.
The classic origin of the requirement to hear a party alleged to be in default before reaching a decision is in Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 C.B.N.S. 180.
The board demolished a partly built house, without giving any opportunity to the builder to be heard in opposition to the demolition.
Willes J. said, at p. 190:
‘I apprehend that a tribunal which is by law invested with power to affect the property of one of Her Majesty's subjects, is bound to give such subject an opportunity of being heard before it proceeds: and that that rule is of universal application, and founded upon the plainest principles of justice.
Byles J. said, at p. 194:
‘a long course of decisions…establish, that, although there are no positive words in a statute requiring that the party shall be heard, yet the justice of the common law will supply the omission of the legislature.
In Russell v. Duke of Norfolk [1949]1 All E.R.
109, 118, Tucker L.J.
said:
‘There are, in my view, no words which are of universal application to every kind of inquiry and every kind of domestic tribunal.
The requirements of natural justice must depend on the circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry, the rules under which the tribunal is acting, the subject matter that is being dealt with, and so forth.
Accordingly, I do not derive much assistance from the definitions of natural justice which have been from time to time used, but, whatever standard is adopted, one essential is that the person concerned should have a reasonable opportunity of presenting his case.
In Wiseman v. Borneman [1971]A.C. 297, 308, Lord Reid said:
‘For a long time the courts have, without objection from Parliament, supplemented procedure laid down in legislation where they have found that to be necessary for this purpose.
But before this unusual kind of power is exercised it must be clear that the statutory procedure is insufficient to achieve justice and that to require additional steps would not frustrate the apparent purpose of the legislation.
Lord Guest said, at p. 310:
‘It is reasonably clear on the authorities that where a statutory tribunal has been set up to decide final questions affecting parties' rights and duties, if the statute is silent upon the question, the courts will imply into the statutory provision a rule that the principles of natural justice should be applied.
This implication will be made upon the basis that Parliament is not to be presumed to take away parties' rights without giving them an opportunity of being heard in their interest.
In other words, Parliament is not to be presumed to act unfairly.
The dictum of Byles J. in Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works , 14 C.B.N.S. 180, 194, is clear to this effect and has been followed in many subsequent cases.
On the application of the duty on a decision-maker to adopt a fair procedure, Lord Denning M.R. said in Reg. v. Gaming Board for Great Britain, Ex parte Benaim and Khaida [1970]2 Q.B.
417, 430:
‘It is not possible to lay down rigid rules as to when the principles of natural justice are to apply: nor as to their scope and extent.
Everything depends on the subject matter…
More recently, in Lloyd v. McMahon [1987]A.C. 625 Lord Bridge of Harwich said, at pp. 702–703:
‘My Lords, the so-called rules of natural justice are not engraved on tablets of stone.
To use the phrase which better expresses the underlying concept, what the requirements of fairness demand when any body, domestic, administrative or judicial, has to make a decision which will affect the rights of individuals depends on the character of the decision-making body, the kind of decision it has to make and the statutory or other framework in which it operates.
In particular, it is well-established that when a statute has conferred on any body the power to make decisions affecting individuals, the courts will not only require the procedure prescribed by the statute to be followed, but will readily imply so much and no more to be introduced by way of additional procedural safeguards as will ensure the attainment of fairness.
In Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981]1 W.L.R. 754 the Court of Appeal decided that when a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence for murder had not been recommended for release by the local review committee or the Parole Board, before his next review he was not entitled to be told the reasons for the board's decision.
The members of the court (Lord Denning M.R., Shaw and Brightman L.JJ.) all took the view that the Criminal Justice Act 1967 and the Local Review Committee Rules 1967 (S.I.
1967 No. 1462), which governed the work of that body, imposed no obligation to give such reasons; that in reaching their decision on whether to recommend release, the Parole Board and the local review committee were under a duty to act fairly; but that the scope of that duty did not include a requirement to give reasons for their recommendation.
In reaching that last conclusion, however, the members of the court differed in their own reasoning, though all took the view that the interest of society as a whole, public policy, outweighed the prisoner's interest in being given reasons.
As I have said, since the decision in Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981]1 W.L.R. 754 the present procedure by which the Secretary of State decides whether and when to release a prisoner serving a life sentence has been created.
Mr. Brittan's statement of October 1983 made clear the division of the decision-making process into two parts, the ‘tariff’ period to meet the purposes of retribution and deterrence which the Secretary of State decides on the advice of the judges; a review towards the end of that period by the local review committee; and after the end of the tariff period, a possible further period, if the Secretary of State on the advice of the local review committee and the Parole Board decides that the prisoner's continued detention is necessary because of the danger he might pose if released, and to maintain public confidence in the system.
In Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981]1 W.L.R. 754 the court was concerned with the process of making the second decision (though the division into the two periods of detention was not then clear).
We are concerned with the Secretary of State's decision as to the first period, the ‘tariff.’
Nothing I say hereafter is intended to relate to the second decision.
There are no statutory rules governing the procedure for deciding a prisoner's tariff.
In my view, we should, to adapt Lord Bridge's phrase in Lloyd v. McMahon [1987]A.C. 625, imply some additional procedural safeguards to ensure what I believe fairness in the making of this decision requires.
The decision as to the length of the prisoner's tariff period is obviously of great importance to him.
It sets the earliest date at which he can hope to regain his freedom.
On the other hand, it would be wrong to imply any procedure which might improperly fetter the Secretary of State in reaching his decision.
Taking both these factors into account, I conclude that a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence should be given the opportunity to make representations in writing to the Secretary of State about the length of his tariff period before it is set.
I also conclude that, to enable him to make such representations, he should be given such relevant information as he does not already have.
However, the scope of such information is limited.
The prisoner has been at his own trial and he already knows, or has had access to, all the evidence and all that was said.
He has heard his counsel, under the procedure now generally adopted, making submissions to the judge after his conviction about the recommendation the judge will make as to the tariff period.
Thus the only relevant facts he does not know are what period the judiciary have recommended as the tariff, and what further comments the judges have made which will affect the Secretary of State's decision on the tariff.
Such comments would include, for example, any opinions that the trial judge has expressed, in a case where there was more than one defendant, as to the respective parts each played and thus as to the culpability of each for the offence.
In my view, the prisoner should be given this information before he writes any representation he may wish to make.
The addition to the present procedure of a requirement that the prisoner be given this information, and thereafter be entitled to make written representations before his tariff is set, would in my opinion satisfy Lord Reid's test in Wiseman v. Borneman [1971]A.C. 297, 308.
The present procedure is in my opinion insufficient in these respects to achieve justice, and there is nothing in what I propose which would frustrate the apparent purpose of the legislation.
Until now the judiciary have expressed their views about the tariff period, tacitly if not expressly, in confidence.
However, I do not regard this problem as insuperable.
I suspect that the confidentiality is largely that of the Secretary of State, and am confident that in acceptance of our decision he will not seek to maintain a claim to such confidentiality.
For the future, the judges can be asked to express their views on the basis that their recommendations (in effect that of the Lord Chief Justice) will be communicated to the prisoner.
We must not, of course, seek to guess how individual judges will respond.
A judge, however, perhaps more than any other person, is accustomed to making and announcing his decisions in public.
I note also that of the judges who expressed opinions to the House of Lords Select Committee on Murder and Life Imprisonment about this issue, a majority favoured immediate disclosure of the judges' recommendation as to the tariff.
If, therefore, prisoners are in future to be told the judicial recommendation as to the tariff period, many judges may think it appropriate to announce their own recommendations publicly in court when passing sentence.
For those prisoners like the present appellants currently serving life sentences, I appreciate that the fact that the judicial recommendation was made in confidence presents a practical problem.
The Secretary of State will have to consider what steps to take to overcome it.
Presumably he will ask the Lord Chief Justice (and trial judges where possible) if they object to their recommendations as to the tariff period and other material expressions of view now being revealed to the prisoner.
The duty to give reasons
The precise question here under consideration is, if the Secretary of State does not adopt the judicial view of the tariff, is he obliged to give reasons for departing from it?
I agree with Mr. Sedley, for Messrs. Doody and Pierson, that the decision of this court in Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981]1 W.L.R. 754 does not bind us to conclude that the Secretary of State is not obliged to give reasons in this respect.
As I have already made clear, the issue in that case concerned the second decision which the Secretary of State has to make, whether to release the prisoner at the end of his tariff period or to detain him in custody.
The factors relevant to the giving of reasons by the Parole Board or a local review committee are not the same as those relevant to the Secretary of State's giving reasons for not accepting the judicial view of the tariff.
The leading authority on this subject is now Reg. v. Civil Service Appeal Board, Ex parte Cunningham [1991]4 All E.R.
310, a decision of this court.
A prison officer who had been dismissed from the prison service appealed against his dismissal to the Civil Service Appeal Board, which held that his dismissal was unfair.
The board assessed his compensation at a substantially lower figure than he would have been awarded by an industrial tribunal had he been able in law to appeal to such a tribunal.
The board refused to give reasons for its award.
This court held that the board was required to give reasons for the way in which it had reached its award, and that in the absence of such reasons its award was prima facie irrational.
The applicant was therefore entitled to a judicial review of the award.
In his judgment, Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. considered some of the authorities on the requirement that a decision-making body should give reasons for its decision, including a decision of the High Court of Australia in Public Service Board of New South Wales v. Osmond (1986) 159 C.L.R. 656.
He concluded that there was neither a general rule of the common law nor a principle of natural justice that a public law authority should always or even usually give reasons for its decisions.
He said, however, at p. 316:
‘In fairness to the board it must be emphasised that it is not being unco-operative.
It has been advised, mistakenly as I think, that to attempt any justification of a particular award, however surprising that award might be, would be to concede the right of every claimant to reasons.
As I have sought to show, this is not so.
The principles of public law will require that those affected by decisions are given the reasons for those decisions in some cases, but not in others.
A classic example of the latter category is a decision not to appoint or not to promote an employee or office holder or to fail an examinee.
But, once the public law court has concluded that there is an arguable case that the decision is unlawful, the position is transformed.
The applicant may still not be entitled to reasons, but the court is.
McCowan L.J.
said, at p. 322:
‘As Mr. Pannick says, it cries out for some explanation from the board.
As I would put it, not only is justice not seen to have been done but there is no way, in the absence of reasons from the board, in which it can be judged whether in fact it has been done.
I find that a thoroughly unsatisfactory situation, in which this court should hold, if it properly can do so, that the board ought to give reasons for its recommendation.
Leggatt L.J.
said, at p. 326:
‘Since the board has elected as a matter of practice not to give reasons, and has given none to Mr. Cunningham, it has been bound by its own logic not to attempt to justify for the benefit of the court the figure awarded.
In default of explanation Mr. Cunningham's award was so far below what, by analogy with the award of an industrial tribunal, he was entitled to expect as in my judgment to compel the inference that the assessment was irrational, if not perverse.
Because there was no general duty to give reasons, the absence of reasons does not by itself entitle the court to hold that the award was not supportable.
But the unexplained meagreness of the award does compel that inference.
As Lord Keith said in Lonrho Plc. v. Secretary of State for Trade and Industry [1989]1 W.L.R. 525, 539: ‘The only significance of the absence of reasons is that if all other known facts and circumstances appear to point overwhelmingly in favour of a different decision, the decision-maker, who has given no reasons cannot complain if the court draws the inference that he had no rational reason for his decision.’
I would apply that decision and those dicta, and in particular the passage from the judgment of Leggatt L.J., in the present case.
In my judgment the Secretary of State, if he sets a tariff period which exceeds that recommended by the judiciary, is not under an absolute obligation to give reasons for departing from the judicial view.
Nevertheless, if the disparity between the two periods is considerable, and he gives no reasons, it may well be that his decision will be open to challenge by way of judicial review as being irrational.
That in my view is the appropriate sanction.
Mr. Pegg's separate point
Mr. Pegg was convicted on 25 March 1985 before Caulfield J. and a jury of the murder of one Peter Goddard by stabbing him with a knife.
The prosecution case was that the murder was premeditated, the evidence of the premeditation being, as the prosecution suggested, that Mr. Pegg had returned to his home to fetch the knife before setting out to meet Goddard.
The defence was self-defence.
Mr. Pegg denied that he had returned to his home to fetch the knife, and alleged that he had seized it from Goddard during the struggle between them.
There were two bases on which he could have been convicted, either that the jury accepted that he had fetched the knife from his home, or, alternatively, that he had obtained the knife during the struggle but that they were satisfied that the essentials of self-defence were not made out.
After the Secretary of State, having received judicial advice, had set the date for the first review of Mr. Pegg's sentence in August 1993, and thus set his tariff, in January 1989 Mr. Pegg submitted a petition to the Secretary of State.
The petition refers to nine separate matters which, it is alleged, tend to establish that the attack on Goddard was not pre-meditated.
Mr. Pegg believes that his tariff may have been set on the basis that the attack was premeditated, and thus that the tariff period should be reduced.
He complains that the Secretary of State has not taken his petition properly into account.
According to an affidavit sworn on behalf of the Secretary of State by Mr. Anthony David Purchase on 5 April 1990, the Secretary of State did consider the points raised in the affidavit and
‘concluded that the submissions raised in it were not of sufficient substance to justify referring the same to the judiciary or altering the first review date.
I should say that Mr. Pegg had earlier appealed to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division), but his appeal against his conviction had been dismissed.
In my view, a number of the points raised in his petition are matters which could have been raised at the appeal.
As to the other matters, in my view the Secretary of State's decision not to alter the review date having considered the petition was one which was entirely a matter for the exercise of his discretion.
I therefore cannot find that in this respect the procedure adopted by the Secretary of State was challengeable in any way.
Conclusion
I conclude that the court should grant declarations in the following terms:(1) The Secretary of State is required to afford to a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence the opportunity to submit in writing representations as to the period he should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence before the Secretary of State sets the date of the first review of the prisoner's sentence.
(2) Before giving the prisoner the opportunity to make such representations, the Secretary of State is required to inform him of the period recommended by the judiciary as the period he should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence, and of any other opinion expressed by the judiciary which is relevant to the Secretary of State's decision as to the appropriate period to be served for these purposes.
It follows that the decisions made by the Secretary of State as to the length of the tariff for each of these appellants should be quashed, and the decisions reconsidered in accordance with the procedure to which I have referred.
To that extent I would allow these appeals.
STAUGHTON L.J.
(1) Irrationality
It is said for the appellants that the decisions of Home Office ministers fixing their tariff periods were irrational, in public law terms, because they must have exceeded those recommended by the trial judge and the Lord Chief Justice.
When capital punishment for murder was abolished by section 1 of the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965, it was provided that the court may:
‘declare the period which it recommends to the Secretary of State as the minimum period which in its view should elapse before the Secretary of State orders the release of that person on licence…
There were no recommendations by the judges under that section in the cases with which we are now concerned.
Evidently that power was intended to act as a restraint on undue leniency by the Secretary of State.
It provided for a minimum but no maximum.
By contrast the present cases arise because Home Office ministers are thought to have increased the periods recommended by the judiciary, in a process of consultation which is extra-statutory.
It is not excessive leniency which is sought to be restrained now, but punishment which exceeds the judicial view of what is appropriate.
The statutory power to recommend a minimum period might, in practice, have been used to create a tariff among the judges for all murders, so that the recommended minimum came to be regarded as the appropriate period of detention, subject only to the question whether the prisoner was a danger to the public when it expired.
But that did not happen.
It was said in Reg. v. Flemming [1973]2 All E.R.
401, 405, that no recommendation under the Act of 1965 should be for less than 12 years.
Possibly for that reason, and certainly for others, minimum recommendations came to be made in only a small proportion of cases.
We were told that in 1988, when life sentences for murder were passed in 150 cases, only 10 minimum recommendations were made.
The Act of 1965 also contained, in section 2, a provision that no person convicted of murder should be released on licence unless the Secretary of State had prior to such release consulted the Lord Chief Justice, together with the trial judge if available.
That section was repealed and replaced by section 61(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, which applied to all life prisoners and not merely those convicted of murder.
There is in my opinion nothing whatever in section 61(1) of the Act of 1967 to suggest that the Secretary of State is bound by the advice of the Lord Chief Justice or the trial judge.
On the contrary, it remains for him to decide.
To adapt what was said by Lloyd L.J.
in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Benson (No. 2), The Times, 21 November 1988, the duty is to consult, not to obey.
The question is whether that has changed since the statement in the House of Commons of Mr. Leon Brittan Q.C.
as Home Secretary in 1983.
This said that he would look to the judiciary, as in the past, for advice on the time to be served to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
After he had done that, he would decide the date of the first reference of the case to a local review committee.
The minimum period which a prisoner can be expected to serve in order to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence has become known as the tariff period.
Presently it is fixed by a Home Office minister after consultation with the judiciary.
It can be deduced by the prisoner if his local review committee date is less than 17 years after he was first detained, by adding three years to the period that he will have served at that date.
In other cases the prisoner will know only that it is 20 years or more, although if he asks and if it is no more than 20 years he will, as I understand it, be given that information.
At this point I must consider what is meant by ‘tariff’ in this context.
There has been a tariff among the judges since the latter part of the 19th century.
Its object was to reduce disparity in sentences of imprisonment, and to remove the difficulty which judges faced when Parliament had told them no more than the maximum sentence for a particular crime: see Reflections on the English Sentencing System by Professor Sir Rupert Cross, Child & Co.
Lecture 1980.
The judges' tariff is now publicly available, from the law reports (including in particular guideline cases on sentencing for particular crimes), and the Encyclopaedia of Current Sentencing Practice .
But it does not follow that one can predict with complete accuracy the sentence that a judge will pass in a given case.
At most the tariff information will provide a range or bracket.
Dr. Thomas in Principles of Sentencing , 2nd ed. (1979), p. 9 writes:
‘the application of tariff principles requires the sentencer to find the sentence which most accurately reflects the offender's culpability, a process which involves relating the gravity of the offence to the established pattern of sentences for offences of that kind, and then making allowance for such mitigating factors as may be present which tend to reduce the offender's culpability.
That is, I think, the task which the Home Secretary expects judges to perform when he asks for their advice on the requirements of retribution and deterrence, and the task which the judges do perform.
Naturally the judges' tariff is not writ in stone; it may and does change over time, so that sentences passed in 1900 are of little or no value in ascertaining the tariff in 1992.
When a discretionary life sentence is passed, for an offence other than murder because of the danger to the public from the convicted person, there is no undue difficulty in ascertaining the determinate sentence which would otherwise be appropriate according to the judges' tariff.
The practice has been for the judge to deduct a period for remission which might be earned, and to advise the Home Secretary that what remains is the requirement of retribution and deterrence.
In the nature of things, experienced judges are those best qualified to perform this task.
But I would suppose that the Home Office has at least some information as to the judges' tariff, and probably a great deal.
The inhabitants of prisons may also be expected to know it.
For the offence of murder a life sentence is mandatory.
Consequently there are no cases in our books which show what the appropriate determinate sentence is specifically for that offence.
In some cases the judge can look at sentences for manslaughter, and make an appropriate adjustment.
In others he will have virtually no guidance, beyond looking at the relatively few determinate sentences for attempted murder and considering what adjustment should be made for the fact that death ensued.
This lack of an established pattern has been recognised.
Thus in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex part Handscomb,86 Cr.App.R. 59, 79, Watkins L.J.
said: ‘There are no precedents or guidelines to assist the judge in forming that view.’
In the 1987 statement Mr. Douglas Hurd said (Hansard, Sixth Series, vol. 120, p. 747, col. 349):
‘In cases of prisoners serving life sentences for murder, where the sentence is not at the discretion of the court, the question of a notional equivalent determinate sentence does not arise.
And in the present case Mann L.J.
said in the Divisional Court:
‘We cannot part from the argument without expressing our belief that some trial judges would be troubled if they were told that their view, unguided as it is by any established practice and expressed in confidence, was to be determinate of the period to be served by a prisoner.
Thus far I have been careful to refer to ‘the judges' tariff,’ for such it is.
The Home Secretary, in fixing the period which he regards as necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence, not infrequently exceeds the judicial view.
He is often said to be fixing a ‘tariff’ period; and there is no harm in using that expression provided that one realises that it is the Home Secretary's tariff, not the judges' tariff.
But is it lawful for the Home Secretary to have a different tariff from the judges?
In my judgment it is lawful.
Section 61(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 makes it clear that the decision as to release on licence is for the Home Secretary, although he is obliged to consult the judiciary.
There was nothing in the 1983 statement to alter that; as Lloyd L.J.
put it in Ex parte Benson (No. 2), The Times, 21 November 1988, Mr. Brittan said that he would look to the judges for advice, not orders.
Nor was there any change so far as mandatory life sentences were concerned in the 1987 statement.
I shall consider later what was then said by Mr. Hurd about discretionary life sentences.
In re Findlay [1985]A.C. 318 accepts, as it seems to me, that it is legitimate for the Home Secretary to form his own view.
Lord Scarman there said, after discussing the constitution of the Parole Board, at p. 333:
‘The emphasis is upon the need for the board to include among its members persons with the skills and experience required to assess the risk of early release.
But the Secretary of State has clearly to consider other aspects of the early release of a prisoner serving a sentence of imprisonment.
Deterrence, retribution, and public confidence in the system are factors of importance.
The Parole Board, through its judicial and other members, can offer advice on these aspects of the question.
But neither the board nor the judiciary can be as close, or as sensitive, to public opinion as a minister responsible to Parliament and to the electorate.
He has to judge the public acceptability of early release and to determine the policies needed to maintain public confidence in the system of criminal justice.
This must be why Parliament saw as necessary the duality of the parole system: without the advice and recommendation of a body capable of assessing the risk of early release the Secretary of State was not to act: but, having received such advice and recommendation, he was to authorise early release only if he himself was satisfied that it was in the public interest that he should.
That brings me to the decision in Ex parte Handscomb , 86 Cr.App.R. 59.
Watkins L.J., at p. 82, asked where else the Home Secretary could look for guidance as to retribution and deterrence, if not to the judges.
And he expressed the view that, in discretionary life sentence cases, the period fixed by the Home Secretary should ‘relate strictly to the judicial view of the tariff.’
I am afraid that I cannot accept the reasoning which has led subsequent Divisional Courts to limit the ambit of that decision:Benson's case, the Divisional Court in the present case, and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Walsh , The Times, 18 December 1991.
After all, there was in Ex parte Handscomb a declaration:
‘the Secretary of State for the Home Department, in determining for how long…a person ought to be detained for punitive purposes, should fix the date of the first review by the local review committee and the Parole Board strictly in accordance with a period of detention…recommended by the judiciary as necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
Since there was no appeal, in my opinion the Home Secretary was bound to change his policy for discretionary life sentence cases as he did in 1987.
However, I am bound to say that in my judgment Ex parte Handscomb was wrongly decided on that issue.
The Home Secretary is in my opinion entitled and bound to reach his own tariff decision, after having regard both to the judges' tariff and to the factors such as public confidence in the administration of justice which Lord Scarman mentioned.
I have already accepted that the judges are the best persons to say what the judges' tariff is, as Watkins L.J.
implied, at any rate in discretionary life sentence cases.
But the Home Secretary is, for good reason, entrusted with the final decision.
Judges have a lively perception of public opinion on sentences; from time to time they receive letters from disgruntled members of the public, and they read criticism of their decisions in the newspapers.
But the Home Secretary has a wider view, and he is answerable to Parliament and public opinion.
I therefore reject the argument on behalf of the appellants in this case, that the Home Secretary is obliged to follow the judges' views as to the requirements of retribution and deterrence in mandatory life sentence cases, even though it allowed some exceptions.
I would also hold that he was not obliged to do so in discretionary life sentence cases.
We need not decide today whether, in consequence of the 1987 statement, prisoners have a legitimate expectation that he will do so, or whether that expectation can be dispelled for the future.
In the light of the changes effected by the Criminal Justice Act 1991 and its transitional provisions, the problem may never arise.
It is argued by Mr. Scrivener that the Home Secretary has acted unfairly or irrationally in treating discretionary and mandatory cases differently.
But even if the Handscomb decision were fully accepted, I consider that he was entitled to make a distinction; the difficulty of assessing the requirements of retribution and deterrence from the judges' tariff in a murder case was a sufficient ground for his reserving the decision in mandatory life sentence cases to himself.
The European Court of Human Rights accepted the distinction in Thynne, Wilson and Gunnel v. United Kingdom (1990) 13 E.H.R.R. 666.
Furthermore, since I disagree with the view of the Divisional Court on this point in Ex parte Handscomb , but the Home Secretary was obliged for the time being to follow it, there is little logic in saying that he should have extended it to mandatory cases.
(2) Delegation
Section 61(1) of the Criminal Justices Act 1967 confers power to release a life prisoner on the Secretary of State.
It is argued for the appellants that fixing a tariff period is part of that power, and must be done by the Secretary of State himself, rather than by a junior minister or official.
There is evidence that at least in some of the cases before us, the tariff period was fixed by a minister of state or a Parliamentary under-secretary of state.
That this is the practice commonly adopted appears from the Report of the Select Committee on Murder and Life Imprisonment (H.L. Paper 78–I, para. 155).
This issue was not raised on behalf of the appellants before the proceedings reached this court.
Mr. Pannick, for the Secretary of State, did not object to it being raised here; but he observed that we have no evidence from the department on the topic.
Parliament frequently confers powers on a minister who is the political head of a department.
Much less frequently, it confers powers on an official of a particular description or grade.
I know of no instance, and counsel were not able to find one, where power is conferred on a junior minister.
But it is absurd to suppose that every power which is conferred on the political head of a department must be exercised by him and him alone.
It is in general sufficient that the power is exercised by a junior minister or an official on his behalf.
The classic statement of that principle is to be found in Carltona Ltd. v. Commissioners of Works [1943]2 All E.R.
560, 563, by Lord Greene M.R.:
‘In the administration of government in this country the functions which are given to ministers (and constitutionally properly given to ministers because they are constitutionally responsible) are functions so multifarious that no minister could ever personally attend to them.
To take the example of the present case no doubt there have been thousands of requisitions in this country by individual ministries.
It cannot be supposed that this regulation meant that, in each case, the minister in person should direct his mind to the matter.
The duties imposed upon ministers and the powers given to ministers are normally exercised under the authority of the ministers by responsible officials of the department.
Public business could not be carried on if that were not the case.
Constitutionally, the decision of such an official is, of course, the decision of the minister.
The minister is responsible.
It is he who must answer before Parliament for anything that his officials have done under his authority, and, if for an important matter he selected an official of such junior standing that he could not be expected competently to perform the work, the minister would have to answer for that in Parliament.
The whole system of departmental organisation and administration is based on the view that ministers, being responsible to Parliament, will see that important duties are committed to experienced officials.
If they do not do that, Parliament is the place where complaint must be made against them.
However, in Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v. Peko-Wallsend Ltd .
(1986) 162 C.L.R. 24, 38, Mason J. said of the Carltona principle:
‘The cases in which the principle has been applied are cases in which the nature, scope and purpose of the function vested in the repository made it unlikely that Parliament intended that it was to be exercised by the repository personally because administrative necessity indicated that it was impractical for him to act otherwise than through his officers or officers responsible to him.
Mason J. went on to explain the reasons why, in that case, the minister's function was to be exercised by him personally.
Some such limitation on the Carltona doctrine is also to be found in English cases.
Thus in Reg. v. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Enahoro [1963]2 Q.B.
455, 465–466, Lord Parker C.J. said:
‘It is well settled that certainly no person made responsible for a judicial decision can delegate his responsibility.
Equally in certain cases of administrative decisions there is no power to delegate…
The latest case on the topic is Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Oladehinde [1991]1 A.C. 254.
In the Court of Appeal Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R., at p. 282, held that there might be express or implied limitations on the right to devolve in the statute, and that otherwise a decision to devolve could be attacked if it was irrational in administrative terms.
In the House of Lords, Lord Griffiths, at p. 303, found no express or implied limitation in the statute, and no objection to devolution under the Carltona principle provided that the decisions to be taken by officials were ‘suitable to their grading and experience.’
In the present case, there is no express or implied requirement in the Criminal Justice Act 1967 that a decision fixing the tariff period, or for that matter a decision to release a prisoner on licence, must be taken by the Secretary of State personally.
Is it then irrational for the Secretary of State, by devolution, to allow such decisions to be taken by a minister of state or Parliamentary under-secretary of state?
Mr. Scrivener points out that, in the days of capital punishment, it was the practice for the Home Secretary personally to decide whether to recommend a reprieve; and political memoirs record how seriously that responsibility was regarded.
The fixing of a tariff period for life prisoners is likewise of great importance to the individuals affected.
But so, no doubt, is the exercise of a great many other powers which are entrusted to the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
Parliament must be well aware of the great burden that is imposed on senior ministers, who not only take charge of their departments but also speak for them in Parliament, attend meetings of the Cabinet and its committees, and see to their constituency affairs if they are members of the House of Commons.
A footnote in the report of the select committee records that there were 2,927 mandatory life sentence cases in a period of slightly more than 23 years, an average of 127 a year.
In a written answer on 7 May 1991 the minister of state said that 274 mandatory life sentence cases were considered in 1990, possibly because there was still a backlog from pre- Handscomb days.
Every such case demands serious consideration, and the burden of considering them all must be substantial.
I can see nothing irrational in the Secretary of State devolving the task upon junior ministers.
They too are appointed by the Crown to hold office in the department, they have the same advice and assistance from departmental officials as the Secretary of State would have, and they too are answerable to Parliament.
There is in my judgment no objection to the decisions attacked in this case on the ground that they were or may have been taken by junior ministers rather than by the Secretary of State.
(3) Natural justice/procedural impropriety
It is now clear that the fixing of the period of detention required by retribution and deterrence is of fundamental importance to the prisoner.
It will determine, in many cases, the earliest date at which his release can even be considered by the local review committee or the Parole Board, subject only to an overriding discretion of the Home Secretary.
There is a powerful argument for saying that, in general, it should be subject to the rules of administrative law.
Many years ago, there was a statutory provision that, in the event of an appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal, the trial judge could write a letter to that court which was not disclosed to the appellant.
Although defended by Diplock J. in London Export Corporation Ltd. v. Jubilee Coffee Roasting Co. Ltd. [1958]1 W.L.R. 271, 281, the practice was discontinued shortly afterwards.
The first requirement of natural justice is the right of the prisoner to make representations.
He has that already, since any prisoner can petition the Secretary of State.
The second requirement is that he should know what is said against him.
Unless he does, the right to make representations is of little value: see Kanda v. Government of the Federation of Malaya [1962]A.C. 332, 337.
Much of the material on which the Home Secretary is likely to base his decision will have been available to the prisoner at his trial: the evidence, both for and against him, any reports considered by the court, and remarks in mitigation made on his behalf (as is now the practice).
All that will be considered by the judge and the Lord Chief Justice in making their recommendations.
Since those recommendations are now made shortly after the trial, there will no longer be additional material such as reports on the prisoner's subsequent behaviour, which would in any event be irrelevant to the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
However, there will also be in some cases the judge's view of the relative culpability of the prisoner and co-defendants.
In my judgment natural justice requires that the prisoner be told what the judges have recommended, and anything the trial judge has said about relative culpability, in such time that he can make representations before the Home Secretary fixes the tariff period.
That period is to all intents and purposes part of the sentence, and he ought to know everything that is said about him before it is fixed.
There is, however, a difficulty.
The evidence is that communications from the judiciary to the Home Secretary on this topic are confidential; and I accept that there is at least a tacit agreement that neither side will disclose them without the consent of the other.
I would hope that this tacit agreement will be rescinded for the future, and if the judges then take the view that they will disclose their recommendations (with reasons) in open court, in mandatory as well as discretionary cases, so be it.
But that will still leave a problem for existing cases.
The Home Secretary will no doubt give his consent, if otherwise the decisions of junior ministers are liable to be quashed on judicial review.
It is not for me to say whether the judges or the Lord Chief Justice should or will consent.
But if they do not, I am inclined to think that it would be open to the Divisional Court, in an appropriate case, to order production of the document in judicial review proceedings despite the confidentiality.
No doubt the Divisional Court would often wish to read the document first before ordering its disclosure wholly or in part.
There is other material which may reach the Home Office.
There may be letters from the victim's relations, from Members of Parliament, from the general public (whether directed at a particular case or at penal policy in general), or from the Howard League or the National Association for the Care and Rehabilitation of Offenders.
None of this material need in my opinion be disclosed to the prisoner.
If it is directed to his particular case, the Home Secretary should disregard it at this stage unless it was evidence at the trial; if directed to penal policy in general, it is merely a small part of his information as to public opinion.
The same is true of newspaper comment.
It was suggested that the prisoner is entitled to see comments, summaries and advice which officials provide to the minister.
I do not agree, for the department is to be treated as a whole: see Lord Diplock in Bushell v. Secretary of State for the Environment [1981]A.C. 75, 95.
If a prisoner has or knows the material which reaches the department, that is sufficient.
Nor do I consider that any in-house tariff which may exist in the Home Office need be disclosed.
Lastly under this head come the minister's reasons.
There is no general obligation to give reasons for administrative decisions: see Reg. v. Civil Service Appeal Board, Ex parte Cunningham [1991]4 All E.R.
310, 317.
In the particular case of a minister's decision fixing the tariff period for a life sentence prisoner, there is not in my opinion a requirement that reasons should always be given.
The prisoner should have seen or known the information that was available to the minister, to the extent that I have indicated, and had an opportunity to make representations.
The minister will generally have to decide only whether the period required for retribution and deterrence is that recommended by the judge, or by the Lord Chief Justice, or is some lesser or greater period.
I can see no need to give reasons for that decision.
There will, however, be some cases where the minister's decision is more complex, and requires some explanation.
The court may then find that, if unexplained, it is irrational.
To avoid that possibility it would be right to give reasons in complex cases.
(4) Conclusion
These four cases are among a great number where ministers have in the past fixed a tariff period on material that was not available to the prisoner, and which in my opinion ought to have been available to him.
I would not afford the remedy of judicial review in all those cases — far from it.
But in these four cases there are features that require the decision, which was relatively recent, to be reconsidered after what I consider to be a proper procedure.
I would therefore quash the decisions by ministers fixing the tariff period, and make the declarations proposed by Glidewell L.J.
There is no need to order discovery, at any rate at this stage.
FARQUHARSON L.J.
Each of the four applicants, now the appellants, has been individually convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment.
The offences were of varying degrees of gravity and the appellants have been given different release dates under the statutory provisions which have been under examination in these appeals.
It has for long been the task of the Secretary of State for the Home Department either in the exercise of the prerogative of mercy or more recently on a statutory basis to determine in the case of prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment, how much of that sentence should be served.
After the abolition of the death penalty in 1965 there was plainly some anxiety by the legislature as to how prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment for murder should be dealt with.
This was reflected in the Criminal Justice Act 1967 which by section 61(1) provides:
‘The Secretary of State may, if recommended to do so by the Parole Board, release on licence a person serving a sentence of imprisonment for life…but shall not do so…except after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice of England together with the trial judge if available.
The Secretary of State was thus granted a discretionary power to release a person serving a sentence of life imprisonment subject to two conditions:(1) He must be recommended so to do in a particular case by the Parole Board (which was constituted by section 59 of the Act of 1967) and (2) He shall not do so except after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice together with the trial judge if available.
While it appears that the application to the Parole Board can only be made by the Secretary of State, he has no power to release a prisoner on licence until he receives the board's recommendation to do so.
The Secretary of State's duty so far as the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge are concerned, is only to ‘consult.’
The Act of 1967 does not specify at what stage, or how often or in what form the consultation is to take place, but the subsection implies that it should be after the Secretary of State has received the recommendation of the Parole Board.
The words of the subsection also imply that the judges are intended by Parliament to act as a form of brake upon any over-eagerness on the part of a Home Secretary when exercising the power of release.
On 30 November 1983 the then Secretary of State made a statement to Parliament explaining how he proposed thereafter to exercise his powers under the subsection.
There was to be an additional consultation with the two judges which would take place after the prisoner had served three years of his sentence, so that the Secretary of State could receive at that stage their advice on the total period which should be served to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence.
The period advised by the judges has become known as ‘the judicial tariff’.
The first reference to the local review committee of the Parole Board would normally take place three years before the expiry of the tariff period.
The Secretary of State made it clear that after the first application to the local review committee there should, before he ordered release, be a further consultation with the judges ‘to satisfy the requirements of the section.’
Under this procedure the prisoner could discover what his tariff was as set by the judges, by simply adding three years to the date of the first reference to the local review committee.
At the same time the Secretary of State gave notice that for certain categories of crime where life sentences had been passed, the offenders could expect to spend at least 20 years in prison.
It was made clear in a further policy statement that in those cases where the tariff was 20 years or more the reference to the local review committee would be made after 17 years had been served, though a warning was given that this did not imply that any particular period had been set for the prisoner's tariff.
Those in the 20 years or more category remained unaware of their tariff or of any possible release date.
In 1988,Ex parte Handscomb , 86 Cr.App.R. 59 came before the Divisional Court.
There has been some difference of opinion as to what that case decided, but there is no dispute that the court held that the postponement of the consultation process with the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge until three years after sentence was unlawful, and that it should take place as soon as possible after conviction.
Watkins L.J.
dealt with the status of the judges' advice in these terms, at p. 82:
‘If, as I am in no doubt, the inference must be from Mrs. Murray's affidavit that the Home Secretary is not obliged to accept the judicial view of tariff and may, as I have also said, impose his own view as to this, a prima facie case of irrationality and Wednesbury unreasonableness must surely arise.
If the Home Secretary is not to be guided by the judges on retribution and deterrence, where else can he look for guidance?
Ex parte Handscomb was a case involving a discretionary life sentence, and on 23 July 1987 the Secretary of State made a further policy statement explaining some modifications to the procedure.
In future the advice of the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge was to be obtained immediately after sentence, whether the life sentence was mandatory or discretionary, but in the latter case the judicial view of the tariff was to determine the date of the first review by the Parole Board machinery.
The Secretary of State emphasised:
‘the release of a life sentence prisoner is solely at my discretion and it is for me to decide, after receiving the Parole Board's recommendation and after consulting the judiciary as required by section 61(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, when actual release should take place.
This policy statement made for the first time in this context a distinction in the Secretary of State's approach to mandatory life sentences on the one hand and discretionary life sentences on the other.
The latter no longer present so serious a cause of complaint compared with the mandatory sentences because of the provisions of section 34 of the Criminal Justice Act 1991.
This section, which will come into force on 1 October 1992, introduces a new procedure whereby the prisoner may require the Secretary of State to refer his case to the Parole Board, in certain specified circumstances.
The effect of consultation
The observations of Watkins L.J.
in Ex parte Handscomb , 86 Cr.App.R. 59, 82, already cited concerning the duty of the Secretary of State when receiving advice from the judiciary on the tariff has been the subject of judicial comment.
For example, Lloyd L.J.
in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Benson (No. 2), The Times, 21 November 1988 said:
‘[Handscomb ]does not decide that the Secretary of State is obliged to accept the judicial view on tariff; if it did so decide, I would respectfully disagree.
Lloyd L.J.
was evidently basing this comment on the terms of section 61(1).
The subsection creates an obligation to consult the judiciary, not to be governed by their opinion, which amounts to no more than advice.
If the decision of the Secretary of State as to the correct tariff after going through the consultation process is so out of touch with reality that it is irrational then, as in Ex parte Handscomb , that decision could be the subject of judicial review.
Apart from that situation the Secretary of State is not in my judgment bound to accept the advice of the judges.
They may be the best equipped to identify the tariff for retribution and deterrence in a particular case but they may also be wrong.
Other considerations of a public character may be present in the mind of the Secretary of State which persuade him to take a different view from the judges.
I would reject the argument advanced before us that a failure to follow the judicial advice on tariff, save in exceptional cases, is in itself irrational.
The position of the judges
Submissions were made that a life prisoner whose case is being referred to the judges under the ‘first’ consultation procedure ought to be allowed to make representations to the judges with the object of limiting his tariff, and further that the material to be placed before the judges should also be available for examination by the prisoner.
So far as the present procedure is concerned, I would reject those submissions.
As already observed, the judges are not called upon under the consultation procedure to make any decisions.
Their task is simply to give advice.
The decision-maker is the Secretary of State.
No rights under public law arise at the stage the judges advice is given.
There cannot be judicial review of an opinion.
Moreover, as pointed out by Watkins L.J.
in Ex parte Handscomb , 86 Cr.App.R. 59, 75 the advice given by the judges to the Secretary of State on tariff is given in confidence.
The present procedure when a judge is about to pass a life sentence for murder is for him to invite defending counsel to make submissions on what advice the judge should give to the Secretary of State on the appropriate tariff.
Unless the judge makes a recommendation under section 1(2) of the Murder (Abolition of the Death Penalty) Act 1965 as to the minimum period of imprisonment a person convicted of murder should serve — and this is now done infrequently — he does not say what advice he proposes to give the Secretary of State.
For my part, I do not see why the trial judge should not at that stage state in open court what that advice will be.
All the facts of the case will be fresh in his mind and he will have just heard the mitigation of counsel.
He will thus be better equipped to give an informed opinion than under the present procedure when the papers are returned to him some months later through the Lord Chief Justice.
Furthermore, there would be no question of the judge, before giving his advice, seeing documents which have not been available to the prisoner.
Both would have seen all the relevant documents either before or during the course of the trial.
As the law stands at present, however, even if the trial judge reveals at the time of sentencing what advice he proposes to give to the Secretary of State, it will still be necessary for the latter to consult the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge at a later stage.
It may be that on such a consultation the Lord Chief Justice will take a different view from that of the trial judge, but under the present procedure the prisoner will be unaware of any variation of the trial judge's original advice.
The present appellants argue that every life prisoner should be informed of the advice on tariff given by the judges to the Secretary of State.
If the prisoner is not aware of the judge's advice he is not able to present to the Secretary of State a reasoned case for a lower figure.
This argument, which is based on grounds of natural justice and procedural fairness, is resisted by counsel for the Secretary of State, partly because the statutory structure does not require that the information should be given and partly in reliance on the decision of this court in Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981]1 W.L.R. 754.
In that case the appellant who was, and is, serving a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment for murder, sought a declaration against the Parole Board and the Secretary of State that he was in effect entitled to know the reasons for refusing to release him on licence.
The appeal was dismissed, Lord Denning M.R. said, at p. 759:
‘In the end I think the problem comes down to this: what does public policy demand as best to be done?
To give reasons or to withhold them?
This is more a matter for the Secretary of State than for the courts.
But, so far as I can judge of the matter, I should think that in the interests of the man himself — as a human being facing indefinite detention — it would be better for him to be told the reasons.
But, in the interests of society at large— including the due administration of the parole system — it would be best not to give them.
Except in the rare case when the board itself think it desirable, as a matter of fairness, to ask one of the members to interview him.
That member may then think it appropriate to tell him.
This is not a case for any declaration.
I would dismiss the appeal.
This basis of deciding the case is not very satisfactory in the current climate.
More than a balancing exercise is required and the decision has not been followed in another case before this court: see Reg. v. Parole Board, Ex parte Wilson [1992]Q.B.
740.
In any case Payne's case is not dealing with the Secretary of State's decision on tariff.
For my part, I conclude that the life prisoner should be informed of the judge's advice on tariff, together with any comments the judges, or either of them, may have made about the responsibility of the prisoner for the crime compared with that of any co-defendant tried with him.
If a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence is to be given the opportunity to make representation to the Secretary of State concerning the length of his tariff, as in my judgment he should be, then, for those representations to be effective, he ought to be made aware beforehand of the nature of the judge's advice.
I recognise that at present this advice is given in confidence but, like Glidewell L.J., I would foresee little difficulty in the Secretary of State asking to be released from that confidence in pending cases.
Counsel for the appellants further submit that the life prisoner should also be informed of any advice given to the Secretary of State by the officials of his department.
I would reject this argument as calculated to undermine the proper administration of a department of state.
The minister in charge must be able to seek the advice of his subordinates without having to publish what he has been told.
The minister is to be regarded as head, and part of, his department, and his decision represents its collective wisdom.
Procedural fairness does not require him to identify his advisers or the advice they give to him.
Should the Secretary of State be compelled to give reasons for his decision to refuse the prisoner's release?
Mr. Sedley for two of the appellants argues that because of the quasi-judicial nature of the Secretary of State's task, it comes at that end of the spectrum of tribunal decisions which require reasons to be given.
We have been taken through a number of English and Australian authorities, but none I think are determinative of the Secretary of State's position.
The most recent case, a decision of this court, is Reg. v. Civil Service Appeal Board, Ex parte Cunningham [1991]4 All E.R.
310.
In his judgment Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. said that in deciding whether a tribunal was under a duty to give reasons for its decision, one considered, first, the character of the decision-making body and, secondly, the framework in which it operated.
One then posed the question whether fairness required any additional procedural safeguards.
It is clear in the present case that the statute makes no express or implied requirement that the Secretary of State should state his reasons for refusing a prisoner's release.
Is the ‘character’ of the decision-maker, i.e. the Secretary of State, and the framework in which he operates, such that additional procedural safeguards are required in the interests of fairness?
As already indicated in this judgment, I think that some additional safeguards are necessary, namely, that the prisoner should be informed of the advice given by the judges to the Secretary of State, and also have the opportunity to make representations to the Secretary of State before he makes his decision about the prisoner's date of release.
It is not necessary that the prisoner should be further protected by compelling the Secretary of State to give the reasons for his decision.
Any challenge to the rationality of the decision can be sufficiently based on the disclosed material.
A further point was taken by Mr. Scrivener that the decisions referred to in the subsection can only be made by the Secretary of State personally and that he may not delegate or transfer the power to make the decision to a minister of state, as happened in the case of Mr. Pegg.
For the reasons set out in the judgment of Staughton L.J.
I would reject that contention.
I agree that the appeal should be allowed and that declarations should be made in the terms appearing at the end of the judgment of Glidewell L.J.
Appeals allowed with costs.
Leave to appeal.
3 November.
The Appeal Committee of the House of Lords (Lord Keith of Kinkel, Lord Templeman and Lord Griffiths) allowed a petition by the applicant, Mr. Doody, for leave to cross-appeal.
Solicitors: Graham Withers & Co., Shrewsbury; Bindman & Partners; Cartwright Adams & Black, Cardiff; Treasury Solicitor.
[Reported by Nigel J. Mason Esq., Barrister]