

[CHANCERY DIVISION]
K. AND ANOTHER v. P. AND OTHERS
J. (THIRD PARTY)
[1991 K. No. 5188]
1992 May 1, 5;
June 22; 23
Ferris J.
Practice — Third party proceedings — Ex turpi causa non oritur actio — Plaintiffs claiming damages against defendant for fraudulent conspiracy — Defendant issuing third party notice against plaintiffs' accountant alleging negligence and breach of contract — Whether ex turpi causa defence to claim for contribution — Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 (c. 47), ss. 1(1), 6(1)
The plaintiffs brought an action for damages against the defendants for, inter alia, conspiracy to defraud the plaintiffs by the obtaining of inflated fees and commission payments in respect of a number of property transactions conducted by the defendants on the plaintiffs' behalf.
The third defendant issued a third party notice against the plaintiffs' accountant claiming an indemnity or contribution in the event of the third defendant being held liable to the plaintiffs, on the ground that the accountant had negligently failed to warn the plaintiffs of the risks inherent in the defendants' transactions.
On the third party's summons seeking to have the third party notice struck out, pursuant to R.S.C., Ord. 18, r. 19 or the inherent jurisdiction of the court, the master held that the claim was capable of falling within section 1(1) of the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978and dismissed the application.
On the third party's appeal, on the question whether assuming the defendants' illegality to be proved, the defence of ex turpi causa non oritur actio precluded a claim for contribution under the Act of 1978:—
Held , dismissing the appeal, that the liability imposed under section 1(1) of the Act of 1978 was intended by Parliament, by virtue of section 6(1) of the Act, to enable claims for contribution to be made as between parties who had no claim for contribution under the general law, and applied whenever a plaintiff had a cause of action against a third party in respect of the same damage as gave rise to his cause of action against the defendant, irrespective of the legal basis of the liability; and that, accordingly, the defence of ex turpi causa non oritur actio could not be relied upon in answer to a claim for contribution under the Act; and that, since there was sufficient possibility of the third party being found liable for some part of the plaintiffs' loss, there were no grounds for striking out the third party notice (post, pp. 1022H — 1023A, G–H, 1024G — 1025D).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Palaniappa Chettiar v. Arunasalam Chettiar [1962]A.C. 294;[1962]2 W.L.R. 548;[1962]1 All E.R.
494, P.C.
Euro-Diam Ltd. v. Bathurst [1990]1 Q.B.
1;[1988]2 W.L.R. 517;[1988]2 All E.R.
23, C.A.
Saunders v. Edwards [1987]1 W.L.R. 1116;[1987]2 All E.R.
651, C.A.
Thackwell v. Barclays Bank Plc. [1986]1 All E.R.
676
Tinsley v. Milligan [1992]Ch. 310;[1992]2 W.L.R. 508;[1992]2 All E.R.
391, C.A.
Weld-Blundell v. Stephens [1920]A.C. 956, H.L. (E.)
SUMMONS
On 9 November 1990, in an action by the plaintiffs claiming damages against the defendants for conspiracy to defraud in respect of a number of property transactions conducted by the defendants on the plaintiffs' behalf, the third defendant issued a third party notice against J., an accountant who had advised the plaintiffs, claiming an indemnity or, alternatively, a contribution to such an extent as the court might think just, on the ground of the third party's alleged failure to properly advise the plaintiffs in relation to the transactions.
On 6 June 1991, the third party issued a summons seeking to have the third party notice struck out.
On 3 October 1991 his application was dismissed by Master Munrow.
The third party appealed.
The appeal was heard in chambers, with an edited version of the judgment being released for publication.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
P. M. Roth for the third party.
Steven Whitaker for the third defendant.
23 June.
The following judgment was handed down.
FERRIS J. This is an appeal by the third party, an accountant, from an order of Master Munrow made on 3 October 1991 dismissing his application that a third party notice, served upon him by the third defendant in the main action, should be struck out.
In order to understand the nature of the application it is necessary first to consider the plaintiffs' claim against the third defendant.
This is not as straightforward as it ought to be, because the statement of claim is long and complex and in some respects obscure.
There are six defendants altogether, including the third defendant, and separate claims are made against three groups of defendants.
The first plaintiff, is a distinguished musician.
The second plaintiff is his brother.
In about the year 1971 the first plaintiff established a music school (‘the centre’).
For about the first 12 years of its existence the centre was carried on as an unincorporated organisation.
The second plaintiff became its administrator in 1980.
It seems that the centre flourished and that by the early 1980s it had over 300 pupils and 31 part-time teachers.
It outgrew its premises, and in 1982 the plaintiffs decided to acquire and convert other premises (‘the bakery’) to become the new premises of the centre.
The third defendant appears to have come onto the scene in about 1982 as a financial adviser in connection with the proposal to acquire and develop the bakery for the purposes of the centre.
It is said that he advised that the centre should be incorporated, and a company (‘C.M.C.’) was duly formed on 29 April 1983.
Presumably C.M.C. took over the running of the centre soon after that.
The third defendant became the managing director of C.M.C. at or soon after its incorporation.
It is said that, at the third defendant's instance, it was proposed to raise finance for C.M.C. from a lender (‘B.M.T.’) and that the third defendant became managing director because B.M.T. would prefer to deal with a man having a proven business record rather than a musician.
In paragraph 5 of the statement of claim the plaintiffs allege that various defendants, including the third defendant:
‘conspired amongst themselves and others to defraud the plaintiffs, and with intent to injure the plaintiffs, by a scheme for extracting moneys from the plaintiffs by way of inflated valuations and percentage fees and commission payments based upon such inflated valuations and by otherwise exposing the plaintiffs to liabilities, and calculated to make a profit for themselves…and/or companies in which the same were interested…by false representations, including forged and/or fraudulently altered and/or concealed loan application documentation by [the third defendant].
The overt acts of the alleged conspiracy are said to be set out in the statement of claim.
So far as the third defendant is concerned they can, I think, be summarised as follows.
(1) The third defendant fraudulently altered in a number of material respects an application which had been signed on behalf of C.M.C. by the first plaintiff for a loan on the security of the bakery. (2) The third defendant concealed from the plaintiffs the true impact of arrangements made between C.M.C. and two companies which I will describe simply as Crescent and Highdene in which, unknown to the plaintiffs, the third defendant was personally interested.
(3) In May 1983 B.M.T. to which the application signed by the first plaintiff and altered by the third defendant had been submitted, offered C.M.C. a loan of £185,500 on the security of the bakery.
This was £80,000 in excess of the loan asked for in the application in its unaltered form.
The plaintiffs say that they accepted this loan on behalf of C.M.C. on the advice of the third defendant.
(4) The third defendant concealed from the plaintiffs what is said to have been a false and fraudulent over-valuation of the bakery made in June 1983 by another of the alleged conspirators in order to support an even higher level of loan by B.M.T. (5) On 24 June 1983 B.M.T. offered to lend C.M.C. £420,000 on the security of the bakery in substitution for its previous offer to lend £185,500.
On 27 June 1983 this offer was purportedly accepted by C.M.C., the acceptance being signed by the third defendant and, on the face of it, by the plaintiffs.
It is said that neither of the plaintiffs actually signed this acceptance, their apparent signatures being forgeries made by a person or persons unknown on behalf of the conspirators or their connected companies.
(6) In August 1983 the third defendant claimed from C.M.C. a commission of £16,000 for himself and £8,000 for Highdene in respect of certain commercial arrangements, not involving the bakery, negotiated between C.M.C. and B.M.T. It is said that this claim led the other directors of C.M.C. to investigate the third defendant's activities and to dismiss him as a director of C.M.C. (7) Between May and July 1983 the third defendant caused the first plaintiff to sign in blank some cheques drawn on C.M.C.'s bank account by fraudulently representing that these cheques would be used to pay small and urgent bills of C.M.C. It is said that in fact the third defendant used six of these cheques to pay to himself and certain other parties sums amounting to about £30,000, allegedly in connection with the financing of the centre.
Although these allegations, if made good, clearly amount to wrongdoing on the part of the third defendant in relation to a number of individual matters, they do not convey to my mind a particularly comprehensible account of a conspiracy or of systematically fraudulent conduct.
The rest of the statement of claim does not make matters much clearer.
It contains allegations which do not directly involve the third defendant.
These include allegations against various solicitors of negligence in connection with the execution by C.M.C. and the plaintiffs of a legal charge in favour of B.M.T. to secure a loan of £420,000; the giving of personal guarantees by the plaintiffs in respect of this indebtedness; and subsequent proceedings brought by B.M.T. in which a possession order was made in respect of the bakery and a money judgment was given against the plaintiffs as guarantors for a sum of nearly £375,000.
It seems, although the statement of claim does not set out the matter in any systematic way, that C.M.C. drew down the full loan of £420,000 and subsequently defaulted in its payments to B.M.T. It does not appear precisely how the £420,000 was expended by C.M.C. After obtaining the possession order in respect of the bakery, B.M.T. sold it for about £183,000.
Bankruptcy proceedings appear to have been taken against the plaintiffs by B.M.T. Receiving orders were made against them in the county court but, on appeal, these orders were, it is said, rescinded on terms which are not stated but which are said to have been fulfilled.
The plaintiffs' underlying complaint seems to be that C.M.C. borrowed more than it needed and spent more of the borrowed money than it could afford to spend, with the result that there was a loss for which the plaintiffs have been held personally liable as guarantors.
But how this complaint lines up with the alleged conspiracy and fraudulent conduct is not clear to me.
I have not, of course, had the advantage of having the plaintiffs' claim explained to me by their own counsel.
The plaintiffs claim damages from a number of defendants, including the third defendant, under the following heads:(1) general damages for conspiracy;(2) exemplary damages on the basis that the acts complained of were calculated to make a profit for the conspirators or their companies and constituted a cynical disregard for the plaintiffs' rights; and (3) damages for deceit as an alternative to damages for conspiracy.
The general damages for conspiracy and the alternative damages for deceit are claimed to include the following:(a) moneys ‘expended upon the C.M.C.’ by the plaintiffs after the commencement of the company;(b) legal costs in fighting B.M.T.;(c) the stain and stigma of bankruptcy;(d) loss of earnings by the plaintiffs;(e) the effect upon the health of the first plaintiff;(f) loss of reputation of the first plaintiff;(g) distress and suffering;(h) loss of opportunity to develop the centre; and (i) other consequential loss.
The want of grammatical sense in this summary reflects, I fear, a similar defect in the statement of claim itself.
The prayer for relief so far as the third defendant is concerned, seeks damages for conspiracy to defraud; exemplary damages; an indemnity in respect of any liabilities to B.M.T. under what is described as ‘the said deed,’ which presumably means the legal charge or other instrument containing the personal guarantee given by the plaintiffs; damages for deceit; and interest.
From this analysis of the statement of claim it is clear that all the plaintiffs' claims against the third defendant are based upon allegations of fraud of one kind or another and that no relief is claimed on any basis which does not involve fraud.
The third party notice with which I am concerned is dated 9 November 1990.
After referring to the action it continues:
‘The third defendant denies the plaintiffs' claim against him but if contrary to his contentions he is held liable to the plaintiffs, he claims against you to be indemnified against the plaintiffs' claims and the costs of this action, alternatively contribution to such extent of the plaintiffs' claims as the court may think fit, on the grounds that (1) at all material times, you were the accountants retained by and advising the plaintiffs and each of them in respect of the proposed transaction (and in particular the financial aspects thereof) in relation to which the said alleged liability of the plaintiffs and each of them to [B.M.T.]was incurred;(2) in about the period from January to September 1983, you acted in breach of contract and negligently towards the plaintiffs and each of them in that you failed to advise them properly or at all with regard to the said proposed transaction and the financial aspects thereof and in particular failed to explain the full nature and extent thereof to the plaintiffs and each of them and/or failed to advise the plaintiffs as to the commercial prudence of the same and/or the risks inherent in proceeding with the same and/or failed to warn them not to enter into the same;(3) that in so far as any financial information was or may have been communicated by the third defendant he did so in reliance upon information supplied by you.
No third party directions have been sought, so that there is no order that the notice shall stand as a statement of claim in the third party proceedings.
Nevertheless the third party and his advisers seem to have acted as if such a direction had been given, for a document expressed to be a defence and counterclaim of the third party has been served.
I do not need to refer to this.
On 6 June 1991 there was issued on behalf of the third party a summons seeking an order that the third party notice be struck out pursuant to R.S.C., Ord. 18, r. 19 and the inherent jurisdiction of the court.
It was this summons which was dismissed by the master, from whose decision this appeal is brought.
I say at once that, as Mr. Roth accepted on behalf of the third party, R.S.C., Ord. 18, r. 19 appears to be inapplicable because a third party notice is not a pleading.
But there is no doubt that the court has an inherent jurisdiction to strike out any proceeding which is an abuse of its process; and it is such an abuse to commence and maintain a proceeding which has no prospect whatever of success.
The test is, of course, a strict one.
If there is any doubt about the ultimate outcome, the proceeding must be left on foot.
Before the master the attack on the third party notice was, I understand, based on somewhat technical issues, such as the want of particularity in the allegations made against the third party, the fact that there is no assertion that he was part of the conspiracy in which the third defendant is said to have joined and an argument that the third defendant and the third party are not on any view liable to the plaintiffs in respect of the same damage, so that the case is not within section 1(1) of the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978, which I shall mention in some detail later.
It was not, I think, surprising that the master rejected these arguments.
Any complaint of want of particularity could and should be dealt with by appropriate directions in the third party proceedings.
Moreover it is difficult, if not impossible, to determine whether the third defendant and the third party are liable in respect of the same damage until there has been a trial in order to determine what, if any, damage they are each liable for.
On this appeal Mr. Roth, on behalf of the third party, advanced arguments of a more fundamental nature than those advanced before the master.
He contended that, as the plaintiffs' claim against the third defendant is based exclusively on conspiracy and fraud, the third defendant will only be held liable to the plaintiffs if he is found guilty of serious dishonesty.
In contrast, it is not said by the third defendant or by anyone else that the third party was guilty of any form of dishonesty.
If he is liable to the plaintiffs at all it can only be on the basis of professional negligence.
Mr. Roth contended that it is inconceivable that a party who has been held to be merely negligent should be required to contribute to the damages payable by a party who has been found guilty of fraud.
It is rather as if a burglar, when sued for the recovery of the stolen property or its value, sought contribution from a security guard who, by falling asleep while on duty, had made the burglary possible.
It was said, with obvious force, that no such claim could ever succeed.
The maxim ‘ex turpi causa non oritur actio’ and its related rules would be applicable.
It is evident that the third defendant and the third party are not, on any view of the case, joint contractors or joint tortfeasors or in a relationship where contribution is available under equitable principles.
The sole basis of the third defendant's claim for contribution is the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978, of which the material provisions for present purposes are section 1(1), which needs to be read in conjunction with section 6(1), and section 2(1) and (2).
These provisions are in the following terms:
‘1(1) Subject to the following provisions of this section, any person liable in respect of any damage suffered by another person may recover contribution from any other person liable in respect of the same damage (whether jointly with him or otherwise).…
‘2(1) Subject to subsection (3) below, in any proceedings for contribution under section 1 above the amount of the contribution recoverable from any person shall be such as may be found by the court to be just and equitable having regard to the extent of that person's responsibility for the damage in question.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) below, the court shall have power in any such proceedings to exempt any person from liability to make contribution, or to direct that the contribution to be recovered from any person shall amount to a complete indemnity.’
‘6(1) A person is liable in respect of any damage for the purposes of this Act if the person who suffered it (or anyone representing his estate or dependants) is entitled to recover compensation from him in respect of that damage (whatever the legal basis of his liability, whether tort, breach of contract, breach of trust or otherwise).
Section 2(3) is not material for present purposes.
It appears to me that the arguments which I have heard involve the consideration of three separate questions, namely:(1) does the ex turpi causa maxim and its related rules (which I will refer to as ‘the ex turpi causa defence’) afford a defence to a claim for contribution under the Act of 1978?(2) If the ex turpi causa defence is capable of so applying, can it be said, with the degree of certainty necessary for a striking out order to be made, that the defence will exclude any contribution from the third party in the circumstances of this case?(3) Leaving aside the ex turpi causa defence, can it be said with the necessary degree of certainty that the court will, under section 2(1) and (2) of the Act of 1978, exempt the third party from liability to make contribution even if he has been negligent in the performance of some duty of care owed to the plaintiffs?
(1) Is the ex turpi causa defence available as an answer to a claim to contribution under the Act of 1978?
The defence is, of course, one which is part of the common law, not statute, being founded upon public policy.
For an application of the defence in a case where a claimant, in order to make good his claim, was obliged to assert his own fraudulent purpose I was referred to Palaniappa Chettiar v. Arunasalam Chettiar [1962]A.C. 294.
The defence has been considered in a number of recent cases in which it has been held that it is to be applied in a flexible and pragmatic way.
There were cited to me Thackwell v. Barclays Bank Plc. [1986]1 All E.R.
676;Saunders v. Edwards [1987]1 W.L.R. 1116;Euro-Diam Ltd. v. Bathurst [1990]1 Q.B.
1; and, by means of a note from counsel after the conclusion of argument,Tinsley v. Milligan [1992]Ch. 310.
In the Euro-Diam case [1990]1 Q.B.
1, 35, Kerr L.J.
summarised the relevant principles.
I quote the following from that summary, but for the sake of brevity I omit some of the references to authority and the elaboration of point (3) and the whole of point (4), which seem to me not to assist in the present case:
‘(1) The ex turpi causa defence ultimately rests on a principle of public policy that the courts will not assist a plaintiff who has been guilty of illegal (or immoral) conduct of which the courts should take notice.
It applies if in all the circumstances it would be an affront to the public conscience to grant the plaintiff the relief which he seeks because the court would thereby appear to assist or encourage the plaintiff in his illegal conduct or to encourage others in similar acts: see (2)(iii) below.
The problem is not only to apply this principle, but also to respect its limits, in relation to the facts of particular cases in the light of the authorities.
(2) The authorities show that in a number of situations the ex turpi causa defence will prima facie succeed.
The main ones are:(i) where the plaintiff seeks to, or is forced to, found his claim on an illegal contract or to plead its illegality in order to support his claim.
…For that purpose it makes no difference whether the illegality is raised in the plaintiff's claim or by way of reply to a ground of defence…(ii) Where the grant of relief to the plaintiff would enable him to benefit from his criminal conduct:…(iii) Where, even though neither (i) nor (ii) is applicable to the plaintiff's claim, the situation is nevertheless residually covered by the general principle summarised in (i) above.
This is most recently illustrated by the judgment of Hutchison J. in Thackwell v. Barclays Bank Plc. [1986]1 All E.R.
676, in particular at pp. 687, 689, as approved by this court in Saunders v. Edwards [1987]1 W.L.R. 1116, 1127 and 1134, and in particular per Nicholls L.J., at p. 1132. (3) However, the ex turpi causa defence must be approached pragmatically and with caution, depending on the circumstances: see e.g. per Bingham L.J.
in Saunders v. Edwards , at p. 1134.
On behalf of the third party, Mr. Roth contended that this is a clear case.
The fact that the claim is made in third party proceedings in the context of a denial by the third defendant that he has conspired against the plaintiffs or defrauded them must not be allowed to conceal the fact that the claim for contribution from the third party necessarily asserts the contrary, albeit on a contingent basis.
The position is equivalent to that which would exist if the third defendant were claiming contribution by means of a separate action after being held liable to the plaintiffs.
In such an action the third defendant would have to plead that he had inflicted loss on the plaintiffs by conspiracy or fraud and had been required to compensate the plaintiffs for such loss.
He would then have to plead that the loss was attributable to the third party's professional negligence in failing to draw the attention of the plaintiffs to what the third defendant and others were doing.
It would not, however, be possible for the third defendant to suggest that the third party was in any way guilty of any illegal conduct.
A claim formulated in this way would, it was said, be a clear case for the application of the ex turpi causa defence, falling squarely within point 2(i) of Kerr L.J. 's summary.
In opposition to this, Mr. Whitaker, on behalf of the third defendant, pointed out that this is not a case where the third defendant is himself asserting against the third party a cause of action in contract or tort.
What the third defendant is asserting is a statutory cause of action under the Act of 1978, the only necessary ingredients of which are that a person or persons, namely the plaintiffs, have against the third party a cause of action in respect of the same damage as gives rise to that person or person's cause of action against the third defendant.
It does not matter that the plaintiffs' cause of action against the third defendant arises from conspiracy or fraud whereas their cause of action against the third party arises from breach of a contractual or tortious duty of care.
Mr. Whitaker relied upon the wording of section 6(1) of the Act of 1978, which says that a party is liable in respect of any damage, and so potentially in the position of being able to claim or having to make contribution, ‘whatever the legal basis of his liability, whether tort, breach of contract, breach of trust or otherwise.’
He pointed out that the Act of 1978 replaced section 6 of the Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act 1935 which created a right of contribution between joint tortfeasors: ‘Where damage is suffered by any person as a result of a tort (whether a crime or not)…
’ The concluding words show that a claim to contribution might arise under the Act of 1935 out of tortious conduct committed by two or more persons even though one or both of them may have committed a crime in the course of such conduct.
In relation to such a claim the ex turpi causa defence could have had no application.
The Act of 1978 extends the potential for contribution beyond joint tortfeasors to joint contractors, joint trustees and others who are liable in respect of the same damage.
Although there is no reference to crime in the Act of 1978 which corresponds to the reference in section 6 of the Act of 1935, it is hardly to be supposed that Parliament, while creating a considerable extension of the right of contribution in cases other than cases of tort, nevertheless intended to narrow the right to contribution previously given to tortfeasors by the Act of 1935.
Apart from other considerations, it is manifest that the words of section 6(1) of the Act of 1978 are intended to be interpreted widely, hence the use of the words ‘whatever the basis of his liability’ and the emphasis added by the word ‘otherwise’at the end of the enumerated causes of action.
Mr. Whitaker also referred me to some passages in the speeches of Viscount Finlay and Lord Dunedin in Weld-Blundell v. Stephens [1920]A.C. 956, 966–968, 976.
These passages contain observations about the absence of a right of contribution between tortfeasors, but they relate to the law as it stood before 1935.
While they provide a context in which to appraise the changes made by the Act of 1935, which was I think the purpose for which Mr. Whitaker cited them, I did not find them of direct assistance.
I do, however, accept the other parts of Mr. Whitaker's argument.
In my judgment the ex turpi causa defence is not available as an answer to a claim for contribution under the Act of 1978.
The specific purpose of that Act, as of the Act of 1935 before it, was to enable claims for contribution to be made as between parties who had no claim to contribution under the general law.
To permit the ex turpi causa defence to be relied upon as an answer to such a claim would, in my view, narrow to a substantial extent the deliberately wide wording of section 6(1) of the Act of 1978 and would, in effect, make a claim for contribution subject to a condition precedent which is not to be found in the Act.
Moreover, section 2(1) and (2) give the court ample power to fix the amount of the contribution at a level, including a zero level, which takes account of all the factors which, in relation to common law claims, are relevant to the ex turpi causa defence.
(2) If it were available in respect of a claim under the Act of 1978, would the ex turpi causa defence clearly exclude a claim to contribution by the third defendant in this case?
In view of the answer that I have given to the first question this second question does not arise and it would be unwise for me to attempt to answer it on a hypothetical basis.
However I would say that, on a strike out application, I would find it difficult to hold with certainty that the ex turpi causa defence, assuming it to be available, would exclude a claim to contribution under the Act of 1978 unless I were also satisfied, with the same degree of certainty, that there must be exemption from contribution under section 2(2).
Whether I am so satisfied is the third question, to which I now turn.
(3) Can it be said with certainty that the court will, under section 2(2), exempt the third party from liability to make a contribution?
The question for the consideration of the court at the stage when the amount of contribution has to be assessed is how much, if anything, ought to be recoverable by the third defendant from the third party ‘having regard to the extent of [the third party's]responsibility for the damage in question.’
In considering whether at this stage it is possible to say that the answer to this question must be ‘nothing’ I must assume that the third defendant will be found guilty of conspiracy or fraud as alleged by the plaintiffs and also that the third party will be found to be negligent as regards the plaintiffs in the respects mentioned in the third party notice.
In so far as the plaintiffs are seeking to recover from the third defendant money which he has obtained for his own benefit or for the benefit of companies which are, in effect, his alter ego, I can see that the third party would have an overwhelming argument that it cannot be just and equitable to require him to contribute to whatever the third defendant is ordered to pay to the plaintiffs.
Contribution, if ordered, would enable the third defendant or his fellow conspirators to retain part of the proceeds of their conspiracy or fraud.
Similar considerations would, it appears to me, be applicable to any claim that the third party should contribute to any exemplary damages which the third defendant may be ordered to pay to the plaintiffs, for exemplary damages would never be recoverable by the plaintiffs direct from the third party.
Indeed it may well be that a claim for contribution in respect of exemplary damages is not within section 1(1) on the facts of this case, so that one never gets to section 2 in relation to such a claim.
However, as I understand it, the plaintiffs' claim against the third defendant goes well beyond a claim to recover the benefits actually obtained by conspiracy or fraud.
It extends, it seems, to a claim for compensation in respect of all the loss which the plaintiffs say that they have suffered as a result of the transaction concerning C.M.C. and the bakery, including the amounts which the plaintiffs have had to pay as guarantors and compensation for loss of earnings, loss of reputation and mental anguish.
If, as I must assume for present purposes, the plaintiffs have a good cause of action in professional negligence against the third party, then it must be at least possible, if not indeed likely, that the damages recoverable by the plaintiffs from the third party would include damages under at least some of these heads.
I can see that the third party would have a cogent argument that even if he were liable to compensate the plaintiffs in respect of these matters it would not be just and equitable to require him to make a contribution to the third defendant's liability.
But what the court has to consider is the third party's responsibility for the damages in question.
Once it is assumed that the third party would be liable to the plaintiffs for damages of a particular kind, it must follow that he has some responsibility for those damages.
In order to carry out the exercise required by section 2(1) it would be essential, in my judgment, to evaluate the relative responsibilities of the third defendant and the third party.
I do not see how this can be done without a trial of both the action and the claim to contribution.
Certainly I feel unable at this stage to say, with the degree of certainty necessary to make a striking out order, that the third party will inevitably be exempted from making contribution under section 2(2).
(4) Conclusion
In the result, although I have considerable sympathy with the third party in the position in which he finds himself and I think it may well be the case that the third defendant will fail to obtain contribution from him, I do not consider that this will inevitably be so.
Accordingly it would not be right to strike out the third party notice on the ground that the claim to contribution is doomed to failure.
I therefore dismiss this appeal.
Appeal dismissed.
Solicitors: Warner Cranston; Lester Madrell & Co., Cheltenham.