

Twenty-One
Pascoe said, ‘Stay here, I'll be back as soon as I can.’
He handed Sophie a piece of paper: Zeno's last letter.
He'd added something to it.
‘That's the number.
Give me half an hour, then call.
That way you can tell me you're all right, I can tell you I'm all right, and who knows: it might make the son of a bitch edgy.’
‘If he wants to kill you, why would he arrange to see you in a restaurant with the whole world looking on?’
‘Don't call too soon, in case he's intending to be fashionably late.
I don't want to be on the phone when he arrives — it'll make him wary.’
‘Edgy's good; wary's bad…
I've got it.’
‘What are you angry about?’
‘I'm worried.’
‘Does that make you angry?’
‘You can see it fucking does.
Now: what's the answer?’
‘Why meet in a restaurant?’
‘Yes.’
‘If I knew what he wanted, I might be able to tell you.’
‘He killed Nick.’
‘Yes, he did.
He must have.’
‘And he tried to kill you.’
‘But he didn't succeed.
Perhaps that's why he wants to talk.’
‘About Lori…’
‘So it seems.’
‘Don't go.
Let's just…
We could leave.
We could pack and leave tonight.’
Pascoe went over to where she was sitting, perched like a nervous bride on the edge of the bed, and kissed her  gently on the lips.
He said, ‘Unfinished business remember?’
You could always hear the ocean in Dewer Street.
Pascoe crossed over to walk beside the sea wall.
It was something a stranger might do — someone who hadn't learned to take the view for granted.
In truth, Pascoe wanted a clear sight of the other side of the street.
Few people went to the seafront at night; a follower would be fairly easy to spot.
He glanced to and fro as he walked back across the road, but no-one was there.
That's something Rob Thomas would probably do, he thought.
I'm acting like a detective.
He laughed out loud at the notion, and the laugh showed him that he was jumpy.
There was a sliver of moon, a white rind.
The sea was a soft explosion in the dark.
On his way to the restaurant he passed a man and a woman arm in arm, a man walking purposefully, as if late for an appointment, a woman standing next to her car and searching her bag for the key.
He looked twice at the hurrying man, but decided that, like the others, he was what he seemed to be.
He looked at the people drinking in the restaurant bar, and thought the same.
One of them was an old man, sipping slowly at a beer.
A table had been booked in Pascoe's name.
He ordered a Scotch, the only drink he would allow himself, he'd decided.
The old man finished his beer and left.
Shortly afterwards, a waiter came across to Pascoe with a note.
‘What's happening?’
Sophie had lifted the phone before the second ring.
‘He didn't show.
I've got a note instead.’
‘Saying what?’
‘Saying…’
He paused; she could hear him shaking out the page.
‘'Lost my appetite.
Come to forty-nine Dewer Street for drinks.
Bring Sophie.’’
‘That's this street.
The hotel's in Dewer Street.’
‘Yes.’
‘Are you going there?’
‘Look…’
The phone was in the crook of her neck; she was wearing a scarab ring on her wedding finger and used the thumb and little finger of the same hand to twitch it back and forth across the knuckle.
The other sign of nervousness was in her voice — breathy and rapid.
‘I thought the idea was that you'd meet him in public.
His idea, wasn't it?
To make you feel safe.
How good is that guarantee now?
I also remember a specific instruction: come alone.
What happened to that?’
‘I know.
I'm going anyway.’
‘You want me to come?’
‘It's what he wants.
So let's pretend to be fitting in with that.’
‘How pretend?
Why are you whispering?’
‘This phone's by the door — there are people at tables nearby, people coming and going.
Listen: I want to flush him out.
Go to that address.
I'll already be there —’
‘Sam —’
‘No, it's OK.
I'm not more than fifteen minutes’ walk away.
That puts me there at eight-thirty.
I'll tell him I have to call you — it's what we've agreed.
If I say, ‘Everything's fine, come round,’ that means stay away, I'm in trouble.
If I say, ‘I'm in trouble,’ that means everything's OK.’
‘What should I do — if it's bad news?’
‘Don't come.’
‘Jesus, I know that.
What should I do about you?’
She was sitting in an armchair, leaning forward, her eyes closed as if to concentrate better on what was being said.
It was clear to her that something was wrong — something beyond what the voice was talking about.
Then, in a moment of appalled recognition, she saw the lie for what it was.
The whisper continued.
‘Don't do anything.’
‘You're just going to walk in there?’ she asked.
‘On his  terms, no back-up, no weapon, no way of knowing what he's got planned?’
Sophie could hear the anger in his voice.
‘Enough's enough,’ he said.
‘This bastard stuck a knife into me.’
A country saying goes: Bad luck if you see the new moon through glass.
One of the waiters peered through the wall-sized window on to the street.
Business was slow, so the tips would be poor: bad luck.
He opened the door and smiled because a good-looking woman was arriving to keep a date.
Sophie sat down at Pascoe's table and said, ‘I thought I'd find you here.’
He could see that something had happened.
‘Where else would I be?’
‘Forty-nine Dewer Street.
I've just had a telephone conversation with the Great Zeno: magus, escapologist and clever bastard.’
‘Go on…’
‘Pretending to be you.
He's calling again.
I've worked out a way of stalling, but it won't hold him for ever.
We've got about four minutes to get back to the hotel.’
They ran, but it took them six.
In the room, Sophie worked on levelling her breathing.
She was given a minute's grace, then the phone rang.
She lifted it to silence.
Looking at Pascoe, she said, ‘Sam?’
The silence extended.
as if to reassure, Sophie added, ‘I was in my room.
My room.
I thought you'd ask for my room.
When you didn't call, I came back in here.’
She waited to see whether she would be believed.
‘I'm in trouble,’ Zeno said, and hung up.
Sophie had given Pascoe the bare details as they ran back from the restaurant; now she told the rest.
‘I'm supposed to go there.
I'm supposed to think that you've just given me the OK.’
She waited for a response, but Pascoe just nodded.
‘A waiter brought you a note?’
‘That's right,’ he said.
‘Did you ask who'd sent it?’
‘Of course.
It had been left on the bar:Please give this to Mr Sam Pascoe .’
‘What did it say?’
He smiled.
‘It said, ‘Delayed; sit tight.’
That's what I was doing.’
‘You're at the restaurant.
I'm on my way to forty-nine Dewer Street.
He'll be expecting me.’
She shivered.
‘What shall we do?’
Pascoe said, ‘That's what he thinks: me at the restaurant, you on your way.
He expects to organize all the surprises — that's the way it's been until now.’
‘You want me to go.’
‘No.
But it gives us an advantage.
He thinks he's fooled us.
This one time, he's off balance.’
‘When they want to shoot a tiger,’ Sophie told him, ‘they tether a goat near a tree.
A guy with a gun sits up the tree and waits.
Eventually, the tiger arrives and tears the goat's throat out.
That's when the man with the gun shoots the tiger.’
‘No,’ Pascoe said, ‘you're right.
I'll go alone.’
Sophie opened the door and walked to the lift.
She got in and held the door-open button.
Pascoe appeared in the hall, but he didn't get into the lift with her.
He said, ‘I can probably handle it better on my own.’
Sophie laughed.
‘Handle what?
You sound as if it's all in a day's work.
Get in.’
As they went down, he asked: ‘When he called, how did you know it wasn't me?’
‘He was clever — he whispered.
You can't identify a voice from a whisper.
But it made me think of the voice that sent us to the bar; he whispered then.
Even so, I wasn't sure.
He acted well.
He made you sound worried and puzzled and angry all at the same time, and that was right for what was happening.
I closed my eyes and concentrated on the voice, and I thought it wasn't you, but I didn't really know.
So I asked him a question.’
‘What did you say?’
‘I said, ‘So you're going there with no back-up, no  weapon, no way of knowing what he'll do’— something like that.’
‘He didn't respond to ‘no weapon’.’
‘That's right.’
Pascoe took her gun from his pocket.
‘You'd better have it back now.
For a moment or two you'll be in there on your own.’
Sophie shook her head.
‘You've got it wrong,’ she said.
‘I'm the goat.
You're the guy up the tree.’
First surprise was the boatyard.
Sophie had been expecting a house, with a front door and a bell.
Second surprise was the music — a soft waltz coming to her through deep blue dusk, strings and woodwind, as if someone in a grand house up on the hill had just opened the door of the ballroom.
She stood just inside one of the big gates and started to act her role.
‘Sam,’ she called out.
‘Sam?’
As she stepped further into the boatyard, she thought: I hope you can hear me, Pascoe, and I hope you can see me clearly from the tree, because I can smell the tiger.
She said, ‘Sam?’
The waltz was Strauss, a touch louder now.
Just in front of her, enclosed by chocked-up hulls, was an open space big as a dance floor.
The music went pom-pom-pom , three-four time, almost irresistible.
‘Sam?’
Third surprise was the little table, suddenly under a spotlight, on it a top hat and a cane.
A gentleman caller had arrived to take her to the ball.
As she watched, the cane snapped and sprang, becoming flowers.
Her corsage.
Out of the hat came a dove — wings whirring — that flew up, circled once, and then was lost in the dark.
He tapped her on the shoulder-Excuse me — and when she turned he took her by the wrist and round the waist, holding her close, whisking her on to the floor.
His tailcoat, his white tie, his dancing pumps, all impeccable.
The white half-mask he wore made it seem as if the upper  part of his face had been skinned.
His lipstick was so thick that when he smiled at her, he showed teeth rimmed with red.
She was breathless, like a girl who had danced every dance.
The arm wrapped round her back hugged her so tightly that her ribs threatened to crack.
Shock did the rest.
Her mouth was open, but she didn't make a sound as he whirled her into the darkness.
His divided face looked down at her in disappointment.
She wasn't dressed for the occasion: no gown, no satin slippers, no tiara.
A girl should have something — a simple row of pearls, perhaps.
A choker.
He spun her away, letting her go to arm's length as she twirled, but following closely.
He stood behind her, his hands falling to her nape like someone about to fix the clasp of a necklace.
She felt the cord fall on to her throat and tighten.
‘Sam!’
In her voice there was terror and anger, summons and expectation.
She was calling for someone she knew to be there.
Zeno heard the difference and half turned as Pascoe stepped into the beam of the spotlight.
His foot struck a cassette-player that skittered off into the darkness.
The music stopped.
He was holding the gun out like a target-shooter, everything wrong, and he didn't speak because he couldn't think of a thing to say.
Sophie grabbed the cord that encircled her throat, holding it out like a tight collar.
When it came loose, she tossed it away.
Already she had started to run.
Her leg cracked against a trailer bar that sloped back to a set of wheels.
She fell heels-up, almost making a somersault.
Zeno and Pascoe faced each other, Pascoe circling to try to get advantage from the light.
Eventually, he thought to say, ‘If you move, I'll shoot.’
Sophie hurried towards the gates.
All she wanted to do was get out of there.
Her legs were almost too shaky to hold her up and she felt consciousness closing down.
To stay on her feet, she talked, just gibberish —‘OK, I've got  to go now, got to go, all right?
I'd better go now, sorry about that, but I have to go, I'll find the gates and I'll leave, that OK? 'Cause I have to go now, no question about it, OK?
I'm leaving, I'm going now…’— in a low voice, meant for no-one.
Zeno backed out of the light.
‘If you move, I'll shoot.’
Pascoe said it again, but all he did was point the gun.
Zeno lifted a hand to say goodbye: a quick salute.
Directly in front of the heeled-up dinghies, Pascoe ducked and lost his footing; he sat down hard, the breath squirting from his lungs, and fired a shot without knowing it had happened.
Zeno's knife clattered away somewhere behind him.
Another was already on the way, off-target because Zeno hadn't expected the gunshot.
The blade sang in the polished boards by Pascoe's head, a thin note declining on the air.
Pascoe scrambled up and found cover behind the light.
He switched the barrel of the gun to and fro, looking for a target, but all he could see was the silk hat and the garish bunch of flowers, pink and green and orange, each with a button-centre like the mad eye of a moon-daisy.
The trick was to retreat towards the gates.
If that was Zeno's move too, Pascoe might intercept him; if not, it would bottle him up in the boatyard.
He started back, using the dinghies as cover.
All he could hear was the sound of the sea and his own breath, dangerously loud.
The gunshot had immobilized Sophie.
The gun was meant to give him control, she hadn't expected to hear it used.
She would be bait, Zeno would be drawn, then Pascoe would appear with the gun and they'd be asking a few hard questions.
That was the idea.
Now someone might be dead.
She could see part of Dewer Street through the half-open gate and it seemed to be deserted.
She stood in the gloom, not knowing whether to stay or run away.
Twice, she opened her mouth to yell Pascoe's name, but reasoned that to call him wouldn't bring him any faster, and might well distract him.
She switched her gaze from the street to  the boatyard.
The spotlight cast shadows that curled on the sculpted sides of the motor launches.
She touched her throat where the garotte had lain and felt the flicker of her own pulse, like a flame in the wind.
Come on, Sam.
Let's go.
Let's go, OK?
All right?
It's time to go.
A new shadow sprang up on the hull, a dark wave, and then the light went out.
Pascoe froze.
He stared towards the point where the light had been, wanting to see a darker shape on darkness.
The absence of brightness made everything totally black.
Then the pale spillage from streetlights seeped back again, barely enough to show him the gun when he pointed it.
He was angry with himself, and that made him reckless.
He knew he should have fired when he had the chance; by leaving it too late, he'd lost the advantage.
Now he was going cat-and-mouse round the yard, as much hunted as hunter.
He'd fallen out of the tree and the tiger was close somewhere just beyond the clearing.
He went deeper into the boatyard, treading like a man on a cliff-edge, and his hip struck the little table, toppling it.
Both Sophie and Zeno looked towards the sound.
As soon as he'd switched the light off, Zeno had taken the same route through the yard as Sophie had done a little earlier.
Pascoe's original position, behind the dinghies, had cut off the route to the storage hut and that other means of getting to the street.
The challenge of the light going off was: Come this way; come further in.
Now Pascoe was doing just that and Zeno was between him and the gate.
Clever, he thought.
Clever Sophie and clever Sam.
And brave, to be used as bait.
And unpredictable, to come with a gun.
I hadn't thought of that — hadn't thought that you might fight back.
I should have guessed, of course.
Sophie was always reckless; and Sam had wanted to blow up a train.
He skirted the stern of the motor launch and looked to where the wash from the lights in Dewer Street fell through the gates.
Sophie tried to read meaning into the noise.
The two men were fighting.
Or Sam had found Zeno by the noise: he was captured.
Or he was wounded and weak; he had fallen; Sam was standing over him.
In a minute, she'd hear Sam speak.
In a minute, she would dare draw breath again.
She took a couple of steps into the yard as if Pascoe's voice were already summoning her.
The whisper stopped her heart.
Just her name, ‘Sophie ’, spoken close to her ear, because no-one else deserved to share the moment.
They had waltzed the last waltz together, now the evening was over.
Her partner stooped to claim his goodnight kiss.
Pascoe heard her scream and scrambled across junk and debris in the darkness.
He fell twice, going down the second time across a litter of boxes, and losing the gun.
From somewhere in the darkness, Sophie made little, stricken noises, all on an indrawn breath.
She was sitting down by the gate, one hand on her neck, her head canted over at a fierce angle.
Her knees were drawn up, like a child's.
She said, ‘Let's go, now — all right?
Can we go?
I think we'd better go now, is that OK?
Sam…is that OK?’
He took her free hand and pulled her upright.
The other hand stayed clamped to her neck.
He said, ‘I dropped the gun.’
‘Let's just go.’
‘I dropped the gun,’ he said, ‘and we'll have to go back and get it.
I want those other things too.’
He tried to shift her arm in order to see the wound, but she turned away with a violent shrug.
‘Don't —’ A yelp, high-pitched and full of anger; it meant: Don't touch, don't look, don't ask.
Pascoe took his hand away as if it had been stung.
His fingertips were wet.
The spotlight was a torch, tied to a stanchion.
The table was bamboo and rattan.
The cassette-player was pocket-sized and dented where Pascoe had trodden on it.
The flowers were a cane in disguise.
The hat was empty.
Pascoe walked the yard for another ten minutes, torch in hand, looking for traces of Zeno.
Sophie was at his side, head bowed, but she wasn't looking.
He wrenched the knife back and forth to free it from the planking.
The first one Zeno had thrown was lost completely.
He took a straight line towards the gates and found the gun at once.
‘I've got to go now, Sam, OK?’
Sophie wasn't looking at him.
She stood quite still, her eyes on the ground, holding her neck.
‘Let's go, OK?
I've really got to go.’
She didn't make a move, so he took her free arm and led her out.
There was no-one on Dewer Street to hear her cry.
Twenty-Two
The entrance lobby of the hotel was bright with neon.
A phone rang in the office beyond the desk, but no-one answered it.
Pascoe had abandoned the bamboo and rattan table.
The cassette-recorder was in his pocket along with the knife.
He carried the flowers and the hat in one hand like a rejected suitor whose props had let him down.
‘You can shoot the tiger before it tears the goat's throat out, or you can do it afterwards.’
Sophie took a long breath that came in torn fragments — the aftermath of weeping.
‘But the trick is to shoot the fucking tiger at all costs.’
In Pascoe's room was a circular coffee table with a glass top.
He laid everything on it and stood back to look, like someone in an art gallery sizing up a surrealist exhibit.
There was bird shit in the hat.
After a moment, he followed Sophie into the bathroom.
She stood sideways to look at herself, leaning towards the mirror, her palm still cupped by the place to trap what lay beneath.
On the pale skin of her neck lay the red-and-purple butterfly of a love-bite.
Blood-beads had seeped from tiny capillaries in the butterfly's wings.
Circling it was a broken O of lipstick.
She looked at Pascoe's reflection with her own reflected face.
‘He didn't have time to kill me, so he kissed me.’
‘I shouldn't have let you go in there,’ Pascoe said.
‘I'm sorry.’
‘He wanted me.
He was expecting me.’
She meant: Don't apologize — it can't make any difference.
In truth, though, she wished that he had stopped her.
She filled the wash-basin and soaped the lipstick off.
The butterfly's dappled colours glistened and new points of blood started  up, freshened by the water.
Pascoe put out a hand to touch the place and she shied away, so he drew her in, pulling against her resistance and binding her arms with his.
He kissed her gently, expecting nothing back.
‘It'll fade,’ he said, ‘it'll soon be gone,’and kissed her again before leaving her to herself.
After he'd gone out, she continued to stand as she had when he'd kissed her — as she had when Zeno had kissed her.
Sophie…
Eyes closed, she called the moment back — his voice in her ear, his mouth on her neck, the way he dragged breath through his nose while he rooted at her.
Pascoe had heard her scream and was coming across the boatyard, crashing and falling.
Zeno's head shook with fury as he sucked her and bruised her.
When Pascoe fell again, Sophie fell too.
If her eyes had been open, she would have seen Zeno heading for the cliff path.
She ran the water out of the basin and held her wrists under the cold tap until they were numb.
The Strauss waltz started up in the bedroom.
Pascoe was sitting on the floor by the coffee table, cassette-player in one hand, the knife balanced across one extended finger.
He said, ‘Whoever it is certainly likes to have fun.
He's a performer — a showman.’
‘Forgive me,’ Sophie said, ‘if I don't applaud.’
Pascoe fast-forwarded the tape, then pressed play, bringing the music back on the swell of a crescendo.
‘Did he seem all right to you — when he kissed you?’
She stared at him, not knowing what he could possibly mean.
‘I shot at him, remember?
I thought maybe I'd hit him.’
She shook her head.
‘I don't think you could hit the ocean if you fired the gun from a boat.’
The tape whinnied on as he pressed fast-forward again.
‘Do you think he owns the boatyard?’
‘Do you?’
‘No.’
‘No, but he might own a boat.
We could look at that.’
Pascoe chose another moment on the tape and the waltz  seemed to be reaching a finale: all brass and basses.
He thumbed the button.
‘I'd better have a drink.’
Sophie said it as if describing some tiresome duty.
She poured Scotch for them both, then went towards the bathroom to add water.
As she passed Pascoe he pressed play and a voice whispered ‘…dead .’
Pascoe said, ‘Christ!’
Sophie froze, a glass in either hand, her gaze fixed on the bathroom door, her lips parted in a silent cry.
She didn't move when she heard Pascoe winding the tape back, nor did she look at him.
There was a pause; he seemed to be waiting for her permission.
She went into the bathroom and added water to the whisky, then came back out and handed him a glass.
After she'd taken her first sip, she said: ‘Play it — go ahead,’ and sat on the bed to listen where she wouldn't have to meet his eye.
The waltz swayed to an end and died on a cymbal crash.
Zeno's voice said, ‘Goodbye, Sophie; you're dead.’
It was the same husky voice that Pascoe had heard when he'd sat in the empty house at the table laid for one.
Zeno had recorded the waltz and second-guessed the scene: a dance, a dip, a twirl, the cord around her neck.
Goodbye, Sophie; you're dead .
Pascoe would have been at the restaurant, waiting.
Maybe Zeno had plans for him as well.
He might have intended to arrive — late as his note had said — with some other surprise.
He might have sat down with Pascoe and eaten the food and drunk the wine with her murder still at his fingertips.
Goodbye, Sophie; you're dead .
Perhaps he'd timed it perfectly.
Perhaps, if Pascoe hadn't arrived, she would have gone first to her knees, then sat down, her tongue out like dead meat, with Zeno kneeling up behind her using his hands like someone binding a bale.
She would have felt her jaw cracking, her eyeballs filling with blood.
Then he'd have rolled her aside and stood up, panting.
Then the cymbal crash.
Then,Goodbye, Sophie; you're dead .
Pascoe thought, only a real performer would bother  with a grace-note like that; only a real egotist.
Sophie thought,Goodbye, Sophie; you're dead .
Pascoe stripped and got into bed.
There was something bleak in his face, something unforgiving.
He said, ‘We can tempt him, or wait for him to tempt us, or leave.
If we leave, it's a fair bet he'll come after us.
Not certain, though.’
‘Is that what you want to do?’
‘I don't know.
I don't think so, no.
The idea of turning my back on him doesn't make me feel safe.’
Sophie was wearing jeans.
She pushed them down and left them on the floor.
Her sweater and T-shirt followed.
‘How would you tempt him?
If that was what you decided to do.’
‘Basically, by staying here, but refusing to be drawn.
No dinner-dates, no meetings.
If we don't play his game, he'll have to be more direct.’
She took off her underclothes — bending, high-stepping — eyes on some distant thought.
‘What else?’
‘Take risks, I suppose.
Go to lonely places and go there alone.
Make it a pattern.’
‘In the hope that he'll see the pattern and try to make use of it.’
‘Yes.’
She got into bed beside him and closed her eyes, briefly.
She could have been trying to picture the place where Zeno and she might meet; some barren scrap of land inside her head.
She opened them when Pascoe leaned across, anxious to comfort her.
He touched her cheek and she leaped, hot-wired, her hands all over him, almost ferocious.
‘What is it?’
She was fighting to turn him, fighting to bring him on top of her.
‘I don't know.’
She sounded close to being afraid.
‘I feel so horny I think I'll faint.’
Her legs forked, greedily.
‘For God's sake put it in me.’
In the same moment, she started to come, hips rising so  fast that she almost bucked him off.
She yelled, as if touched by fire, and held on to the moment, her torso subsiding fraction by fraction.
She lay under him, loose-limbed, like someone who'd fallen, and raised both arms above her head to grasp the bedrails.
‘Again,’ she said.
Pascoe saw where it had come from, that excitement, that unstoppable hunger.
It was the cord on her neck, the killer's hands there, his voice on the tape speaking her name out loud.
He lay beside her as she slept, watching the slow fill and fall of her ribs, the tap of pulse in her temple, and felt as restless as a husband who suspects infidelity.
He switched out the light, but the darkness made his skin crawl so he switched it back on, then took Sophie's sweater from the floor and draped it over the lampshade.
She spoke in her sleep, a little rill of syllables like someone imitating an instrument.
Her warmth spread towards him when he got back into bed.
The noise like distant rain was the lift doors opening and closing.
Pascoe got up and checked the lock on the door.
He could hear himself breathing.
The Palings was an old building; it had stood full face to the sea and the prevailing wind for the best part of a hundred years.
Pascoe lay still listening to beams settling, to pipes ticking.
Sophie was like an engine that hadn't been switched off; he could sense the energy in her and feel the heat.
She'd said, ‘Again,’ and stretched out, hands raised, and turned her face away.
Pascoe felt a little rush of lust, as if her appetite had just caught up with him.
Her arm rose, then fell back on the bedclothes, and she flinched violently.
Pascoe was almost asleep.
He touched her hand and said, ‘OK…’ but it was a reflex; the bed was shelving under him.
When Pascoe woke, the room was a cave; the shrouded lamp cast a dull glow.
It felt chilly and late.
Street sounds  filtered up to him.
He opened the curtains on stark daylight, and a bright sea pouring in along the beach.
Sophie had gone.
Her jeans were still on the floor, and last night's underwear, but she'd taken her make-up out of the bathroom cabinet and her toothbrush from the tumbler by the sink.
He noticed that the cassette-player had been moved and saw that she'd removed the tape.
as if it were a fair trade, she had left the gun on the coffee table next to the flowers.
There wasn't a note, but he knew she'd gone for good.
Twenty-Three
‘Five thousand pounds.
You can have fun with that.
It won't buy the rest of your life, but it'll certainly fund a good time.
Take a holiday.
Go with a friend.’
Ellwood wondered where Annie Roland was calling from.
A clear line in Hilary's office, he suspected.
His little tape-recorder was attached to the earpiece of the phone with a rubber sucker.
He was deep in an armchair, naked from the shower, heels lofted to rest on a mahogany writing desk.
Room service had sent fruit for breakfast and Ellwood had skinned one half of a peach.
He rolled the fleshy dome against his lips while he waited for Annie's reply.
Take your time, he thought.
You'll get there in the end.
‘Why is five thousand right?’
‘How do you quantify such things?’
Ellwood asked.
‘It's not the money — it's whether you want to do it.
Would you kill someone for that money?
I don't think so.
But there are those who'll do it for pennies.
They want to, you see.
You'll do it or else you won't.
Now, here you are, talking to me on the phone.
So it's clear that you will.
OK; the next issue is: how do we fix a price?
Easy — five grand is what I'd pay if it wasn't you.
It's what I'd pay anyone.
It's the going rate — the market price, you understand?
If you were someone the Department needed information from, I could put in an expenses slip for five thousand, and Hilary Todd would sign it.’
He felt buoyant.
He always knew when things were going well.
Snail tracks of peach juice ran from the heel of his hand, over his chest and down to the hollow of his belly.
‘You'll know how to pay,’ Annie said, ‘if you know how much to pay.’
She meant non-sequential notes; not new; middling denominations.
‘You've done this before,’ Ellwood said.
He was grinning wryly, his voice sardonic; then, as he finished the remark, a little jolt of pleasure hit him and he saw that he was absolutely right: she had.
Annie said, ‘Since you mention it, I am taking a holiday.
I'll need the money tonight.
I hope that's OK.’
She sounded waspish and impatient.
‘That's fine.’
Annie named a motel, a cabin number, a stretch of road between nowhere and nowhere.
‘I'm your insurance, Ellwood.
And you're mine.’
A bead of juice meandered into the crease of his thigh.
‘Sure-that's how it works.’
A silence developed, as if there were something left to say.
Ellwood put the sucked peach into his groin and worked it up and down, clenching his fist to squeeze the sweetness out.
Lust went through him like a sudden scorch.
‘OK?’
Annie said.
Ellwood tossed the peach aside and lowered his hand to the warm slick of juice and pulp, hardness and sweetness, hatred and desire.
He moved the hand slowly, eyes closed, teeth clenched on a smile.
‘OK?’
‘Fine,’ he said, ‘yes, that's fine.’
Another silence settled.
And when she hung up, he kept the phone to his ear as if she were listening still.
Zeno's method for protecting Carla was lies and half-lies.
Ellwood was the financial adviser — that was his story.
Most often they would meet at Ellwood's hotel.
If Ellwood went to the house, Zeno got him out of the place as fast as he could.
Carla made fun of Ellwood behind his back.
She would return from her banishment to the kitchen as Ellwood drove away, imitating his spidery walk, asking: ‘What did  old Stoneface have to say?’
Edgy, Zeno would turn away to laugh.
And Tom Carey?
He was the priest who visited patients at the private hospital on the hill.
That's how they'd met, he told her.
Zeno said he liked the man well enough, but wouldn't want to make a close friend of him.
‘Does he come too?’
Carla had asked.
‘When you put on a magic show for the people up there.’
‘Sometimes.’
Carla had once met them as they were walking by the seafront.
It wasn't intended; none of them had been paying any attention to the world round about: they'd all but walked into one another.
Carla had been carrying groceries to the car; she'd put the bags down on the sea wall to shake hands.
Zeno had looked out to sea while a few words were exchanged, then laid a hand on Carey's arm, as if about to hurry him along.
‘Fishing,’ Carey had told her.
‘I'm staying at the Windrush — along the coast.’
Carla had seen the tension in Zeno.
His desire to be gone had been so strong — the desire for movement — that he'd seemed to be leaning into the wind.
‘He might talk to you,’ Carla said.
‘He never talks to me not about things that matter.’
She was speaking from a phone-box near the sea wall.
‘What's wrong?’
Carey could tell she was anxious.
‘Will you talk to him?’
‘Yes, of course.
But what's wrong?’
‘I don't know what it is.
I only know it's there.’
‘Where is he?’
‘At home.
I made an excuse to come out.
I'll walk for a couple of hours.
It's a bright day.’
Carey left his room and went up to Ellwood's.
‘I got a call from the girl,’ he said.
‘She seems to be worried about him.’
‘Why?’
‘Well, she didn't say that.
He doesn't tell her things.
She's for adoration,’ Carey said, ‘not information.’
‘You think he's in love with her?’
‘I'm sure of it.’
‘Really…’
Ellwood smiled thoughtfully.
‘That's good to know.’
‘I'll talk to him.
I'm going there now.’
‘If something happened,’ Ellwood said, ‘I want to know what it was.
There's someone I have to see.
I'll be back tonight or tomorrow: talk to me then.’
Ellwood had answered the door wearing his bathrobe; now he shrugged it off and began to dress.
Carey looked away.
The other man's sinewy thinness, his smooth torso and the dull tone of his flesh, made Carey think of something bloodless and odourless; something skinned.
‘I don't know how much time we've got with Piper, but I wouldn't have thought it was much.’
Ellwood wasn't telling Carey how tight things were, or what methods might have to be used.
‘He's changed,’ Carey said.
‘Had you noticed that?’
‘We've all changed.’
‘No, that's not true.’
Carey glanced across.
‘Grown older, perhaps.’
‘What do you see in him now that you didn't see before?’
‘Don't you know the answer to that, Wallace?’
Ellwood's clothes were so neutral in colour, so commonplace in style, that he seemed to fade as he dressed.
‘Should I know it?’
‘He's murdered two people.’
‘Oh, that.’
Ellwood smiled.
‘You think he had to change before he could kill someone?
It wasn't to do with change.’
‘What then?’
‘Evolution,’ Ellwood said.
He picked up his car keys, his Raybans, his wallet.
‘Father Tom,’ he said, as if he were meeting Carey for the first time for a long time.
The tone irritated Carey, and made him impatient.
‘Look, Wallace, I was small fry.
I was a very small link in an immensely long chain.
I didn't go to Africa, I didn't go to Latin America, I didn't suffer for liberation theology.
I didn't do anything brave .
You recruited me when that wasn't difficult to do.
A radical priest in a revolutionary decade.
I did a few jobs for you — mostly, I listened to people and passed information along.
Not very demanding.
I allowed myself to think it was risky, and because of that, it felt right.
Now here I am, doing it again; but this time, it doesn't feel right.’
Ellwood was waiting patiently.
He resisted the impulse to glance at his watch.
‘How does it feel?’
‘Wicked,’ Carey said.
For a moment, Ellwood looked vacant — a man hearing a word in a language he doesn't know.
Then he laughed.
‘Wicked !
Good Christ, where did you dig that up from?’
‘The Berlin Wall's down, Eastern Europe's put on democracy like an old coat, Russia's bankrupt and we're all suckers, Wallace.
Nobody won.
Don't you think that's funny?
And you're supposed to be down here finding out whether some crazy old man was a double.
Now, I'm surprised to learn that you don't know the answer.
After all, you were working the wrong side of the fence yourself, weren't you?
A chain of information set up by you that ended somewhere in East Germany.
I just passed on what I knew.’
Carey gave a bark of laughter.
‘And with every stolen syllable, the people's revolution came closer.
That's what I was — a link in the chain.
But you were something much grander than that.
Much more glamorous.
You were a traitor.
But times change, Wallace, don't they?
And here you are, a survivor, working for the winning side.’
Carey paused a moment, but Ellwood had decided to wait him out.
‘You never chose sides, Wallace; you only chose yourself.
I made myself believe we shared a cause.
We didn't.
And now I wonder whether I ever got the truth from you.
I wonder what you really wanted.
And I wonder why you're here at all.’
‘I'm paid to be here,’ Ellwood said.
‘A more interesting question is you.’
‘Families,’ Carey said.
‘I felt connected.
I didn't come because you said I could have anything I wanted, I came because of the past.’
It was something like the truth — as much as he would give to Ellwood.
Unwisely, he added: ‘I'm beginning to see that it isn't enough.’
Ellwood stepped forward slightly and lowered his voice, as if they weren't alone.
For the first time, Carey felt menaced.
‘I need to know about Piper,’ he said, ‘and I need you to help me find out.
You're right to talk of the past.
Here's why: the past can hurt everyone — you included.
Perhaps you were true to your version of religion, who knows — who cares?
But you betrayed your country.
Remember that.
Now, you've run a few errands for me since then, without enquiring too closely about their nature.
Remember that, too.
Our relationship doesn't have to do with a cause,Father Tom; it's based on fear and guilt and power — like all true relationships.
You started out with a cause and wound up with a habit.’
He put on his dark glasses and smiled with only his mouth.
‘Do what I want you to do, then you can go.
Remember the way it was?
Just talk to him.’
as if nothing else had been said, he added: ‘I know he's unbalanced.
Keep him level just long enough, OK?
Keep him close to Piper.
It's all he's for.’
Ellwood reached out with two stiffened fingers, the rest of his hand a loose fist, and made the sign of the cross close to Carey's face.
‘Go with God,’ he said.
Carey stood in the room alone.
Fruit was piled up in a bowl; he took an apple and bit into it.
A few errands …yes, he had; and without knowing, really, what they meant or who they were for.
Maybe they had been for old times the old times that had never really existed.
First came belief, then involvement; after that — once you were part of the family — sides didn't matter.
Carey and Zeno had been on the same side once.
Then they became part of the family-Ellwood as paterfamilias.
But now, Carey knew, it was every man for himself against the past.
I wish I could help him, Carey thought.
I wish he could help himself.
He realized he wished this for a man who had committed murder but, strangely, that seemed the least issue — not a family matter.
He feared for Zeno and, in fear, spoke as if Ellwood were still there to hear him.
‘He's a killer, Wallace, but he talks like a suicide.’
Twenty-Four
Between nowhere and nowhere, Wallace Ellwood found the motel.
He had driven into London, then out again with a document case containing five thousand pounds.
Another hour had taken him to a five-mile strip of dual carriageway cut through downland.
Two lanes north and two lanes south cars poured through in an unbroken line; container trucks, like cliffsides on the move, whammed into each other 's slipstream.
The noise was so constant and so intense that it fabricated silence.
The motel was built on a bank above the southbound road, and no more than fifty metres back.
It was the only building: U-shaped, with two lines of cabins forming the outward arms, the base a restaurant.
There was a metallic grey VW Golf parked outside cabin fifteen.
Ellwood drove past and parked close to the end of the row.
A light, high tang of fuel lay on the air.
When you walk into one of those cabins, you would swear you'd just gone deaf.
The triple-glazed windows block out every sound.
Outside, endless engines and the boom of things at speed; inside, a vacuum.
Annie had neither the television nor the radio on.
When she closed the door after letting Ellwood in, her eyes went at once to the document case.
‘That's right,’ Ellwood told her.
‘This is what you get.
What do I get?’
‘Show me.’
Annie didn't seem to have unpacked.
The room was untouched by her presence — no suitcase, no clothes lying about the place.
‘I'm going to the bathroom,’ Ellwood said.
‘Look for yourself.’
In the bathroom he found no make-up, no toothpaste, no creams or shampoo.
Annie had emptied the document case, now she was filling it again.
She worked fastidiously, squaring the little stacks of bills so that they alternated: first lengthwise, then breadthwise.
Ellwood returned.
‘You're right to be careful,’ he said.
‘Trust is for household pets.’
Annie arranged the last of the money and closed the case.
‘Here's the deal,’ she said.
‘I'm going to tell you something about Todd that will leave you safe.
What leaves me safe is this — you killed four men in a gym in Chelsea.
A few people know about that and it makes them angry — Todd's one of them — but they can't allow anything to happen to you.
First, you're doing a job that's considered important; second, it wouldn't help the Department all that much.
So, it remains an unsolved crime.
Keep to our bargain and it'll stay unsolved.
But try to implicate me in any way — or use me as a trade-off- and it'll be added to the police clear-up rate faster than the eye can follow.
I know three or four investigative journalists who would do a front-page lead on a story like that absolutely no question.’
Ellwood spread his arms.
‘For Christ's sake…’
Annie looked at him for a moment, then turned away.
‘Spare me that puzzled smile,’ she said, ‘I'm the person who had dinner with you, remember?’
…a spike up your ass and my sperm all over your face .
‘So you've warned me.’
Ellwood shrugged and swung up on to the bed, his shoulders against the headboard, his boots on the counterpane.
‘Now pay me.’
‘He fences drugs to a policeman, the policeman sells it on, Hilary takes half the money.’
‘Drugs?’
‘Heroin and cocaine.’
‘Stash-for-cash,’ Ellwood said.
‘That's right.’
The Department often used narcotics as a means of pay-off, or bribery, or inducement.
Drugs came without trace, without any kind of documentation.
Illegal shipments  seized at customs went round like a kiss at a party — police, SAS, departments like the one Todd ran…then on to the people they'd been intended for in the first place — the syndicates who brought them down to street level, street prices.
‘And Hilary's taking some off the top for himself…’
‘A Drugs Squad copper called Tremayne.
He offloads it and credits a John Doe account by London Wall.’
‘Who else knows about this?’
‘No-one.
Todd, Tremayne, me.’
She thought for a moment.
‘Todd's broker, perhaps.
I expect someone has to manage the account.
I don't see Todd being content with deposit rates.’
‘And how is it that you know about it?’
‘Stash-for-cash is only one way of trading.
All sorts of things are saleable.
You have to work off what you can get.
I can get information — every good PA can.’
‘You've bugged his office.’
Annie laughed.
‘Nothing so complicated: a tape-recorder.
It's me they talk to first when there's going to be an office sweep.
I simply take it out.’
‘What else do you know?’
‘Lots,’ she told him.
‘But your money's spent.’
‘Terrific.’
He swung his legs off the bed, grinning broadly, and started for the door.
As he passed her, he gathered her hair in his hand, taking it at the nape of her neck and pulling tight.
She was off-balance — nothing she could do to prevent herself from turning towards him as his grip pulled her in.
She stumbled slightly, one knee buckling, her face close to his, and he kissed her, just a rapid peck, the tip of his tongue sizzling between her lips and running across her teeth.
The door closed behind him and Annie found herself sitting on the edge of the bed, her hands between her knees, her eyes on the floor.
She wasn't sure how she'd got there: like someone who takes an electric shock from a kitchen implement and winds up on the other side of the room.
After a minute, she went into the bathroom and leaned over the basin and spat.
Ellwood walked to his car and got in like a man with a purpose accomplished.
He drove a wide circle out of the car park towards the slip-road that would take him back to the dual carriageway.
Each cabin had two curtained windows; the curtains on number fifteen were blind eyes.
Out of sight of the cabins, Ellwood trod on the brake.
He drove back and parked outside number three — at the top of the arm of the U that stood opposite Annie's cabin.
Two or three other cars came in and parked; a couple left.
Ellwood could have been anyone.
He climbed into the back seat and looked towards Annie's cabin, making little attempt to conceal himself or keep low.
A piece of fundamental fieldwork: people don't look for the unexpected.
A field of vision rarely extends beyond a table, a car door, the next patch of pavement.
As he watched, a young woman emerged from the restaurant and walked towards cabin fifteen.
She was tall long legs and a long waist — and was dressed in black.
A wool dress sculpted her slender figure and ended at mid-thigh.
She had blond hair that swung as she walked.
Ellwood smiled.
He thought: Well, well…
Annie must have used the house-phone to have her paged at the restaurant.
The girl was carrying a latchkey; she let herself into the cabin.
…who would have thought of that?
They were like one another.
The difference was a matter of more-or-less.
The same blond hair, except that Tessa Latham's was a little longer, had a little more curl.
The same tilted nose, except that Annie's was just too snub.
The same lithe figure, except that Tessa had a couple of inches advantage in height and a slightly fuller body.
People took them for sisters.
In fact, they had known each other for only two years, and had been lovers for most of that time.
When they kissed, it seemed that Tessa had embraced a mirror image very slightly distorted by the glass.
Annie held the kiss, both hands to her lover's cheeks, using her tongue until Tessa responded and washed Ellwood away.
‘Is everything OK?’
Annie had left the document case open on the bed, like a welcome-home present.
Tessa walked over to it and lifted out a handful of the money.
‘Fine,’ Annie told her.
‘He would have gone more than five thou.’
‘No.
He wouldn't.
He might next time.’
‘Who is he?’
Tessa thought that putting the bite on people for fun-money was a terrific idea.
She flicked through a wad of bills without counting, then dropped them into the case and closed the lid.
Ellwood hadn't seemed very exciting to her.
‘I watched him in and I watched him leave.
He looked like anyone to me.
No-one.
A grey suit.’
‘He's poison,’ Annie said.
A slight shiver took her, like the onset of illness.
‘Let's get out of this Christless dump.’
Ellwood watched them get into the VW and drive towards the slip-road.
When they passed out of sight, he started his engine and backed out of the parking place.
‘There's a lesson you have to learn…’
He spoke pleasantly, as if passing on a gem of advice to a good friend.
Ellwood drove an Audi — fast but not flashy.
He filtered on to the dual carriageway, overtaking a haulage truck and a couple of slow-moving cars, always going back to the nearside lane.
The VW was in sight, staying in the overtaking lane, but hemmed-in.
Ellwood settled down.
He'd driven eight hours that day, but he was feeling good.
Really good.
He was feeling fine .
‘The lesson is: don't threaten me.’
His tone was still light.
‘You dyke bitch.’
Zeno ran a coin across his knuckles, this way and that, a tiny acrobat, then flipped it; as it fell he clapped it to the back of his hand.
‘Heads,’ said Father Tom.
‘Most people say heads.
Most people choose seven or nine.
We make our own illusions.’
He lifted the palm of his hand; it was tails.
‘Can you do that every time?’
‘I didn't cheat.’
‘I believe you,’ Carey told him.
‘What has Wallace asked you to do?’
‘After I've finished the show, I go to the office and photograph the old man's records.
Piper's.
Then I give them to Wallace.’
‘That's all he's asked?’
Carey had been aware of the anxiety in Ellwood's voice when he spoke of Piper and deadlines.
‘I went to see him.’
‘Piper?’
‘Yes.’
‘When?’
‘One night.’
Zeno flipped the coin again.
‘It's heads,’ he said.
‘You see — it's all a matter of luck.’
He flipped once more, and when he raised his palm there were two coins on the back of his hand.
He flipped a third time.
Now there were three, all showing heads.
‘Lucky,’ Zeno said.
‘Lucky, lucky, lucky.’
‘Do you want to talk?
Is there anything you need to talk about?’
Zeno crossed himself and bowed his head.
‘Forgive me, Father, for I have sinned.’
He laughed and the coin spun upwards, singing from the sting of his thumbnail, a silver disc on a silver spindle.
He trapped it and showed his hand: now there were four.
‘I told a lie: I always cheat.
What will you give me?
One Hail Mary for each coin?’
They had been together all morning, but little had been said.
Zeno had smiled and prattled cocktail-party talk.
Carey had thought the whole performance eerie.
After a couple of hours, Zeno had simply lain down on the floor and gone to sleep.
He'd been asleep when Carla returned.
She had made them some food, then gone out again.
She knew that Zeno wanted to preserve her from everything but himself.
She'd invented some errands and left the two men alone.
Zeno said, ‘Don't come here again.
We can meet at your hotel.
We can go down to the beach.’
‘Yes, all right.’
‘Pretty soon, I can go away.
I'll take Carla away.’
He was depressed by what had happened the previous night.
Such a good show, such a good set-up — everything arranged for a fine performance.
I give a magic show…
First Marianne — a simple sleight of hand.
Then Nick — a little playlet of magic and deceit.
…and someone dies .
Each time his performance had grown more elaborate: he wrote the script, set the stage, and took the lead.
The moment when Pascoe had sat down and taken a sip of the wine!
A triumph!
When Sophie had joined him in a waltz…
They had to die to make the future safe.
To keep the past secret.
But sometimes he only thought of the next performance.
‘What did he say?
Piper.
When you went to see him.’
‘He didn't want to talk, really.
I made him an illusion.
He liked that.’
‘He said nothing?’
‘I asked the questions Wallace wanted me to ask.
He just talked gibberish.
He's mad.’
‘I know,’ Carey said.
‘Are you?’
A silence gathered and spread.
Carey knew he'd gone too far, but didn't care.
They sat in silence while the minutes passed, confessor and supplicant, knowing too much and too little.
Finally, Zeno said: ‘Listen.
Sometimes I  don't know who I am.
I can go to a shop and buy something.
I can talk to people.
I can ask the questions that Wallace wants me to ask.
I can remember the past, and be afraid of it.
I can imagine the future, and be afraid of not getting it.
I know I'm not crazy like that old man, like Piper, because crazy is something else.
Crazy is living in a fog and pissing your pants.
I hate Wallace, and I think I hate you.
I hate the past.
I love Carla, but sometimes I frighten myself.
I'm frightened now.
Love and hate…and in between is me.’
‘And you don't know who that is,’ Carey said.
‘I give a magic show and someone dies…’
‘What?’
Carey thought he'd misheard; a chill went through him.
‘…
Marianne and Nick, because that's who I am,that's who everyone sees,that's who Piper talks to,that's who steals notes from Harris's files,that's who Wallace needs…’
He thought of Sophie in his arms, the cord falling on to her neck.
He'd marked her as he left, wanting to feel her fear.
He'd been angry because Pascoe had rewritten his script.
‘When I'm on-stage,’ he said, ‘I know who I am.’
‘Who?’
He rolled the coin and flipped it.
Five came down.
‘The Great Zeno…’
Less than half an hour had taken them to the motorway; after that it was easy — they were heading north.
Ellwood's technique was to let them stay about five vehicles ahead, but now and then he'd drop back and let them fall out of sight.
He did it, though he knew it was a needless precaution.
You can travel two hundred miles on those roads and realize that some of the cars you started out with have done the trip with you; but you wouldn't recognize the drivers.
He always stayed close when they were approaching a service station, because he knew that sooner or later, they'd have to stop for fuel.
His plan for that was to go into the restaurant car park  and allow enough time for the other car to clear the fuel service area, then fill his own tank and give chase.
When the moment came, it happened the other way round.
Annie and Tessa went to get coffee and a sandwich.
Ellwood filled up and parked off the forecourt behind some store-rooms.
The VW drew up at the pumps about twenty minutes later.
They had a routine for it, as most couples do — Annie put the fuel in, Tessa took some paper towels from the dispenser and cleaned the windscreen; then Tessa went to the pay-window and handed over a credit card as soon as Annie put the pump nozzle back into position.
Oh yes, Ellwood thought, and I'll bet you fit each other just like a finger in a glove.
He gave the women a thirty-second start and picked them up on the northbound carriageway with ease.
The first, slight sign of tiredness came on him — a moment of dizziness and a thin line of pain from the tension in his shoulders.
If you're taking a holiday more than a three-hour drive from here, he thought, I'll have to find a different way of doing this.
‘What's making you unhappy?’
Carey asked.
‘What's making you depressed?
Is everything all right— with Carla?’
At the mention of her name Zeno grew alert.
He swung his head like an animal that suddenly intuits a reason for fear.
‘Where is she?’ he asked.
‘Where's Carla?
She ought to be here.’
‘She had some things to do: that's what she said.’
‘It's getting late.’
Zeno's head was lifted as if to search for scents on the air.
‘You'd better go now.
She'll come back when you go.’
‘Has Wallace given you any new instructions about Piper?
Has he asked you to do more than just bring film of Piper's records?’
‘You'd better go now.’
‘I can see that you've been made upset.
All I want to do  is help.
Like I used to.’
Carey felt old and grimy, worn threadbare.
‘Forgive me, Father…’ he prompted.
Zeno ran at him — a sudden rush, murderous fury out of nowhere.
He swung a fist clamped round five coins — the punching power of a sap-glove.
Carey went back on his heels, his head snapping to and fro like something spring-loaded, and a little fan of bloody spray rose from his face.
Zeno stood in front of the priest, arms hanging down, his face sallow and lean with rage.
His blow had taken Carey on the eyebrow and split it, a long gash that extended to the other brow.
As they stood there, less than an arm's length apart, five lines of blood started across Carey's face, like beads of rain chasing each other on a window pane.
He put his hand up to his cheek and collected the drops.
‘It's all right,’ he said, and held out the bloody hand as if refusing a favour.
‘Don't worry.’
The anger subsided in Zeno.
He took a step back, dizzy and breathless, then found himself sitting on the floor, back to the wall.
He thought the door closing might be Carey leaving, but it was Carla arriving.
He wondered whether he'd been asleep for a while, or just deep in thought.
He clambered up and intercepted her at the kitchen door, enfolding her and drawing her in to his body so that his warmth flowed through to her, just as he had that day when he'd found her on the beach, lost and afraid; like him, a victim of the past.
‘I was thinking about you,’ he said.
‘I was worried about you.
I didn't know where you were.’
She couldn't reply, he was holding her so tightly; and, in any case, there was nothing she wanted to say.
She clung to him, arms round his neck, her face hidden in his shoulder, like a child afraid of a storm.
She was everything he wanted — all ambition, all love, all comfort, all need, all passion embodied in Carla.
She murmured something to him, some affirmation of love, and he felt the vibration of her voice strike through him.
She eased back and kissed him, then walked on into the  kitchen, her limp dictating the tiny sway of her hips.
She had brought things to make their evening meal and she emptied them on to the work-counter: wine, cheese, spinach, onions, bread, the pink-white tines of a rack of lamb, as if all the promise of their future lay in the guarantee of such ordinariness being possible.
I give a magic show and someone dies …
When this is over and we are far away from here, and living quietly and happily and safely, Zeno will have to die too.
Like stepping out of your skin, like changing your face.
He followed Carla into the kitchen and produced the coins for her to see, then started to flip them one by one.
She smiled and said, ‘Heads.’
One by one they came down.
As he caught them, he placed them on the counter in front of her, all in a row, all of them heads.
Carla smiled and kissed him.
‘Lucky,’ she said.
He smiled back.
‘It's just a magic show,’ he said.
‘It isn't real.’
The drive was a little over two hours — due north, then north-west into the southern part of the Lakes.
When Annie signalled to take the motorway exit just below Kendal, Ellwood had pushed forward a little, leaving only three vehicles between them at the intersection.
After that, things had become more difficult.
Annie must have been tired, but she drove quickly and cleverly, overtaking on the narrow road when she could and leaving Ellwood stranded.
Twice he'd lost sight of them and been obliged to put on speed or else run the risk of failing to see them as they took some minor road or turn-off.
The first time, he'd been virtually on their tail as he'd rounded a bend.
Desperate not to have to overtake, he'd braked hard and had felt the car shimmy dangerously.
The second time, travelling fast to find them, he'd passed a junction just in time to see the VW rounding a bend on the other road.
He had overshot by fifty yards but, since there was no room to turn, he'd backed up to the junction in a  rapid, snaky line, and picked them up again after ten minutes of anxious-cautious driving — fast on the straights, slow on the bends.
Although the traffic wasn't heavy, there was a string of other cars on the road.
Ellwood reasoned that the women would only have felt curious if Annie was driving on the mirror: clearly, she wasn't.
The VW kept a more or less constant speed — no avoiding action, no tricky moves.
After another mile or so, Ellwood saw them pull off into the gated driveway of a hotel.
He drove past until he found a rest area: just a track behind trees and a few picnic tables.
He locked his doors, cranked the seat back, and set the alarm on his wrist-watch.
When he closed his eyes, fatigue swam up at him in a mazy spiral, making his head spin as if he were drunk.
A moment later, he was asleep.
Improvisation is the secret of success.
Wallace Ellwood's plan had been a loose one: find out how great a risk Annie Roland might be and act accordingly.
He'd been pretty sure that Annie would prove potentially harmful.
For one thing, he'd made her fear him; in addition to that, she'd threatened him too readily.
The threat could be used as a safeguard, sure; but it could also be used to turn a further profit.
It didn't take a psychic to see that Annie had worked that out for herself.
Improvisation means work with what you've got.
During the drive, Ellwood had turned a number of ideas and opportunities over in his mind.
The trick was to get this bitch out of his life as soon as possible.
Ellwood didn't want her back in Hilary Todd's office and close to people who posed a threat to him.
Her life in London would be full of secrets and safeguards; full of routines and regular habits.
It made her less vulnerable.
And the fact that she was taking time off with her dyke lover offered more flexibility, more opportunities for invention.
Improvisation means take your chances while you can,where you can; it means ride your luck.
The watch-alarm woke him at midnight.
He got out of the car and went up and down on his haunches a few times to ease some of the stiffness from his legs, then started to walk the mile or so back to the hotel gates.
The night air was cool and sweet, the country dark limitless; he picked his way along the road almost by instinct, except when a quarter moon found a space between clouds.
Ellwood hated it.
He wanted toxins in the air.
The hotel was a converted manor house.
Between the gates and the big double doors was half an acre of lawn; the driveway was lined by poplars.
Ellwood walked down the row of trees, then circled the house, staying well back from the lighted windows.
The dining room was empty apart from a couple of staff members who were laying tables for breakfast.
At the rear of the house, the bar had its french windows open to the lawn; a man and a woman were drinking a nightcap, each cradling a brandy balloon.
The lawn was scrubbier there; a small apple orchard bordered a kitchen garden.
Ellwood stood close to the bole of an apple tree and watched the bar.
After ten minutes or so, the couple finished their drinks and left.
The barman pulled the knot on his bow tie, gave himself a shot of booze, drank it, then gave himself another and carried it out into the garden, strolling away from the orchard and the tufty grass.
Ellwood smiled.
Improvisation means if it looks like a gift, it probably is a gift.
He went through the bar and into a corridor: the corridor led to the narrow entrance lobby with a sofa covered in chintz, a row of sporting prints on the wall, lights on a dimmer switch turned low.
The office behind the reception desk was dark.
Ellwood flicked through the register and found Annie and Tessa immediately.
Names, car registration, room number.
He took the dupe key from a hook behind the desk, then went upstairs, moving casually, easily, like any guest returning late.
He unlocked the door and stepped inside.
When he  closed it, there was a gun in his hand: a short-barrelled 38 made awkward by its silencer.
The room was in darkness.
Ellwood stood very still, the gun held just in front of his chest and slightly to the side.
After a few seconds, he heard them breathing — one breath long and light, the other slightly shorter and huskier.
He imagined them lying close, arms round one another, Annie, perhaps, with her leg drawn up over the other girl's haunch, and breathing softly on to one another 's faces.
When he switched the light on and dragged the bedclothes back, he saw that his image of them had been perfect.
He thought that it would be Tessa who'd yell, so he'd already put a hand across her mouth.
And he let them see the gun.
Annie said, ‘Oh, shit.’
Then she added, ‘You won't kill us here, Ellwood.’
Ellwood's voice was little more than a whisper.
‘I'd sooner not, but I will if you raise your voice.
The only danger to me is someone hearing us in here, getting alarmed, calling the police, maybe.
But listen — that's also the danger to you.
If it happens, you're dead and I'll get out as best I can.
Otherwise, you're not in too much trouble.
I don't want to kill you.
I want my money back: that's all.’
He took his hand from Tessa's mouth and smiled at her.
‘Nice tits, sweetheart.’
Annie looked at him in amazement.
‘You can't imagine it's worth the risk,’ she said.
‘I've told you what I'll do.’
‘You've told me.
I don't believe it.
Why?
Because it cuts both ways.
It's a Cold War equation — it depends on mutual destruction.
But if I take my five grand back: what difference?
None.
The balance of power doesn't change.’
Tessa had crossed her legs, leaving only the tiniest triangle of coppery hair visible; she had put a pillow across her breasts.
Annie was behaving as if she were fully dressed.
She said, ‘Yes.
But it is mutual.
And it is destruction.
And in any case, I might just come out of it OK.
You're forgetting that it's Hilary you would have to turn to if you  want me taken out.
But if you use the information, Hilary's dead.
And if you don't use the information, then I can — and he's still dead.’
Ellwood shook his head.
‘There are people you answer to other than Hilary Todd.’
Annie shrugged.
‘I don't get it.
All this trouble for your five thousand.
Why not just pay for the information like anyone else?
Who knows — we could do business again.’
‘I don't think so.
You threatened me.
I don't like that.
I'm teaching you a lesson and taking your profit away.
Call it pride; call it spite.
Call it what the fuck you like.
You lose, that's the important thing to me.
I know you don't like me.
You're prepared to let it show.
Bad move.
Bad business practice.
It makes me resentful.
That's why I'm here taking my money away.’
Ellwood could see that she almost believed him.
Turning slightly, he stabbed the gun barrel with its fat, cylindrical silencer into the crack between Tessa's thighs; she could have only moved away by uncrossing her legs.
She froze, her breathing stalled.
He said, ‘Now, I'm sure you can see that there's no future in all of us being found here.’
He didn't bother to look at Tessa.
‘You can scarcely pretend that I'm a prowler or whatever: someone you've never met.
But I don't want you to fly off the handle,’ he smiled at Annie as if he knew her temperament of old, ‘or do anything rash.
I think you should talk it all over with Miss Nice Tits, here.
But I can see how you might think you could gain an advantage — me having problems with the local police while you work out a way to come up smelling sweet.
So I'm going to tie you up while I leave.
I'll make a good job of it; enough to put me a county or two away.’
He switched his attention to Tessa and waggled the gun.
‘So take your ass over to that chair.’
She walked clumsily, not sure where to put her hands, as if movement made her more naked than before.
The chair was a rush-seated ladderback; one of the girls had draped her clothes over it.
‘Sit down, Nice Tits.’
He opened a few drawers in the dresser until he saw what he'd expected to find — half a dozen packets of tights.
He used three of them for Tessa, the legs of one pair tying her ankles to the chair legs, her hands pulled behind and tied together with the second pair.
He used the third to make a cinch between her hands and the chair's bottom rail.
He lifted a sock from the floor and pushed it into her mouth, then held a silk blouse out by its cuffs and spun it until it became a rope to hold the gag secure.
All the time, the gun was in his hand or close by on the floor.
Once or twice, Annie glanced towards the door; each time Ellwood tracked the line of her gaze with his own, then smiled.
The smile meant: No chance.
He worked as if he were roping a piece of luggage, barely looking at Tessa, not touching her unless he had to.
When the gag went in, her eyes widened and her shoulders braced as she pulled in air through her nose.
Annie said, ‘You don't have to do that.’
‘It makes me feel happier.’
‘Just go away, all right?
Take the money and go.’
There seemed to be a hint of alarm in her voice.
Ellwood shook his head, seeming to suggest that Annie hadn't understood the point.
‘I don't want you to act hastily.
I'll be gone — you'll have had time to think things through and come to the right decision.’
He was standing close to her.
‘Put your arms up — reach out to either side.’
It was a brass bed with rails top and bottom.
He used tights to tie Annie's hands in a cruciform; then he gagged her.
He seemed about to leave — walked to the door, in any case — but when he reached the foot of the bed, he took hold of the brass upright and pulled the bed out into the room; then he carried a second ladderback chair to the head of the bed and sat down behind Annie.
She struggled to look over her shoulder at him, but her arms were tied too tightly for that so she lifted her shoulders and thrust her chin up, like someone attempting a headstand.
She saw his face upside down, and saw that he was smiling.
The final pair of tights went round her neck, then round two brass rails.
Ellwood yanked, and the back of her skull slammed up against the bedhead.
He twisted the garotte until it was a hard torc, leaning forward in the chair to get leverage, busy at his task, absorbed, like any technician.
Annie's legs drummed on the bed; her body was leaping and bucking, like a big fish barrelling upstream.
Ellwood hauled her in.
He leaned the chair back on two legs and put the sole of one shoe against the bedrails, then pulled on the rope of nylon until his biceps began to crack.
Annie's face was purple-black.
She could detect only agony: her eardrums rupturing under the pressure; something cracking and tearing free, deep in her chest.
Ellwood shifted the sole of his foot to put it directly behind Annie's head, knee bent.
He took the strain like the anchor-man on a rope, pushing hard against his own backward pull — all the power in his leg and all the power in his arms — his face a rictus of effort, his lips drawn back like someone enduring pain.
Over Annie's shoulder he could see Tessa watching in a nightmare of dumbness, a silent scream of terror belling from every line in her face, from her wide eyes, from her rigid limbs.
A quietness came into Annie's body.
Her legs were still; her shoulders dropped; her torso folded into itself.
Despite the ligature, her head tilted forward an inch.
It was as if a fall lay within her that she wasn't able to make.
Ellwood continued to strangle her even when she was dead.
Something in her throat cracked.
Her eyes were as dark as a rotten egg, and a tear of blood ran down alongside her nose to the corner of her mouth like a symptom of regret.
Finally he let go, falling against the bedhead, elbows on knees, panting like a runner after a close finish.
Their heads were together: friends sharing a secret.
After a moment, he looked up and smiled at Tessa through the rails.
‘Now — what shall we do with you?’
He picked up the gun and walked towards her, enjoying  the effect that had.
As he came close she started to urinate, the stream trickling through the rush seating and darkening the carpet.
He untied the silk blouse very slowly, to let her know what he was doing.
He put a finger to his lips:Shusssshhh …then removed the sock from her mouth.
She made sounds, but she didn't speak.
Ellwood crouched down in front of her, putting their faces close together.
He said, ‘Now…you've got a terrible problem, here.
It's not the problem you think it is — I'm not going to kill you.
You're much more use alive.
Know why…?’
He paused, then gave a pleasant little laugh.
‘I've forgotten your name; how rude of me.’
She opened her mouth, then closed it, but nothing happened.
Ellwood waited.
Finally, she whispered: ‘Tessa.’
‘Of course it is; I saw it in the register.
So forgetful these days…’
He was down on his haunches, looking comfortable and wearing a slight smile, the gun held loosely in his right hand.
‘Well, Tessa, your problem is this-you don't have the kind of cover she had.
I don't know you, so I'm certain you're not with the Department; in their parlance, you're a stranger.
That makes you dispensable.
All strangers are dispensable.
Department business is sacrosanct — protected at all costs.
Annie was foolish to involve you.
I expect she thought it would be more exciting to share, to have an accomplice.’
He made the notion sound endearingly old-fashioned.
‘But she put you at risk.
Now here you are with your lover's body and a terrible story that you simply can't tell.
What would you say?
That I killed her because you were blackmailing me?
That you possess all sorts of incriminating information about a department head?’
He glanced back at the dead girl and smiled, as if to chide her gently for her folly.
‘You're a stranger…
Guess what would happen next.’
Tessa shook her head — not disagreement, but a gesture of hopelessness.
‘It's a mess, isn't it?’
Ellwood asked.
‘But it's perfect for me…
Annie found naked and strangled, her girlfriend what?— mysteriously disappeared, I  expect.
Who knows what funny sex-games?
Who knows what jealousies?
Someone else involved?
A lover of yours, maybe.
A man…’
Ellwood shrugged, grinning, as if he himself might fill the role.
‘So you'll need to make yourself scarce for a time, won't you?’
He went to the document case and took out a fistful of money, pretending to weigh it in his hand.
‘Feels like a thousand pounds.
That'll buy you some time.
Go to Scotland.
The car's pointing in the right direction.’
He tossed the money towards the bed.
The bundles of notes landed in Annie's lap.
‘Does anyone know about the two of you?
Friends of hers?
Friends of yours?’
Tessa's breathing had grown shallow.
She couldn't find a way past the fear.
Somehow she managed to whisper: ‘No friends, no…
Just me and Annie.’
Speaking her lover's name was almost too much for her.
Ellwood saw her eyes roll up to show the whites.
He slapped her hard to bring her back.
A blush spread on her cheek, thickened by his fingermarks.
‘Good.
You see?
You're in luck already.
The police won't know who they're looking for.
Just a description they'll get from the people who run this place.
A change of make-up, have your hair cut short and change the colour, dowdy clothes…
It's easy for a woman.’
He touched her breasts, briefly, as if her nakedness confirmed her as the victim.
‘Get clear, go to ground, stay there.
Ditch the car and take a train.
No problem.
Two days for the papers and TV to forget; three days maximum.
After that you're clear.’
Tessa was looking past him at Annie's body.
Her mouth was open and she was making little wet gulping noises horror ladled over grief.
‘I'll untie your hands,’ Ellwood told her, ‘but not your legs.
It won't take you long.
Then you're on your own.’
He was standing directly in front of her, smiling down.
His smile was ovens and chains and darkness.
Twenty-Five
A sheen of seawater sluiced the cat's back.
Foam boiled up round the seal's flank, then fell away with a soft, diminishing hiss.
Here I am, Pascoe thought.
Can't I tempt you?
Come and get me, you bastard.
Rob Thomas still had Sophie's address from the junk-mail source on Alex's computer.
Pascoe had obtained the number from directory enquiries and listened to her answerphone message a dozen times or more.
Sophie had thrown up a wall.
Pascoe tried out several emotions for that, coming closer to the real thing each time — impatience, irritation, concern, anxiety…
Finally, he realized that what he really felt was fear: not for her safety, but fear that she might have gone out of his life.
I'm alone, Zeno, he thought.
No-one's here with me.
Come on…
Once is bad luck, twice is a pattern.
He remembered Karen's absence like a silhouette cut from each scene in the house; he remembered Sophie's jeans and her underwear still on the floor.
Here's what I'll do.
I'll go back to London, I'll move to a new district, I'll start seeing Sophie on a regular basis, I'll do my job as if I were any competent lawyer, and I've come here alone, you bastard, so why don't you do whatever you've got in mind?
Sophie's gun was making a bag of his pocket.
He thought: And why did you have a gun for Christ's sake?
Did I ask you that?
Did I ask you anything?
We talked about the past, but only the past we once shared.
What happened to you since then?
I want to know.
The tide was ebbing.
The arched spine of the cat's back began to dry out, changing from sleek plum to a dull lilac.
Veins of crystal ran through it, glittering in the sun.
Don't you know what I've come here for?
That's right.
To meet you again.
I'm expecting you.
Zeno…
Clouds going like banners across the sky, gulls drifting and screaming, great gouts of brilliant light riding like spillage on the surface of the sea.
Zeno…
It's the logical thing to do, now; it's what I ought to do.
Back to London, pick up where I left off, more crimes and misdemeanours, more Anthony Stewarts and the commonplace killings that proceed from a lifetime of domestic loathing, or lust, or rivalry, or greed.
Find Sophie again, and agree to forget the past.
But I know I won't.
You killed Nick.
Maybe you killed Marianne.
You tried to kill me.
You tried to kill Sophie.
Will you let it drop if I will?
No, I didn't think so.
Here am I — where are you?
…
Find Sophie again, because something was happening there that hasn't happened to me in a hell of a long time.
Maybe it was the power of the past, maybe it had to do with bonds of fear and guilt.
I don't know; but I'd like the chance to find out.
I'm here, I'm alone, I'm waiting, but you don't seem to want to join me.
OK.
So far, it's all been on your terms.
Letters and invitations, lies and illusions.
I'm changing that.
If you won't come to me, you bastard, I'll come to you.
Not at your request.
Not for one of your stagey trick-or-treats.
My turn now.
I'm coming after you .
The sea was drawing off across the foreshore — leaving acre after acre of rocks — with a long series of hollow roars, diminishing, diminuendo on diminuendo.
Soon the cat's back and the seal would be high and dry.
Fronds of bladderwrack began to stiffen and blanch in the sun.
He sat still for another half-hour or so, then got up and walked slowly out to the water's edge.
Anyone out for a morning walk on the cliff path would have seen him, a single figure in a wilderness of sea and stone.
Twenty-Six
Families feud, but always protect their own.
When Wallace Ellwood was summoned to Hilary Todd's office, no mention was made of Annie Roland's death.
Ellwood wondered how the search for Tessa was going and how long it had taken the Department to close the story down.
He smiled a winning smile.
It was on the tip of his tongue to ask after Annie: was she ill, perhaps, or taking a holiday?
He suppressed the temptation, but the idea made his smile grow broader.
‘What in God's name are you grinning at?’
Todd appeared bringing coffee for himself; none for Ellwood.
‘It's a nice day, Hilary.
The river looks lovely.’
The Thames sluiced by the window, sluggish and brown.
When the tide fell, you could see oil drums and supermarket trolleys in the shallow reaches.
‘We're in trouble,’ Todd spoke sharply, like a businessman on an impossible schedule.
‘Which means you're in trouble.’
He cast a quick glance at Ellwood to make sure he'd registered the threat.
‘An insider…
A man at the centre of a stay-behind group in France has been killed in a Brittany sailing resort.
There wasn't even much attempt to make it look like a mugging; he still had his wallet.
You might even think we were supposed to find the death notable.’
‘They were advertising…’
‘A warning, an example, a statement of intent: maybe all three.’
‘Piper,’ Ellwood said.
‘Don't worry, I've got —’
Todd cut across him.
‘You may or may not have guessed this, Wallace, but I don't like you.
Not a bit.
Not at all.
I  argued very hard to have you thrown to the wolves after the police found four low-lifes strewn around the locker room of that gym.
The only thing that's keeping your neck out of a noose is that little set-up you've got going in Longrock.
We think Piper can tell us who knows about the insiders; then we'll know what to do.
We might get that information through you.
Now, as things stand, that knowledge is still useful to us.
In fact, it's crucial.
But there might come a time when it no longer matters.
If we lose our grip on this, if it gets away from us, we'll be very unhappy, very embarrassed, and very much in debt to all sorts of people we prefer to control rather than be controlled by.
We need to work hard to avoid that.
‘But if we don't — well, some might think it your fault, Wallace.
Some might say that you'd been given a job and failed to do it.
And whether that was said or not, Wallace, the bald fact is that we wouldn't really need you any longer, would we?
You wouldn't be at all important to us.
We could — how shall I put it?— dispense with you quite happily.’
Todd paused.
‘Well,’ he added, ‘I know I could.’
The smile came back to Ellwood's face.
One of the things that particularly amused him was that Hilary had pushed a red handkerchief into his sleeve as if it were a sign of breeding and distinction.
He thought: You're going to be so sorry you ever said that, you ridiculous fop, you silly tart, you piece of shit.
as if Todd had never interrupted him, he continued with his original remark: ‘Don't worry, Hilary.
I've got someone close to him.’
If you travel across the city, you move from numbered zone to numbered zone.
The centre is One, the outer fringe is Six; zones where there used to be neighbourhoods.
Buffer zones and war zones.
On the cusp of the second zone, close to the mainline station — the place where he always went — Ellwood picked up a girl and took her home.
He shut the door of his  apartment and turned to her at once, putting her shoulders against the wall, knocking her legs apart with his knee.
Although their faces were inches apart, he seemed not to see her.
His eyes were dull like slate, grey like slate.
She raised one leg to make things easier, and he caught her thigh in the crook of his elbow, hoisting it up.
Backed-up and hog-tied.
She noticed how his slicked-back hair carried the faint, sweet scent of gel.
After that, there was more time.
He stripped, slowly, and pulled his belt through the loops, then stood naked by a chair, gripping its back.
Hilary Todd's contempt was still stinging him; he wanted to cover it with pain he really owned.
He threw the belt to the girl and said, ‘Hit me.’
She'd heard that before and knew they didn't mean it.
The belt licked his shoulders — a loose slap.
‘No,’ Ellwood said, ‘do it.
Hit me.’
She tried again, unconvinced and so pulling the blow.
He turned his head towards her, eyes suddenly burning, lips tight.
‘Do it to me,’ he said, ‘or else I'll do it to you.’
She looked at the look in his eyes and swung the belt like an axe.
Zeno said, ‘I'm sorry I hit you.’
Tom Carey put a hand to the place, lumpy and healing over, but tender still.
He thought he could detect something odd in the other man's voice — a faint sing-song tone; a little, obsessive rhythm, lilting and mad.
He said, ‘It's OK; it doesn't matter.’
Down there in the dunes, they were out of the offshore breeze and out of the sun.
Zeno had turned his face away, like a penitent at prayer.
‘All I want to do,’ he said, ‘is cut off the past.’
Carey knew that he wasn't talking about forgetting.
He meant amputate, as you would a diseased limb.
It was how Zeno saw those memories, those people — gangrenous things, putrid flesh to be flensed away.
‘Carla…’
Zeno spoke the name to himself; a little  fluting sound.
To Carey he said, ‘Is that too much to ask…?’
Ellwood made the distance in under five hours, overtaking on the inside, riding the rear bumpers of faint-hearts in the fast lane.
He arrived in a violet twilight; a sickle moon standing in a hoop of its own light, birds making dark arrows just above the wavetops.
He stood at the lit window of his hotel room and saw his own reflection, and beyond it the room, and in that ghost-world the image of Tom Carey walking to and fro, a glassy shadow.
Carey shrugged, answering a question.
‘He's under pressure, he wants out, a safe future — secure, you know himself and the woman — Carla — that's all he can see.
He has his own ideas about how to get it.
The ideas include killing people.
He's doing a job for you, just like he has before; but something's different.
For the first time, he wants something for himself.
He's got something to lose.’
‘That's not what I asked you,’ Ellwood said.
‘I don't care about that crap.
What I want to know is: how long will he last?
How long is he good for?’
Carey shrugged.
‘God knows.’
Ellwood continued to look at his reflection in the glass.
If he stared long enough at his own face, he began to see another creature there, himself but not himself.
‘Does he?
Then you're just the man to ask.’
Twenty-Seven
‘Pascoe?’
Your dreams will dance you through doorways.
‘Pascoe?’
He had lifted the phone and put it to his ear without ever coming properly awake.
He might even have said, ‘Hullo.’
Then Rob Thomas spoke his name a third time and he was back in the world.
He pulled the pillow over from Sophie's side of the bed and propped himself up.
‘Rob…’
‘Were you asleep, or what?’
‘Asleep, yes.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘It doesn't matter.
What have you got?’
‘Sam — you're sure it's OK to bill your office for this?
You know: I have to make a charge, but you're not there , are you?’
‘Why are you asking?’
‘I spoke to George Roxborough…’
‘He queried your bill?’
‘Not really.
He sort of behaved as if you didn't work there any more.’
‘I'm a lawyer, not a store assistant.
They can't fire me like that.
Don't worry, Rob.
What else did George say?’
‘There's a message.
I'll get to it in a minute.
Listen, I've got Charles Singer for you.’
The phone line buzzed like a tiny, expectant crowd.
‘Sam?’
‘How?’
‘Holland, Carlton and Shakespeare, remember?’
‘Yes.’
‘It's the Shakespeare: a hotel.
Tough to see the connection, unless someone was thinking of the body count in Hamlet .’
Pascoe smiled.
‘When did you see Hamlet ?’
Thomas sounded indignant.
‘I'm a dedicated movie-goer.’
‘What's he doing there?’
‘Lying low.
Very low.
Almost invisibly low.
Goes out to eat at night, or brings food back to his room.
Stays banged-up.
I'd guess he's trying to decide what to do next, but the decision's eluding him.’
‘You're sure you've got the right guy?’
‘The Holland and the Carlton are hotels too.
I suppose he must have been choosing between them.
He sure as hell found the right one if anonymity is what he's after.
It's Apache country.
Attack dogs go round in pairs.’
‘But it's him?’
Pascoe persisted.
‘I nipped in for a look.
His passport's there.
An Amex gold card that I suspect he can't use.
One or two other personal bits and pieces.
He probably didn't take them out with him because he was afraid of being mugged.
So he leaves them in a room where the locks open if you give them a threatening look.’
Thomas sighed; he sounded genuinely sorry for Singer.
‘People don't know how to truly disappear; or they can't bear to.
Always hang on to something that tells them who they are — and tells me, too, in this case.
I'm sorry it took so long — there were the other two hotels to check.
Also your description isn't that accurate any more.’
‘How has he changed?’
Pascoe asked.
‘Booze.
Also he's on the run and he's scared and he looks like hell.’
‘On the run —’
‘Who knows?
Taxman, bogeyman…’
Pascoe could hear the shrug.
‘Listen: I don't know what name he's using.
I mean — no surprise, but he's not registered as Charles Singer.’
‘Where is this place, Rob?’
Pascoe looked round  hopelessly for a pen and paper, then memorized the information Thomas gave him — a room number and an address close to the edge of Zone Two.
‘The other thing,’ Thomas said, ‘the reason I was talking to George Roxborough — well, he called me.
He's been trying to get you.
A woman's been phoning your office every day: wants to speak to you.
George wouldn't give me her number.
He says he needs to talk to you first.
He might try you again, but I said I'd pass the message along.
So I have.’
‘What's her name?’
Sophie, Pascoe thought — phoning when I was out at the cove trying to tempt that bastard out of hiding.
Sophie, worried about me, and wanting to talk.
‘Susan Larkin?’
Almost a sense of loss; a tiny death.
‘Don't know her,’ Pascoe said.
‘She used to be Susan Hart: that help at all?’
Pascoe felt a trickle of shock like electrodes on the temples.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘that means something.
Thanks, Rob.’
Pascoe's recognition stirred a faint memory in Thomas, too.
‘Wasn't she on the list you gave me?
Hart?’
‘She was.’
‘That's the problem.
Men remain themselves if they stay honest.
An honest woman changes her name: she marries.
Go to the computer for Hart: she's not there.
You're still Pascoe — and that'll be how she found you phone book, nothing simpler.
Pity she wasn't a feminist we'd have got to her easily enough.’
‘George wouldn't give you her number.’
‘That's right.’
‘Why not?
Did he say?’
‘No.
He sounded a little jumpy, you know?
Harassed.’
‘Who signed your last cheque, Rob?’
‘He did.
Roxborough.’
‘Keep sending the bills.’
‘There's more you want me to do?’
‘There might be,’ Pascoe said.
‘You're on retainer.’
‘Listen, Sam, are you going to see Singer?
Confront him, or whatever.’
Pascoe hadn't had time to think it through, but he knew he would.
He said, ‘Yes.’
‘Take it easy.’
‘I will.’
‘I could…’
Thomas paused, as if having second thoughts, then said, ‘I don't know what the fuck you're doing down there, I don't know what's going on, and I don't really know why I'm offering this, but I could probably get you a gun, if you'd feel — I don't know —safer , or whatever.’
‘Thanks, Rob.
I've got one.’
‘You have?’
‘That's right.’
There was a pause on the line long enough for Pascoe to have taken a nap.
Thomas said, ‘I don't know about that.
I didn't hear you say that.’
Pascoe laughed.
‘You just offered to get me one.’
‘It would have been the same if I had…’
‘Hear no weapon,’ Pascoe guessed, ‘see no weapon —’
‘Speak of no weapon — right.’
Thomas cleared his throat, as if dislodging an embarrassment.
‘You tried calling her — your friend Sophie?’
Pascoe had got her address from Rob Thomas; at the same time, he'd added a quick surveillance job to Thomas's bill.
‘I tried, yes.’
‘She's there,’ Thomas told him.
‘She's just keeping the answerphone on full time.’
‘OK,’ Pascoe had expected it.
‘Sam…
Some guy called on a couple of occasions.
Spent some time with her.’
‘Yes?’
Pascoe could hear the residue in Thomas's voice and didn't want to know what was left to tell.
‘In fact, he spent the night there.’
Pascoe nodded, as if Thomas could see him.
‘OK, Rob, thanks.’
‘Do you want me to take another look?’
‘I don't think so.’
Pascoe closed himself off from the knowledge, like someone turning to face a wall.
He said, ‘Tell me about the hotel.’
‘A few itinerants.
Some labourers from the sticks living cheap while they get the job finished.
One or two people who'll be sleeping rough if they can't beg the room rate.
The streets round about are a meat market; couples rent by the half-hour — I don't think many of them are man and wife.’
‘OK, Rob.
Thanks.’
‘Take your rabbit's foot,’ Thomas said.
He sounded sincere.
Pascoe stood in the shower for twenty minutes, but still felt sluggish with sleep.
When the shower finally ran cold, he continued to stand under the jets for a while, then stepped out and put a towel round his waist and another over his shoulders.
He sat on the edge of the bed and dialled his office number.
The girl who sat in the reception area and answered the switchboard was called Lucinda.
She told him that Mr Roxborough wasn't in the office and could his secretary help?
It was with a little fillip of surprise that Pascoe realized she hadn't recognized his voice.
Surprise and a strange excitement; in some odd way, the incident seemed to mark a life-change.
He dialled George's home number and got no reply.
As soon as he hung up the phone, he started to pack a few things.
He would hold his room at the Palings while he went back to London.
He'd more or less stopped thinking about money; he'd stopped thinking about ordinary living.
Like a stranger in a strange land, he travelled with his other life in abeyance.
He would talk to Roxborough when he reached London.
He would talk to Charlie Singer.
Twenty-Eight
They sat on high stools by the window of a pub, enduring the after-work rush.
Someone nudged Pascoe twice, the second time more violently.
When he turned, he saw that he was backed up to a young man with crinkly hair and a baggy silk suit, sleeves turned back to mid-forearm.
He was standing with three friends and telling a tale in which he'd conned some adversary into covering a dubious investment.
The young man was the star of his own story.
In telling it, he cackled like a corncrake and waved his arms about.
An elbow came back and took Pascoe beside the ribs.
He shifted his stool a little closer to Roxborough's; at the same time, he organized a few ounces of beer into the young man's jacket pocket.
‘I don't know what's happening in your life, Sam.
I'm not sure I want to know.’
Roxborough watched the stain spread on the pocket and start to travel along the jacket's hem.
He smiled.
‘You might find it difficult to keep your place.
We can't get along being under-strength for ever.’
Pascoe shrugged.
‘I wish I could say I was worried by the thought.
Someone called me.
Susan Hart, yes?
Susan Larkin.’
‘She did.
I've been writing cheques to Rob Thomas.
Meeting his bills.
Which is odd, since he hasn't been doing any work for me.’
Pascoe snorted.
‘Don't tell me you care…
This is George Roxborough of expense account fame I'm talking to?
Your annual lunch bill is twice a teacher's salary.’
‘Just letting you know.’
‘I can hear you letting me know.
What do you want?’
‘Anthony Stewart comes to trial in just over a week's time.’
‘There's a problem…’
‘Yes and no.
I'm worried.
I wanted the chance to talk.’
Pascoe spread his hands, inviting Roxborough in.
‘Nothing's changed.
Nothing significant.
He and the mother are still telling the same story.
They're word perfect — in fact, that's a trifle worrying in itself.’
‘But it's not that.’
‘No.
I feel secure with Stewart; he's not a problem.
The prosecution will take him through it all a thousand times, but they've got sod-all evidence, and they know it.
With his mother to back him, I don't see what the opposition can do.
And that's where I feel edgy.
She tells their story well enough; she doesn't seem shaky at all.
But she's hostile.
She doesn't like me.
And it shows.
It might show in court.
I don't feel I can predict what she'll do.’
Pascoe said, ‘She doesn't like anyone.
You have to earn it.
Bribes.
She's been expecting them — you haven't delivered.’
‘What bribes?’
‘You take her chocolates,’ Pascoe said.
‘And flowers.
She likes roses.
And she likes liqueur centres.’
Roxborough looked at him, mouth slightly open.
He held the look so long that Pascoe laughed.
‘That's it ?’
Roxborough asked.
‘The whole trial could hang on whether or not I'd thought to take that stupid, self-centred , mad old woman flowers?’
‘And chocolates,’ Pascoe said.
‘The trouble is, George, you're a good lawyer, but you forget about the people.
They're odd; they have foibles; they rob banks or steal cars or kill people, but otherwise most of them have normal lives.’
As he said it, he felt the hairs rise on his arms.
Zeno…
Otherwise, they have normal lives.
‘Take her flowers and chocolates; she'll say what she's supposed to say, the jury will believe her, and you're a star.
OK?
Now, keep signing Rob's cheques and let me have Susan Hart's phone number.’
Roxborough handed Pascoe a slip of paper.
‘I'd've given it to you; I wasn't holding out.
Just needed some advice.’
He sniffed his whisky as if someone might have doctored it, then took a gulp.
‘She said to phone only in the evening.’
‘Why?’
Roxborough raised his eyebrows as if the answer were ludicrously obvious.
‘I imagine she's not there during the day.’
Pascoe looked at the figures, but the dialling code meant nothing to him.
‘How did she sound?’
‘Sound?’
‘Susan Hart — Larkin?
She didn't leave a message at all?’
‘Just to call.’
Roxborough finished his drink and got down from his stool, then collected Pascoe's beer mug and prepared to dive into the crush at the bar.
‘Is she a professional woman?
You know — futures, perhaps; something fast and financial?’
‘I don't know.
Why?’
‘She sounded tough,’ Roxborough said.
‘She sounded like a ball-breaker to me.’
Pascoe left as soon as he could.
Roxborough was a colleague not a friend; and, in any case, Pascoe wanted no-one's company but his own.
He went to his flat and kicked through the residue of ordinary living that lay behind his front door: letters, bills, journals.
as if that kind of world were possible or real, he sat down at his desk and wrote cheques for the bills.
Down on the southern edge of Zone One, you can hear sirens most of the time; you could imagine that wild animals roamed the park outside Pascoe's window, the constant whoop-screech-whoop their cries.
He walked round the cold rooms and looked at the place with a stranger's eyes.
All these odd trappings of a salvaged life, he thought.
All these bits and pieces washed ashore.
After Karen left, I  lightened my life — threw things overboard.
What did I keep?
Some things of hers; some things of mine.
It wasn't what I planned.
The idea had been to keep only what was mine, but I found there were things I couldn't bear to part with.
Perhaps I was trying to make an amalgam of what was best in both of us.
In which case…
He smiled at himself in one of Karen's mirrors.
In which case, there ought to be more of her things here than mine.
Each room dusty and unlived-in.
A faint, stale aroma like the residue of sweat — the city's stench seeping in.
He roamed around like a visitor who's been left to his own devices, curious and oddly furtive, opening drawers, reading a letter or two, shuffling through a deck of photographs.
So this is how I used to live…
Pascoe drove to the Shakespeare hotel and passed it, then turned round and passed it again.
The girls on the roadside looked like crippled birds — bright plumage, hobbled feet.
He parked the car a street away and walked back through a gauntlet of whispers and stony smiles.
He watched from a nearby bus-shelter.
Maybe not tonight, he thought.
Maybe he's eaten, isn't hungry, got drunk.
He let five buses go by and the girls kept at him, sure that they knew what he wanted.
He just said, ‘Later, later…’
They laughed, wondering how long he'd take to change his mind.
Charlie Singer appeared in front of the hotel and went towards the railway station, moving fast as if it had suddenly started to rain.
Nimble Charlie; nervy Charlie.
A private man; a man with secrets.
‘Just the type to bring a rabbit out of a hat,’ Sophie had said.
But Pascoe had come to this broken-down hotel in these bleak streets already guessing that Charlie probably wasn't Zeno.
For one thing, Longrock was three hundred miles from London — a long way for a bolt-hole.
And Rob Thomas's description of the man made him seem a fugitive, not a killer.
Then, when Pascoe saw Singer leave the hotel, he knew for sure.
He recognized the man only because he was looking for him.
Charlie was older, of course, but it wasn't only age that had changed him.
His features were smudged by drink and fear, fleshy and haggard.
Pascoe saw a face he knew locked up in the face of a stranger.
We'd better talk, Pascoe thought.
You and I, Charlie — we'd better see what there is to be said and what there is to know.
I'd like to hear why you're on the run.
I wonder was it because someone sent you a letter?
The girl who picked Pascoe up was a tall redhead in a glove-leather halter top and a skirt no bigger than a broad belt.
As they walked towards the hotel, she gave him the rates on an ascending scale and spat her gum into the kerbside as if she had already decided what his preference would be.
The sexual act, it seemed, was low on the list of priorities and was on offer at bargain prices; then, as you toured the body's locations, the cost increased.
Pain was the most expensive thing you could buy.
The redhead was leggy and had a terrific figure.
Pascoe thought of the things she did, hour in, hour out — the things that were done to her.
Each time a different man, each time the same things.
As they went into the hotel lobby, he noticed that her make-up was a mask, crimson lips and fake tan and eyes dark as a domino.
For a moment he saw Zeno, and his head sang.
‘Sign anything,’ she said.
A fat man in a bow tie tapped the register.
The girl nodded.
‘Anything — you know.’
He signed Samuel Pascoe, Esq , collected a key to room 308 and followed the girl to the lift.
She slammed the gate across — surprisingly lithe, her bicep bunching — and hit the button for the third floor.
They travelled upwards slower than grass grows.
Pascoe fished some money out of his wallet and handed it over.
‘That buys me a blow-job, doesn't it?’
The girl gave a tight grin, amused that she'd been right.
‘I'm buying it, but you can save it for the next guy.
Do you know a way out of here that isn't past the desk?’
‘Are you kidding?
I know six ways out of here that aren't past the desk.’
‘Good.
Take one of them.’
‘OK.’
Her shrug meant, I don't know, I don't want to know, and, anyway, I couldn't give a fuck.
When the lift stopped she yanked the gate back and stepped out like someone in a hurry.
‘Was it good for you, honey?’
There was a good-natured lilt to her voice.
‘It was perfect for me…’
She started down the hallway with long-legged strides: anxious for the street where time is money.
Pascoe took the lift back down a floor.
According to Rob Thomas, Singer was in room 215.
Pascoe walked down the hallway, still feeling a little light-headed.
Along its length were neon strips that fluttered and buzzed.
The noises that came from the rooms on either side seemed like the sound-track of a film that everyone in the hotel was playing, a film in which various people were constantly ambushed, or tortured, or — in joy — found God.
A man and woman were walking ahead of him, so he slowed his pace until the woman opened the door to room 214 and went in without bothering to look at her partner.
Pascoe went past as the key clicked in the lock.
At the end of the hallway he turned a corner and saw that he was facing a dead end, doorless apart from a fire exit, the walls dappled with scabs of paint and sick yellow neon light.
He stood just out of sight and listened for the lift.
People arrived in couples, but the men were the first to leave.
The hotel was a factory where itinerant shift-workers put the finishing touches to pleasure and pain.
Pascoe heard the mechanics working hard in rooms close by.
And then he heard the lift.
Footsteps approached, shuffling, and stopped.
When Pascoe looked into the hallway, he saw Singer leaning against the door of his room, his back half-turned.
He seemed to be either massively weary, or massively drunk.
Eventually, he got his key into the lock and nudged the door open with his knee.
He was carrying a brown bag, blotched with grease stains.
Pascoe walked up behind Singer as he opened the door and then simply followed him into the room.
Singer sensed a presence and turned, swinging a punch as if instinct or fear dictated it.
Pascoe side-stepped and Singer fell, towed by the trajectory of his own fist.
He lost his hold on the bag and a slew of rice and chicken and ochre sauce splashed on to the carpet.
Singer was up surprisingly quickly.
He got on to his knees, then rose in a crouch and hit Pascoe full on the chest with a tight fist.
It was a lucky punch, but Pascoe stepped back from it gulping after breath, and Singer followed, swinging his arms in the hope of connecting again.
His hand rapped the door frame and he gave a chirrup of pain.
Pascoe threw a punch and missed, then threw another and felt the connection travel to the point of his elbow.
As Singer went back, he grabbed Pascoe's lapel, dragging him on, and they both fell.
Singer's face was flushed as if he'd just got out of a hot bath.
As they lay on the floor, he went at Pascoe with knees and elbows, everything uncoordinated, getting a blow in to the cheekbone and then a knee close enough to the groin to make Pascoe panic.
A chair went over and Singer rolled through the mush of food, trying to gain his feet.
Pascoe got on to his knees like a man at prayer, and hauled Singer towards him by his hair, punching twice, hard, as he pulled the man in.
There was a sudden pause.
Singer put both hands up before his face, arms outstretched; he was begging.
Blood was running freely from his nose and dripping in rapid little jots from the point of his chin.
Pascoe said, ‘You needn't have done that, Charlie.’
He was so out of breath that he had to swallow a couple of words to get air.
Singer peered, as if through a fog.
He said, ‘Sam Pascoe?’
If there had been any last doubts in Pascoe's mind about whether Charlie Singer might be Zeno, Singer's tone of voice would have dispelled them.
The surprise and confusion couldn't have been faked.
Pascoe dropped his hands.
He said, ‘I've been looking for you, Charlie.’
Singer tucked a leg underneath, put a hand to the floor, and pushed himself into a squat.
He stayed that way for a moment waiting for a sudden onslaught of dizziness to pass; three or four times, he shook his head and bloodbeads flicked across the room.
When he'd recovered, he went to a suitcase in a corner of the room and took out a T-shirt to use as a swab.
‘Looking for me…’
Singer draped the T-shirt over his head, but his laughter was evident in the way his shoulders shook.
After a moment, he pulled the T-shirt away; his face was streaked red and his mouth was wide open in a silent howl of laughter.
Pascoe waited him out.
Finally, Singer sat on the edge of the bed, laughter spent, his face now peculiarly solemn.
‘Yes, well, you're not alone in that.’
He looked at Pascoe in astonishment and shook his head.
‘What in fuck's name do you want, Sam?
Planning to blow up a train and need some help?’
‘What are you doing here?’
Pascoe asked.
‘What's wrong?’
‘I asked you a question, you asked me a question, but I didn't leap out of nowhere and start a fight, did I?
You go first.’
‘I had a letter,’ Pascoe said, ‘about Lori.
I don't know who sent it and I want to find out.’
‘Lori…’
Singer looked incredulous.
‘Jesus Christ, about Lori ?’
He felt a trickle of blood touch his lip and wiped it away.
‘A threatening letter?’
‘Well,’ Pascoe said, ‘it wasn't a news letter.’
‘Blackmail.’
Singer started to laugh again.
‘Well, I'm not at my home address, as you see, so if there's a letter for me, I haven't got it.
And even if I had, I don't think I'd've paid it much attention.
Someone's bringing his bucket to a dry well.’
He paused, realizing what Pascoe had meant.
‘Looking for me .
You thought it might be me.’
‘It's someone who knows.’
‘Jesus,anyone could know.’
‘Have you told anyone?’
Singer shook his head, allowing the point.
‘No.’
Then he added, ‘It's not me.’
I can see that, Pascoe thought.
He was giving Singer the bare minimum — nothing about Nick's death or Marianne's disappearance, nothing about Sophie or Zeno.
He said, ‘Now you —’
‘I owe some people some money.’
‘Much money?’
Pascoe didn't ask about the people, but he guessed that they had grown angry waiting for the debt to be paid.
Singer grinned like someone about to reveal an amazing piece of gossip.
‘More than a quarter of a million.’
‘They want your hide.’
Singer's grin didn't fade; if anything, it grew broader.
‘Oh, I'm dead.
No question: dead.
You're talking to a dead man.’
Someone came into 214.
They heard the door open and close.
The man's voice was a soft bass, the syllables blurred.
The woman's higher voice was dampened by the wall, but clear, like all the women's voices from all the rooms.
‘Listen — you can get your hands round that when I've seen some cash …’
She managed to sound both coquettish and businesslike, though what really lay in the voice was endless anger.
‘What are you going to do?’
Pascoe realized he'd spoken in a whisper.
Singer gave a half-laugh.
‘I don't think they're listening to us.’
Even so, he dropped his voice.
‘I'm becoming anonymous.
The theory is that if I stay among the faceless long enough, I become faceless myself.’
In 214, the bed creaked like a rack.
The man's low voice rumbled an instruction: ‘Do this, do that .’
It never changed.
‘How long will your money hold out?’
‘About another three months,’ Singer said.
‘The thing about betting the horses — sometimes you win.’
‘But mostly you lose,’ Pascoe observed.
‘You lose two hundred and fifty thousand or more.’
‘I'll wait for a month or so: here, some other place, I don't know.
Then I'll try to get to France.
It's moving that's the problem.
And the passport.
It gives you an identity.
Having no identity at all— that's the trick.
Becoming someone else; becoming someone new.’
‘Is that what you like ?’ the woman asked.
‘Is that what you want to do ?’
‘What happened?’
Pascoe asked.
He thought back to the moment when he and Sophie were inside Singer's flat: the bed littered with clothes hangers, the dim light, the stale air.
‘The same as always happens,’ Singer told him.
‘There's nothing original about a mess like this.
I made some bets and they came good.
I made some more — the same.
What was that about?
Clear as day — I was on a winning streak, I'd hit a seam.
Made some more bets that didn't quite work out, but I could still see the pattern — a good one, too.
More bets; I started to lose.
Well, that couldn't last, because I'd found my touch, right?
So: more bets, then more, then more again.
Woke up one morning and I was in for twenty thousand.
There was a pattern all right; problem was I'd misread it.’
From beyond the wall came: ‘You want to do that ?’
Then the man's voice, rumbling a response.
She said, ‘OK ,’ and laughed.
‘You're going to need an entry fee .’
‘There's a gambler's remedy,’ Singer said, ‘the equivalent of hair of the dog.
It's called bet your debt.’
‘That's what you did?’
‘That's what I did.
Twenty grand spread on straight bets and accumulators.’
Singer laughed.
‘God was not good and I was broke.
So I did the logical thing — for a gambler, that is.
I went after the money with money borrowed from legit sources so far as I could: you know, against property, against insurance policies.
By the time that had gone I was close to fifty thousand out.
There was only one place left to go.’
Singer shrugged: ‘Well,places , really.
Soho, Chinatown…’ he laughed, ‘Mayfair…
You don't pick up a quarter of a million all in one place.’
The woman said, ‘That hurts .’
Then, again, ‘That hurts, Goddammit .’
The man seemed not to be listening; he was cursing her — a growing crescendo of long-hoarded hatred and fear.
Lines of blood had dried on Singer's face, a little map of pain.
He sat on the bed, shoulders down, face averted, like a refugee.
‘You couldn't lend me some money, Sam?’
Pascoe handed over almost all he had and Singer took the cash without looking at it.
‘Lori…
Who in God's name would write to you about Lori?’
Pascoe said, ‘Someone troubled by the past.’
Then, remembering Singer's remark about blackmail, added: ‘Someone who needs money.’
‘I need money,’ Singer confirmed.
‘It isn't —’
‘It isn't you; I know.
I can see that.’
Nimble Charlie, Charlie light on his feet, skinny and quick and deft.
Charlie once-upon-a-time…
Now the face was lost in flesh and a paunch hung on him like a soft bell.
Pascoe thought of Sophie and felt no jealousy.
He felt sadness.
The woman in the next room gave a brief shriek of outrage and damage; then came a silence so long that it was almost eerie.
Pascoe looked around the room as though he were checking to see whether he'd left anything behind.
He said, ‘Lots of luck, Charlie.’
‘Lori…’
The way Singer spoke the word seemed to endow it with some great mystery.
‘I'd forgotten she ever existed.’
Pascoe could tell a good lie from a bad.
He said, ‘Sure
‘Did you have fun, Darling ?’ the woman asked.
There was strain in her voice plain to hear.
‘So tell your friends, OK ?’
There were fires burning in the park.
You could imagine  you were prospecting some dark land and seeing camp fires, or signal fires, or fires that were the only known evidence of a hidden tribe.
The flames ran in red-gold points of reflection on Pascoe's window.
He looked out, only half-focusing, until it seemed the fires were burning in his room, or else his reflection had stepped out through the window to roam the park like a ghost.
There was a rough, unshiftable pain where Charlie Singer had landed his punch, and Pascoe was drinking whisky to take the edge off it.
He called Sophie and listened while her voice ran through the little script that people write for answerphones, then doubled his double Scotch and went back to the window.
Dear God, I'm tired…
As the thought struck him he felt a sudden wild dizziness, and fatigue ran through him like an electrical surge.
He went to sleep as he stood there, clutching his glass, his forehead resting on the windowpane.
His breathing fetched a tiny, circular patch of dew to the glass, that faded and swelled to the rhythm of his sleep.
An image of distant fire danced on his brow.
He woke next morning without remembering that moment of sudden sleep.
He was in bed, fully clothed, feeling a hangover latch on hook by hook.
He emerged swearing softly at himself and swaying slightly.
The discomfort in his chest had settled to a hoarseness as the bruise blossomed, but his stomach churned on the lees of booze and bile.
One or two deaths from old age had taken place in the fridge.
He rooted around for survivors but there were none.
In the store cupboard, he found a can of beef stew and dumped it in a saucepan to heat.
He ate it with some biscuits, getting it down fast, his face close to the plate, his fork-hand hooking round to beat illness to the punch.
He made coffee, then found the piece of paper Roxborough had given him and took it to the phone.
He had almost decided to hang up when a man's voice came on the line, sounding muzzy and oddly worried.
‘Is Susan Hart there?’
Pascoe corrected the mistake.
‘Larkin.’
‘Who do you want?’
The voice seemed tremulous with age.
‘Susan Larkin.’
Pascoe glanced down at the paper to check the number.
‘I know who you are.’
The remark was so puzzling Pascoe continued as if it hadn't been spoken.
‘My name's Sam Pascoe.
We used to know one another.’
A silence came in, inexplicable and laden with unease.
Pascoe heard a woman's voice, growing in volume as she approached.
There was a clatter as the phone was put down.
Out of the jabber of syllables — the man's and the woman's — came her question.
‘Who is it?’
‘Who is it?’
The man gave a little squawk of indignation.
Of fear.
‘Your lover,’ he said.
The woman lifted the phone and said, ‘Wait, please.’
Pascoe guessed that she must have put her hand over the mouthpiece.
Her voice grew muffled, though her words remained clear enough.
‘Go back to bed, all right?
What are you doing down here?’
‘Intercepting your secret phone calls.’
Now he was angry, the man suddenly seemed younger.
‘Go back to bed.’
Pascoe pictured the woman watching the man out of sight before she turned back to the phone.
‘Yes?’
‘Sue?’ he asked.
‘It's Sam Pascoe.’
Her voice was like flint.
‘When I left my number at your office, I said that you weren't to call me during the day.
Didn't they tell you that?’
‘I forgot.
I'm sorry.’
It seemed such a bizarre exchange after two decades of silence that he repeated her name —‘Sue?’— as if it might turn out not to be her after all.
‘What's your address, Sam?
Where are you?’
He told her.
‘OK,’ she said, ‘give me an hour.’
‘Sue —’
‘An hour,’ she told him.
Then the phone went down.
Twenty-Nine
Zeno's house was in woodland, half a mile from Longrock and in sight of the sea.
You could drive to a track where there was a parking circle and from there walk fifty yards uphill to a gate, a garden, a cottage built of granite and constantine.
Its virtue was that it had no neighbours and it had been picked out for just that reason: no-one to ask questions, no-one expecting to start up a friendship.
As you walked from the house to the sea, the sound of the wind in the trees became the sound of waves on the rocks.
Because Zeno was edgy, Carla was telling him a story.
It was a story that began in sadness, but came out well — the story of herself.
They were sitting in front of the house and looking at the ocean.
‘Once upon a time,’ Carla said, then stopped.
She was picking at a leaf-taking the green out to leave a filigree of veins.
‘Except it can't begin like that, since I don't remember specific times.
All I see are snapshots.
Each snapshot has a feeling that goes with it: mostly sadness, sometimes fear, once or twice happiness.
That's all the past is: snapshots and feelings.’
Zeno's snapshot was Lori in the instant that she leaped from the low branch.
Her arms and legs were spread like a flayed hide; her face was a gargoyle's grimace.
Carla said, ‘One moment is with my father.
We're standing on a hill.
I'm wearing a red dress.
I suppose I was about five years old; maybe four.
It's the only moment with him, there weren't any others.’
Lori as she leaped from the low branch …
When Pascoe opened the door to Susan Hart, he recognized her at once; then the recognition fled.
Before his eyes, the person he'd known did a slow dissolve into the person she'd become: the face sharper and sterner, the hair short and severe, the body lean as a toothpick on salads and work-outs.
The make-up did a terrific job, but couldn't get rid of the two deep creases that ran from the corners of her mouth to her jawline, or the network of lines on her brow.
‘You look great,’ he told her.
‘I look like hell; if it comes to that, so do you.’
‘I'm sorry about the phone call.
I got the instruction but I didn't really take it in.’
Pascoe was still shaky, the hangover circling like a storm amid mountains.
He made coffee for Susan, but decided not to risk a cup himself.
‘I got a letter,’ she said.
‘About Lori.’
She didn't seem surprised.
‘Yes.’
‘I got one too.’
‘I thought you must have done.’
‘Did you?’
Pascoe felt a little rush of nausea, as if someone had pulled a spigot in his gut.
‘Why?’
‘The only person I stayed in touch with— after Lori — was Marianne Novaks.
Not for long-I mean, we hadn't seen each other for years.
But I knew where her father lived.
I called.
He told me that you and Sophie had been there; he also told me that Marianne had disappeared.
I didn't think you were down there renewing an old acquaintance.
How is Sophie?’
Pascoe shrugged.
‘Fine.
She had a letter as well.’
‘I couldn't find her.
I expect she married and changed her name.
But you were easy enough — your name was all over the papers recently.’
Pascoe looked at her as if he couldn't make the connection.
‘You're defending Anthony Stewart.’
‘No, I'm not,’ he said.
‘But I was.’
Susan was dressed in businesswoman's black.
‘Here we sit,’ she said.
‘The great revolutionaries.
You a lawyer, me —’ and she spread her hands, inviting Pascoe to guess.
He shook his head, though he was thinking what George Roxborough had thought: broker, investment banker.
‘Kept woman,’ Susan said.
‘I married for money, and I got just what I wanted.
A rich man, devoted to me.’
‘Lucky you,’ Pascoe said.
He thought: Just like Sophie — the same journey, the same cash contract.
In Charlie's loft, they had talked through the night about the sickness money brings, the violence and fear that money brings, the corruption money brings, and all along the real subject was not fear or corruption or violence, but money.
Pascoe changed his mind about the coffee; anything to distract his body from what was happening to it.
Susan laughed.
‘Lucky…
Maybe then; not now.’
Pascoe didn't ask her what she meant.
‘What about the letter?’ she asked.
Pascoe told her what had happened: everything; about Nick Howard's body being found in the cove, about dining and dancing with death, about magic.
He saw knowledge and pain in her eyes long before he'd finished, but he to! d her the rest anyway.
She said, ‘It's Luke.’
Except he hadn't told her about finding Charlie Singer.
‘It could be Charlie,’ he said.
‘What makes you sure?’
‘It's Luke.’
Lori in bed beside him saying, ‘Never leave me.’
‘Another snapshot,’ Carla said, ‘is my mother waving goodbye.
I don't remember what the occasion was — maybe it was my first day at school, or maybe I was staying with my aunt for a few days…’
She pondered, seeming anxious to trap the moment, then gave up.
‘No: I can't remember.
But it was seeing her waving — standing there and seeming to wave for ever as she backed away from me.
I think it must have been out of doors, because what I recall most is the way she seemed to dwindle on planes of blue.’
They had begun to walk through the woods towards the  sea; two lovers out for a stroll, telling each other everything.
Because they were walking downhill her limp was making her awkward and she linked arms with him to keep her balance.
Lori wrapped up in him, her face a love-mask.
‘You know that Luke and I were lovers?’
Susan asked.
‘Ah…’
Pascoe was thrown by her bluntness.
‘I thought it was on and off.’
‘Everything was on and off in those days.
Permanence was a drag , man.
Change — that was the issue.’
Susan held her cup out for more coffee.
‘No, we were having a relationship, such as it was.
After the Group split up, we got married.’
There was an extravagant pause.
Finally, Pascoe said: ‘Married?’
‘It was Luke's gift to me,’ she said.
‘He handed it over in return for disappointments and betrayals.
Though, of course, betrayal wasn't a word you were allowed to use either.’
‘What happened?’
‘They were heady days, weren't they, Sam?
Luke wanted to blow up the world and start again.
He used to use the word ‘bloodbath’ as if it were a form of baptism.’
‘Did you want that?’
Pascoe asked.
‘He used to make hit lists — you know?
Members of the Cabinet, right -wing back-benchers, policemen, soldiers…’
She paused.
‘Did I want it?
I wanted whatever he wanted.’
‘If you're right — if it's Luke — why?
Why is he doing it?’
‘The marriage lasted a year, almost to the day.
Lori…’
She glanced at Pascoe quickly, then looked away again.
‘That was tough for everyone.
Tougher for me, though, since I knew Luke was sleeping with her.
‘For the cause,’ he said.’
Pascoe looked at her blankly.
‘He was sleeping with her, yes.
What do you mean: for the cause?
What did he mean?’
‘You thought it was just a gag,’ Susan said.
‘Luke  Mallen, revolutionary and acid-head, bangs the wife of a USAF colonel.
Poor Lori.
After I'd finished hating her, I began to feel sorry for her.
Then we killed her, and I felt frightened of her.
As it happened, I was right to feel that.’
‘Some people would say she killed herself.’
Susan's gaze was bleak with knowledge.
‘We harassed her.
We made anonymous phone calls.
And we knew how frightened she was, how disturbed, because Luke told us that — told us fresh from her bed and hardly able to speak for laughter.’
‘For the cause …?’
‘There was a man called Wallace Ellwood.
He knew about Luke and Lori: God knows how.
He was —’ Susan threw her hands up as if inviting Pascoe's disbelief.
‘He worked for British Intelligence, but he was a double agent.
Or said he was: told Luke that.
He was stationed at the Base in some sort of fake capacity.
The British keeping an eye on the Yanks was the idea.
Except Ellwood was keeping an eye on everyone and seeing to it that East Germany got the news.
He recruited Luke — not that Luke needed to be persuaded.
He thought it was terrific — you know?— the real thing,professional stuff.’
‘How did you know this — about Ellwood?’
‘Luke told me.
It worked well: Luke slept with Lori.
Lori gave him bits and pieces of information gleaned from her husband.
Luke passed them on.’
‘To Ellwood.’
‘No: to a priest called Carey.
Luke used to go to confession.’
Her smile was almost a grimace.
‘Confession…
Carey was part of a chain.
Ellwood didn't want the limelight; he had a cover to preserve at the Base.
He saw Luke now and then: just to stay in touch.
The chain was the Colonel — unwittingly — then Lori, Luke, Carey, after that…wherever.’
‘What was it about Ellwood?’
Pascoe had seen how the name filled her face with darkness.
‘It seemed like a joke, didn't it?
‘We know all about you …’
A cruel joke, but then it was supposed to be that.
But when we phoned her, when we made those calls saying, ‘We know,’ it wasn't just the infidelity that Lori worried about.
It was all the things she told Luke.
It was spying, giving away secrets, pillow talk…
Luke knew how desperate she was.
She never told him about the phone calls: I think perhaps she thought that might drive him away.
And the truth was — the bald truth was — Lori was crazy about him.
He could see how hopeless it was for her.
She was twenty years older than Luke.
Too late to change.
And, anyway, she wasn't so deluded that she thought they might make a life together.
But she was so much in love with him it was witchcraft — he had her in thrall.’
Susan stopped speaking.
Her face was turned away, as if she had seen something out of the corner of her eye.
Pascoe was like a man watching from the shore, too far off to give help, while a swimmer fought to stay afloat.
Finally, Susan said: ‘Me too.’
‘All I really remember,’ Pascoe said, ‘is that Luke was screwing the Colonel's wife.
I remember we laughed about it.
He'd give us funny stories — the Colonel coming in the front door while Luke left through the back.
The phone calls were just…they were stupid…we were mostly out of our minds, for Christ's sake.’
‘Lori was out of hers.
We didn't know that.
We didn't think of that.’
‘You knew,’ Pascoe said suddenly.
Susan nodded, slowly.
‘She was my rival.
She loved Luke as much as I did.
You think I cared what happened to her?’
And here's a group shot: everyone standing under the tree, Lori's face among the branches, dark like bruised fruit.
Everything still.
Then a woman, crying.
The acid trip came and went like an image on a screen, sometimes faint, sometimes strong — music among the trees, Lori's dark head singing, colours among the undergrowth, curling like lurid fog, light crowning the treetops, Lori seeming to move in a stately dance.
And a woman crying .
Carla said, ‘In hospital, everything was white or black.’
The memory seemed to worsen her limp; her hip knocked his as they walked.
‘I was there for a long time, but I can't remember anyone visiting me.
My hospital snapshot is a doorway where people came and went.
I could see into the hallway.
Ordinary life was going on outside.’
They had reached the foreshore.
Carla took her shoes off and loosed his arm so that she could walk through the lip of foam.
The shutter went click.
Lori climbed the tree: click.
She fixed the rope: click.
She jumped: click.
Everyone there…
Look at the camera — smile — click!
Pascoe realized that he'd been asking questions that Susan hadn't answered.
He tried again.
‘How do you know it's Luke?’
‘A year to the day it lasted.
God knows how.
We spent most of the time on the planet acid: the best place for us to be.
Luke would rave on about change.
Changed states, changed lives.
Everything had to change…’
She smiled, then picked up on his question.
‘From the letter itself that's how I knew it was Luke.
I was in love with him; I was his wife.
The tone of the letter, the way it spoke of Lori; I was sure Luke had written it.’
‘Were you?’
A thought occurred to Pascoe.
‘I'd assumed the letter was identical in each case.
Maybe not…’
Susan shrugged.
‘It was meant to threaten and compel, it was anonymous, it suggested a meeting.
I expect they were all much the same.
The difference lay in the reader.’
‘If you knew…’
‘Knew what?
I knew it was Luke.
I didn't know he was likely to kill anyone.
Blackmail was what I assumed.
I thought: If he tells someone, my life will change.
It seemed like a good option — a chance for chaos.
I wanted that.
When nothing happened, I was almost disappointed.’
‘Still, it's only guesswork,’ Pascoe was being the lawyer — asking for better and more secure evidence.
Susan shook her head.
‘Maybe…before this moment.
Not now.’
Pascoe looked at her, asking for the proof.
‘We were on a beach in Greece,’ Susan said.
‘There was a guy doing tricks: you know, magic, conjuring, juggling…
Luke was like someone who'd seen a vision of the Holy Grail — completely obsessed.’
She smiled ruefully.
‘Obsession is in his nature.
I've been his obsession, and I know.
It's quite a responsibility.’
The smile went away.
‘It turned out that the guy was a pro; he gave performances here and there, novelty turns, you know.
Louis Maddox: but his stage name was Orso.
Luke started going to all his shows.
Made a friend of him.
Eventually wound up taking lessons from him.
And Luke was good.
They did a switch on stage one night — Maddox got into a trunk tied hand and foot, but it was Luke who emerged.
He finished the show pretending to be Maddox, and no-one knew.’
She picked up another question Pascoe had asked.
‘It's Luke,’ she said, ‘but I don't know why he's doing it.’
She jumped and came up short as the rope went taut.
The shock seemed to travel through the entire tree, as if that drop, that weight, that terrible dry snap became a tremor in the tap root, as if it bled into the sap.
When they reached the dunes, Carla sat down close to where Tom Carey normally sat.
She said, ‘Now I've found you, those old photos don't matter any more.’
Her pale, plain face was turned to him as a flower turns to the sun.
She lifted the hem of her skirt back to her waist, and smiled, and touched herself briefly between the legs.
‘Come on,’ she said.
‘Revolutionaries — were we?’
Susan laughed.
‘Little acts of sabotage, little deeds of spite; that was us.
And what have we become?’
She extended a hand to Pascoe, as if introducing him to strangers.
‘A lawyer, defending seedy killers,’— the hand returned to herself —‘an opportunist trapped by her own greed.’
‘Is that who you are?’
Pascoe asked.
‘My husband has cancer.
He's dying.
He's convinced that my lover and I are waiting eagerly for that event, so he's written a will that leaves me destitute.
The most amusing part of all this is that I don't have a lover.’
Pascoe realized that what he'd heard in the voice on the phone hadn't been age, but sickness.
‘I only ever loved Luke,’ Susan said.
‘I don't know what happened to us.
He took a lot of acid; he practised all day and all night — magic, tricks, illusions.
He became secretive and distant.
I know he saw Wallace Ellwood sometimes, but I don't know why.’
She stood up and Pascoe stood too, oddly formal.
He felt weak, like someone who has endured months of broken nights.
He said, ‘Now that you know that it's Luke, that he sent you the letter, what are you going to do?’
Even as he spoke, he saw that it was a dead issue for Susan.
‘Go home to my husband,’ she said.
‘He's dying, and he's afraid.
Carla stretched out, feeling the rub of sand against her thighs.
She pulled her dress up over her face and looked at the sun as it washed into the cotton.
He lowered himself and kissed her through the weave.
‘The best…
The best ever…’
Her voice was muffled and indistinct.
She lifted her legs and scissored them on his back.
Seen through the sunlit material, he was nameless and faceless, a pleasure device.
Lori strung up like meat in the windless wood, everyone standing there, and someone…
Susan had her hand on the door.
Pascoe asked, ‘Ellwood?
What was it about Ellwood?’
He thought she wouldn't reply, then she shrugged and tried to laugh, but couldn't bring it off.
The failure chilled him.
She said, ‘Wallace Ellwood is the most evil person I've ever met,’ then wiped a hand across her face as if his name had fouled her mouth.
…and someone crying.
Susan, crying.
The dress slid from Carla's face to show her eyes wide with desire, wide with love.
A great flush spread on her throat and she drove her heels into the sand and arched her back, whispering his own name to him like a fierce incantation.
Luke, Luke, Luke, Luke, Luke…’
Thirty
As an invalid might, or a child, Wallace Ellwood sat in a chair by the window of his apartment and watched the traffic go by.
The phone was wedged under his chin.
He was eating nacho chips and drinking beer from the bottle and listening as Hilary Todd told him to forget about Piper, to stay in London, to wait for further instructions.
Ellwood's ear was tuned to the glee in every word, a little bugle call that meant, ‘No quarter’.
Two more men had died — another in France and one in Italy, both of them Insiders.
‘The chance has gone,’ Todd said.
‘Your chance.’
Ellwood could have been talking to a simpleton.
‘You'll have to give me more time down there, Hilary.
I'm inclined to finish the job, now it's begun.
I think I'd prefer that.
But I'll need a little more time.’
Todd laughed.
‘No-one could accuse you of unnecessary panic, Wallace.
But let me give you a tip — panic.
Do it now.
Look down: you'll see your balls in my hand.’
‘Now you can find a way, Hilary, I'm sure of it.
I can see that we're going to have to speed things up: I'll give you that.’
Ellwood was having fun.
His voice was just a hint more than a whisper.
‘You're a headless chicken, Wallace.
Still in motion, but dead meat.’
Ellwood's timing was perfect.
He could see Todd's smile, could feel the gesture forming as the other man leaned forward very slightly and prepared to put the phone down.
He said, ‘Poor Annie…’
A silence grew on the line, a vacuum that drew loathing and dread towards it in a soundless rush.
‘Poor Annie,’ Ellwood continued, ‘gone, now, and out of harm's way, but so curious, Hilary, and so indiscreet.
She seemed to know an awful lot about you.
I'm sure she didn't tell me everything.
But she mentioned the stash-for-cash deals, and she kept a little record, and she named names.
We had dinner one evening and although she didn't know it, I was recording everything she said.
Because I like to keep a little record myself.
I've had a few copies made to be on the safe side: solicitors, banks…you know.
If I come to grief, Hilary, then so will you.’
Ellwood waited, happy to hear the line humming between them.
He took a swallow of beer and watched a red Lotus Elan convertible cutting an aggressive, jagged line between trucks and lazily driven cars.
A woman was driving, her straight, dark hair streaming like a banner, her skirt hiked up over lean thighs, her arms held straight from shoulder to wheel.
She cut in on a station wagon, forcing the driver to brake heavily, then made fifty yards on the hard shoulder.
Even after he'd lost sight of her, Ellwood retained the image of power.
‘Now I can see that things are growing difficult for you, Hilary, with people dying in foreign countries.
I'm sure you're under pressure.
I don't expect you to be able to give me all the time in the world: that would be unreasonable.’
Todd hadn't spoken in over a minute, but there was a harshness on the line that Ellwood knew to be his breathing, and a thin, reedy, barely audible sound behind that, which resembled nothing so much as a cry that had been buried alive.
‘So I'm asking for another week, Hilary.
A week or so .
Because I'm going to take some measures to…speed things up.
And after that, a little holiday.
And after that, you can find me another nice job to do.’
He put a nacho chip in his mouth and soaked it with beer.
‘Life's deceptive, Hilary.
Life is a hall of mirrors.
You think those are my balls in your hand?
Nah…
Look again.
You see?
It's a mirror.
And have you noticed what's in my other hand?
That's right, Hilary; a knife.’
Less than ten minutes later, Ellwood was driving west on the elevated section, carving a path through the laggards and deadheads.
He hoped he might encounter the girl in the Lotus Elan making the return trip.
Thirty-One
Pascoe watched a globe as it glowed in the darkness, then rose and fell in a sizzling arc.
Another joined it, then a third.
All three hung in the air, moving and looping, until they were joined by a fourth: white, green, red, blue.
Out of the blackness a voice said, ‘Spectacular, isn't it?’
Louis Maddox kept the globes suspended for a little longer, then caught them in turn, letting their brilliance fade.
When he drew the curtain back from the windows, he was smiling.
‘Everyone likes that trick.
Look —’ he held one of the globes out to Pascoe.
‘It's a neon circuit, with a damper switch in the perspex, right here.’
Pascoe could see a tiny, colourless button in the seam where the two halves of the globe were joined.
Maddox pressed it and the little circuit hummed with white light.
‘Makes simple juggling into a magic show.’
He stowed the globes in a styrofoam case like an over-sized egg box.
‘How is Susan?’
‘Fine.’
‘It's a long time,’ Maddox said.
‘And I'm not sure what it is you want to know.’
Pascoe had found Maddox easily: he was listed with several theatrical booking agencies.
Deciding what to tell the man wasn't so simple.
‘Neither am I.’ Pascoe was busking.
‘I'm a lawyer.
Susan and Luke and I were friends years ago: we lost touch not long before you and Luke came to know one another.’
‘They're still together?’
Maddox said it as if even this world could deliver miracles.
‘No.
Luke's been in touch with her, though; and with me.
It's possible he's in trouble.
We want to find him.’
‘And you're a lawyer…?’
‘I'm also Luke's friend.’
‘So why come to me?
I haven't seen Luke in years.’
‘I don't expect you to know where he is,’ Pascoe said.
‘I just want to talk to you about him.
It's called background.’
When Maddox shrugged, Pascoe lifted a store bag he'd brought with him and took out some fake flowers and a top hat.
He passed them to Maddox.
The top hat had bird shit in it.
‘What's this?’
Maddox asked.
‘Left at the scene of the crime?’
‘Something like that.’
‘You're not going to tell me, are you?’
‘I will if you say I must.’
‘Forget it,’ Maddox told him.
‘I'm guessing that I wouldn't want to know.’
He made the flowers a cane and twirled it like a drum majorette.
As Pascoe watched, it exploded in Maddox's hand to become a bunch of flowers again.
‘Tricks are OK,’ Maddox said, ‘tricks are fine.’
He tossed the flowers aside.
‘They're a warm-up device: nothing wrong with that, but it's not magic.
Magic is illusion and belief.’
‘Was Luke good at that?’
Maddox was tall and slender, like a wand.
He must have been sixty or so, but you had to get close to see it and if his hair was grey, someone had made a good job of disguising the fact.
Pascoe noticed how nimble his hands were: long fingers, a delicate touch.
A slow smile, almost sad.
Maddox said, ‘Luke was the best natural talent I ever saw.’
‘You taught him…’
‘Well…
I showed him what to do.
And he had tremendous flair.
But remember I said illusion and belief.
There are good mechanics who can produce a series of illusions flawlessly.
It's a job, to them; a technique.
They can show you magic, but not a magic show .
A magic show  is a story.
You can be a performer, or else you can be the hero of the story.’
‘And Luke knew how to be that,’ Pascoe suggested.
‘Luke knew how to be that.’
Maddox shook a cigarette from a packet and drew it back and forth through pursed fingertips.
‘You have to construct a story, of course, sentence by sentence, trick by trick.’
The cigarette slid back into his hand, then popped up again, a sly temptation.
‘I'm trying not to light it.’
‘Will you succeed?’
‘It's tricky,’ Maddox said.
‘What was Luke's speciality?
Did he have one?’
‘He was good at everything.’
‘Escapology,’ Pascoe wondered.
‘You've seen him work,’ Maddox was sure of it.
There wasn't a trace of the sardonic about Pascoe's smile.
‘In a manner of speaking — yes.’
‘It fascinated him more than anything else.
He loved it.
He used to liken it to confession — you go in a sinner, laden with chains, bound by evil deeds, then,whoof , the sinner emerges, unfettered and free.’
Maddox was fighting an uneven battle.
He lit the cigarette and waved an apologetic hand through the smoke.
‘He could always see the illusion from the point of view of the audience.
I mean, he was able to put himself among the duped.
Which was particular and odd, since all magic is to do with knowledge versus ignorance.
A key hidden in your mouth or under your scrotum, a button to press, a collapsible blade…
‘Would you like something to drink?’
He moved with a lithe grace; only the lines on his face gave him away, the little scrawny pouch under his chin.
He went through to his kitchen, then returned with a bottle of claret and two glasses.
‘Just wine and beer now,’ he said, as if that told Pascoe all he needed to know about Maddox's state of health.
‘And, in theory, no cigarettes.’
He poured the wine and said, ‘It should have had longer…’
Then: ‘Why are you looking for him?’
‘I thought you didn't want to know.’
‘You're right; I don't.’
‘What else could Luke do?’
‘He was good at make-up — disguise.
He used to do a show for me sometimes.
Never went pro, but I used to put him on as part of my act.
He'd do a standard trunk escape, but come on as a clown to test the chains.
It was a good ruse.
He'd palm a key and undo the locks that way.’
Maddox held his wine to the light, then sipped.
‘Everything — close work, cards, juggling, knife-throwing.’
His head lifted sharply as if an idea had struck him.
‘Don't think about it,’ Pascoe said.
Maddox took another cigarette from the packet and lit it straight away.
‘I knew it must have been something like that.’
‘Don't worry, you never saw me.
I was never here.’
Maddox didn't seem worried, he seemed curious.
‘What did you hope to get from me?’
‘Confirmation,’ Pascoe told him, ‘and I got it.’
Maddox nodded and poured more wine for himself.
Pascoe's glass was untouched.
He said, ‘If you find Luke, what will you do?’
‘Don't know.’
Pascoe got up, leaving the flowers and the hat where they lay.
‘From the moment you arrived,’ Maddox said, ‘I knew it was something like that.’
Luke Mallen walked out along the strip of headland that led to Meer's Point and stood with Tom Carey as he fished.
It was early evening.
A layer of cloud had drifted in to take the warmth out of what remained of the day; the wind tore it occasionally, leaving rags of blue.
Carey's reel clicked slowly, then stopped.
The two men stood side by side in silence.
Carey re-baited his hook with fish-scrap and cast again.
‘What would you have done?
Marianne said she wanted to…’
Luke stumbled on the word, ‘…confess.
I thought: She'll have to die.
It's obvious: they'll all have to die.
Then Carla and I can be safe.’
The line payed out, making the ratchet sing.
Carey checked it, then dragged back on the rod and took up the slack, working that way for five minutes or so before he beached the fish.
It was pale and hammer-headed, with thick, fleshy lumps on the brow like some awful growth.
‘All of them,’ Luke said, ‘because they know about Lori.’
Carey fixed the rod into its vee and stooped to the fish.
Luke squatted alongside, like a child anxious to keep the priest's attention.
Carey took out a disgorger and removed the hook.
The gills were crisp and sharp as paper, and bright with blood.
From the lip trailed two white mandarin moustaches like pulpy tubers.
Carey stood up, the fish held in the crook of his arm, as you would hold an infant.
He could only think of the confessional's stock-in-trade: ‘Did you find pleasure in it, Luke?’
The fish made little leaps and flips, as if it could feel the sea along its flank, its mouth wide open in a frantic dumb-show of breathing; all the time, its eyes were growing dull and yellowed as old tinfoil.
Luke scooped the fish up from Carey's arms and threw it into the shallows.
He smiled at the ease of it; one minute the fish was dying, the next it was in its element.
With one bound — the Great Zeno, escapologist .
‘Pleasure,’ he said.
‘I don't know about that.
It was magic — you understand?
It was a magic show.’
It was almost a habit with Pascoe: every time he passed the phone he called Sophie; and every time he got a machine with a message.
It had become so much a matter of routine that when she answered he came close to putting the phone down before he realized that all he'd heard was, ‘Hello.’
‘Don't hang up.’
‘No.
OK.’
Then she said, ‘I wasn't going to.’
‘I want to see you.’
‘Where are you?’
‘London.’
She said, ‘Oh…’
It wasn't what she'd expected to hear.
‘Are you planning to go back?’
‘I don't know,’ Pascoe told her.
It was a lie; they both heard it ring like a dud coin.
‘I woke up and you were gone; why did you leave?’
‘Well, this might come as a surprise to you, but I felt safer here than down there.
It was down there that someone tried to kill me.’
‘Luke,’ Pascoe said.
Sophie sighed, as if the news were too sad for words.
‘Was it?
You're sure?’
‘I came back because Rob Thomas found Charlie Singer for me.
Also because Susan Hart had been trying to reach me through my office.
I saw Charlie — he's holed up in a cess-pit hoping that the stench will cover his scent.
He owes money to some very rough people.
He's not Zeno.’
‘Luke is…?’
Sophie was asking for better proof.
‘Susan came here to see me.
As soon as I told her about the things that had happened, she knew.
She and Luke used to be lovers, do you remember that?
And —’
‘Yes, I remember; but so what?
It wasn't —’
‘And they were married.’
He waited a long time for her response.
‘I can be pretty sure you'll have enough to drink, but is there anything in your fridge?’
‘Botulism.’
Thirty-Two
The past is moments half-forgotten; it's the ghosts of joy and misery; it's places and faces.
Pascoe expected to open his door to the present, and found, instead, a face from the past.
Karen read his look faster than he could recover it and smiled as she asked, ‘What's her name, Sam?’
Pascoe said, ‘If it comes to that, what's your name?’
He leaned against the door jamb, hands in pockets; it looked casual enough, but in truth it was a method of recovery.
After a moment, the tremor left his legs and he stood aside to let her in.
She walked round the room, looking at the fragments he'd preserved from their life together.
Pascoe felt as though he were seeing a moment from his future but couldn't guess what he would feel when the moment arrived.
Karen ended her tour at the window.
‘When George Roxborough said you were living down here I didn't believe him.’
‘Where did you expect to find me?
This city used to be villages; now it's castles under siege.
It doesn't matter much which drawbridge you raise.’
Neither of them spoke for a while.
Pascoe watched her as she peered out at the lowlife in the streets.
She was still slim, but her figure seemed to have wasted slightly; she was still pretty, but her features were more sharply etched.
He said, ‘Where have you been?’
Karen laughed.
‘You sound as if I'd been gone for a few hours and forgot to leave you a note.’
‘Well, you forgot to leave a note; go back to that and start again.’
‘I let it be known that I wasn't dead; that I was safe.’
‘Let it be known…
There's not a lot of heart in that, is there?’
‘There wasn't a lot of heart in our marriage, Sam.’
‘You might have told me that.’
‘Well,’ Karen put her back to the window, leaning against it, and folded her arms.
‘It was the fact that you needed to be told that made telling you impossible.’
Pascoe said, ‘I'm going to have a drink.’
He collected a bottle and glasses from a low table.
‘Of course you are.’
Although she was facing into the room, Karen said, ‘You don't drive a green Merc, do you, Sam?’
He shook his head.
‘No.’
‘Just that a couple of guys are taking the sound system out through the window.’
Pascoe walked over, bottle and glasses in hand.
He hadn't registered the two-tone scream of the car-alarm; in much the same way, a countryman might be deaf to the cry of a rooster.
There was a clutter of glass in the road and two men were working unhurriedly, anxious not to bruise the equipment.
‘London life,’ Pascoe said, ‘you'll never die of boredom.’
He poured two drinks.
After a moment's consideration, Karen took the glass he was offering, then moved away from him.
‘Italy,’ she said.
‘Italy is where I've been.
Perugia: it's near Florence.’
‘How long have you been there?’
‘Since I left.
I mean, for the last ten years.
It's where I live.’
Pascoe thought about it; he was looking for the clue he knew he must have missed.
‘I came home one day, ten years or so ago, expecting to find you there.
The house was just as I'd left it — just as you'd left it.
It was some while — I mean, a day or so — before I realized just what ‘left it’ really meant.
I didn't know you were going to do it, and after it had happened, I didn't know why.
No note, no phone call.
You might have been dead.
It was one of the  possibilities that the police finally considered — until you ‘let it be known’ that you were OK.
In the meantime, I went through all sorts of misery, puzzlement, desperation, confusion, fuck knows what.
Do you know how lousy I felt, how…’
He struggled to find some simple way of saying: lost, drunk, frightened, lonely, filled with self-loathing.
In the end, he simply stared at her, shaking his head as if she had been the one to ask the question.
‘It seemed sudden to you?’
Karen asked.
‘Me too.
I'd been out to meet someone, I was on my way home, I realized I didn't want to be going there.
Before I got back, I said enough is enough.
I turned around; I never got home.
That's why I hadn't taken anything with me.’
‘Enough is enough…’
Pascoe took a swallow of Scotch; it made his head swim.
‘Enough of nothing,’ Karen said.
‘Nothing was what I seemed to get most of.’
The due remained hidden.
Pascoe said, ‘Why Italy?
I don't understand what took you there.’
‘You think it was the climate?’
‘Climate, wine, art galleries; I don't know.
Surprise me.
‘An Italian.
An Italian took me there.’
Very slowly, Pascoe unscrewed the cap of the whisky bottle and topped up his drink — just a dribble, just a tot, just something to do.
Karen smiled and raised her eyebrows:Check that !
Finally, he said, ‘Well, you surprised me…’
The memory was only a couple of minutes old, but he felt that scrap of the past unravel to bring him back to the moment when she said, ‘I'd been out to meet someone.
I was on my way home…’
And there it was: the due.
‘What's his name?’
He asked the question just as Karen had asked it of him when he'd opened the door.
The difference was, she hadn't really cared.
‘What's his name?
Where did we meet?
How long had it been going on?
All those questions are ten years old, Sam.
I loved him, I'd stopped loving you.
The really interesting  thing — really staggering — is that you never came close to noticing.’
She swallowed her whisky in one, as if about to leave.
‘What an ego.’
‘Was that it?’
‘Egotism, indifference — opposite sides of the same coin.’
Then she said, ‘Eduardo,’ because it didn't matter much whether he knew or not.
‘You live there now?’
‘Yes.
We've moved a couple of times, but still the same area.
Just outside Perugia now.
A farmhouse; we even have a small vineyard.’
Pascoe closed his eyes on the image for a moment.
A hillside under a blue sky, terraced vines, the building itself pale stone with a roof of big, weathered terracotta tiles.
Outside on the terrace, Karen and Eduardo drank wine and took the last of the day's sun.
He said, ‘It sounds idyllic.’
‘It suits us.’
She sounded deliberately modest.
Pascoe wanted to say: I was desperate, I was frightened, I wanted you back but I didn't know where you were.
I tried to make choices, but wound up with empty gestures.
I went to Argentina and sat in a cell and waited for the torturers to come in.
He said none of it.
He could see that his life wasn't at issue; she hadn't come to hear about that.
‘Well, Karen,’ he smiled at her as if she were an acquaintance he'd just spotted in a crowd.
‘I think you haven't made the journey to say sorry.’
‘We've decided to get married,’ she said.
‘I'm here to ask for a divorce.
I didn't want to say that to you in a letter or over the phone.’
‘Why not?
You left without seeing me; you haven't seen me since.’
‘That's true,’ Karen said.
‘The difference is, it doesn't matter any more.
At first, I was angry; then I was living a new life — other things to think about, other people to consider.
But the past was always there, like a whisper in a room of other voices.’
‘But not now.’
She confirmed it: ‘Not now.’
A silence grew between them.
Pascoe was walking through their house, ten years before, going from room to room, first puzzled, then anxious, then searching for something that would explain her absence.
The moment came back to him, flush with scents and sounds.
The cello concerto swelling through the house, the briny tang of the scallops in their marinade, doors opening and closing as he searched for the missing due.
The memory was so strong that he lost himself in it.
When he emerged, Karen was sitting in an armchair opposite, clearly amused.
She half turned to look over her shoulder; when he followed her gaze, he saw that Sophie was standing in the doorway.
‘The door was open,’ Sophie looked at them in turn, ‘bad security in this district, no?’
Pascoe said, ‘I didn't…’ and ‘How could…?’and ‘She's —’
‘I can see who she is, that's why I'm about to leave.
You'll have things to talk about.’
‘Not many things,’ Karen said.
‘More than I want to hear.’
Pascoe said, ‘For Christ's sake, don't go.’
All he could see was loss.
Before she closed the door, Sophie asked, ‘What would you suggest I do instead?
Stay and counsel you both?’
Karen spread her hands.
‘I'm sorry, Sam.
Lousy timing.
I couldn't have known.’
‘Speak to George Roxborough about the divorce.
It'll be trouble free: mutual consent.’
‘No money,’ she said.
‘There won't be any settlement involved.’
He nodded, ‘OK.’
Then: ‘How do you…?
How has it been?’
‘My life?’
‘Your life, yes.’
‘The house is beautiful; it's falling down, bits of it, you know.
It's very old.
But the roof's secure and the summers are hot, and there are wood-burning stoves for the winter.
We have seasons that seem to revolve round the grape harvest.
It's a tiny vineyard — we just drink the wine ourselves, but we follow the old festivals.
Friends come in to help us gather the crop and press the grapes.
I live there with a man I love.
We have just about enough money.’
It wasn't coming out in any special order, though Pascoe suspected that something was being saved until the end.
‘I teach English sometimes.
I go to the local market once a week.
I keep a journal that seems to be turning into a sort of year-book of the area, a little account of the way the seasons turn.
I'm sorry, Sam; I can see that I'm either too early or too late with this, but the time is right for us.
Eduardo and me.
What else…?’
She seemed to be completing the check list.
‘My life's slow; I can see the moments passing; I like that.
There are two children, both girls — seven and four.’
Pascoe laughed — too loudly, too lengthily.
He said, ‘Well, I asked about your life.
You told me.’
As she was leaving, Karen said, ‘I'm sorry…’
She made it sound as if she were saying it for the first time.
Pascoe drank some more whisky; then he drank a little more than that.
He thought about the house in Tuscany, the perfect life.
He suddenly wished, with an almost desperate fervour, that he'd asked the names of Karen's daughters.
Little electric pulses of tiredness buzzed behind his eyes.
He thought, I know what this is: sleep as self-defence.
The admission was enough to make him doze.
It seemed that Sophie was best at turning up when his guard was down.
He felt the glass being tweaked from his fingers and opened his eyes to see her disappearing into the kitchen.
Her voice floated back to him.
‘Bad security, I told you that.
I've double locked it.
There's a boozer down the road; I watched your front door  from there.
I have to tell you, Pascoe, you're living in the dead zone.
You know?
Zone of the fucking dead.
During the time it took to drink three glasses of unspeakable piss masquerading as wine, I had close to twenty offers: straight sex, not so straight sex, definitely warped sex, threesomes, foursomes, orgies, photos, videos.’
She returned and stood in front of him.
‘I'm definitely not coming down here again.
You'll have to move.’
He said, ‘She was asking for a divorce.’
‘Did she ask nicely?’
Pascoe laughed.
He felt weak and the laughter sounded shrill.
‘She did, yes.’
‘Good.
I've put some coffee on; there are things I want to say to you later.’
She held out a hand and, when he took it, heaved him upright and pulled him towards the bedroom.
‘I tried not to listen to all that dirty talk, but the truth is a couple of suggestions left me wondering…’
Carey said, ‘You're not thinking, Wallace.
If he's not in control, you're not in control.
And he's not in control.
He seems to be, but…’
‘I've spoken to him.
I saw him an hour or so ago.’
‘You went to the house?’
‘That's right.
New instructions: you know?
We're running out of time.’
‘He doesn't like people going to the house — because of Carla.’
‘Fuck what he likes.’
They were sitting in the restaurant at the Windrush.
Ellwood had ordered lamb cutlets, French beans and button mushrooms; he was using his fingers to eat.
‘Fuck what he likes, and fuck him.’
‘I've had enough of this, Wallace.
More than enough.’
Ellwood balanced a cutlet between fingertip and fingertip and took half the meat off in a single bite.
He chewed and smiled and cuffed a little run of juice off his chin with the heel of one hand.
‘Well, Tom…’
He took the second bite.
‘I think it won't take long now.
Just hang in.
He needs someone to talk to.’
‘You don't understand, Wallace.
It isn't that.
I'm not frightened or bored or weary.
I've had enough .
I don't want to be part of this.
I don't owe you.
I don't owe anyone except, perhaps, myself.
You're trading off loyalties, off ambition, off belief…it all died years ago.
Years ago, Wallace.
I felt responsible; I felt an affinity with him —(God knows, even with you.
That's why I came.
But what's happening here has nothing to do with loyalty or belief.’
‘No kidding.’
Ellwood pursed his lips round a bean and sucked it in like spaghetti, then touched his mouth and hands with his napkin before taking a sip from a full glass of red wine.
‘This is very nice, you know.
Rasteau — very round, very fruity.’
‘Don't make fun of me, Wallace.’
Ellwood smiled; the smile became a chuckle; the chuckle grew into a brief laugh.
When he spoke, it was in a low whisper, ragged as a band saw, his mouth barely moving.
‘I can't have this conversation with you, Tom; Father Tom; Holy Holy Father Tom.
I can't hear all this.
There are things I have to do; things I have to think about, Holy Father, Father Tom, things that are occupying my mind and I can't give you time for these things, these words, Father Tom, Your Holiness.’
Carey could feel a vast energy of violence and savage anger coming off the man.
The words seemed to clog in his throat, then come free in little gouts and spurts.
He was looking down at his plate and there was a tremor in his jaw as if each syllable was finding a nerve in a broken tooth.
‘So you'll see, I'm sure you'll see, that I can't listen to you, Holy Father Tom, can't hear you, can't, not for a minute, so you'll have to do as you're told, have to do what I want, Father Tom, because there's no time for this, no time, no time for these words of yours, you fuck, Your fucking Holy Holiness, only time for what I want, time for words of mine, time for what I want to say, nothing else, Father Tom, you fuck, Your fucking Holiness, you see, for my words, nothing else, nothing Holy Father, nothing else, just me, just mine, only time for that.’
Ellwood kept his head bowed.
His eyes were fixed, like someone watching a flow of water across a weir.
Carey said, ‘Whatever you —’ It was as far as he got.
Ellwood snatched up his wine glass and clapped it to his mouth, driving the rim past his teeth.
He yanked down with his hand and lifted his head, biting a chunk out of the glass, then turned the rim and bit again, splintering the glass almost to its stem.
He half rose, leaning towards Carey, and spewed the fragments at him, shaking his head with rage, spraying glass and wine and blood.
People at other tables turned to the commotion.
A waiter came hurrying across.
Carey's face and his shirtfront were speckled with wine and glass; he was shaking.
Ellwood sat still, a filigree of wine and blood and saliva strung across his jowls.
After a moment, he picked up his water goblet and rinsed his mouth, then spat the rinse back into the glass.
To the waiter, he said: ‘My friend's had an accident.
He offered a winning smile, grouted in red.
‘I'm sorry.
He's always been accident prone.’
They had made love then fallen asleep, so the curtains were drawn back.
A spillage of lurid neon light, yellow and orange, dribbled from the windowsill to the floor.
Although it was after three in the morning, Sophie could hear the low, penetrating drub-drub-drub of a bass-line and a siren somewhere wailing in counterpoint.
She got up on an elbow.
With an outstretched finger, she traced the lines of Pascoe's sleeping face.
His handsomeness was a little battered now, but he still had the wolfish look she remembered from years ago — long face, strong jaw, broad brow; his mouth was full and slightly lopsided, which gave him a crooked grin.
Every time he touched her, now, she could remember the screen and the butterfly shawl, and the long, looping rhythms of their lovemaking — a single, endless, fluctuating note.
He stirred under her touch and turned towards her, his head rooting for her shoulder, like a child's.
Her whisper was almost too faint to be heard.
‘You don't know this, Pascoe, but we're in trouble.’
Drub-drub-drub-drub-drub …
The bass was a word of warning from the dead zone.
She kissed the corner of his mouth.
‘We're in real trouble, you and I.’
Thirty-Three
Out of the room and into the hallway, along the hallway and up to the door, out of the door and down the driveway…
The clown and the Man with the Big Bow Tie were out for a walk.
The drive was tree-lined, so they went down the farther side, only visible now and then.
Piper toddled along, holding the clown's hand.
He thought: I like this clown .
Past the trees and down towards the gate, out of the gate and into the clown's car, through the town and then beside the ocean…
Piper sat bolt upright in the passenger seat, smiling a fat smile, his hands clasping and unclasping in his lap.
He leaned out of the window and waved at passers-by.
The clown said, ‘Don't do that.’
When Piper turned, he saw that the big, red, down-turned mouth had gone, the spots of colour on the cheeks had gone, the arched eyebrows had gone.
The hair was no longer an orange porcupine; the nose had lost its red blob.
He said, ‘Where's that clown?’
Under Luke Mallen's feet lay a wad of tissues clotted with cold cream and make-up.
‘It's me,’ he said, ‘I'm the fucking clown.’
Ellwood said, ‘Where does Carla go when you send her out?’
‘She usually walks.
She likes to walk by the sea.
Don't worry, she won't be back for a while.’
They were in the house that Luke and Carla shared.
Piper walked round, inspecting things.
The main room  had low ceiling beams; a rough oak pillar, square-sectioned and glossy with age, went from floor to cross-beam, partitioning the space.
On the other side, Piper found Tom Carey sitting in an armchair.
‘You're the priest,’ he said.
Carey looked at him, but didn't reply.
‘I'm the Great Anarch,’ Piper said conversationally, ‘I order the spheres as they dance in the vault of space.’
Ellwood tapped the barrel of a syringe and pumped a little jet of sodium pentothal into the air.
Almost inaudibly, he said, ‘For my money, you're the Great Pain in the Ass.’
Carey led Piper back into the other half of the room, but the old man seemed to have other things to do.
He pulled away and began to wander towards the stairs.
When Carey grabbed his arm, Piper wrenched it away.
Luke went over.
Between them, they trapped Piper's arms and brought him back to where Ellwood was standing close to a couch.
Luke pulled the collar of Piper's jacket down, trying to free the old man's arms of the sleeves, but he shrugged it back into place.
Carey was pulling at the lapels.
Piper squirmed between them for a moment, fighting to get free, then went limp.
Carey stumbled, suddenly having to take half Piper's weight, and he fell on to the couch taking Piper with him.
Luke wrestled one arm out of a sleeve and went after the cuff button.
Piper wagged his hand up and down like a broken automaton.
Ellwood handed the syringe to Luke.
He leaned down and took Piper by the shirtfront, hauling him upright then turning the man and running him backwards across the room.
Piper slammed into the oak pillar; in the same moment, Ellwood hit him backhanded.
Piper screamed, then he began to cry.
Still holding the old man's shirtfront, Ellwood yanked him back to the couch and threw him full length.
Piper lay there; he was sobbing and his eyes were full of fear.
Ellwood unfastened the shirtsleeve button and laid Piper's arm bare for the needle.
He picked up the syringe and tested it again, speaking softly, gently almost, head turned away, his concentration reserved for the task in hand: ‘…fuck with this old creep.
Forget it.’
Ellwood asked a lot of questions; Piper told him a great deal about how the universe was ordered by the laws of music.
‘You've got about another fifteen minutes,’ Luke said.
‘After that, they might start to wonder where he is.’
Tom Carey found some brandy and gave himself a double.
There was a coldness about the house that showed it for what it was — a rental for two people whose life together had hardly begun.
He noticed how bare the room was of the bits and pieces that usually make two lives one life; but Carla had tried to compensate for that with a beachcomber's finds: little groups of pebbles and shells on the windowsills, a fan of dried marram in a vase, a gnarled limb of driftwood that she had smoothed and varnished.
It made him unspeakably sad.
Ellwood and Luke were crouched over Piper as he told them about the slow, magical dance of the cosmos.
‘Jesus fuck ,’ Ellwood said.
‘You'd better take the old bastard back.’
His eyes were glittering with anger and he seemed to be about to throw a punch.
Piper allowed himself to be threaded back into his jacket.
He said, ‘Janus was the guardian of doorways.
Janus was double-faced.
The doors of his temple were open in times of war, closed in times of peace.
A pretty good pun, we thought, to call it Janus.
Three men in each country, the classic triangle: one visible agent, one in support, one underground.
Three Insiders, each of them double-faced, each looking both ways.’
Ellwood said, ‘And what about you?
Were you double-faced?
Did you betray them?
Did you — years ago?
What were their names?’
Piper looked at Luke for a long time as if trying to find a face behind the face.
Ellwood put his mouth close to the old man's ear and whispered, showing his teeth.
‘What were their names?’
‘Where's that clown?’
Piper asked.
His face had closed down; it was the only thing he would say.
Piper sat in his room and counted birds as they passed the high window.
They all seemed to be choughs, black smudges against a dappled sky; bad omens.
You don't know who I am.
You don't know what I know.
He felt sick: the after-effect of the drug, and his face throbbed where Ellwood had hit him.
Janus guarded the doors.
Sometimes the doors were open, sometimes they were locked.
Dr Harris arrived for an afternoon session and found his patient strangely silent.
He sat with Sir Harold for a while, but they exchanged few words.
Janus was double-faced.
Dr Harris said, ‘I'll call in to see you tomorrow, OK?’
He added, ‘Have you been looking at birds?
Did that tell you anything?
Have you been looking at cloud-shapes?’
Sir Harold sat still, his eyes turned away from the window, his head full of old dreams.
Dr Harris left, closing the door softly as if anxious not to wake a sleeping child.
Piper saw more choughs and, later, a skein of crows; only black birds.
He saw a cloud shaped like a man's fist.
A tear sprang up in his eye and meandered across his cheek.
He said, ‘I don't like that clown.’
It was warm in the city, but you couldn't see the sun; it hung somewhere behind a sky pale as a cataract.
Sophie said, ‘I'm fucked out, Pascoe.
I've fucked all I can; I can't fuck any more.’
He was coming into the bedroom with mugs of coffee.
They hadn't bothered to get up to eat.
The things they had grazed on lay around the bed — the remnants of a baguette, some salami, tomatoes, a pot of cottage cheese, a big  wooden bowl of fruit.
Sophie had brought them with her the previous night.
An empty bottle of wine and a bottle half full of mineral water stood on a cabinet.
There were grapes crushed into the sheet, some rolling loose; another popped as Sophie rolled over in a parody of sexual refusal.
When she turned back, the crushed grape was stuck to her belly and sending a thread of juice into the crease of her thigh.
Pascoe leaned forward and tongued the grape up.
‘I've told you,’ she said, ‘I'm out of fucks.
This is a fuck-free zone.’
He grinned: ‘Thank God for that.’
She took her coffee from him and shifted across the bed to give him room to lie down.
‘Now you know it's Luke, what will you do?’
‘Not sure.’
He sipped his coffee and hissed because it scalded his lip.
‘If you go back,’ she said, ‘you go without me.’
Pascoe nodded.
‘OK.’
Then: ‘Will you be here when I get back?
If I go…’
‘It looks that way, doesn't it?’
Pascoe wanted to ask questions about the man Rob Thomas had seen visiting her.
The man who'd stayed the night.
‘Luke and Lori…’
Sophie's eyes were half closed as she sought the memory.
‘Was he more to blame than the rest of us, do you think?’
‘No.’
‘No, I'm sure you're right.’
Luke screwing the Colonel's wife; what a joke, what a jape.
And then the phone calls; what a ruse.
They had passed the phone from hand to hand, listening to Lori's terrified silence; and they would take it in turn to say, ‘We know everything; we know all about you .’
On a few occasions, they had driven to the lane, made the call on the public phone, then hurried through the wood to watch the house.
Sometimes they'd seen her, other times not, but it was always more exciting to be that close.
Sophie's eyes were tight shut.
She saw the call-box and the members of the group crowding in, the phone going round.
The colours were bright, the sounds distant and oddly distorted.
The drug wafted round her and the airwaves brushed against her like a cat.
Time telescoped strangely — they were in the lane, in the wood, opposite the house.
Sophie was in the branches of a tree eating an apple while she watched Lori going from window to window like someone trying to escape from a fire.
Sophie concentrated on the sweetness of the apple and by the time she had gathered drops of juice along her tongue, Lori was below her, lying on the turf and crying because she had fallen in the near-dark.
She sat up and put her hand to her mouth: the gesture of someone gobbling peanuts.
A few of the pills slipped from her palm to the ground.
She stood up, cheeks bulging, and started to tear off her clothes, walking in a ragged circle as if invoking the spirits of the place.
It was when she was fully naked that Sophie saw the line round her neck, just a piece of thin cord.
When she looked down again, Lori was climbing the tree.
Pascoe tried to keep his voice light.
‘I couldn't get in touch with you; always your answerphone…
So I put Rob Thomas on the case.
He let me know you were all right.
He saw your visitor.’
Sophie didn't respond.
She had turned away from him and he wondered whether she might have dozed off.
‘Someone who stayed the night.
Or so Rob said.
I guess he must have seen him go in sometime late, and come out the next morning.’
Pascoe tried a laugh.
‘Rob's nothing if not thorough.’
He leaned over, bridging her body with an arm, wondering whether she was asleep, and saw that tears were sluicing her face.
Although Lori was climbing, acid tricked the moment and Sophie imagined that she could see the other woman floating slowly towards her.
She expected to find Lori's head swimming into focus, close to her own, like a pale balloon and looked away in order to avoid that confrontation.
When she looked back, Lori was standing on a thick branch nearby, the line tied off near her feet, the noose dark against her skin like a piece of primitive jewellery.
She was making a tiny, repetitive sound, a little mew, as if in response to a lover's touch.
When she jumped, the leaves on the branch rustled and shook.
Sophie looked down and saw Lori swing out, then back, then into view again.
Her legs were pumping and her fingers were wild at her throat.
Pascoe said, ‘It doesn't matter.
Don't tell me about it.
I don't need to know.’
He put his arms round Sophie in the hope that she would turn to him.
She said, ‘It isn't that,’ but the words were muffled and all he caught was her tone of voice, thick with distress and remorse.
The curtain stirred and a smell of the city slipped in past the half-open window — acrid, high-octane, with a touch of rot.
They stood round in a ring long after she'd come to rest, after her legs had stopped wagging, after her fingers had stopped tugging.
She hung still, a totem at the centre of their circle, suddenly powerful in death.
The drug cleared from Sophie's head like a dream dispersing.
She backed off, then turned and ran through the wood.
Someone called her name.
Was it Pascoe?
Then she heard all of them, crashing through brush and low branches as they followed her towards the road.
She turned and put an arm round Pascoe's neck, as if he  might be in need of comfort.
‘Not that,’ she said, ‘I was thinking about Lori.’
‘It's time to stop,’ Pascoe said.
‘We didn't mean it to happen.’
She nodded, as if she knew he was right but doubted whether forgiveness was possible.
After a moment, she sat up in the cluttered bed and regarded him in mock annoyance.
‘You had me watched; your dick followed me around.’
‘He watched the house.
I was worried about you, I wanted to be sure you were all right.’
‘It was my husband.
We talked a bit; it got late so he slept in the house.
But not with me.
Next morning he went away.’
‘What did he want?’
‘His gun.’
Pascoe said, ‘I wondered where you got it.’
‘That's where.’
She smiled, leaving him guessing for a moment, then added: ‘He's a politician: Northern Ireland Office.’
‘House-sweeps on a regular basis, mirrors under the car each morning, a discreet bodyguard and,’ Pascoe added, ‘a gun.’
‘He's on their list; not high, but he's there.’
‘How did you get it?’
‘I went to see him one evening and asked to borrow it.’
‘He handed it over?’
‘Yes.’
‘Why would he do that?’
‘We're divorcing.
I'm being nice about it.
Apart from other things, I'm not bringing into court the fact that he liked to beat me.
One time, he cut me.’
Pascoe saw her hand go towards the puckered scar on the underside of her breast.
‘I told him I needed the gun to feel safe — just the same reason he needs it.’
Pascoe watched her as she went through to the bathroom.
When the phone rang, he answered it but kept his eyes on Sophie.
‘Sam?’
It was Roxborough, drunk and elated.
Sophie stepped into the shower through a billow of steam, her body a blur that trickled across the frosted glass.
‘Sam, listen Sam, we won.’
Roxborough's words clattered against one another.
‘That old woman did the business, word-perfect, she was perfect , the jury took one look at that little old lady and he was off the hook, she never made a slip.
Oh Jesus, Sam, she was everybody's Aunt Jemima, if she'd turned up with her hair in a bun and flour on her apron she couldn't have made them love her more, Jesus, Sam, we're not guilty.
We're not guilty, Sam.’
‘That's great, George.’
Pascoe lowered the phone on Roxborough's jubilation and set it gently back on to its cradle.
Very quietly, he said: ‘That's great.’
He went and stood by the shower and watched Sophie in soft-focus shampooing her hair then turning her face to the showerhead.
He said, ‘I'll have to go back.’
The foggy shape behind the glass stood still and didn't speak.
‘To Longrock…’
Pascoe raised his voice.
‘I'll go in the morning.’
The shower door slid back and Sophie's head emerged.
‘I thought you would.’
Her arm appeared, fist clenched, as she offered some hidden trophy.
‘I just found this,’ she said.
‘Buried treasure; and I think I know how it got there.’
He opened his palm and she let the object go.
A grape.
Thirty-Four
Next afternoon, they drove across two zones and parked close to the river.
Sophie said, ‘I thought you'd go this morning.
I thought you might be gone when I woke up.’
‘Tomorrow,’ he said, ‘maybe the day after.’
‘What are you waiting for?’
‘I don't know.’
They crossed a bridge and came down steps to the water's edge.
‘Yes I do — I want more of us.’
She had kissed the corner of his mouth while he slept.
She'd whispered, ‘We're in real trouble…’
There was dust on the leaves of the riverside bushes.
Their toecaps turned little scoops of dust as they walked.
There's only one way to do this, Sophie thought.
She waited for a pleasure-craft to go by, so there was no chance that its engines would drown her voice.
‘We're in trouble,’ she said, ‘I'm pregnant.’
Beside the ocean, then climbing a narrow road towards woods — the clown and the Man with the Big Bow Tie were out for a drive.
Luke Mallen brought the car to a ragged stop in the parking circle, then wrestled Piper out of the passenger door.
They went up the track with Piper dragging his heels like a recalcitrant child.
In the house, Ellwood took the old man by the shirtfront and pulled him round in a circle, then round again, as if they were playing a manic version of Ring o' Roses.
Piper leaned backwards, staggering, and watched the room revolve until his brain seemed to hum with the motion.
Ellwood spun him a dozen more times, then released him on to the sofa.
He lay there inert, as the room whirled past and Ellwood slipped the needle into his arm.
Ellwood said, ‘I know about Janus.
I know how that worked.
What I want to know is: who did you tell?
Who were you working for?
Who did you speak to?’
‘Janus,’ Piper said.
‘Janus was the guardian of doorways.
Janus was two-faced.’
Tom Carey turned away.
Under his breath he said, ‘I've had enough of this.’
He went through to the kitchen to look for the brandy bottle.
‘I've had more of this than I can take.’
Pascoe was laughing, or else he was crying.
He had walked away from Sophie and now she lengthened her stride to catch him up.
He turned to face her, shaking his head, and she still wasn't sure what his expression meant.
He put a hand to his mouth.
‘I don't know what to say.’
‘Try the stock responses: Are you sure?
Is it mine?
How could you be so stupid?
That's generally how it goes.’
‘You've done this before.’
‘But I've never had a child.’
A cargo boat went past, sending lick after lick of backwash against the bank.
‘I couldn't see what that was — tears or laughter.’
‘Both,’ he said.
‘Didn't it seem that way to you?’
‘What do you want to do?’
‘Christ knows,’ Pascoe said.
‘What's your plan?’
They walked on in silence for a while.
She said, ‘I'm not making any plans.’
Dr Harris sat and watched while Sir Harold Piper rocked slowly to and fro.
There were tears on the old man's face and his mouth was drawn up in a silent parody of a grin.
Harris knew that something had happened but he couldn't for the life of him think what it might be.
‘Janus…’
In Piper's mouth the words distorted so much that Harris could understand no more than one in five.
‘Janus is the guardian of doorways.
Janus is two-faced.’
He rocked and rocked, arms wrapped round, head bowed.
‘I told no-one; I didn't tell anyone anything.
Leave me alone.
Harris understood that.
He said, ‘I'm here to help.
What can I do to help?’
Piper said, ‘Keep that clown away.’
His voice was a thin whine, like a broken engine.
Harris struggled to separate the words, but all he could hear was Piper's anguished keening.
‘Keep that clown away.
Away from me.
Keep him away.
I don't like that clown .’
Pascoe peered at the drink before putting the glass to his lips, as if drinking it at all was a risky thing.
It was a single malt whisky: nutty and rich, but with a sharp tang underneath.
‘Drink it,’ Sophie said.
‘Get drunk.
Do the bottle.’
‘I've thought of that.’
‘I'm sorry…’
She smiled: ‘I hadn't said sorry yet, had I?’
Pascoe squinted through the faceted glass and warm amber lights flooded his eye.
‘What can you see?’
Sophie asked.
‘In your crystal ball?’
‘The past.’
‘What does it look like?’
‘It's a great crowd of people,’ he said, ‘all saying sorry, sorry, sorry…
Thirty-Five
When Susan Hart arrived in Longrock, the first person she saw was Luke Mallen.
She had given herself two days, no more, and it was as if her urgency had crowded the place with chances.
The agency nurse had folded her arms and smiled the smile of someone competent and in control.
Susan's husband had stared at her bleakly from the bed, already certain of her betrayal.
‘What's his name?’
Susan had been taking a few items of clothing from a chest of drawers to a suitcase open on the bed.
She said, ‘There's no-one.
It's business.
I've told you that.’
‘I'll be dead in less than a year.
You could wait till then.’
‘It's business.
There's no-one else.’
There had been a terrible fragrance in the air that she'd noticed before, as if the mad cells in his lungs were blossoming, scarlet and fleshy, like poisonous hothouse orchids.
‘There's no-one…’
When she'd closed the case he had sunk back on the pillow, a thin smile on his face, his lips tinged with yellow.
He had seen the lie, but was nowhere near the truth.
Two days — she would give herself that long to see him again.
I only ever loved Luke .
When she'd said that to Pascoe she'd realized it was true.
Nick Howard dead; Marianne, too, if Sam Pascoe's guess was right.
Luke was drawing them all in, drawing them back, drawing her…
Unfinished business.
And then, when she looked out from the window of her room in the Palings Hotel, there he was, a star performer  modest amid the crowd, the Great Zeno, walking past with his twin, Luke Mallen.
He was wearing a navy sweater and a light-coloured shirt and blue jeans, and her heart lurched because time shrank to the moment when she had finally walked away from him, one autumn morning, early, with their love already an awful deadweight in her memory.
She ran downstairs, circling the lift-shaft, certain that he'd be gone, but when she emerged into the street, he seemed to have moved only a few yards, walking slowly, his head bowed.
There was a moment when she almost called to him, but instead she dropped back and followed.
He didn't go far; his car was parked outside the double gates of a boatyard.
Susan thought: Now I've lost him; but he sat behind the wheel without starting the engine.
He might have been waiting for someone.
She walked rapidly back to the hotel and collected her car from the parking area, then drove back and parked a few cars' lengths from the boatyard.
She could see that Luke was still motionless in the driver's seat.
The sky was slate-grey and a cool breeze came off the sea.
A perfect day for fishing, but Luke hadn't been able to find Tom Carey at the usual places.
It made him edgy.
Everyone had gone missing: Carey, Sam Pascoe, Sophie Lanner.
He felt that things were loosening and slipping from his grasp.
He had seen the fear and disgust in Carey's eyes when Ellwood roughed-up the old man, when he pushed the needle in.
By the time Ellwood had done with Piper, got as much as he could in the time they dared allow, Carey had gone.
They found a brandy glass in the kitchen and the door open.
Luke wanted to find the priest and say, ‘Don't do anything risky, don't fuck up.
It's not just your life, it's not just your future.’
When he started the car, Susan eased out to follow.
They went up on to the cliff road, then turned inland, driving between wooded banks.
She was anxious to keep a distance between them, though there was no reason why  Luke should guess he was being followed, much less who was following.
When he turned off at a small junction taking a no-through road, she stopped and watched him out of sight.
She let five minutes pass, then followed slowly.
His car was in the turning circle.
Immediately, she backed up until she got to the junction and found a gateway to park in, then returned to his car on foot.
The track was the only option.
It was like watching a clumsy remake of an old movie.
Susan stood among tree-cover and watched a woman go from window to window — she was taking Lori's role.
Susan clasped her hands because she was trembling, but the tension in her locked fingers only made her shake the more.
Luke came into view and put his arms round the woman; he smoothed her hair with one hand, then gave it a little tug — reassurance, a reminder:I love you .
Susan felt the gesture as if it had barely lapsed — felt his hand on the nape of her neck, the gentle pull that turned her face up to his — and she cried out, almost as if she hoped to be heard.
He said, ‘I have to go out again.
I'm sorry; I won't be long.’
‘It's OK.’
Carla smiled in a way that meant: I don't ask about your affairs, I don't need to know.
I trust you.
Make me safe.
He was taking risks with Piper.
He had lost Pascoe and Sophie.
He couldn't find Tom Carey.
Only Marianne and Nick were safely out of his life.
He pulled Carla into his arms and closed his eyes, feeling a vast, directionless violence, as if his task were to kill everyone in the world and the problem was how to start.
Susan saw him come out of the door and start back down the track, anger and anxiety making him push his pace.
It was impossible to follow on the track without being noticed.
She heard his car start up and drive away.
When she looked back towards the house, Carla's face was  at the window, peering out like a sailor's wife watching for masts at the quayside.
Luke drove to the Windrush and went to Ellwood's room.
He sat on the edge of a chair, eager to be away.
‘I looked in the likely places; he could be anywhere.’
‘The headland where he goes to fish?’
‘Yes.’
‘The church?’
‘Yes, of course.’
‘Well,’ Ellwood said, ‘he hasn't checked out.
He hasn't left without saying goodbye.’
‘He could have just taken off.’
‘I don't think so.
Unpaid bills make trouble.’
Luke said, ‘I'm going too.
I can't stay here much longer.’
‘Yes you can.
You can stay as long as I like.’
‘No,’ Luke shook his head, ‘you don't understand.
I have to go soon.’
He spoke almost offhandedly, making it clear that Ellwood had little or no say in the matter.
It was a private thing.
Ellwood walked over to where Luke was sitting and crouched down in front of the chair.
He smiled preparing to explain a simple fact to an even simpler person.
‘There's a job to be done,’ he said.
‘It's almost over.
We're behind schedule, but we're getting there.
You're a part of that — part of the solution to a problem I badly need to solve, and I need you, and you're going to stay here until we're finished, and you're going to do what I tell you to do.
Now,’— Ellwood shifted slightly on his heels, finding a more comfortable position —‘let me tell you why.
Because I know a great deal about you and about your past.
I know about Lori; I know about a lot of other things.
I know that you killed two people.
I know that you're in love with someone and I know exactly how to fuck all that up.
Yes?
Fuck it up .
And I will.
That's just what I'll do.
You think you can be safe by getting rid of a few hippy revolutionaries you used to know?
You stupid bastard.
There's me.
Me .
And there's all the people I  know, the people I work for, the people who work for me.
I'll throw you to the fucking wolves — are you listening, you stupid fuck?— and there'll be nothing left of you but a pile of shit and a hank of hair.
And if I feel like it, I won't just screw up your life with that stupid, lame bitch, I'll make her part of the deal.
How would that be?
You in jail, Carla in jail, you think I can't do this?
I can.
It's easy.
Or how about kill you, and leave her stranded?
Or kill her and let you go?
I don't care; any will do.
I'll make my mind up at the time.’
Ellwood straightened up and backed off.
Luke seemed not to be breathing; he didn't blink.
Ellwood said, ‘So just stick around for a little longer, yeah?
That would be nice.
I'd like that.
OK?
I think that would be best.’
Luke stood outside his own front door and read the note that Susan had left under the door-knocker, telling him that she was staying at the Palings Hotel.
At the end of the note, she had written:Don't be afraid .
He imagined the moment and fear overwhelmed him — Carla on one side of the door, Susan on the other.
Suddenly, everything Ellwood had said stood on the threshold.
Thirty-Six
Wallace Ellwood sat on a lip of rock above the path that led to Meer's Point and waited for Tom Carey to appear.
First a drive, he thought, headed anywhere, fooling himself into thinking he might simply keep going.
Then he'll turn round.
Then he'll come here.
A great flood of anger washed through Ellwood.
He half closed his eyes, deliberately losing focus until the sea was a vast grey void.
He needed to solve the puzzle that was Harold Piper.
He needed success, a clean slate, because that would give him freedom to do much as he chose; and that freedom was everything in life to Wallace Ellwood.
It put him in the forefront at the Department.
Given time, it would put him in line for Hilary Todd's job.
Most important of all, it put him beyond the law.
Above all else, Ellwood hated weakness.
He exploited it where he found it; he fed off it like a predator.
Love was weakness, compassion was weakness, attachments were weakness; forgiveness, guilt, generosity, mercy — all weakness.
He thought of Carey and fury bubbled up in him again like black lava.
as if summoned by that anger, Tom Carey rounded a bend in the path, rod in hand.
He passed under the rock where Ellwood was sitting and went down to the narrow spit where he always stood to fish.
Ellwood stayed still for a while, letting the priest set up his tackle and make a couple of casts, then he slithered down to the path.
The light was going and the sea was calm.
The surface of the water had a slick, glassy look about it and Carey's cast disappeared with barely a splash.
Without looking round, he said: ‘It's the end for me, Wallace.
Twenty years late, or more; but now it's the end.’
Ellwood felt light-headed with tension; his anger ramrodded each limb with a wild energy.
‘Just behave, Father Tom,’ he said, ‘just be good.’
His face was rigid, his mouth partly open, lips stiff.
Carey couldn't tell what had been said; the words were spoken far back in Ellwood's throat and seemed to gush from his mouth and nose like a great gulp of water swallowed too hastily.
He turned and saw Ellwood's face gnarled and dark with rage.
‘What will you threaten me with, Wallace?
What can you blackmail me with — now that I don't care?’
He reeled in and prepared for another cast, seeming absorbed by his task.
For a moment, Ellwood was half blind.
He shouted something, though he couldn't tell what it was.
Carey swung the rod out for a cast, and Ellwood tore it from his grip, then stepped back and lashed at the priest, holding the rod two-handed, bellowing with outrage.
The carbon pole cracked across Carey's brow, opening a gash.
Twelve inches of weighted line hung from the tip, ready to feed the cast; it wrapped round his face like a bolus, sending the big hook shank-deep under his cheek-bone, close to the nose.
He turned away, dancing with pain, both hands to his face.
Ellwood yanked the rod back for another blow and the barb tore a strip of meat out of Carey's face from nose to eye.
Ellwood couldn't tell what damage he was doing, and couldn't stop doing it.
Carey had covered his face, but blood was pouring through his closed fingers.
The rod lashed him repeatedly, cutting his neck, his scalp, his jaw.
He lost his footing as he backed away and went down heavily.
Instinct caused him to put out both hands in an attempt to break the fall, and Ellwood was on him, the rod flailing, blood rising from Carey's face in a thick mist of spray, the hook going into his flesh wherever it landed and ripping out again as Ellwood's arms rose and fell, rose and fell.
‘Holy Father, Father Tom, you fuck, you fucking Holy  fuck…’
Ellwood's voice was a klaxon, one note, hoarse and maniacal.
His arms flailed faster and faster, like some crazed woodsman trying to fell every tree in the forest.
Carey's face gouted blood, shredding in strips as the rod came at him again and again, the hook trailing and tearing.
After a while he simply lay there, numb, half conscious, his hands making hopeless little passes in the air, until Ellwood stopped, suddenly, his arms raised, as if a connection had been broken in some terrible machine.
He let the rod drop and stood there breathing hard, Carey between his feet.
The sea came in with a weightless rush and trickled between dry rocks.
That sound,plashy …
And over it another sound that was Carey's breathing.
His face was a red mush.
The hook had ripped a great tuft of flesh from his throat.
Air sawed in and out with a curious, inhuman noise like a faulty ratchet.
His shoulders moved and bubbles rose from his face.
The words were a faint gargle, unknowable.
He was saying, ‘I knew you'd think of something I really wanted.’
His head was a wellspring.
His eye-sockets were cups, full to the brim.
Ellwood said, ‘You fuck.
You stupid fuck .’
A flight of cormorant went past the tip of the headland, low to the water but sharply silhouetted in the last, lucid moment before true dusk.
Ellwood crouched down alongside the priest and looked this way and that, as if he might be given some notion of what to do next.
After a moment, he straightened up and began to strip.
‘You stupid fuck .’
He wedged his clothes into a gap between boulders above the waterline, then grabbed Carey's feet and pulled him towards the edge.
Looking over his shoulder for a second to be sure of his footing, he backed into the water, dragging Carey after him.
A dark cloud rose from Carey's head and was swatted away by a wave; it made a little slick that thinned and trailed out to sea.
Ellwood stood waist-high in the water as Carey floated free.
Wave-motion knocked the slack limbs this way and that.
As an afterthought, Ellwood emptied the priest's pockets, then scrambled back on to the rock and pushed Carey's belongings in between the boulders along with his own clothing.
When he returned, he was carrying four good-sized rocks in the crook of his arm.
He loaded them into Carey's shirtfront, filling it like a sack.
The priest turned turtle and dipped in the water.
Just above the spot where Carey had stood to fish was a spread of broom, so close to the edge that it seemed to be rooted in granite.
Ellwood made it his landmark.
He kicked off, towing his burden like a lifesaver.
He knew he wouldn't get far, but hoped to find deep water.
Carey bobbed like jetsam, always awkward even though Ellwood was swimming with the tide.
Now there would only be days to finish things.
When Carey's body was found, there would be more trouble, more disruption.
Apart from anything else, it would be necessary to keep Hilary Todd on a tight rein.
The landline darkened.
He kicked hard, clutching Carey's destroyed head, pulp under his hand, the hair wagging like weed.
In a farther reach of the bay, the seafront lights came on.
A shearwater skipped the surface almost under his nose and skittered off with a whip-whip-whip of wings.
The light was so poor, now, that the land and the sea seemed to meld under the blue-black sky.
He trod water and realized at once how cold he was.
A wave swamped his face and he turned his head away.
When he looked back, his landmark had gone.
He turned in the water, panicking for an instant, and Carey's body got away from him.
It bobbed off, listing clumsily, then started to sink.
Not yet, Ellwood thought.
His arms were stiff from  holding Carey up and his legs were tired.
He turned and made a few fast strokes in pursuit, and swam into a current of colder water that snaked across the bay and washed round him.
He felt the cramp come on like iron bars bending in his limbs.
Thirty-Seven
On the table was a light supper, white wine in a cooler, candles in silver candlesticks.
Apart from the table and two chairs, the room was bare.
Susan Hart stood in the doorway, a hesitant guest.
She said, ‘This house is empty; no-one lives here.’
Luke was pouring the wine.
He said, ‘A stage is empty: it's just a space, nothing there.
Then someone decides on a set to suit the play someone brings the props and suddenly, there it is’— he waved a hand —‘dinner for two; it's magic.’
Pouring the wine, just as he'd done for Marianne Novaks.
‘Is that what this is?
A play?’
Susan walked into the room but didn't sit down.
‘It's a scene from a play.
A very long-running play.’
‘I got a letter from you,’ she said, ‘then I talked to Sam Pascoe…’
‘What do you see when you think about the past?
Sit down…
You might as well sit down, now that you're here.’
Susan sat opposite to him.
She took a sip of wine before she'd had time to wonder whether that might be wise.
He clapped his hands, delighted by her boldness.
‘When I think of the past,’ she said, ‘I see what I want to see.’
‘Is that possible?’
He looked at her in wonder.
‘Surely that isn't possible.’
Susan felt light, unsubstantial.
She said, ‘My life is so full of failure, Luke.
What does the past matter?’
Her words set up a faint echo among the room's bare boards, its scabby walls, its uncovered windows.
‘Did you kill Nick and Marianne?
Why did you kill them?’
‘What I see when I think about the past…’
He paused; the words were an introduction, a title.
He poured more wine; he gestured towards the food like a concerned host.
‘I see scenes from a play; I see myself…’
He put his hands together, palm to palm, then drew them slowly apart.
‘Look,’ he said.
Something glittered in his hand.
Susan bent forward slightly for a better view and saw what it was.
Luke clapped his hands again and it disappeared.
He reached out and drew the object from Susan's ear, then dropped it on to her plate.
A wedding band.
It rang on the china briefly, then came to rest.
‘When I think about the past,’ he said, ‘I see us.
You and me, and all the rest of us.
Nick and Marianne and Sam; Charlie and Sophie.’
‘Lori,’ Susan said.
The wine was making her heady, but she let him refill her glass.
She thought: I must be here because it doesn't matter to me much whether I live or die.
‘Why did you come?’
He might have been reading her mind.
She answered with a question.
‘Why are you here?’
He said, ‘One place is as good as another.
The past is everywhere; it makes no difference.’
‘I came because of the past,’ Susan told him.
‘You're right.’
Luke steepled his hands again.
‘Marianne talked about Lori.
It was something she couldn't forgive — couldn't forgive herself.
There's a way the past can become the present, you know?
A way it can spoil the future.
That's what Marianne wanted.
She wanted to tell about everything.
She said she had bad dreams all the time.’
He parted his hands an inch or so, and another glittering thing was there.
A lockpick, his own invention, something that could be easily concealed during an escape  routine; it telescoped — a little spring-loaded spike.
Susan watched the steel as it unfurled between his hands.
‘And are you going to kill me, Luke?’
She raised her glass and sipped, as if that were an act so casual, so ordinary, that death couldn't possibly accompany it.
‘I don't know,’ he said.
‘I ought to.’
The last of the light was flowing into the horizon.
Wallace Ellwood was out to sea, drifting like a rudderless boat.
He had turned on to his back and was sculling slowly with his forearms, face-up to the evening sky, the chill spreading in his limbs, spreading up under his ribcage, spreading behind his eyes.
He had been making progress that way for almost an hour.
The faint glow on the skyline gave him some guidance, but apart from that, he couldn't tell whether he was moving towards the shore, or across the bay, or just circling endlessly.
It never once occurred to him that he might die.
He thought: It's win or lose, now; unravel things move swiftly — a straight line.
A tiny wave broke on the crown of his head and swamped his face.
Get the truth from Piper, make the best use of it, then unload a few unnecessary encumbrances.
He kept pedalling his legs, bending them at the knee then pushing away; he kept scooping water with his arms.
The coldness was creeping through him, atom by atom, like frost forming on stone.
He bore a line of cramp across his shoulders, thick as a yoke.
Susan watched her wineglass as Luke filled it.
She seemed to see the splash and curl of the liquid as an image of whirlpools.
Behind the glass as it filled was Luke's magnified smile.
She said, ‘There's something wrong with the wine.’
‘What?’
He handed her the glass and she drank
‘Something wrong — something in it.’
‘There's nothing wrong with the wine,’ he told her.
‘You're doing that yourself.’
‘Am I?’
‘It's tension,’ he said.
‘Tension and fear.’
Susan picked up the wedding ring — Luke's ring — and slipped it on to her finger.
‘When we were together, when we were married, I used to dream of an ordinary life.’
‘What was it like?’
He had retracted the lockpick, but held it still in his hand.
‘Ordinary; day to day; uneventful.
Nothing strange happened, nothing risky, nothing to make me unhappy or break my sleep.’
‘Is that how you live now?’
‘I thought I could.
I married someone to get that life.
It was like putting together a jigsaw.’
For a moment, she wasn't sure of what she'd just said.
It seemed to Susan that she must be terribly drunk or terribly tired.
She asked, ‘What was that?’ as if she'd just failed to catch some remark that Luke had made.
‘Jigsaw…’
‘Yes…all the pieces in place, one by one by one.
A house not in the city but not quite in the country either — safe, you see.
Safe things going on in my life.
That was the idea.’
She drank some more wine; the food sat on their plates untouched.
‘But there isn't a life like that; it doesn't exist.
All those domestic things, those ordinary things, they're strangest of all — more dangerous.
And one day it's an ordinary day — he comes home in the usual way and says, ‘I'm dying; I'll be dead in a year or so.’
And you think…’
Susan paused, as if the moment had happened only yesterday and she was still finding out how she felt, ‘…you think: How strange, how commonplace, how dangerous.
You think: I wish I could care.
You think: Does anyone know who I am?’
She found a little space on the table and rested her head.
He seemed to have come to the deep, still centre of the sea: a place where you felt nothing, where you saw nothing  except the coal-black atoms that danced before your face and knitted up the dark.
A wave slapped the back of his neck, first throwing him upwards then drawing him down, and he slid beneath the surface like a waterlogged spar.
Ellwood gritted his teeth against the weight of water, trying furiously to work his arms and legs against the deadlock of cramp.
He surfaced, briefly, but the swell rolled him over and drove him down again before he'd even had time to draw breath.
He turned in the current, head singing, a knot of fire flaring in his chest.
He felt as if he were being fished.
‘You were right,’ Luke said, ‘there's something in the wine.’
Susan didn't hear him.
She slept like a drunk, head on the table, one arm alongside her face, the other hanging straight from the shoulder.
Each indrawn breath was a little throaty snore.
Luke got up and walked round the table.
He put out a hand and drew Susan's hair away from the side of her face.
Her cheek bore a faint blush.
‘The others were different,’ he said.
‘I couldn't look at you and kill you’— he clapped his hands —‘just like that.’
Ellwood surfaced and sank, surfaced and sank.
Below the water was silence and blindness; above was all frenzy and wild, all effort.
He had managed one gulp of air, no more.
Now his mouth was stretched in a mad parody of a cartoon character's grin — lips wide, teeth clamped — as he fought against the terrible urge to breathe.
He rolled and rolled, not knowing which way was up.
The ocean was a vast black room, no floor, no rafters, nothing beyond.
Then his shoulders rapped against granite, scoring the flesh, and he was bounced upright.
The jolt rattled his ribs and he breathed in at the same moment as his head crashed through the surface, like a seal in the surf.
He roared and roared, waist-high in the shallows, pushed this way and that by the breakers, his head lofted, air piling into his lungs, as he fought his way towards the granite rockpile.
He found it and clung there for a while, then pushed clear and knelt among the waves, head lowered.
After a moment, he waded ashore and sat down.
He was on the southern side of the narrow spit of Meer's Point, no more than a hundred yards from the place where he'd killed Tom Carey.
The table was bare again, as if there had never been good food and wine.
The room was silent, as if there had never been conversation between old friends.
The window was dark, as if there had never been candle-light.
Susan's head lay where she had rested it, one arm curled round, the other hanging so that her fingertips brushed the floorboards.
Carla heard Luke come into the house, and went to meet him, just as she always did.
He folded her into his arms; she could feel the tension singing inside him, as iron sings when it's brought to a white heat.
He said, ‘A couple of days, that's all.
One way or another, a couple of days.
Then we're gone; then we're out of here.’
Carla put her arms round his waist, one hand lifted to clap his back, as a mother does to a child; and held him so closely that the deep tremor of his sobbing ran through them both.
Once he had found his clothes and put them on, Ellwood stood up to massage his arms and legs, rubbing and slapping to get the feeling back and loosen the knotted muscles.
He stuffed Carey's belongings inside his shirt.
His fingers were numb and he had trouble fastening the buttons.
He wagged his hands like flippers, feeling a fire of sensation stealing back; it hurt like hell, but he kept going — kneading, chafing, running on the spot.
Only now that he was safe did he feel a little black jet of fear rising in his chest, a gobbet of bile that filled his mouth, washing his teeth in acid.
He turned his head and spat, then buckled and retched up a thin stream of vomit.
‘Father Tom,’ he said, ‘Father fucking Tom, you fuck, you Holy fuck .’
He put out a hand and leaned against an outcrop of rock, head bowed, his torso thrust forward, and let go two more jets of puke.
‘I wish you weren't dead, Father Tom, you fuck, I wish you were still alive, because I'd like to kill you again, you fuck, I'd like to be starting now, starting to kill you now , starting now , holy Father Tom, you fuck , I'd like to be killing you now .’
Steel-grey light at the windows, opaque at first, then each pane slowly clarifying as if the dawn were melting frost from the glass.
The light got into corners, casting shadows on the bare boards.
Susan's arm lay close to her head.
Luke's wedding ring was on the table, close to her hand, and her eyes were wide open, like the eyes of someone who has just woken up.
‘Thank you,’ she said.
Her fist closed round the ring.
‘Thank you.’
When she got to her feet there was no strength in her legs to hold her.
She grabbed the chairback, her head thick with drugged sleep, then lowered herself to the floor and sat there cross-legged.
In one corner, a pine cabinet.
Dust motes climbing and falling, now, in sudden shafts of sunlight.
By the door, dark stains on the wall and the floor.
She wondered who would buy this house, moving in with their everyday things, their everyday lives.
Whoever you are, she thought, we'll be your ghosts: old loves, old crimes; we'll never go away.
Thirty-Eight
She checked out of the Palings and drove away from Longrock with the windows open and the early morning sun strong on her face.
After a hundred miles or so, she came off the motorway to pick up fuel and drink a cup of coffee.
She phoned Pascoe from there.
‘The house is up in the woods.
Come out of the town on the coast road, then find a no-through road on the right that ends in a turning circle.
From there, a track.’
‘What did he say?’
Pascoe asked.
‘He talked about the past.
Listen, Sam, that's all.
I went there to lay a ghost.
It didn't work.
That's all from me.’
She told Pascoe about the house and the woman she had seen there; she told a little of her meeting with Luke; the rest she kept for herself.
Then she went back to her car and sat there for a while.
She wound the window down and watched her own reflection disappear.
It reminded her again of the woman who had drifted from window to window waiting for Luke — her unadorned face, the limp that made one shoulder dip as she hurried to meet him.
Susan thought, Maybe you love him, whoever you are.
Who knows?
Maybe you're lucky.
Pascoe said, ‘You won't wait here?’
‘You're kidding.’
Sophie was already getting her things together.
‘But you will wait…’
‘I'll go back to my own place.
It's closer to the DMZ — I can go out during the day and sustain only flesh wounds.’
‘But you will be waiting.’
‘Anxious?’ she asked.
‘You sound really anxious.’
‘I just need to know.
Nothing more than that.
My life won't support any more uncertainties.’
‘I'll be there.’
She found an envelope in her bag and wrote something on the back, then handed it over.
‘What's this?’
‘Mobile phone — no answering machine on this.’
‘OK.
How's baby this morning?’
‘Don't be coy,’ she said, ‘it doesn't suit you.’
But she put an involuntary hand to her belly, as if checking for signs of life.
‘Not coy,’ he told her.
‘I've never done it before; I don't know the vocabulary.
The child; the foetus; the little visitor…’
She laughed.
‘It's not important.’
After a moment, she said: ‘Take care of yourself.’
She went to the window and watched him into the street, then into his car, then out of sight.
A taxi was on its way to take her home.
The sky was grey and came all the way down to the ground.
Although it was only ten in the morning, the temperature sat in the high seventies.
Sophie shook the collar of her blouse to make a little breeze, but didn't think of opening the window.
Four boys, drunk to the wide, started a mock fight down by the park railings.
A woman went by pushing a child in a buggy and they yelled at her, grabbing their crotches and grinding their hips.
As an afterthought, one of them threw a beercan at the buggy.
Sophie went into the bedroom.
Earlier that morning, she had piled the bedsheets in a corner of the room; a sweet aroma of grapes still clung to them.
Street-noise wafted through to her.
This is a two-note city, she thought.
All you ever hear are bass-lines and sirens, sirens and bass-lines.
It occurred to her that what Pascoe had said earlier wasn't at all coy; in fact, the more she thought about it, the more carefully judged it seemed to be.
How's baby?
Not your baby, not our baby, certainly not my baby.
Just baby.
Pascoe arrived in Longrock at four in the afternoon.
He took Susan Hart's directions and found the no-through road and the turning circle and the track.
He thought what Susan had thought:The parking place close to Lori's house.
The track through the woods .
He watched the house for ten minutes or more, but saw no sign of movement so he simply went to the door and knocked.
No-one was there.
He circled the house, looking in, and saw nothing but the bits and pieces of ordinary living.
Dishes stacked in the sink.
Coats on hooks in the hallway.
In the living room, a forgotten glass half-full of wine.
Someone had arranged a scatter of sea-shore pebbles on a low trunk, trying for a random pattern to make it look as though they had been cast like dice.
Each room lay in stillness, the air unstirred by breathing.
A terrible pause, he thought; the moment before the accident.
Going from window to window, he could see traces of the woman Susan had told him about, but Luke Mallen was a ghost in the place — nothing of him to be found; except, in all that stillness, a sense of violence.