

Towards a Sociology of Culture
The sociology of culture, in its most recent and most active forms, has to be seen as a convergence of very different interests and methods.
Like other convergences, it includes at least as many collisions and near misses as genuine meeting points.
But so many people, in many countries, are now working in it that it has entered a new phase.
Within traditional categories the sociology of culture is seen as a doubtful area.
In ordinary lists of the fields of sociology it gets in, if at all, as a very late entry: not only after the hard stuff of class, industry and politics, of the family or of crime, but as a miscellaneous heading after the more defined fields of the sociology of religion, education and knowledge.
It then both seems and is underdeveloped.
There is no actual shortage of specific studies, though here, as elsewhere, much more remains to be done.
It is rather that until it is recognized as a convergence, and as a problem of convergence, the usual reaction, even when sympathetic (and this, among an older and established generation, is comparatively rare) is to see it as little more than a loose grouping of specialist studies either of communications, in their modern specialized form as ‘the media’, or of the rather differently specialized field of ‘the arts’.
Of course to see these studies as specialist, in a working  and practical sense, is quite reasonable.
But to see them as marginal or peripheral is something else again.
The modern convergence, which the contemporary sociology of culture embodies, is in fact an attempt to rework, from a particular set of interests, those general social and sociological ideas within which it has been possible to see communication, language and art as marginal and peripheral, or as at best secondary and derived social processes.
A modern sociology of culture, whether in its internal studies or in its interventions in a more general sociology, is concerned above all to enquire, actively and openly, into these received and presumed relations, and into other possible and demonstrable relations.
As such it is not only reworking its own field, but putting new questions and new evidence into the general work of the social sciences.
‘Culture’
Both the problem and the interest of the sociology of culture can be seen at once in the difficulty of its apparently defining term: ‘culture’.
The history and usage of this exceptionally complex term can be studied in Kroeber and Kluckhohn (1952) and Williams (1958 and 1976).
Beginning as a noun of process — the culture (cultivation) of crops or (rearing and breeding) of animals, and by extension the culture (active cultivation) of the human mind — it became in the late eighteenth century, especially in German and English, a noun of configuration or generalization of the ‘spirit’ which informed the ‘whole way of life’of a distinct people.
Herder (1784–91) first used the significant plural, ‘cultures’, in deliberate distinction from any singular or, as we would now say, unilinear sense of ‘civilization’.
The broad pluralist term was then especially important in the nineteenth-century  development of comparative anthropology, where it has continued to designate a whole and distinctive way of life.
But there are then fundamental questions about the nature of the formative or determining elements which produce these distinctive cultures.
Alternative answers to these questions have produced a range of effective meanings, both within anthropology and in extension from it: from the older emphasis on an ‘informing spirit’— ideal or religious or national — to more modern emphases on a ‘lived culture’ which has been primarily determined by other and now differently designated social processes usually particular kinds of political or economic order.
In the alternative and contending intellectual traditions which have flowed from this range of answers, ‘culture’ itself then ranges from a significantly total to a confidently partial dimension of reference.
Meanwhile, in more general usage, there was a strong development of the sense of ‘culture’ as the active cultivation of the mind.
We can distinguish a range of meanings from (i)a developed state of mind — as in ‘a person of culture’, ‘a cultured person’ to (ii)the processes of this development — as in ‘cultural interests’, ‘cultural activities’to (iii)the means of these processes — as in culture as ‘the arts’and ‘humane intellectual works’.
In our own time (iii) is the most common general meaning, though all are current.
It coexists, often uneasily, with the anthropological and extended sociological use to indicate the ‘whole way of life’ of a distinct people or other social group.
The difficulty of the term is then obvious, but can be most usefully seen as the result of earlier kinds of convergence of interests.
We can distinguish two main kinds:(a) an emphasis on the ‘informing spirit ’ of a whole way of life, which is manifest over the whole range of social activities but is most evident in ‘specifically cultural’activities — a language, styles of art, kinds of intellectual  work; and (b) an emphasis on ‘a whole social order ’within which a specifiable culture, in styles of art and kinds of intellectual work, is seen as the direct or indirect product of an order primarily constituted by other social activities.
These positions are often classified as (a)idealist and (b)materialist , though it should be noted that in (b) materialist explanation is commonly reserved to the other, ‘primary’, activities, leaving ‘culture’ to a version of the ‘informing spirit’, of course now differently based and not primary but secondary.
Yet the importance of each position, by contrast with other forms of thought, is that it leads, necessarily, to intensive study of the relations between ‘cultural’ activities and other forms of social life.
Each position implies a broad method: in (a) illustration and clarification of the ‘informing spirit’, as in national histories of styles of art and kinds of intellectual work which manifest, in relation with other institutions and activities, the central interests and values of a ‘people’; in (b) exploration from the known or discoverable character of a general social order to the specific forms taken by its cultural manifestations.
The sociology of culture, as it entered the second half of the twentieth century, was broadly compounded of work done from these two positions, much of it of great local value.
Each position represented a form of that convergence of interests which the term ‘culture’ itself, with its persistent range of relational emphases, notably exemplifies.
But in contemporary work, while each of the earlier positions is still held and practised, a new kind of convergence is becoming evident.
This has many elements in common with(b), in its emphasis on a whole social order, but it differs from it in its insistence that ‘cultural practice’ and ‘cultural production’(its most recognizable terms) are not simply derived from an otherwise constituted social order but are themselves  major elements in its constitution.
It then shares some elements with (a), in its emphasis on cultural practices as (though now among others)constitutive .
But instead of the ‘informing spirit’ which was held to constitute all other activities, it sees culture as the signifying system through which necessarily (though among other means) a social order is communicated, reproduced, experienced and explored.
Thus there is some practical convergence between (i) the anthropological and sociological senses of culture as a distinct ‘whole way of life’, within which, now, a distinctive ‘signifying system’ is seen not only as essential but as essentially involved in all forms of social activity, and (ii) the more specialized if also more common sense of culture as ‘artistic and intellectual activities’, though these, because of the emphasis on a general signifying system, are now much more broadly defined, to include not only the traditional arts and forms of intellectual production but also all the ‘signifying practices’— from language through the arts and philosophy to journalism, fashion and advertising — which now constitute this complex and necessarily extended field.
This book is written within the terms of this contemporary convergence.
In some of its chapters, notably 4, 5, 7 and 8, it deals with questions over its whole range.
In its other chapters, while conscious of the general field, it deliberately concentrates on ‘the arts’ in their most common received sense.
The work of the new convergence has been best and most frequently done, either in general theory and in studies of ‘ideology’, or in its distinctively new areas of interest, in ‘the media’ and ‘popular culture’.
There is then not only a relative gap to be filled, in these new terms, but also, from the quality of some of the work on the arts carried out from other positions, a sense of challenge: indeed a sense that it may be above all in this still  major area that the qualities of the kinds of thinking represented by the contemporary convergence stand most to be tested.
Why a ‘sociology’ of culture?
It will already be clear that in the contemporary convergence, with its deliberate extension and interlocking of hitherto separate (if always related) senses of culture, what is now often called ‘cultural studies’ is already a branch of general sociology.
But it is a branch more in the sense of a distinctive mode of entry into general sociological questions than in the sense of a reserved or specialized area.
At the same time, while it is a kind of sociology which places its emphasis on all signifying systems, it is necessarily and centrally concerned with manifest cultural practices and production.
Its whole approach requires, as we shall see, new kinds of social analysis of specifically cultural institutions and formations, and the exploration of actual relations between these and, on the one hand, the material means of cultural production and, on the other hand, actual cultural forms.
What brings these together is, distinctively, a sociology, but, in the terms of the convergence, a sociology of a new kind.
We have already seen the theoretical differences between this and earlier forms of convergence.
We can now indicate, if only in outline, the historical forms of the same development.
The new sociology of culture can be seen as the convergence, and at a certain point the transformation, of two clear tendencies: one within general social thought and then specifically sociology; the other within cultural history and analysis.
We can briefly indicate the major contributions within each.
The ‘cultural sciences’ and sociology
It was Vico, in his New Science (1725–44), who gave at once a new confidence and a particular direction to social thought, in his argument that ‘the world of civil society has certainly been made by men’ and that this ‘since men had made it they could hope to know’.
What thus far was a general argument for the validity of all social sciences was given a special emphasis by Vico's idea of finding the ‘principles’ of civil society ‘within the modifications of our own human mind’.
For if the human mind is modified , in and through social development, it is a necessary emphasis of social studies to examine the cultural forms — for Vico, notably, language — through which social development is manifested.
This is so again in Herder (1784–91), who added the concept of specific cultural forms, but in a context, already discussed, of the ‘informing spirit’.
There are clear continuities from both Vico and Herder in Dilthey (1883), who offered an important distinction between ‘the cultural sciences’(Geisteswissenschaften ) and ‘the natural sciences’.
He distinguished the cultural sciences by the fact that their ‘objects of study’ are humanly made, that someone observing them is observing processes in which he himself necessarily participates, and that different methods of establishing evidence and interpretations are then inevitable.
Specifically Dilthey defined method through the difficult concept of ‘verstehen ’— a ‘sympathetic understanding’ or ‘intuitive grasp’of human social and cultural forms — while at the same time insisting that all such studies must be historical.
This emphasis passed into the work of Max Weber and thus into one tendency in modern sociology.
But quite different ideas were also contributing to the  formation of modern sociology.
These stressed the discovery, by the different method of objective observation and recording (often by analogy with the natural sciences), of the laws of social organization.
There were strengths and weaknesses in each of these tendencies.
The method of ‘verstehen ’ could be quite insufficiently explanatory, or could fall back for explanation on a (theoretically circular)‘informing spirit’.
The method of objective observation, while accumulating indispensable empirical data, was often insufficiently conscious of the nature of some of the less tangible cultural processes, of these as elements of history and, crucially, of the effects on observation of the specific social and cultural situation of the observer.
These problems, in more refined forms, have continued to exercise sociological theory, but their effects on the sociology of culture are now most relevant.
The study of cultural forms and works continued, by an obvious affinity, to be practised by exponents of ‘verstehen ’.
Elsewhere, within mainstream sociology, the cultural facts which were most amenable to observational analysis were primarily institutions and the cultural ‘products’ of institutions.
Within sociology generally, these were the persistent emphases of the two earlier historical convergences.
Each contributed much, but they did not often speak to each other, and indeed almost literally could not speak to each other .
Contributions from observational sociology
Thus we find in the tradition of observational analysis (which in Britain and America is often taken as sociology tout court ) a developing interest in cultural institutions at that point when, through actual social developments in the modern press, cinema and broadcasting, there were major  institutions and their products which could be studied by already generally available methods.
In this tradition, before this development, the sociology of culture had significantly been concentrated on the already institutionalized areas of religion and education.
Three useful kinds of study can then be distinguished, of (i) the social and economic institutions of culture and, as alternative definitions of their ‘products’, of (ii) their content and (iii) their effects.
(i) Institutions
There have been many studies of modern communications institutions within one explicitly (functional) sociological perspective.
For examples see Lasswell (1948); Lazarsfeld and Merton (1948), Lazarsfeld and Stanton (1949).
Other studies of the same institutions combine institutional analysis with some history — White (1947)— or with general social argument-Siebert, Peterson and Schramm (1956).
It is significant that in this area of institutional studies some of the sharpest questions about the nature of sociological inquiry have been directly or indirectly posed.
Much of the earlier American work, highly developed empirically and in its immediate working concepts, was undertaken within a relatively uncritical assumption of a market society, where general ‘socializing’ and ‘commercial’functions could be supposed to interact or conflict.
It was also commonly described by an interpretation of modern society as ‘mass society’, in which such different elements as very large audiences, relative ‘impersonality’ of transmission or ‘anonymity’of reception, and the ‘unorganized heterogeneity’of ‘democratic and commercial’societies were fused and indeed confused.
This assumption led to the designation and methodology of ‘mass communication’ research, which still dominates the orthodox sociology of culture.
For a critique of the concept and its  effects, see Williams (1974).
Ironically, the same concept and designation were evident in work of a different kind, where comparable observational and analytic techniques were employed but in the context of a radical critique of the institutions and their functions in capitalist society (a specification of particular kinds of ‘socialization’ and ‘communication’within a particular social and economic order).
This explicitly campaigning sociology was of course in conflict with the (only apparently)‘neutral’ stance of the earlier phase.
It added, necessarily, elements of economic analysis (of the ownership of institutions) and of economic and political history.
A major example is Schiller (1969), but see also Weinberg (1962), Murdock and Golding (1974)’ and Glasgow University Media Group (1976).
There have been relatively few studies of modern cultural institutions outside the dominant fields of press and broadcasting, but on cinema see Mayer (1948) and on more recent approaches see Albrecht, Barnett and Griff (1970).
Empirical studies of older cultural institutions, drawing on historical as well as sociological procedures, include Collins (1928), Beljame (1948), Altick (1957), Williams (1961) and Escarpit (1966).
(ii) Content
Sociological studies of cultural ‘content’ have been distinguished from otherwise comparable studies, in the history of art or of literature, by the methodological assumptions of observational analysis.
Thus ‘content analysis’ has been defined as ‘a research technique for the objective, systematic and quantitative description of the manifest content of communications’(Wright [1959], 76).
This work has been useful in two main areas: analysis of types of content — see Berelson (1950) and Williams (1962)— and of the selection and portrayal of certain social figures  — see Lowenthal (1961).
In the former case, analysis necessarily requires extensive and systematic survey procedures, by contrast with the more selective and even arbitrary treatment of ‘content’ in non-sociological studies This is true also of the latter case, where the cultural research into fictional ‘types’can be combined with broader analysis of the changing social significance of certain socially ‘typical’figures (policeman and detective, doctor, nurse, priest, criminal and so on).
Content analysis is often criticized for its ‘merely quantitative’ findings, but its data, while often needing further interpretation, are essential to any developed sociology of culture, not only in modern communications systems, where the large numbers of works make it inevitable, but also in more traditional kinds of work.
(iii) Effects
The most evident contributions of observational sociology have been in the study of effects.
This tendency is itself in need of sociological analysis, since it is in some respects clearly related to the social character of certain modem institutions, most obviously in advertising and market research but also in audience research and in political opinion polling.
Funding for research of this kind has been on a scale not approached by any other area of sociological enquiry.
But we can then distinguish between two kinds of study:(a)operational studies , often not generally published, which study effects as indicators of internal policy and marketing decisions —‘attitude’ surveys in market research; studies of responses to programmes in broadcasting research; private political polling on ‘issues’; and (b)critical research , in which the effects of programmes showing violence or of political broadcasting or other distinguishable kinds of production are assessed for both specific and general social effect, often in response to an  expressed public concern.
Much of what we now know, in a still difficult and very controversial area, about different kinds of ‘televised violence’ and their differential effects on differently situated children, or about the effects of different kinds of political broadcasting — party statements, electoral reporting, definitions of the ‘main issues’— has come from this kind of research.
For examples see Himmelweit, Oppenheim and Vince (1958), Blumler and McQuail (1968), and, more generally, Lazarsfeld and Katz (1955), Halloran (1970) and Halloran, Brown and Chaney (1970).
A critique of ‘effects studies’, raising the question of the social norms on which the effects are presumed to operate, is in Williams (1974).
At the same time it should be remembered that in non-sociological cultural studies, as in much general writing, the question of effect is commonly raised but without much or any evidence and often by simple and even casual assertion.
Here, as elsewhere, the sociological contribution, while usually needing critique and refinement, has been indispensable.
The alternative tradition
Outside observational sociology there was an early convergence between social theories of culture and what had been more specifically philosophical, historical and critical theories and studies of art.
This was especially so in the German tradition, where several important schools developed.
And it was from the beginning the case in a more general Marxist tradition, which has been especially active and, it should be stressed, diverse in recent years.
Before turning to this complex modern area, we should note certain major examples of cultural history and analysis which we would not call sociological but in which some  crucial concepts and methods were practically explored.
Outstanding among these, in addition to the work of Vico and Herder already discussed, are Ruskin (1851–6 and 1857) and Burckhardt (translated 1878), together with the work of Dilthey (translated 1976).
It can be said that works of this kind — and there are many other possible examples begin more evidently from the actual art and culture in question, and can thus be assigned to history or criticism.
Yet they are distinct from general art history and criticism in their conscious introduction, if in varying ways, of active social concepts as necessary elements of description and analysis.
Their overlap with modern cultural sociology, in the alternative tradition, is thus clear.
In modern studies we can distinguish three broad emphases:(i) on the social conditions-of art;(ii) on social material in art works; and (iii) on social relations in art works.
(i) Social conditions of art
Work on the social conditions of art overlaps, evidently, with general aesthetics and some branches of psychology, as well as with history.
Indeed there is a major theoretical division, within such work, between primarily aesthetic and psychological approaches, on the one hand, and primarily historical approaches on the other.
Some work of the former kind altogether avoids social considerations, and passes out of our present context.
But there are significant tendencies based primarily on ‘aesthetic’ and ‘psychological’data which either (a) introduce social conditions as modifiers of an otherwise relatively constant human process or (b) construct general periods of human culture within which certain types of art flourish.
Examples of the former include Read (1936) and other works of a generally ‘social-Freudian’ orientation; of the latter, with some precedents in Nietzsche (1872) and Frazer  (1890), in Weston (1920), Jung (1933) and Frye (1957).
The most interesting current aspect of work of this kind, which in general bears decisively away from sociology and indeed is often hostile to it, is its relation to one tendency in Marxist thinking about art.
Neither Marx nor Engels wrote systematically about art, but important theoretical positions were derived from them.
The best known of these positions relate to analyses of social material and social relations in art works, and will be discussed below.
But there is Marxist work on the origins and on typologies of art which properly belongs in this first division.
Examples include Plekhanov (translated 1953), relating art to ‘primitive instincts’ or ‘drives’, Kautsky (1927), relating the development of art to evolved animal behaviour, Caudwell (1938), relating art to the ‘genotype’, and Fischer (1963).
Elements of these approaches, combined (as also in Caudwell) with specifically historical orientations, can be seen in Lukacs (1969) and Marcuse (1978).
It is important to distinguish work of this kind, and to emphasize its possible value, by comparison with that narrowest version of the social conditions of art (often called ‘sociologism’ or ‘sociological relativism’), which is more commonly associated with Marxism.
No studies of art can in the end neglect the physical processes and needs of the human organism, with which (see Chapter 4) its means of production are so closely involved.
These can be directly studied in physiology and experimental psychology, but there is then the major problem of the variability of the kinds of work produced from these (presumably) common bases, in the evidence of anthropology and of history.
Correlations in this area, especially in non-Marxist work but still in most Marxist work hitherto, have tended to proceed less from the steady analysis of evidence than from relatively a priori concepts, usually of a strictly contemporary kind, to which such  evidence as there is is illustratively added.
This is especially the case in the abstraction of ‘magical practices’ or of ‘economic motives’or ‘sexual symbolism’to give generic explanations of the art of other cultures.
All these concepts have been applied, successively, to prehistoric cave paintings, with different but always arbitrary results.
Meanwhile the abstraction of an ‘aesthetic instinct’, isolated from its conditions and from other relationships, has, while often coming nearer to the work, suppressed the whole problem of connected but variable practices.
Substantial theoretical correctives to such procedures can be found in the important work of Mukarovsky (translated 1970) and Morawski (1974).
In terms of the sociology of culture, this area can now be theoretically redefined as a study of the situations and conditions of practices (see Chapter 4).
We have then to look in detail at the ways in which relatively constant biological processes and relatively variable means of production have combined both in specifically comparable and in specifically variable ways, always within specific social (historico-social) situations.
Yet by comparison with the bodies of conceptual speculation, this fundamental sociology of culture has barely begun.
(ii) Social material in art works
The study of social material in art works has been very extensive, and is often taken, simply, as the whole content of a sociology of culture.
Much of it, in fact, is more properly historical, but it includes one major sociological formulation or assumption.
This is most recognizable in the theory of ‘base and superstructure’, effectively generalized for culture by Plekhanov (translated 1953).
The problems of this concept are discussed in Williams (1977).
Within this tendency, the basic ‘facts’ or ‘structure’of a given society and/or period are received or are established  by general analysis, and their ‘reflection’in actual works is more or less directly traced.
Thus both the content and the form of the new eighteenth-century realist novel can be shown as dependent on the already known facts of the increasing social importance of the commercial bourgeoisie.
For a sustained and influential example of this method, see Lukacs (1950).
(iii) Social relations in art works
At its most complex, the analysis of social material in art extends into the study of social relations.
This is especially so when the idea of ‘reflection’— in which art works directly embody pre-existing social material — is modified or replaced by the idea of ‘mediation’.
Mediation can refer primarily to the necessary processes of composition, in a specific medium; as such it indicates the practical relations between social and artistic forms (see below).
But in its more common uses it refers to an indirectness of relation between experience and its composition.
The form of this indirectness is variably interpreted in different uses of the concept.
Thus Kafka's novel The Trial , for example, can be read, from different positions, as (a)mediation by projection — an arbitrary and irrational social system is not directly described, in its own terms, but projected, in its essentials, as strange and alien; or (b)mediation by the discovery of an ‘objective correlative' — a situation and characters are composed to produce, in an objective form, the subjective or actual feelings — an inexpressible guilt — from which the original impulse to composition came; or (c)mediation as a function of the fundamental social processes of consciousness , in which certain crises which cannot otherwise be directly apprehended are ‘crystallized’ in certain direct images and forms of art — images which then illuminate a basic (social and psychological) condition: not just Kafka's but a  general alienation.
In (c) this ‘basic condition’ can be variably referred to the nature of a whole epoch, of a particular society at a particular period, or of a particular group within that society at that period.
All these references, but most obviously the second and especially the third, are potentially sociological, but they involve very different kinds of analysis from the tracing of direct relations of content or of form.
Analyses employing these concepts and methods can be found in Benjamin —(translated 1969), Goldmann (1964), Adorno (1967a) and the collective work of the important Frankfurt School (see Jay, 1973).
Forms
There has been some convergence between the analysis of social material and social relations in art works and the content-analysis of communications material described above.
In their assumption of systematically traceable content, either reflected or mediated, they have considerable common ground, and between them have produced much valuable work.
But there has in recent years been a more influential convergence, both in studies of art and in communications studies, around the concept of ‘forms’.
This emphasis has been notably theorized and exemplified in Lukacs (translated 1971), Goldmann (translated 1975) and in Bloch et al .
(translated 1977) where it is also vigorously debated.
An extended discussion of this kind of social analysis is in Chapters 5 and 6.
Forms and social relations
From the analysis of what can be defined, within this tendency, as the social forms of art, there has been some development of the analysis of their corresponding social  formations.
There is a good example in Goldmann (1964), and there are classic pioneering studies in Gramsci (translated 1971) and Benjamin (translated 1973).
Here again there is some convergence with the work of a more directly sociological tradition, and especially (though many theoretical problems are then raised) with Mannheim (1936 and 1956), as well as with a number of empirical studies of specific groups and conditions (cf.
Beljame [1948]).
The sociology of cultural formations , and its relations with the more widely practised sociology of institutions , is directly investigated in Chapters 2 and 3.
Ideology
It remains to indicate one especially important and difficult area of the sociology of culture, which has been prominent and at times dominant in the current convergence.
This is the set of problems associated with the difficult term ‘ideology’.
‘Ideology’ is an indispensable term in sociological analysis, but the first level of difficulty is whether it is used to describe:(a)the formal and conscious beliefs of a class or other social group — as in the common usage of ‘ideological’to indicate general principles or theoretical positions or, as so often unfavourably, dogmas; or (b) the characteristic world-view or general perspective of a class or other social group, which will include formal and conscious beliefs but also less conscious, less formulated attitudes, habits and feelings, or even unconscious assumptions, bearings and commitments.
It is clear, first, that sociological analysis of culture has often, even primarily, to work with sense (a).
It is a main way in which cultural production can be related, often very precisely, to social classes and other groups which can also  be defined in other social terms, by political or economic or occupational analysis.
But it is soon clear, also, that cultural analysis cannot be confined to the level of formal and conscious beliefs.
Two kinds of extension are necessary.
First, to that wider area of feelings and attitudes and assumptions which usually mark, very distinctively, the culture of a particular class or other group.
This wider and less tangible area is also important in tracing the changing culture of what is otherwise (say in economic terms) a continuing or persistent class.
In such areas we discover a whole lived ‘colouring’, and a wide area of actual social practice, which are culturally specific and thus analytically indispensable.
Then, second, there is need for extension to that area of manifest cultural production which, by the nature of its forms, is not, or not primarily or only, the expression of formal and conscious beliefs: not philosophy or religion or economic theory or political theory or law, but drama, fiction, poetry, painting.
There are often in fact close connections between the formal and conscious beliefs of a class or other group and the cultural production associated with it: sometimes direct connections with the beliefs, in included manifest content; often traceable connections to the relations, perspectives and values which the beliefs legitimize or normalize, as in characteristic selections (emphases and omissions) of subject; often, again, analysable connections between belief-systems and artistic forms, or between both and an essentially underlying ‘position and positioning’ in the world.
But then the use of ‘ideology’ as a common term in these essentially different stages of analysis can be confused and confusing.
In the case of manifest content there is no real problem.
Characteristic selectivities can also, without much strain, be called ‘ideological’, though something  must often be allowed for an otherwise conditioned persistence of certain artistic forms embodying such selections.
It is in the case of deeper congruences and possible congruences that the use of ‘ideology’ raises most problems, since if ideology is a major reference-point, or even point of origin, at such basic levels of social production and reproduction, it is difficult, as previously in some uses of ‘culture’, to know what is left for all other social processes.
Moreover, while ‘ideology’ retains, from the weight of linguistic usage, the sense of organized beliefs (whether formal and conscious or pervasive and dissolved), it can often be supposed that such systems are the true origin of all cultural (and indeed other social) production.
In the case of art this would be very seriously reductive.
It would exclude, on the one hand, the directly physical and material processes (cf.
Chapter 4) in which so many arts are grounded.
It would exclude, on the other hand, those crucial processes of working and reworking which are the specifics, as distinct from the abstractable elements, of important art.
These processes range from (a) active illustration (still relatively simple) to (b) kinds of active reinvention and exploratory discovery and, crucially,(c) tension, contradiction or what would elsewhere be called dissent.
They range also from what can be seen, simply, as the ‘translation’ of ‘ideology’into directly sensuous material, to what is better seen, in terms of the physical and material processes of art work, as production of a distinct and general kind.
We have then to note that, unless we make these extensions and qualifications, ‘ideology’, even and perhaps especially in some powerful contemporary tendencies in Marxist analysis, is in effect repeating the history of ‘culture’ as a concept.
In its more specific uses it has much to contribute by way of correction to generalizing uses of  culture'.
It can break down what is often the false generality of a ‘whole way of life’ to discriminate ascriptions to specific classes and other groups.
As such indeed it is a key procedural term in an active sociology of culture.
But in its more extended and generalized uses it can become remarkably similar to the ‘informing spirit’ of idealist cultural theories, and this can still be so when it offers (but does not include or specify) a ‘last instance’referral to the economy or to the mode of production.
It is not the generality as such that is at fault.
General ideologies, in their full depth and elaboration, have indeed to be seen as among the most remarkable forms of collective cultural production.
But then it is precisely because all significant ideologies are indeed this deep and elaborated that the concept cannot be abstracted as some kind of ‘informing spirit’, at the roots of all cultural production.
To say that all cultural practice is ‘ideological’ need mean no more than that (as in some other current uses) all practice is signifying.
For all the difficulties of overlap with other more common uses, this sense is acceptable.
But it is very different from describing all cultural production as ‘ideology’, or as ‘directed by ideology’, because what is then omitted, as in the idealist uses of ‘culture’, is the set of complex real processes by which a ‘culture’ or an ‘ideology’is itself produced.
And it is with these productive processes that a full sociology of culture is necessarily concerned.
To study ‘an ideology’ and what ‘it’produces is a recognizable form of idealist philosophy.
What the cultural sociologist or the cultural historian studies are the social practices and social relations which produce not only ‘a culture’ or ‘an ideology’but, more significantly, those dynamic actual states and works within which there are not only continuities and persistent determinations but also tensions, conflicts, resolutions and irresolutions, innovations and actual changes.
One final point can be made about current uses of ‘ideology’.
Where it is contrasted, as ‘false consciousness’ or as ‘illusory experience’with ‘science’—(cf.
Althusser 1970, 1971) it is often remarkably similar, in effect, to that presumed area of ‘common experience’ against which the ‘scientific observation’of empirical sociology positioned itself.
To be sure, the philosophical bases of these tendencies are distinct and even opposed.
But the assumption of an explanatory method which can be taken as a priori ‘above’ all other social experience and cultural production is itself, when analysed, a fact in the sociology of a particular phase of culture.
Its modes of privilege, in actual institutions and practices, need especially careful study.
Directions
Cultural sociology, then, is concerned with the social processes of all cultural production, including those forms of production which can be designated as ideologies.
This defines a field, but the work now being done, from so many different starting-points, is still a convergence of interests and methods, and there are still crucial theoretical differences at every stage.
Another effect of the variety of starting-points, in history, philosophy, literary studies, linguistics, aesthetics and social theory, as well as in sociology itself, is that there is always a problem of overlap with other distinct and still necessary disciplines.
A sociology of culture must concern itself with the institutions and formations of cultural production, for this is one of the most distinct of its fields.
It is the subject-matter of the second and third chapters of this book.
But then a sociology of culture must also concern itself with the social relations of its specific means of production.
These are the subject of the fourth chapter.
It must further  concern itself with the ways in which, within social life, ‘culture’ and ‘cultural production’are socially identified and distinguished.
These are the subject of the fifth chapter.
In all these areas there are overlaps with general history and with the history of particular arts.
Cultural sociology cannot replace these, but can put to their material certain distinctively sociological questions.
A sociology of culture must further and most obviously concern itself with specific artistic forms.
These, exemplified from drama, are the subject of the sixth chapter.
In this area there is overlap with critical analysis and with the general study of sign-systems, as in semiotics.
The sociology of cultural forms cannot replace these disciplines, but in its emphasis on the social as well as the notational basis of sign-systems, then seen as general signifying systems, it puts specific sociological questions and adds, to what would otherwise be internal kinds of analysis, a deliberately extended social dimension.
A sociology of culture must further concern itself with the processes of social and cultural ‘reproduction’.
This is the subject of the seventh chapter.
Here there are evident overlaps with political theory and with general sociology, which cultural sociology can not replace but to which it can try to contribute its own kinds of evidence.
Finally, a sociology of culture must concern itself with general and specific problems of cultural organization.
This is the subject of the eighth chapter.
Here there are again overlaps with political theory and with general sociology, which cultural sociology cannot replace but to which it can try to contribute its distinctive emphasis on the organization of signifying systems and on the special kinds of social formation which are professionally concerned with this, among them the difficult category usually identified as ‘intellectuals’.
In the matter of organization there is also direct overlap with economic analysis, and this is becoming  especially important in work on modern capitalist cultural organizations and especially the ‘media’.
The recent development of a ‘political economy of culture’(see Schiller [1969], Murdock and Golding [1974, Garnham [1977]) is especially necessary and welcome, and should be seen as not only distinct from, but complementary to, a cultural sociology.
We have then described a convergence, and the interests and methods which have at once contributed to it and, in most cases, remain important beyond it, as different disciplines.
We can now move into the specific areas of its direct concerns.
Institutions
Any adequate sociology of culture must, it seems, be an historical sociology.
When we look at the vast evidence of the relations of cultural production, in so many different societies and historical periods, it is clear that it would be unwise to adopt, as our first theoretical construct, some universal or general explanatory scheme of the necessary relations between ‘culture’ and ‘society’.
Much actual sociology of culture presumes, in a way inevitably, the typical or dominant relations of the period with which it is concerned; it goes on to adduce detailed evidence of these.
But it can then happen that these relations become a norm, from which other periods are interpreted or even, by contrast, judged.
The cultural relations of the ‘market’ are contrasted with those of the ‘patron’, or the situation of the ‘professional artist’with that of the ‘State producer’.
Many of these terms make sense in a closely defined context, but as we move, with them, towards general sociological statements, they become less and less satisfactory.
The important concept of the patron, for example, covers (and then often obscures) at least four or five distinct social relationships in cultural production.
Thus theoretical constructs derived from empirical studies and their extension or generalization are always likely to presume too much, in the transition from local and specific to general concepts.
On the other hand, it is only  from such studies, at whatever degree of reflection or theoretical remove, that we can begin to shape, test and substantiate our conceptual descriptions.
To move, or appear to move, beyond this necessary empirical work, by the early construction of a general theoretical framework, is usually in practice an unargued transition from local and specific to general concepts.
Its difference from simple empirical generalization is that whereas this former extends its local names to a variety of historical situations to which they may be only partly appropriate, this latter, theoreticist tendency extends its presumptive interpretations and categories in what is always, essentially, a search for illustrative instances.
Some versions of this tendency are, however, more recognizable as ‘theoreticist’ than others.
The best known example is that of the presumed (theoretical) relationship between ‘base’ and ‘superstructure’in Marxist cultural studies, which in its simplest form asserts that art ‘reflects’the socio-economic structure of the society within which it is produced, and then presents its (often persuasive) instances of this relationship.
But this kind of Marxist theory should not be isolated.
It is in fact no more ‘theoreticist’ than the basic liberal idea of culture, in which It is presumed that the universal source of cultural production is ‘individual expression’, so that to study the social relations of cultural activity is to describe the conditions which bear on this norm, permitting or preventing its ‘free exercise’.
In fact here, as less obviously in the theory of base and superstructure, what is presumed or presented as theory can be seen, on further examination, to be the extension and generalization of the (often very significant) problems, preoccupations and observations of a particular cultural period.
An adequate sociology of culture must work more rigorously.
It cannot avoid the informing presence of  existing empirical studies and existing theoretical and quasi-theoretical positions.
But it must be prepared to rework and reconsider all received material and concepts, and to present its own contributions within the open interaction of evidence and interpretation which is the true condition of its adequacy.
All that now follows, in this book, is presented in this sense: as an inquiry and a set of working hypotheses, rather than a body of demonstrated and verified conclusions.
Institutions and formations
We can propose as an initial distinction the following: on the one hand the variable relations between ‘cultural producers’(a deliberately neutral if abstract term) and recognizable social institutions ; on the other hand, the variable relations in which ‘cultural producers’ have been organized or have organized themselves, their formations .
This is a working distinction, to make possible some variety of approach to the question of the effective social relations of culture.
It is not intended to imply that there are no significant or even causal relations between institutional and formational relationships; indeed, as we shall see, these will often and perhaps always be present.
But if we deduce significant cultural relations from the study of institutions alone, we shall be in danger of missing some important cases in which cultural organization has not been, in any ordinary sense, institutional.
In particular we may miss the very striking phenomenon of the cultural ‘movement’, which has been so important in the modern period, and which will be specifically analysed in the next chapter.
In the present chapter we shall consider mainly the relations between producers and institutions, and only in that context the question of direct formations.
Instituted artists
The first case to consider is that in which, in many relatively early societies, an artist of a certain kind — often in fact a poet — was officially recognized as part of the central social organization itself.
This case is so important, by comparison with the social situations of artists in later societies, that it is often presented as if it were singular and uniform, and this can have important effects on its more general interpretation.
Where we have records of such official recognition within the central social organization, we find not only — as we might expect — differences between different societies but also historical differences, between different forms of a continuing society.
This is very clear, for all the uncertainty of detail, in the characteristic case of the Celtic bards.
Thus we can say that in traditional Celtic societies the bard was given an honoured place in the official organization of the ‘kingdom’ or ‘tribe’.
But the real social relations were always more complex and variable.
The earliest evidence we have, from observation by the Romans of  the Celts in Gaul, is already from a considerably developed society.
What this evidence suggests is a particular stage in the specialization of functions which, at still earlier stages, would — as in many comparable cases — not have been clearly distinguished.
This process of specialization is of course central to cultural history (see Chapter 5).
The functions which can later be distinguished as those of ‘priest’, ‘prophet’ or ‘bard’— and in more modern terms ‘historian’or even ‘scientist’— were often originally exercised by the same individuals or groups of individuals.
The distinction of these functions was in part a result of their internal development, as each function required more skill and time.
But it was also, and perhaps primarily, a  result of more general changes in social organization and in the mode of production.
At any rate, by the time we can observe such changes, the ‘official recognition’ turns out to be an element of a structured aristocratic society.
Thus it is said (though still with problems of interpretation) that the bards were a specific order ranking below the priests and the seers, though composing with them a specific privileged caste.
There is then an immediate problem in interpreting their actual social relations.
It has been said, on the one hand, that in this situation the bard is accountable to society, and is its spokesman; on the other hand, that it is his duty to serve the past and present glory of the ruling class.
By the time we come, at a later stage again, to any evidence of actual work, we can certainly see the fulfilment of the latter function, in the very common eulogy or encomium of men in power.
But then, extending from these, we can see the mixed character of the sagas and genealogies, which often function as legitimation of power but are also versions of history.
Beyond these again, there are clear cases of more general lore and precept and observation, which undoubtedly served a more extended social function.
Moreover there is evidence of some relative independence even in relation to direct rulers, as in the conflicts and subsequent laws, in Irish literature, about the use of the lampoon.
Or again: ‘the bards of the world pass judgement on men of valour,’ as a sixth-century Welsh poet (Aneirin) wrote, in a remarkable poem mourning a defeat and honouring those who died in it.
The recognition and further specialization of the bardic function continued to change, as the societies changed.
Thus after the Christianization of Ireland, the priestly function was removed to a quite different kind of order, increasingly employing writing, while the bardic function, still often oral, entered a different and more specialized relationship to the aristocratic families.
In Welsh  literature, by the tenth century, the official status of bards was codified in grades: the chief poet, the battle poet, the minstrel; with assigned differences of subject and in some respects of audience, and with relatively strict internal rules about the craft itself.
As society changed further, and especially as the political independence of the courts within which the poets worked was weakened and finally lost, the social relations changed again, and the literary organization became at once more specialized and more socially disconnected.
This is the point at which, for all the relatively doubtful and overlapping cases, we can mark a change from one category of social relations to another.
After the very earliest period of relative non-differentiation of functions, in which the ‘literary’ or ‘artistic’had not or not fully separated out from the more generally ‘cultural’, there had been this phase of specifically instituted artists , which should not really be described in terms taken from later phases, such as‘official recognition’or ‘patronage’.
Each of these later terms implies an act of variable social choice:deciding to recognize a poet or poets;deciding to act as patron to them.
But in this important early phase, the social position of this kind of cultural producer was instituted as such, and as an integral part of general social organization.
We have still to remember its variations, in the changing periods and structures of such societies, but as a categorical distinction it is reasonably clear.
Artists and patrons
The distinction that matters is from that of ‘patronage’, which itself, as we shall see, is highly varied.
(i) From institution to patronage
There is one early form of patronage which is in effect a modulation of the earlier situation of the instituted artist, in altered social conditions.
The change is marked, for example, in Welsh literature by the transition from the instituted court poets (the ‘poets of the princes’) to the ‘poets of the nobility’ who were now, though still highly regarded, more occasionally dependent.
A poet might be attached to a household, or, increasingly, be dependent on travelling between households, performing his work and looking for hospitality and support.
This is the beginning of a transition from the social relations of a regular institution (its exchange factors fully integrated and in that sense coherent) to the social relations of conscious exchange, though of course not yet of full exchange.
It was part of the social self-definition of the patronizing household, often deliberately in terms residual from the true courts, to assume what was at once a responsibility and an honour!
Meanwhile, the specific literary organization — the residual bardic order — was to an important extent self-defining in shared grades and rules.
(ii) Retainer and commission
A second and much more general form of patronage was that of a court or powerful household in which there was no intrinsic organization of artists as part of the general social organization but in which, often very extensively, individual artists were retained, often with titles which represent the true cases of ‘official recognition’.
In painting and music, especially, this kind of patronage was extremely important and lasted for many centuries.
Its detailed arrangements varied, in the many thousands of cases, but what is generally true about its form of social relations is that the artist was typically retained or commissioned as an individual professional worker.
This is a crucial stage of  development from that in which — in the earlier stages substantially, in the later stages residually — artists were themselves a specific form of social organization.
At the same time, under the general conditions of this best-known of all forms of patronage, certain less specific forms of professional organization in the arts were often present, at a different stage: evidently in the master and apprentice system which was at times similar to that in a wider area of skills and crafts (see pages 58ff below).
The distinction can be interestingly explored in relation to the very large amount of art — painting, sculpture, architecture, music and (in a different sense) literature produced within the variable social relations of the Christian church.
Some of the best-known work of this kind is at least analogous to that of court patronage; the large amount of art commissioned by the Vatican Court is an obvious example.
Yet there is also a less determinate area, in which artists devoted themselves to religious art not only, and sometimes not primarily, because this was the willed commission of their Immediate patron, but because they could identify themselves with the religious purpose of which the immediate social organization was the available manifest form.
This willing integration is significantly different from the case at the other end of this spectrum, where the individual artist is in effect available for hire to glorify or embellish the particular court or household which has hired him.
For while the immediate economic relations were often similar, as the specific form of patronal exchange, the full social relations can be seen as variable, once the fact of willing and independent service of a social and religious-kind is admitted.
Indeed, there had been, within the Church, a relation more analogous to that of the instituted artists of earlier social orders.
In the monasteries, especially, we can find many interesting cases of specific forms of organization  which, while governed by manifest religious rather than secular rules (and in that sense relatively displaced from the integration of such an organization in the direct social organization as a whole), functioned in practice as cultural organizations, of great significance, in learning, in literature, in dramatic writing and in the visual arts.
Since the order was primarily religious it has to be distinguished from specific cultural orders, but it is even more distinct from the social relations of patronage.
Within such an order, many producers became in effect specialists, yet still within the terms of a general organization beyond their specialism.
The transition to full ecclesiastical patronage — a transition of course marked by many intermediate and overlapping stages — was a transition to those forms of professionalism, involving mobility and availability for hire, which are characteristic of the second main form of patronage.
(iii) Protection and support
The third form of patronage is again distinct, in that it is concerned less with the direct retaining and commissioning of artists than with the provision of some kind of social protection or recognition.
The theatrical companies of Elizabethan England are good examples of this kind.
There might still be some direct commissioning, and some direct (retaining) support, but the main function of such patronage was social support, in the uncertain social and legal conditions of theatres and actors.
This relatively explicit form can be seen to modulate into the process of association of particular works with particular powerful names: the patron, in effect, as dedicatee.
This was a milder form of social support, moving towards mere social recommendation.
It often did not involve economic exchange relations.
What was really being exchanged, within a specific kind of society marked by overt class  inequalities, was a hopefully mutual reputation and honour
(iv) Sponsorship
It is then necessary to distinguish this type of patronage from a fourth kind, in a period in which there were qualitatively new social relations of art, determined by the increasingly regular production of works of art as commodities for general sale.
In either form there were continuities from earlier forms of patronage, but now in more complex and more open societies.
The patrons of the first and second kinds offered hospitality, reward and (in some cases of the second kind) direct monetary exchange, but for work then specifically performed for and (where relevant) owned by them.
The patron of the third kind, offering social reputation and protection, often worked within conditions where the work was being partly or wholly offered to a paying public; the Elizabethan public theatres were in that sense fully commercial institutions.
The patron of the fourth kind, though continuing some of the earlier functions, worked more fully within a world in which the production of works of art for sale was normal.
His function was to provide early support, or early encouragement, to artists beginning to make their way in the market, or unable to sustain some particular project within it.
The typical relation was monetary, and it came to be generalized from the individual patron to the eighteenth-century form of subscription-list (prepublication).
But there was still a residue of the functions of social reputation and recommendation.
Commercial sponsorship.
This fourth form of patronage survived into conditions in which commodity and market relations had become dominant.
Indeed it can still be found in our own time, in some individual cases but also in new forms of patronage.
There is a limited sense in which some  industrial and commercial corporations have entered into patronage of the second kind, analogous to earlier courts and households, commissioning works for their own use or ownership.
But while some of these cases are of this simple kind, others are more directly involved with modern market conditions, whether as a form of investment or as a form of prestige advertising.
(v) The public as ‘patron'
Public ‘patronage’, from revenues raised by taxation, has some continuities of function and attitude with earlier forms, but some quite new definitions of function, such as the deliberate maintenance and extension of the arts as a matter of general public policy.
Many of the controversies about the new institutions which serve these purposes can be seen, on analysis, to be arguments about different forms of patronage — encouragement or intervention within and beyond the market — but also, and crucially, about distinctions between the social relations of patronage (where the public body is held merely to have replaced the court or the household or the individual patron) and the alternative social relations of a now publicly instituted art.
The most available historical models are all from the period of different forms of patronage, and it is not surprising that these have been predominant in the forms of new public bodies.
Yet there is considerable tension between such models and the fact of public revenue.
The historical models of instituted or integrated arts, as distinct from patronized arts, are mostly too far back, in such evidently different social orders, for the principles underlying them to be easy to grasp.
Yet the defining characteristic of all patronal social relations is the privileged situation of the patron.
Within varying forms of self-definition of the honours or responsibilities that go with  such privilege, the patron is defined as one who can give or withhold his commission or support.
The specific social relations of such privilege are of course derived from the social order as a whole; it is there that the patron's powers and resources are enrolled or protected; in the crudest terms, he is doing what he wishes with his own.
It is this fact, above all, which makes the patronal definition of any public body, deriving its authority and resources from the supposed general will of the society, at best controversial, at worst quite inapplicable.
Yet the habituated relations of various forms of patronage, and of artists as ‘clients’, have in practice persisted into these otherwise new forms.
Artists and markets
Historically there is a long period of overlap between patronal and market social relations in the arts.
Yet in principle they can be readily distinguished.
Production for the market involves the conception of the work of art as a commodity, and of the artist, however else he may define himself, as a particular kind of commodity producer.
But there are then crucially different phases of commodity production.
All involve production for simple monetary exchange; the work is offered for sale and is bought and thus owned.
But the social relations of artists involved partly or wholly in commodity production are in fact highly variable.
(i) Artisanal
There is the simple, early but in some areas persistent situation of the independent producer who offers his own work for direct sale.
This is usually called artisanal .
The producer is wholly dependent on the immediate market, but within its terms his work remains under his own  direction, at all stages, and he can see himself, in this sense, as independent.
(ii) Post-artisanal
The next phase of commodity production is very different, but itself has two stages.
First, the producer sells his work not directly but to a distributive intermediary, who then becomes, in a majority of cases, his factual if often occasional employer.
Then, second, the producer sells his work to a productive intermediary, and typically capitalist social relations begin to be instituted.
The intermediary invests in the purchase of a work for the purpose of profit; it is now his relations with the market which are direct.
We can see the complex relations of this crucial post-artisanal phase in, for example, the evolution of booksellers into publishers.
The phase is typically characterized by the outright purchase of the works in question.
In much of his immediate situation, the producer remains an artisan, but now in a more complex and more organized market in which he is practically dependent on intermediaries.
It is worth emphasizing that there can be significant variations, within this situation, in the productive process itself.
At one level, the producer is still offering his own product, work completed before the offer for sale.
But to the extent that such relations become normal or, in certain areas, dominant, he can in the end, basically, be offering his labour, to produce works of a certain known type.
There is great practical complexity in the various stages of transition between these essentially alternative relationships.
This is true also of that other level, at which the producer defines, to himself, the nature of his work.
This is the source of the many important and difficult arguments about the relations between the artist's responsibility to his work and his ‘responsibility’, or ‘obligation’, or ‘subjection’ to a ‘public’and to a ‘market’.
Some of these  arguments substantially repeat earlier arguments about the relations between an artist and his patron, but others, within the expansion, diffusion and relative displacement of the artist's social relations in this sense, are qualitatively new.
It is significant, for example, that the artist's claim to ‘freedom’, to ‘create as he wishes’, was much more commonly made after the institution of dominant market relations, and must be both positively and negatively related to them.
Neither the artisanal nor the post-artisanal phase of market relations in cultural production can be said to have ended.
Indeed the phases seem to be variable between specific arts.
Thus in painting, where patronal relations, in directly commissioned works (the simplest example is the portrait), have also persisted, there are still some examples of artisanal and many post-artisanal relations, the latter still often in their first phase, where a painter's relations to a gallery which sells his work are still commonly in the distributive phase.
In music, where there are still also patronal relations in commissioned works, there are still predominantly distributive post-artisanal relations in orchestral works and in traditional sheet music, while in popular music the second, productive post-artisanal phase has long been established, and there has been major movement into later phases of market relations.
In literature, though there are still cases of artisanal and distributive post-artisanal relations, productive post-artisanal relations have long been dominant, and important internal changes within them have taken much publishing into a later market phase.
These variations between arts are important in themselves and also as a reminder that the social relations of artists are closely related to the technical means of production of each specific art.
The general question of the relational effects of these means of production is discussed  in Chapter 4, but some of their institutional effects are noted here as they occur.
(iii) Market professional
The internal changes in productive post-artisanal relations in literature are especially significant in understanding the next market phase.
They are very complex in effect, since there is both increasing capitalization of the productive intermediaries — modern publishers — and increasing professionalization, of a specific kind, among writers.
The two significant indicators of these changing relations are copyright and royalty .
In this period of cultural technology, and especially in the nineteenth century, the reproducibility of print was very much ahead of most other kinds of artistic reproduction, and this made the question of property in the work acute.
A writer's productive (post-artisanal) relations with a publisher could be, and widely were, bypassed, by other publishers (domestic ‘pirates’ or foreigners) who reprinted and sold the work without reference or relation to the author.
A long struggle by writers to establish first domestic and then international copyright resulted not only in a new concept of literary property but new, or at least amended, social relationships of writers.
For although works were still passed to productive intermediaries, their general ownership tended to remain in the producer's hands.
The newly typical relationship was a negotiated contract for a specific form or period of publication, with variable clauses on its terms and duration.
As an expression of this relationship, the ‘royalty’— a specific payment on each copy of this form sold — came to replace the common earlier form of outright purchase.
Thus the writer became a participant in the direct market process of the sale of his work.
The terms of this participation have been endlessly argued about, and the  increasing practice of the advance on royalties has to some extent modified it, in restoring an element of purchase.
But the general result, for all its great unevenness between writers, was a specific kind of social relationship which can be defined as a form of professional independence within integrated and dominant market relations.
Typically, writers became involved in relations with the market as a whole, rather than with a specific productive intermediary, and this generalization of full market relations took them, in majority, beyond the post-artisanal phase and into the phase of the organized professional market.
Further intermediaries, such as literary agencies, marked this more developed phase.
Perception of the ‘market’.
In all these market phases, the producer could still be seen as an originator, though in practice, throughout, there were qualifications.
The artisan, the post-artisan in indirect distributive or productive relations and the market professional all attended necessarily, at some point, though in remarkably varying degrees, to that form of demand or projected demand which was mediated, with increasing indirectness, by the form of the actual selling relationship.
Indeed production for the market, as a purpose taking priority over any other, is widely evident in each phase, though there are many examples of producers struggling against or effectively ignoring market trends.
Culturally this interaction is crucial, for it defines the social relations of artists at a different level from that of most other kinds of production.
Characteristically it becomes difficult, but also necessary, in just this market phase, to distinguish this form of production from others with which it had analogous economic relations.
Our conventional distinctions between ‘artisan’, ‘craftsman’ and ‘artist’belong to this phase of the cultural market, but as responses to its internal difficulties.
At the root of these distinctions is an attempted differentiation between the production of one kind of object and another.
This can be expressed as a contrast between the ‘merely utilitarian’ and the ‘artistic’, or, on the other hand, between the ‘useful’and the ‘merely cultural’.
There can be no doubt that over the whole range covered by these attempted distinctions there are substantial differences of immediacy and perception of use and need.
It can indeed be argued that this has always been so, in pre-market as in market conditions.
We can construct a plausible hierarchy of material and cultural needs in which the cooking-pot or the shoe will always be more ‘needed’, and in that sense more ‘useful’, than the painting or the story or song.
But the most effective way of exploring this difficult question is not in abstract, supra-historical terms.
It is in examining the ways in which these problems of need and use are practically organized, in specific social orders.
What we then see is that the hierarchy of use and need is itself directly related to the character of the organizing productive relations.
Where it was necessary, for example, to make art-objects as a form of delineation of the governing kinship relations, or a form of practical relations with the natural world, or-as so often — as a form of the reproduction of a specific social or social-metaphysical order, the problem of hierarchy is radically different from the outset.
Indeed it is well known that societies which were very poor, by all later standards, allotted very significant time, energy and resources to the production of what would now be distinguished as art-objects.
In all the later, more organized phases of this type, at a time when the practice of art had been both distinguished and specialized, the institution of artists as part of the general social organization was still, as we have seen, normal.
The exceptional difficulty of the place of ‘cultural’ production in modern societies can then in its turn be  examined in terms of its relations to the general productive order.
And here there is at once a difficulty, in that the general productive order, throughout the centuries of the development of capitalism, has been predominantly defined by the market, and ‘cultural production’, as we have seen, has been increasingly assimilated to its terms, yet any full identity between cultural production and general production has been to an important extent resisted, one of the forms of this resistance being the distinctions between ‘artisan’, ‘craftsman’ and ‘artist’, and in an important related form the distinction between ‘objects of utility’and ‘objects of art’.
Thus it would be true to say that the source of these modern difficulties is indeed the market economy, but on the other hand, on the evidence of the attempts at distinctions, it would not be true — it would in fact be seriously reductive — to say that the general market order has transformed all cultural production into a market-commodity type.
For while the earlier forms of patronal relations are in general residual from more culturally integrated societies, many of the later forms are precisely interventions either within, or at times against and beyond, normal market forces.
We are then faced, not for the first time in the analysis of societies economically based on capitalist modes of production, with certain significant asymmetries between the social relations of the dominant productive mode and other relations within the general social and cultural order.
These should not be exaggerated.
Most relations of cultural production have indeed been assimilated to the terms of the developing market.
But some have not, and it is significant that these are defended in terms of types of production which are important ‘in and for themselves’.
On this basis they are distinguished from ‘production’ by the difficult specialization of ‘creative activities’.
At the level of definitions, this has never been satisfactory.
The widespread and in many cases willing and eager involvement of cultural producers in what are really quite normal market relationships has always cut across it.
But this has significantly led, within each art, to further attempted distinctions between ‘commercial’ and other (‘creative’, ‘authentic’) forms of the same manifest practice.
And while we should never pretend that the distinctions are adequate, in their usually rather complacent conventional forms, it would be quite wrong to disregard the actual or attempted social relations, of an alternative kind, which the attempts at differentiation, and the initiatives and marginal institutions corresponding to them, undoubtedly represent.
(iv) Corporate professional
The question has become more acute in the latest phase of market relations, which is that of the corporate.
This phase is mainly associated with very important developments in the means of cultural production, and especially the use of new media.
But in one or two areas the corporate development is not wholly related to these.
In writing, for example, the field of market relations was affected by new kinds of combine and corporate development in magazine and newspaper publishing.
Social relations typical of the integrated professional market persisted into this phase, but there was also a significant development of new social relations, for some kinds of writer, who were now effectively or wholly employed within the new corporate structures.
This tendency has steadily increased, and alongside it there has been a different but related tendency, as combine and corporate ownership have become much more common in book publishing.
Again, here, the social relationships of the professional market have persisted, but there has been a significant and growing development of  some new relations, within an increasingly capitalized corporate sector.
These relations turn on the question of the origin of production.
In some earlier relations, notably those of the productive post-artisanal and the market professional, it indeed quite often happened that a work originated in a commission, from a bookseller or publisher.
But in the corporate structure this has become very much more common, in relation to a highly organized and fully capitalized market in which the direct commissioning of planned saleable products has become a normal mode.
It is virtually impossible to estimate the proportion of such relations, within books as a whole, since some and perhaps much commissioning is still, in cultural terms, governed by considerations of what authors would in any case have wished to write.
But in an important and rising number of cases, the relations are not really of this kind.
The dominance of the corporate publishing sector is such that for many writers the most available social relations are those of employment in this sense, with the ideas for books coming from new professional intermediaries (publishers' editors) within the market structure, and authors being employed to execute them.
Relations then vary from diverse occasional employment, still not far from the situation of the market professional, to quite new relations, through retainers and serial contracts, in which the writer becomes, in effect, the employed and (with modifications such as royalties) salaried professional.
New media
But of course the most important cases of the rise of the salaried professional in cultural production have occurred in the institutions of the new media, in which integrated social production became normal and necessary.
Cinema, radio and television are the outstanding examples, in which capitalist and some non-capitalist corporations organize production from the beginning and offer salaried or contracted employment within these terms.
The great cultural importance of these new media has made these social relations, in the late twentieth century, dominant and even typical.
There is then a qualitative change from earlier socio-cultural relations, even within the earlier market phases.
For the effective (if of course never absolute) origin of cultural production is now centrally sited within the corporate market.
The scale of capital involved, and the dependence on more complex and specialized means of production and distribution, have to an important extent blocked access to these media in older artisanal, post-artisanal and even market professional terms, and imposed predominant conditions of corporate employment.
This does not mean, of course, that older forms of relation have not survived elsewhere.
In the older arts of painting and sculpture, orchestral music and, as we have seen, some writing, the complex relations of the individual producer (and originator) have persisted.
But in music, for example, these older relations have become minor by comparison with the new corporate institutions of popular music, based on the new technologies of disc and cassette, where the corporate capitalist mode is decisive.
Advertising.
We should note also a form of cultural production which is highly specific to the phase of the corporate market: what is still called ‘advertising’.
In earlier phases of a market society some advertising, usually specific or classified, existed in the margins of other cultural institutions, and drew on some general cultural skills.
But from the period of corporate organization, beginning in the press in the late nineteenth century, it became, in specific ways, a form of cultural production in  itself.
Advertising agencies which had begun by booking insertions became, in the twentieth century, institutions of a form of cultural production, wholly governed by the organized market.
It is interesting that producers within advertising agencies were quick to claim the title ‘creative’.
By the late twentieth century, with the increasing dependence of many other cultural institutions on revenue or sponsorship from this specific market institution, ‘advertising’ had become a quite new cultural phenomenon and was characteristically being extended into areas of social, economic and explicitly political values, as a new kind of corporate cultural institution.
Thus the late phases of a market culture are very different from its early phases.
Its institutions, in their increasing centrality, have moved towards a situation in which it, could again be said (but with the qualitative difference of an epochal change) that cultural institutions are integral parts of the general social organization.
In a modern capitalist economy, and its characteristic kind of social order, the cultural institutions of press and publishing, cinema, radio, television and the record industry, are no longer, as in earlier market phases, marginal or minor, but, both in themselves and in their frequent interlock or integration with other productive institutions, are parts of the whole social and economic organization at its most general and pervasive.
Post-market institutions
Yet modern cultural institutions cannot be understood exclusively in terms of the corporate market and the persistence of some earlier market forms.
Three kinds of post-market institutions have become important; they can be distinguished as the modern patronal, the intermediate  and the governmental.
Their incidence varies within different societies at comparable stages of general development.
Modern patronal and intermediate
The modern patronal is common in advanced capitalist societies.
Certain arts which are not profitable or even viable in market terms are sustained by specific institutions such as foundations, by organizations of subscribers, and still by some private patronage.
Intermediate between this and full governmental institutions are bodies wholly or significantly financed from the public revenue (as in Great Britain the Arts Council) which fund certain arts.
Or in the same general category there are institutions like some of those in broadcasting (in Great Britain the BBC) which depend on one form or another of public revenue but which direct their own production.
Social relations of producers to the modern patronal and intermediate institutions range from the patronal, through the post-artisanal and professional, to (as in most broadcasting) corporate employment.
Governmental
In some capitalist societies, and in most post-capitalist societies, cultural institutions have become departments of state, especially in the modern media.
There is a variety of detailed arrangements, but the typical relations of producers in these conditions are those of state-corporate employees, or in some cases state rather than market professionals.
Conditions then vary from those in which the cultural institutions and their producers are wholly subordinated to general state policy — a condition often made harsher by full or attempted monopoly of all means of cultural production — to more nuanced situations in which, while general policy direction is exercised, the practical  relations are not significantly different from those in modern patronal and intermediate bodies, which of course also, in varying ways, have general policy directions in accordance with the social order in which they are working.
Conclusion
The sociology of culture, at this level of institutions, has then to take account of both historical and contemporary diversity.
It is important to retain the full range of provisional classification of institutions and types of relations, as the means to specific analysis, rather than to work with the (pre-sociological) formulas of ‘the artist’ and ‘his public’, or ‘the cultural superstructure’and ‘the economic base’.
Indeed it is at once the changing social history and the complex sociology of the changing institutions and relations which take us beyond these formulas to the possibility of more precise analysis.
Formations
In much work in the sociology of culture, we find that we have to deal not only with general institutions and their typical relations, but also with forms of organization and self-organization which seem much closer to cultural production.
Early forms of internal organization
We have already noticed some early examples of this, in such cases as the internal organization of the bardic orders, which were concerned not only with social position and relations, but with the practice (at several stages, the rules) of the art itself.
However strange this may seem within the modern formula of the artist as free creative individual, there can be no real doubt that major art, of certain kinds, was produced and sustained in these ways.
There is a direct relation, of course, between this strict form of internal organization and the integration of its order within the general social order.
Significant breaks from the rules, or the opposite cases of their increasing formalization and rigidity, can often be related to periods of change or crisis in this general relationship.
Bardic rules
Thus it was in the period of the Welsh court poets (the Gogynfeirdd ), at a time of severe political crisis under the encroachments of English power in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, that the strictest regulation and formalization (in most people's opinion, also, the isolation and specialization) of the rules of poetic composition can be found.
A decisive break from the narrowness of these rules came in the fourteenth century, with Dafydd ap Gwilym, in a period marked both by increasing interaction with a more general European culture, after the loss of political independence, and yet, creatively, by a new ‘national’ poetry, itself governed by more flexible but still clear internal rules (the cywydd metre).
The internal social organization of the poets changed in the same period as this specific artistic change.
Guilds
An important and different form of internal organization, distinct from at least the main phases of the bardic orders, is the craft guild , which was very common in later medieval society.
This marked a shift from the integrated singular order within which the bardic and similar orders were first defined, though in its disputed origins the guild may once have been close to them.
By the time we have adequate records, the craft guild can be seen emerging from the lodge of craftsmen working together on a project.
It became at once more general and more regulated.
In an increasingly mercantile society, the craft guild served a variety of functions, social, religious and economic.
Some of its most significant early relations were with the guild merchant , which sought to regulate the conditions of urban trade.
The craft guild, or ‘mistery’ or ‘company’, organized the artisans of a particular craft, and in most cases provided specifically for craft training and for the maintenance of  craft standards.
In the case of what we would now distinguish as ‘arts’, an early example is the fourteenth-century Florentine guild, actually that of the surgeon apothecaries but including painters from an overlap of working materials.
A special branch for artists, with compulsory membership, was formed in 1360.
In addition to this kind of specific organization, guilds in some societies were involved in more general cultural production.
The most important example in England is that of the urban dramatic festivals, of cycles of religious ‘mystery’ plays, where responsibility for production was distributed among the craft guilds.
In changing conditions of trade, the self-management of many of the early guilds gave way to restrictive and eventually unacceptable forms of internal dominance and privilege.
The master-apprentice system, which was always inherent, developed from a craft emphasis to what was in the end an unmistakeable class emphasis, with new restrictions, privileges and financial qualifications attached to mastership.
There were attempted revivals of the earlier spirit, as in the compagnonnage movement of self-organizing journeymen.
But in the case of most crafts there was a long and complex development towards the radically different organization of the craft or trade union , which belongs to the epoch of predominantly capitalist development and social relations.
Even along this road, however, many of the old ‘guilds’ had become, in effect, the organizations of employing ‘masters’— the craft status shifted to the economic status — and these were themselves in complex relations with the development of capitalist trade, which was breaking down the kind of autonomy from which the guilds, new and old, had derived their monopoly.
Academes
In the case of what we now call ‘the arts’, and above all in painting and sculpture, a different form of organization developed, in the academy .
This emergence marks two shifts: first, the declining importance of the church as the main patron for art, which produced a more secular emphasis — the guilds, it will be remembered, had almost always included a specifically religious element; and, second, an increasing differentiation of ‘arts’ from ‘crafts’.
The earlier specification of the ‘liberal arts’ had been primarily of branches of knowledge.
The usual list was grammar, rhetoric and dialectic; music, arithmetic, geometry and astronomy — where only music and some elements of grammar and rhetoric would now be recognized as ‘arts’.
The shift among painters and sculptors, who had been in the craft guilds, is most clearly marked in the adoption of the term ‘academy’ from the place of the famous school of Plato.
This had already been widely adopted as the name of a higher school.
This specifically educational definition has of course continued, but its adoption by artists marks a significant shift.
On the one hand it led to the concept of art education rather than craft training, with the professor-student relationship substituted for that of the master-apprentice.
On the other hand, it marked the new and broadly secular movement towards the independent status of ‘arts and learning’; indeed, though the term is not yet used, of ‘culture’.
As a result of these two tendencies, the academy, historically, had a range of functions and was often internally diverse.
Thus there was an academy of practising poets in Toulouse in the early fourteenth century.
There was an informal academy of painters and sculptors, attended by Michelangelo, in Florence at the turn from the fifteenth to the sixteenth century.
There was the later, more famous and (under ducal patronage) more recognized,Accademia del Disegno of Vasari, from 1563.
Many subsequent academies of this kind were founded, usually with an increasingly formal organization of instruction.
But also, from its early stages, the academy could be either a general or, increasingly, a specialized learned society; there are many such examples, from the thirteenth century onwards, in speculative philosophy, literature and language, and the sciences.
Exhibitions
The subsequent development of academies is then very complex.
One direct line is the emergence from the art teaching academies of the annual exhibition, begun in Paris in 1667 and widely imitated throughout Europe.
This eventually set a pattern of official exhibition, from which, as we shall see, there were many crucial later breaks.
But this type of development was more evident in the centralized royal states.
In other societies — for example, the Netherlands — forms of guild organization persisted, and artists worked for the market through the new intermediaries, the dealers.
Cultural effects of academies
Where the academies were powerful, there was a complex overlap between social position and artistic prestige.
By the mid-eighteenth century there were powerful complaints against their authority, both in general social terms and because of their embodiment of ‘academicism’ in art: the teaching of principles and rules which, it was argued, worked against the practice of original art.
This situation and its controversies have continued, but in general, from the eighteenth century, increasingly specialized academies came through as institutions for teaching many of the arts.
The learned and scientific academies took in general a  different course, since education in their disciplines was predominantly centred in the universities.
Professional societies
Meanwhile, alongside the later phases of the academy, there was an important new phase of internal cultural organization,— corresponding to the emergence of the market professional.
The new type of ‘professional society’ was founded primarily to regulate the new economic arrangements.
There is a typical example among writers, seeking to protect copyright and to negotiate general contract conditions.
By the twentieth century many of these were beginning to move, through much internal controversy about the social-class implications, to a kind of trade-union status and function.
This movement has been especially evident under the pressure of economic conditions in an increasingly corporate market.
But then it is characteristic of this latest phase that the professional society is primarily a business organization.
This highlights the fact that there had been a practical separation between the organizations of business and artistic concerns, which in earlier types of organization had often seemed to be, and in many cases clearly were, united.
‘Movements’
It is at this point that we need to introduce the concept of a quite different type of cultural formation, in which artists come together in the common pursuit of some specific artistic aim.
Such formations, under the names of ‘movement’, ‘school’, ‘circle’ and so on, or under the taken or given label of a specific ‘ism’, are so important in cultural history, and especially modern cultural history, that they present a special, difficult, yet unavoidable problem in  social analysis.
What then are these specific artistic formations?
Movements as formations
The initial problem is in the terms themselves, since some of the most common descriptions of relatively informal groups, notably ‘school’, have been shared, often by deliberate if critical imitation, with more formal institutions.
Yet this complexity of terms does no more than represent, indeed often under-represent, the complexity of the actual history.
'Schools'
Thus a ‘school’ can be literally that, in its modern sense: an institution in which there are a master and pupils, whose characteristic work can be identified.
This is one main use in, for example, descriptions of tendencies in classical Greek philosophy.
But the term was also available for broader or more informal tendencies.
The original Greek word had passed from meaning ‘leisure’ to the ‘employment of leisure in disputation’and from that to both the institutional meaning and the more general description of a tendency.
Thus a ‘school’ can be a general tendency, often identified by the name of a particular ‘master’, who need not, however, be in direct institutional or even otherwise direct relations with his ‘pupils’or ‘disciples’.
But also, broadening the other way, a ‘school’ can be a whole body of teachers of a discipline, in a particular place, and then by no means necessarily a specific tendency or body of doctrine.
In universities, where the term became common for the body of teachers of a subject, there are examples both of the specifying tendency and of the neutral institutional description.
In painting in Renaissance Italy, where the term ‘school’ is now commonly used in classification, the crux of the definition is usually a particular city — Florence or Venice — within which certain identifiable styles and techniques were developed, sometimes by direct teaching, at other times by the more general facts of civic association and mutual influence.
In this range of senses, we find forms of association of artists which have continued to be important.
Moreover, beyond the identifiable forms of actual association, an additional emphasis has been given by the methodology of most forms of cultural historiography, which distinguish and classify ‘schools’ or more general ‘movements’and ‘tendencies’.
It is clear that this can have no retrospective effect on the actual forms of association, but it can have important other effects, since in presenting the history of philosophy or painting in this way it suggests forms of identification or association to new contributors.
Yet while there is both an actual continuity of forms and this kind of imputed or suggested continuity, it is clear that there are also new social forms and variations of received forms.
Some of these can be directly related to changes in the general social relations of cultural production.
'Independents'
The case of new organizations of painters is particularly instructive.
The vast number of self-instituted independent organizations in the nineteenth century, and into the twentieth century, can in many cases be directly related to two related factors: the development of the teaching academy, with its tendency to prescribe rules; and the greatly increased importance of the exhibition, within the market conditions which had succeeded patronage.
Breakaway groups
We can attach variable importance to either factor, in each  individual case, but in their outcome they are often inextricably fused.
While the academies monopolized exhibitions, there would always be arguments about selection and the principles of selection.
Thus the breakaway group, organizing its own exhibition, was an obvious initiative.
There are very many such cases, the most famous being the Salon des Refuses , of 1863, at which Manet, Pissarro and Cezanne exhibited.
In this case much of the work shown was subsequently (and through this emphasis) identified as an autonomous stylistic movement in art, and of course this was often likely to be the case.
It is so in the famous Sezession in Vienna in 1897, in relation to art nouveau , and Die Brucke , from 1905, in relation to expressionism.
Specializing group
On the other hand there are cases, such as the English Free Society of Artists, in the late eighteenth century, in which the fact of independent exhibition was more important than any actual innovation in style.
There are also many cases in which the break was mainly functional, within the general practice, to give emphasis to, or to redress academic neglect of, engravers, watercolourists and so on.
In yet other cases, such as the early-nineteenth-century German Brotherhood of St Luke, the emphasis was on the breakaway from academic training towards a workshop kind of organization, more centred on training and development than on exhibition.
Types of group organization
The sociology of such groups is already complex, but it is important that in most cases in this phase some kind of organization was instituted; indeed there were often constitutional rules.
The cases in which there was no constitution, or lesser formality of organization, merge into  types of association which are more characteristic of the twentieth century (though some of the earlier forms have continued).
Here the break is more explicitly towards a particular style or more general cultural position.
It may include such devices as collective exhibition or similar public manifestations, but it often does not include actual membership of anything.
It is a looser form of group association, primarily defined by shared theory and practice, and its immediate social relations are often not easy to distinguish from those of a group of friends who share common interests.
The sociology of such groups, internally considered, is then obviously difficult, in any orthodox terms.
Yet a general sociology of the phase in which the formation of such groups can be seen as culturally distinctive, alongside more formal and established organizations, is at once necessary and fascinating.
Some principles of independent formations
It is obviously easier to offer social analysis of a formal institution, with its regularized type of internal organization, and its commonly regulated relations to the rest of society, than even to begin analysis of the relatively informal associations which have been so important in modern cultural life.
There are particular methodological difficulties, beyond the level of relative formality or informality.
Such cultural groups are typically small in numbers, and offer little opportunity for reliable statistical analysis, of the kind which is normal for larger institutions and groups.
This is why, among other reasons, orthodox sociology has found it (apparently) easier to analyse cultural effects, where large numbers and control groups are available, than to analyse  the social relations of cultural production.
Indeed this emphasis has persisted into a period where, in the new media, large-scale organizations are in fact available for analysis.
It might then be tempting to pass straight to this later type of analysis, of the newspaper office, the publishing combine, the broadcasting company, the film corporation; indeed such work is necessary.
But while there has been little analysis of the social relations of earlier, equally formal though smaller, or less formal and indeed informal institutions and associations, there ought to be some theoretical hesitation.
For it is characteristic of the social relations of any cultural production that there is a problem about the definition of the purpose of any particular organization.
The distinction must not be too sharply drawn; similar problems occur in the analysis of educational or religious organizations.
But there is usually an effective distinction from the institutions of simple commodity production even where the cultural work is quite clearly a commodity it is almost always, and often justly, also described in very different terms — and from the institutions or power and administration, in which purposes and objectives are inherent.
As we distinguish this specific character of cultural production we should hesitate before attempting sociological analysis of modern cultural corporations, which in other respects resemble contemporary large-scale manufacturing and administrative organizations.
Certain principles of analysis have to be learned in work on other types of cultural formation, and on the relations between formal and informal, established and breakaway formations, before the problems which are being negotiated and at times overridden in the combines and corporations can be substantively rather than merely organizationally assessed (see pages 116ff below).
Yet the difficulties of method then return.
To the  relatively small numbers involved in many cultural organizations and associations we must add the characteristic of relatively short, often extremely short, duration.
Among the relatively or wholly informal groups and associations, the rapidity of formation and dissolution, the complexity of internal breaks and of fusions, can seem quite bewildering.
Yet this is no reason for ignoring what, taken as a whole process, is so general a social fact.
Types of modern cultural formation
In full awareness of these difficulties, some principles of an appropriate kind of analysis can be suggested and briefly exemplified.
Thus it is an evident advance on a mere empirical listing of successive ‘movements’ or ‘isms’, which then moves away to an unlocated discussion of ‘styles’, to attempt to identify two factors: the internal organization of the particular formation; and its proposed and actual relations to other organizations in the same field and to society more generally.
Internal organization
We have already discussed several examples of internal organization, and can now provisionally classify them as follows:
i
those based on formal membership , with varying modes of internal authority or decision, and of constitution and election;
ii
those not based on formal membership, but organized around some collective public manifestation , such as an exhibition, a group press or periodical, or an explicit manifesto;
iii
those not based on formal membership or any sustained collective public manifestation, but in which there is conscious association or group identification , either informally or occasionally manifested, or at times limited to immediate working or more general relations.
An example of (i), following many earlier kinds of guild, compagnonnage and brotherhood, is the German Brotherhood (later Order ) of St Luke.
An example of (ii) is the English Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, with its periodical The Germ , or the German Der Blaue Reiter , with a book of the same title (by one of its founders, Marc) and a collective exhibition.
An example of (iii) is the French Nabis , who met regularly but otherwise collaborated only in a private gallery exhibition.
These general classifications, of course with some cases of overlap, take us some way in the analysis of groups based on a single art or on two or three related arts.
They are all in this sense working organizations, whether or not they proclaim other more general objectives.
Many cultural formations have of course been restricted in this way.
But already in some nineteenth-century cases, and commonly in the twentieth century, a group has formed around some much more general programme, including many or indeed all arts, and often additionally, in relation to this, some very general cultural (and often ‘political’) position.
The best examples are the Futurists , from 1909, bringing together painters, sculptors and writers but also proclaiming general (though aesthetically related) positions on the machine, war and danger, and the necessary destruction of the past; the Surrealists , from 1922, again bringing together painters and writers, but also relating their work, and justifying it, in terms of general positions on the unconscious, the irrational and dream-activity.
Clearly these are still working groups, usually of type (ii), with a manifesto, a periodical and exhibitions, but there has also been a change of some kind in their social relations, and this can best be understood by the second kind of analysis, of the proposed and actual relations with all those beyond the group.
External relations
We can provisionally classify types of external relations in cultural formations as follows:
(a)Specializing , as in the cases of sustaining or promoting work in a particular medium or branch of an art, and in some circumstances a particular style;
(b)alternative , as in the cases of the provision of alternative facilities for the production, exhibition or publication of certain kinds of work, where it is believed that existing institutions exclude or tend to exclude these;
(c)oppositional , in which the cases represented by (b) are raised to active opposition to the established institutions, or more generally to the conditions within which these exist.
An example of (a) at its simplest is the English Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers , from 1880, or, with some complications, the contemporary English Ruralists.
Examples of (b) range from the New English Art Club of 1885 to the Société des Artistes Indépendants of 1884; such cases are especially numerous.
Examples of (c) include the Futurists , the Dadaists and the Surrealists .
There are many complex problems of interpretation, in specific cases, within these general terms.
Yet it is of the greatest importance to make such distinctions within what is normally either an unanalysed category — free cultural association — or at best an indiscriminate range.
Thus it is only the specializing groups which fit easily into the familiar category of an open or plural society.
Such groups can properly be described in terms of free association within a generally accepted cultural diversity, though it must be noted that even here, in many cases, the diversity is established by these initiatives, rather than prepared for them, and that in the cases of particular branches of an art the initiatives often involve significant local conflict.
The genuinely alternative groups go beyond this, since  their critique of the available established institutions, usually in the same general kind of cultural activity, is at least implicit, and is often, as in the typical cases of the secessions, explicit and direct.
While the new group can be satisfied by the establishment of alternative facilities, which give it public presence and identity, its distinction from oppositional groups is reasonably clear.
Yet it has often happened that attacks on such alternative groups, by established opinion, have shifted them into conscious opposition as distinct from conscious dissent or the offering of a conscious alternative.
However, even in these cases, there is an important difference from the fully oppositional groups, which characteristically begin with attacks on prevailing art forms and cultural institutions, and often with further attacks on the general conditions which are believed to be sustaining them.
There is no obviously regular relation, in this range of formations, between types of internal organization and types of external relation.
It is often the case that the specializing groups are of type (i), with formal membership, but they have also been of types (ii) and (iii).
Most alternative and oppositional groups have been of type (ii), though there are early cases of type (i) and some later cases of type (iii).
But then the problem of the relation between internal and external modes cannot be considered at this formal level only.
It has to be reinserted into questions of historical change and of the character of the general social order.
Fractions, dissidents and rebels
There appears to be a very marked increase of every kind of independent cultural formation from the middle of the  nineteenth century.
The proliferation of independent specializing groups can be largely explained in terms of two kinds of development, themselves related: first, the increasing organization and specialization of the market, including its emphasis on the division of labour; second, the growth of a liberal idea of society and its culture, with a corresponding expectation or tolerance of diverse kinds of work.
The formation of specialized groups, by trade or by style or tendency, served either to organize and regulate market relations or to bring a body of work to public attention.
Often, of course, these were different forms of the same general relations, though the latter cannot be reduced to the former, in all or even a majority of cases.
The alternative and oppositional groups evidently owe something, perhaps much, to the same general conditions.
But the (often severe) tensions and conflicts so evident in their formation make it impossible to rest on explanations m market and liberal terms.
We have to note, first, an increasing generalization and development of the idea that the practice and values of art are neglected by, or have to be distinguished from, or are superior or hostile to the dominant values of ‘modern’ society.
This range of ideas is complex, and its social history equally so.
Its social bases include:(i) the crisis, for many artists, of the transition from patronage to the market;(ii) the crisis, in certain arts, of the transition from handwork to machine production (see Chapter 4, below);(iii) crises within both patronage and the market, in a period of intense and general social conflict;(iv) the attachment of certain groups to a pre-capitalist and/or pre-democratic social order, in which some arts had been accorded privilege within a general privilege;(v) the attachment of other groups to the democratization of the social order, as part of the process of general liberation and human enrichment to which the arts, if they were allowed, could contribute:(vi) a more general  opposition, often overlapping and even seeming to unite these diverse political views, to the practices and values of a ‘commercial’ and ‘mechanical’civilization, from which the practice and values of the arts could be distinguished.
The period in which these ideas were becoming general, from the late eighteenth century, is also the period of the attempted distinction between (‘external’)‘civilization’ and (‘internal’or ‘human’)‘culture’.
It is moreover the period of the newly general modem meanings of ‘the arts’ and ‘the artist’, as terms indicating more than specific practices and practitioners and now centrally including conceptions of general (and then often alternative or oppositional) values.
The independent formations, alternative and oppositional, are directly related to this complex process and set of ideas.
Yet the possibility of actually establishing effective independent formations depended, obviously, on general social conditions.
This is why, though the ideas were becoming common from the late eighteenth century, effective alternative and oppositional formations became common only in the second half of the nineteenth century and increased markedly towards the end of the century.
One factor in this development, within particular societies, was change in the internal structure of the dominant classes.
Within aristocratic and mercantile societies, conflicts about style and tendency, as well as more general social and economic tensions and conflicts in arts practice, were often resolved, or could be attempted to be resolved, by movement from one patron or kind of patron or intermediary to another.
This continued, obviously, in early market conditions.
But in the new circumstances of established art institutions, fundamentally in relation to an established arts market, the movement towards independent associative formations was inevitable.
Recurrent problems of the imposition or privilege of certain styles  and tendencies, of methods of selection and of publicity, and then of both general and commercial advantage, might in some cases (usually unsuccessfully) be individually negotiated.
But they were much more readily negotiable through association, which was already a basic general tendency in most other social activities.
Yet the new formations were by no means always.
and in many cases not at all, defensive.
And this m turn depended on the emergence, within the dominant social order itself, of actual or potential supportive groups.
It is at this point, in critical relation to some of the independent groups, that we must introduce the concept of the class fraction .
Class fractions
Some examples may clarify this inherently difficult concept.
We can look at three important English cultural formations: Godwin and his circle, in the late eighteenth century; the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, in the mid nineteenth century; and the Bloomsbury Group, in the early twentieth century.
We must remember, first, that a social class is by no means always culturally monolithic.
In this as in other respects particular groups within a class may be rising or falling in importance, according to the general development of the class and the society.
Moreover, groups within a class may have alternative (received or developed) cultural, often religious, affiliations which are not characteristic of the class as a whole.
Again, in any established class, there are processes of internal differentiation, often by types of work.
From all these situations, possible alternative bases for variations in cultural production can exist.
Additionally, there is a basis for variations in the changing relations between a particular class and other classes.
Godwin and his circle
What is now commonly described, in English cultural history, as ‘William Godwin and his Circle’, is an especially interesting example, both substantially and as a problem in the analysis of formations.
From its familiar title it indicates something like a ‘school’, centred on the ideas of one writer, and this is not unreasonable, since in the 1790s there were conscious ‘Godwinians’ and Godwin's best known work,Political Justice , was widely and directly influential.
Yet it is soon clear that we have to see Godwin himself within a much wider and more general social formation.
This can be directly defined in two ways: first, as the radical wing of English religious dissent, moving towards rationalism; second, as a radical political grouping, concerned with parliamentary reform, the extension of education and the removal of obstacles to free intellectual inquiry.
This general formation is widely evident from the 1770s, and is directly connected with the most progressive elements of the industrial bourgeoisie, with their attachments to free enquiry and to a rational science.
Thus, within the bourgeoisie as a whole, we find a particular formation which (a) is rising in importance and (b) has distinct religious and intellectual affiliations.
This wide formation then encountered a particular crisis, of internal relations but especially of external relations with other classes and with the dominant social order, in the specific historical situation of responses to the French Revolution.
The most enthusiastic defenders of the revolution, and advocates of comparable political changes in England, were to be found mainly here.
Yet what had previously been an alternative tendency within the general social order, and in some respects a central tendency within the rising industrial bourgeoisie, was now, in this crisis, shifted into an oppositional tendency.
Its explicit political  arguments were met not only by counter-arguments but by direct State repression, culminating in 1794.
It was within this crisis of the broader social formation that the particular cultural formation of the circle around Godwin became significant.
As a cultural formation it was of type (iii), though there were overlaps to membership of political societies, within the broad formation (e.g., the Revolution Society).
But while its range of activities and interests was broad, its cultural identity can best be defined in a particular cultural form, which was in effect a new kind of novel.
The intellectual principles which were common to the broad formation — open rational inquiry, the development of morality through education, opposition to oppression and to arbitrary laws — were specifically composed into novels which integrated individual lives and social and moral circumstances by a new formal integration of ‘character’ and ‘plot’, with the founding assumption that character and action grew together out of circumstances and could be altered only by their general alteration.
Elisabeth Inchbald's A Simple Story (1791), Thomas Holcroft's Anna St Ives (1792) and Godwin's Things as They Are (Caleb Williams)(1794) are major examples, and we can associate with these Mary Wollstonecraft's unfinished The Wrongs of Woman 1798).
The cultural formation, at this level, is still alternative, but in the crisis of those years it was both necessarily involved in political activities, with direct and dangerous consequences, and in an overlap between what might in a different period be seen as separate kinds of practice; as Godwin justly observed in 1794, ‘the humble novelist might be shown to be constructively a traitor’.
In fact, this crisis directly entered the form, as a crisis of the principles underlying the formation, in Godwin's two (radically different endings to Things as They Are , of which the  latter, written at the time of greatest danger, marks the transition to a new and more subjective form.
Thus the alternative formation, forced by prejudice and repression into opposition, became again alternative, by an internal change and adaptation.
Godwin and his circle, after this shift (1794–7), have a quite different cultural importance, with Godwin relatively isolated but with continuing influence on a new formation — that around Shelley, who married the daughter of Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft.
But the authors of Queen Mab and of Frankenstein , between 1810 and 1820, belong to a distinct and different formation.
The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood
The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood is at first sight a much simpler kind of formation.
Founded by three young painters in I 848, it published a periodical (The Germ , 1850) and proclaimed common artistic principles: a rejection of academic conventions, and an attachment to ‘attentive observation of inexhaustible nature’.
As often happens in such cases, a distinct style was evolved during the early stages of each painter's development, but by the time of their full development they had diverged.
Yet, in the most significant period, a set of shared attitudes to painting and to poetry, and through these to more general cultural questions, was distinctly established.
By contrast with Godwin and his circle, who grew out of a broad and rising general formation, at first not in critical relations with its own class, the Pre-Raphaelites, who were in majority from families of the commercial bourgeoisie, were in conscious opposition to the main cultural tendencies of their class, though they may finally be seen as articulating and expressing them.
In fact, they found, in majority, commercial bourgeois (usually provincial) patrons, to whom their naturalism was acceptable.
But this  naturalism was mixed, from the beginning, with an explicit ‘medievalism’: an attachment to a certain romantic and decorative kind of beauty, which was also — and in the end very explicitly — a critique of the ugliness of nineteenth-century commercial and industrial civilization.
At this point, inevitably, they were dissidents from their class, and in one sense rebels against it, but in a specializing way, in that they found in the arts of painting and poetry an alternative to the dominant social and cultural order.
With this sense of a specialized alternative went a certain set of alternative moral and social attitudes, much more open and relaxed (‘bohemian’) than the norms of their class.
Although the early work of the Pre-Raphaelites was heavily criticized, by established opinion, they came through, in majority, as the established painters of an immediately succeeding generation.
This often though by no means invariably happens with such formations.
In this case it was probably a matter of a commercial bourgeoisie, itself still rising in importance, which had not yet found its styles in art.
Yet, while this may be generally true, there were other elements in the original position, involving a more thorough opposition to commercial modes and alongside this position attitudes to manual labour, and to the practice of arts and crafts.
This can be seen most notably in William Morris, who began under the influence of the group and in much of his practice clearly stayed within their cultural formation, yet who at a later period (the 1880s) developed the dissent from commercial civilization into outright opposition to the whole capitalist order.
By the time of that development, however, there was a linkage with other formations, mainly political (socialist) in the quite different social situation of the 1880s, and the specifics of the Pre-Raphaelite formation, though influential, lay far behind.
Bloomsbury
Godwin and his circle had grown out of a relatively broad tendency within the rising industrial bourgeoisie, but was then, as a specific formation, forced into crisis — into a dissidence verging on rebellion — within a general crisis of the social order, itself still politically directed by another class, the ruling landed aristocracy.
The Pre-Raphaelites were a specializing formation with ambiguous and eventually alternative relations with a rising commercial bourgeoisie: dissident but at some levels representative of their still forming cultural (decorative) intentions.
The later phase, around Morris, belongs to a different phase of the social order, defined primarily by relations with a more organized working class.
The cultural formation we know as Bloomsbury is very different from both.
It is especially this formation which enables us to define the difficult concept of a fraction.
‘Bloomsbury’ is clearly a formation of type (iii).
Indeed its members often denied that they belonged to any ‘group’; they were, they said, primarily friends, with certain family connections, who found some definition (and their group name) from the district of London where a number of them lived.
There is no need to deny these elements of their self-description; indeed it is important to recognize that certain cultural formations occur in exactly this way.
Yet we do not have to look far into Bloomsbury as an active group to find some of the more fundamental features of an authentic cultural formation.
Thus they were, in majority, from professional and administrative families, and grew up within the newly regularized (reformed) educational system of ‘public’ school and university.
Their leading members (Woolf, Keynes, Strachey) met at Cambridge.
The professional and administrative sectors of the now dominant social class (itself a fusion of the high bourgeoisie and the landed  aristocracy) had become increasingly important in the new social order of liberal imperialist England; indeed the educational system had been reformed, at its higher levels, primarily for their production.
The cultural interests of this general sector, defined by specific kinds of educational achievement, can be clearly distinguished from those of the directly industrial and commercial sectors of the same dominant class.
Thus they are a fraction of the ruling class in the sense both that they belong integrally to it, directly serving the dominant social order, and that they are a coherent division of it, defined by the values of a specific higher education: the possession of a general, rather than a merely national and class-bound, culture; and the practice of specific intellectual and professional skills.
It is significant, and ironic, that their twentieth-century successors were to define them as an ‘intellectual aristocracy ’.
Bloomsbury was a formation within this fraction.
It was genuinely dissident, for two reasons.
First, it expressed its values in a more absolute form.
It insisted on wholly open intellectual inquiry, and on a related entire tolerance.
It therefore found itself in opposition to what it regarded as the stupidity, incompetence and prejudice of the actual holders of political and economic power.
Second, it was based in and expressed a paradox: that the educational reform had been primarily for men; women were still relatively excluded.
The girls of the same families included in the formation by these direct relationships shared the same interests but were, in majority, beyond the immediate formative system.
Thus Bloomsbury came to criticize the dominant order over a wide range: for its militarism; for its repressive colonialism; for its unmanaged capitalism; for its sexual inequalities; for its rigidities of manners; for its hypocrisies; for its indifference to the arts.
Its view of a more civilized order involved at once the removal of unreasonable  restraints and the sensible management of the necessary political and economic framework of life.
With these conditions fulfilled, generally or for the time being locally, people would live as free and tolerant individuals, finding their deepest values in the consequent kinds of human diversity and intimacy.
Thus the extreme subjectivism of, for example, the novels of Virginia Woolf, belongs within the same formation as the economic interventionism of Keynes, who wanted not only to preserve the economic system by rationalizing it but to do this so that , within that achieved stability, the real processes of civilized life could be extended, undisturbed.
In the course of their work, which they characteristically, in the terms of their sector, did not see as collective but as a series of specialist contributions, they intersected and overlapped with other groupings and other classes.
In their critique of unmanaged capitalism and of colonialism this was especially so, and, together with the related Fabians, they had important influence on the evolution of the working-class Labour Party into a specific kind of social democracy.
In their real critique of the old order, they were also, often, both isolated and mocked.
Yet they remained, practically and culturally, a fractional formation, and this can be seen especially with the advantage of hindsight, since it is now evident that they were expressing at once the highest values of the bourgeois tradition and the necessary next phase of a bourgeois social and cultural order.
Simple and complex formations
We can all see the complexities of any specific analyses of cultural formations.
These brief examples are given, in bare outline, to indicate some possible procedures.
To the  considerations already adduced — modes of internal and of external relations — we can add a distinction, evident between the Pre-Raphaelites on the one hand and both the Godwinians and Bloomsbury on the other, between relatively simple and relatively complex formations, in terms of the area — the actual grouping of practices — which the formation represents.
Thus Bloomsbury, with its combination of writing, painting, philosophy, political theory and economics, is especially complex, at the level of practice, by comparison with the Pre-Raphaelite painters and poets.
This affects both their internal and external modes of organization.
Characteristically, the internal organization of Bloomsbury, beyond its status as a group of friends and neighbours, and its meetings to read memoirs, was a private but eventually general publishing house (the Hogarth Press) which published over its whole range.
We can see also, as between the Godwinians and Bloomsbury, that the external relations of such formations are not only a matter of internally defined intentions , but of the actual and possible relations of the whole social order.
Thus when we see the often remarkable similarity between the principles of the Godwinians and of Bloomsbury, and the external relations implied by these — a rational and tolerant group wishing to extend reason and tolerance, where necessary by radical reform — we find also that we cannot stay on this level, since the actual external relations were also determined by others .
The Godwinians were not only historically earlier, and therefore more exposed.
They were also an advanced element of a rising but not yet dominant class, as distinct from Bloomsbury's status as a fraction of dominance.
That the Godwinians were politically repressed was a function of these general class relations, as well of the severity of the historical crisis.
At another and crucial level, we find that the Godwinians  were only barely able to sustain themselves, financially, in dissent; they depended, in practice, on the general market.
In the case of Bloomsbury, changes in the general order, and especially the establishment of a solid sector of professional and intellectual employment, made independent survival much more practicable.
National and ‘paranational’ formations
The examples given so far relate to developments within a single national social order.
Such national formations have continued to be important, but in the twentieth century there has been a marked development of certain kinds of ‘international’— or, better, ‘paranational’— cultural formation.
By the mid-twentieth century this can be clearly related to the institution of an effective world market in some sectors of art, music and literature, and to the corresponding (but not always dependent) sense of larger effective cultures (‘European literature’, ‘Western music’, ‘Twentieth-century art’).
The sociology of such developments is at a different and much broader level than that of cultural formations.
Yet the broader developments were in some ways preceded by an important new kind of cultural formation which has to be distinguished from national groups.
This can be seen most readily in the development of the concept of the ‘avant garde ’.
No full social analysis of avant-garde movements has yet, to my knowledge, been undertaken, and many of the relevant facts have still to be empirically established.
But, looking broadly at various avant-garde movements between the 1890s and the 1920s, we can propose certain hypotheses which can be tested by research.
First, that the avant-garde movements have, typically, a metropolitan base (where ‘metropolitan’ must be distinguished from  both ‘urban’and ‘national capital’definitions, its key factors being a relative [especially cultural]autonomy and a degree of internationalization, itself often related to imperialism).
Second, that a high proportion of the contributors to avant-garde movements were immigrants to such a metropolis, not only from outlying national regions but from other and smaller national cultures, now often seen as culturally provincial in relation to the metropolis (e.g., the typical figure of Guillaume Apollinaire — born Wilhelm Apollinaris de Kostrovwitzki and his eventual role in Paris).
Third, that certain factors in avant-garde culture, and especially the conscious breaks from ‘traditional’ styles, have to be analysed not only in formal terms but within the sociology of metropolitan encounters and associations between immigrants who share no common language but that of the metropolis and whose other (including visual) received sign-systems have become distanced or irrelevant.
This would be a traceable social factor within the often noted innovations in attitudes to language and to the received visual significance of objects.
Fourth, that such avant-garde formations, developing specific and distanced styles within the metropolis, at once reflect and compose kinds of consciousness and practice which become increasingly relevant to a social order itself developing in the directions of metropolitan and international significance beyond the nation-state and its provinces, and of a correspondingly high cultural mobility (cf. the relations between the Paris of 1890–1930 and the New York of 1940–70).
Fifth, that the internal social conditions of a metropolis, combining at once the metropolitan concentration of wealth and the internal pluralism of its metropolitan-immigrant functions, create especially favourable supportive conditions for dissident groups.
It is not yet known whether research would confirm  these hypotheses of the character of certain distinct twentieth-century paranational cultural formations, though they provide an initial basis for considering the contradictory character of the history of the avant-garde movements: that they represent sharp and even violent breaks with received and traditional practices (a dissidence or revolt rather than a literal avant garde); and yet that they become (in ways separable from the important facts of their dilution and commercial exploitation) the dominant culture of a succeeding metropolitan and paranational period.
Formations, history and individuals
These brief examples should show at once the possibilities and the limits of formational analysis.
The limits are especially clear.
No full account of a particular formation or kind of formation can be given without extending description and analysis into general history, where the whole social order and all its classes and formations can be taken properly into account.
All that formational analysis can do is to put sociological questions to that general history and, at times, from these questions, suggest new areas for detailed research.
Again, no full account of a formation can be given without attending to individual differences inside it.
Formations of the more modern kinds may be seen to occur, typically, at points of transition and intersection within a complex social history, but the individuals who at once compose the formations and are composed by them have a further complex range of diverse positions, interests and influences, some of which are resolved (if at times only temporarily) by the formations, others of which remain as internal differences, as tensions, and often as the grounds  for subsequent divergences, breakaways, breakups and further attempted formations.
Thus no sociological analysis of formations can replace either general history or these more specific individual studies.
Yet it is still an indispensable kind of analysis, since there is normally a very wide gap between, on the one hand, general history and the associated general history of particular arts, and, on the other hand, individual studies.
It is, then, by learning to analyse the nature and the diversity of cultural formations-in close association, as is later argued, with the analysis of cultural forms — that we can move towards a more adequate understanding of the direct social processes of cultural production.
Means of Production
We have been analysing social institutions and formations in cultural production, in their variably manifest forms.
Yet it is clear that there is another kind of social history of cultural production, in its most general sense, and that this is central to its sociology.
The invention and development of the material means of cultural production is a remarkable chapter of human history, yet it is usually underplayed, by comparison with the invention and development of what are more easily seen as forms of material production, in food, tools, shelter and utilities.
Indeed a common ideological position marks this latter area off as ‘material’, by contrast with the ‘cultural’ or, in the more common emphases, the ‘artistic’or the ‘spiritual’.
Yet we do not have unreasonably to assimilate cultural practice to this area of the satisfaction of basic human needs to realize that, whatever purposes cultural practice may serve, its means of production are unarguably material.
Indeed, instead of starting from the misleading contrast between ‘material’ and ‘cultural’, we have to define two areas for analysis: first, the relations between these material means and the social forms within which they are used (this is of course a general problem in social analysis, but the discussion is limited, here, to cultural means and forms); and, second, the relations between these material  means and social forms and the specific (artistic) forms which are a manifest cultural production (these will be discussed in the succeeding chapters).
We can make, first, an important general distinction, with continuing social and sociological effects, between (i) that class of material means which depends wholly or mainly on inherent, constituted physical resources, and (ii) that other class which depends wholly or mainly on the use or transformation of non-human material objects and forces.
No history of the arts can be written without full attention to both.
The arts of spoken poetry, of song and of dance are obvious examples of the former, as are painting and sculpture of the latter.
And then what is interesting is that whatever their exact priority (which may perhaps never be determined) each of these kinds is very early indeed in human culture.
Moreover each kind has continued to be important; it is not a simple question of successive stages.
It is often said, persuasively, that men entered into social relations in the course of using or transforming the non-human material world.
But this should never carry the implication (common in some branches of theory) that no social relations were entered into in the course of using and developing inherent and constituted physical resources.
Both forms of development are already evident at an evolutionary stage, and there, as in later more consciously social development, the analytically separable processes are usually in practice inextricable.
Yet because social relations, and especially changes in social relations, are often more evident in cases of developments in the use or transformation of non-human material objects and forces, it is worth emphasizing the manifest social character of the other kind of development.
Development of inherent resources
The achievement of language, in any full sense, lies within the complex transition from the evolutionary to the social.
The development of species-inherited ‘non-verbal communication’(postures, gestures, facial expressions) into cultural forms and variations of these basic possibilities is within the same complex transition.
But even if the ‘social’ stage is moved forward (tendentiously) to the point at which these developed resources can be said to ‘already’exist, it is impossible to overlook the extraordinary social history of the institution of systems for their further cultural development.
Dance, song and speech
There is, for example, the amazing social development of all the forms of dance, over a range from complex traditional forms to prolonged professional training.
There is the same remarkable development in ways of using the human voice in singing and in certain specifically formal kinds of speech.
We can observe a familiar transition from a relatively general training, in these highly valued skills, to degrees of specialization and professionalization in more complex societies, but some forms of specialization seem to be remarkably early and, on the other hand, there are probably no societies in which relatively general training in forms of these basic skills is not attempted.
This relative generality of development is of great sociological importance, by contrast with the much more uneven and often specialized and exclusive development of forms of cultural production which depend on the use or transformation of non-human resources.
In complex societies there is a significant and often decisive unevenness, as the systems which train these inherent and  constituted resources become more professional and more masterly.
But (the more so while elements of the most general training persist) certain crucial human and social connections, or potential connections, are still there, in the shared resources of which these are developments.
It is then not at all surprising that dancing and singing, in their most general forms, have been and have remained, in complex as  in simple societies, the most widespread and popular cultural practices.
Uses of non-human means
It is when we turn to practices based (in whole or in part) on the use or transformation of non-human material objects and forces that the social relations become much more complex and variable.
We can begin with a preliminary distinction of types of such practice, as follows:
(i)combination of the use of external objects with the use of inherent physical resources, over a range from the use of paint, masks and costume in dance to the use of masks, costume and scenery in acted drama;
(ii)development of instruments of new kinds of performance, as notably in musical instruments;
(iii) selection, transformation and production of separable objects , which then carry cultural significance, as in the use of clay, metal, stone and pigment in sculpture and painting;
(iv) development of separable material systems of signification , devised for cultural significance, as most notably in writing;
(v) development of complex amplificatory, extending and reproductive technical systems , which make possible new kinds of presentation of all the preceding types, but also new kinds of presentation of practices still otherwise based on the use of inherent and constituted resources.
In the matter of social relations, the first three types are  relatively continuous with those based on inherent resources, while the fourth and fifth types introduce problems of relationship of quite new kinds.
Problems of access
There is usually some generality of access to at least some of the techniques involved in the first three types.
Where this is so, the relation between some form of general training and highly developed specialist training is not necessarily more difficult than in the comparable relation in the training of inherent physical resources.
On the other hand, as a culture becomes richer and more complex, involving many more artistic techniques developed to a high degree of specialization, the social distance of many practices becomes much greater, and there is a virtually inevitable if always complex set of divisions between participants and spectators in the various arts.
These important divisions affect the character of modern cultures, to the point where the social relations between artists and (‘their’) spectators or ‘publics’ can seem the only kind that needs to be considered.
Yet, first, that outcome of specialization which is an assumed general division between those who create and perform and those who merely receive is not significantly greater at this level of material techniques than at the level of systems of training of inherent resources.
Indeed,; second, while there are connections between at least some elementary general training and the advanced forms of professional training, and while access to these advanced forms, for those who want it, is still relatively open, the form of division between ‘artist’ and ‘public’need not be at all of a damaging kind; it is often in practice a willing and serious interchange between professionals and those interested in the highest development of these/skills.
The very different case of a generalized division, between  ‘creators’ and ‘spectators’, may in part be influenced by such relations, but is not fully generated or confirmed there.
Indeed it is only, or at least primarily, in the development of material techniques of the fourth and fifth types that what is at first not much more than a relatively open specialization and diversity of attention becomes a formative and even determining set of divisive social relations.
There are a number of reasons why this is so.
For some centuries the first reason seemed simple, though it has been greatly complicated by the most recent technical developments.
If you are watching some highly developed dance form, or some elaborately staged drama, or listening to highly developed music, or looking at highly developed sculpture or painting, you have at least some given mode of access to each art.
You can at least see or hear, which has been part of your ordinary physical development.
And then, though in varying degrees, you can see or hear these specific kinds of work: relatively easily if they are specific forms of your own culture; with more difficulty, and sometimes with absolute difficulty, if they are forms of some other, especially remote culture, or if your own culture is deeply divided and these forms come from an area that is strange to you.
Through all these varying degrees of access, there is still, in work in these techniques, some connection of inherent resources.
It has been possible for many of us, for example, to respond to dance from quite other cultures, and to sculpture, carving and painting not only from other cultures but from other, often very remote, times.
The connection of inherent resources, often deepened by what may be shared rhythmic and perceptual qualities in our species, offers at least some degree of relatively unmediated access.
The cultural specialization which is also present, with varying degrees of difficulty, in these especially  physical forms is usually more of a problem in at least some music, where there have been some very radical divergences in systems and in instruments.
But again, over a surprisingly wide area, and especially in song and in the simpler instruments, some degree of relatively unmediated access is available, with some shared rhythmic resources, possibly of the whole species, as an important factor.
Drama, inevitably, is more culturally specialized by language, but in many of its other elements of movement and scene it is widely and inherently accessible, as is clear in mime and was very evident in the silent film.
Writing
The point of these examples is not to underestimate the difficulties of social relations and cultural access in these types of cultural technique, but to show, by contrast, the qualitative difference when we come to such material systems as writing.
For though writing shares, at a later stage, all the difficulties mentioned — of degrees of familiarity with specific forms, and of the effects of cultural specialization, as most notably in language — it has also, from the beginning, a radically different status, as a technique.
Thus while anyone in the world, with normal physical resources, can watch dance or look at sculpture or listen to music, still some forty per cent of the world's present inhabitants can make no contact whatever with a piece of writing, and in earlier periods this percentage was very much larger.
Writing as a cultural technique is wholly dependent on forms of specialized training, not only (as became common in other techniques) for producers but also, and crucially, for receivers.
Instead of being a development of an inherent or generally available faculty, it is a specialized technique wholly dependent on specific training.
It is then not surprising that for a very long period the most difficult problems in the social relations of  cultural practice revolved around the question of literacy.
Social relations of writing
The earliest forms of writing were developed by and confined to very limited specialist (usually official) groups; they were later somewhat extended in continued urban development and in merchant trade.
The general cultural problem was not at this stage acute, for writing was still primarily a technique of administration, record and contract.
It was in the next stage, when writing came to carry an increasing proportion of law, learning, religion and history, previously carried in oral forms, that very marked cultural divisions, already socially present in preliterate societies, became, as it were, technically stabilized.
In the further powerful development of all these uses, and even when some other social relations were changing, this form of stratification of access became more and more important.
Increasingly, also, the oral ‘literature’ of preliterate or marginally literate societies was, through many complex stages, transferred to this new material technique, and further developed through it.
Writing moved from (i) a supporting and recording function, in societies in which oral composition and tradition were still predominant, through (ii) a stage in which this function was joined by written composition for oral performance and (iii) a further stage in which composition was additionally written only to be read, to (iv) that later and very familiar stage in which most or virtually all composition was written to be silently read, and was at last, for this reason, generalized as ‘literature’.
The great advantages of writing, with its enormous expansion of newly possible kinds of continuity and access, have been counterpointed, throughout, by the radical disadvantages of its inherent specialization of the faculty of reception.
It is only in the last hundred and fifty years, in  any culture, that a majority of people have had even minimal access to this technique which already, over two millennia, had been carrying a major part of human culture.
The consequences of this long (and in many places continuing) cultural division have been very great, and the confusion of developments beyond it, in societies at last becoming generally literate, is still very much with us.
Amplification, extension and reproduction
But at this point, decisively, techniques of the new fifth type become relevant and even determining.
There are always internal constraints on any kind of notational or visual-symbolic signifying system, since these depend on an absolutely or relatively complete possession of the relevant (social as technical) systematic information.
But while the objects embodying these systems are themselves relatively fixed and single, there is a correspondence (usually of a caste kind) between the internal systematic constraints and internal (often hierarchical) social relations.
Reproduction of images
The new techniques of deliberate reproduction and circulation are then of great sociological significance.
In their earliest examples, as seals, coins and medals, they were directly connected with extending trade and with extending political empire.
The reproducible symbolic visual image became a mode of defining a social area of credit or of power.
In the case of political empire, the decisive production and reproduction of an area of power was of course by other (military and political) means, though at the level of reproduction use of the reproducible image of authority became and has remained very important.
In the case of extended trade, the reproducible  image as currency (often stamped on material of intrinsic value) became quite decisive in the reproduction of trading relationships, and was also a leading factor in the production of new kinds of trade.
In either case the reproducible image was still primarily a function of political or economic relationships.
It was in the field of cult and religious objects, of decorative and decorated-utilitarian articles, and of what can eventually be distinguished as, in a modern sense, works of art, that reproductive technology became a major cultural mode.
The leading technique was that of casting, and we can find it, from early times, across a very wide range.
It was a major factor in the extension of cults and religions, from the votive statuette to the image of a god.
It was also very evident in political-cultural uses, as in the portrait-busts of kings and emperors.
Many, perhaps most, of these objects are seen now as ‘works of art’, in one sense justly, because of their fine workmanship, but in another sense misleadingly, since their primary function, especially in this area of reproduction and deliberate circulation, was evidently religious or ideological.
What can properly be called art is still, in majority, an inherent and inseparable element of some other purpose.
Graphic reproduction
This remains true in the next decisive technical stage, that of graphic reproduction.
In fourth-century-BC Athens it was possible to buy manuscripts reproduced by hand-copying at relatively low cost, and the scriptoria in which such copying was done — there is a reference in Pliny the Younger to an edition of a thousand copies — remained important through Roman to medieval times.
But techniques of reproducing graphic images — illustrations — were very slow to develop.
The woodcut reproducible illustration, and even wooden letters for printing, made their  first appearance in China, but it was as late as the fourteenth century in Europe before paper (brought to Europe by the Arabs in the late twelfth century, when the traditional material of parchment was in short supply) began to be extensively used for the new technology of xylography: repeatable woodcut designs in fabrics extended to rapidly reproducible illustrations.
There was then a huge trade in religious and moral pictures of this reproduced kind, often in series and printed literally by the million.
Then, in the fifteenth century, the casting of metal type was combined with developments in kinds of press and of ink to make the printing of texts possible, and the full range of rapid and accurate graphic reproduction was at last available.
Social effects of reproduction systems
The social effects of this complex of technical changes have been diverse.
On the one hand it is clear that the techniques of physical reproduction were still largely employed within the modes of general social and cultural reproduction.
This is especially evident in the huge production of prints of Christ and the saints, and in the extensive printing of bibles, psalters and indulgences.
But then there are also, in printing, overlapping cases such as calendars, almanacs and grammars, and soon, decisively, the printing and circulation of a whole body of classical literary texts, of other (introduced and reintroduced) forms of thought and learning, and then, finally, of newly produced texts.
It is then clear that, at the very lowest, social and cultural reproduction, in these technologies, is significantly more diverse than in the pre-reproduction phase.
This radically affected the position of the writer, the scholar and the artist as producers.
The changes correspond, in fact, to the stages  of overlap and eventually transition between patronal and market relations.
What had been technically and socially achieved was not only extended distribution but that inherent mobility of cultural objects which is crucial to regular market relations.
It is interesting that it was in the same period as that of the large-scale production of holy prints on paper that the (moveable) canvas began to replace the wall-fresco as the most common base material for painting.
With this diversity, extended distribution and mobility, came new forms and opportunities of artistic and cultural independence; or, to put it more strictly, forms of direct dependence, within relatively monopolistic social and cultural reproduction, were modified and sometimes replaced by forms of more variable dependence on more diverse modes of such reproduction, and within this diversity there was some significant innovation.
Relations between social and cultural production and reproduction
The most important theoretical indication, from this series and complex of changes, is that of the variable degrees of symmetry between cultural production and general social and cultural reproduction.
For all practical purposes we can designate such relations in the earliest productive modes as wholly symmetrical.
There is an effectively full parity between the purposes of cultural production and this more general social and cultural reproduction.
But in some of the early stages of the technical reproduction of cultural production, as most notably in the political empires and the related imposition of religious systems, elements of asymmetry begin to appear, in the relations between dominant and subordinated cultures.
In the massively  reproductive social orders of the feudal and medieval periods these elements are still evident, and can at times be clearly perceived as asymmetries of a class kind.
Asymmetries
But it is in the new period of widely available physical reproduction of cultural artefacts, within already diversifying social relations, that asymmetries of a more complex kind than those of domination and subordination begin to appear.
Many of the leading relations are still of course quite symmetrical, as in the case of the production of religious prints and texts.
Indeed in some respects the new technologies of standardized and widely distributed reproduction made certain forms of social and cultural reproduction very much more effective, over a wider range, and in modes distinguishable from direct domination and subordination.
But in printing especially — in literature and learning but also in scientific texts, in which accurately reproducible illustration played a crucial part — there was soon an evident asymmetry between the received and relatively rigid forms of social and cultural reproduction and this newly diverse and mobile cultural production and distribution.
Many of the most important problems of the social relations of culture take their origin from the appearance of this effective if always variable asymmetry.
Three types of asymmetry
This general condition of asymmetry can be examined in three major areas of tension, conflict and struggle, within which the fact of asymmetry is always a major element.
These areas are (i) the organization of licensing, censorship  and other similar forms of control, and the struggle against these;(ii) the organization of the market, both in its aspect as a trading area whose purposes, in expansion and profit, may often be in conflict with otherwise dominant political and cultural authorities, and its aspect as a mechanism for commodities in this especially sensitive field, where inherent calculations of profit and scale may impose tensions with other conceptions of art and, at a different level, impose its own new forms of commercial controls; and (iii) the uneven and changing relations between a received and always to some extent recuperated ‘popular’(largely oral) culture and the new forms of standardized and increasingly centralized production and reproduction.
(i) Controls and their limits
The struggle for freedom of expression, and the invention of means to control it, are of course both very old.
The difficult and often contradictory principles of this age-long argument were memorably expressed as early as Plato's version of the Apology of Socrates and, with a different bearing, in his Republic .
There is also an instructive history in the condemnation and prohibition of books by the medieval church.
But changes in the means of production, and especially printing, led to new forms of control, with more emphasis on prevention than on retribution: a direct reflection of the new conditions of rapid and extensive reproduction.
In the Church, by a papal bull of 1487, pre-censorship was prescribed, and from 1559 the Index.
In England, from 1531, a pre-censorship licensing system was established under secular authority; forms of this system lasted till 1695.
The struggle against such controls was long and hard, and it was not, for example, until the mid twentieth century in England, where the struggle had been early and relatively successful, that the last general form of this kind was abolished, in the theatre.
ii) State and market
But the crucial factor of asymmetry, which had been present throughout in the factors of cheap and rapid (often secret) reproduction and mobility, became more and more evident in the fuller development of the market.
Crucial battles were fought over the newspaper, with a new armoury of legal and (very significantly) fiscal (stamp-duty) controls, but both the buoyancy of the market and the growth of liberal opinion eventually prevailed.
In its later stages, the conflict settled around two issues:(a) official information, which in modern conditions was of direct political interest to the State; and (b) obscenity, which characteristically only became a major object of legislation in the nineteenth century, with the development of an effective popular market.
Through all these phases, though of course in different ways, we can see the complex asymmetry between the older established institutions of cultural and social reproduction (Church and State) and the new institutions and forces both of the market and of professional and cultural independence.
If the conflicts have been most evident in direct cultural production, they have been most complex and most general in the crucial formative area of education, where the direct controls of established institutions of reproduction have been easier to maintain, largely because the influence of market forces has been very much less relevant, and the only major factor of asymmetry has been the (always practically weaker) claim of professional and cultural independence.
Asymmetry between the market and the official reproductive institutions changed in character as the market moved towards universality, especially in the newest means of production and reproduction, above all cinema and television.
It is common today to hear complaints from established institutions, which still claim some dominance  (now more usually called ‘responsibility’) in general social and cultural reproduction, against the character of market-dominant cultural production, usually specified as ‘sex-and-violence’.
There is, here, a theoretical curiosity.
Simple Marxist versions of social and cultural reproduction often elide the bourgeois market with the ‘ideological apparatus’ of the bourgeois state.
Yet it is clear that there is significant and sustained conflict, over some crucial cultural issues, between the state in its simplest form (as in legislation on obscenity or on official information) or the ‘apparatus’ in its more complex form (as in religious or educational campaigns against ‘sex-and-violence’or ‘materialism’), and the actual profitable operations of the capitalist market.
Such conflicts are evidence of the most significant modern form of asymmetry.
Social relations of asymmetry
This is even clearer when we examine the basic social relations underlying this asymmetry.
It is impossible, for example, to take at face value the implied relations between the state, the established cultural institutions, and the market.
For the cultural production which is complained of comes m majority from central market institutions which in all other respects (and even, practically, in this one) the state exists to promote and protect, and even, in some cases, from institutions which it directly licenses.
This complexity must not be reduced to simple hypocrisy, although there is of course some of that.
The basic complexity is one of asymmetry, which in these conditions shows itself as a deepseated contradiction between the reproduction of market relations (both directly, within the market, and indirectly, within state and educational functions) and the consequences of such reproduction in certain sensitive and perhaps crucial areas of public  morality, respect for authority and actual crime.
In the last twenty years, in new and decisively extended areas of physical reproduction (notably television and the disc and cassette in popular music), this deepseated contradiction has been especially acute.
The interacting actors of (i) a newly effective market among the young, of (ii) some culturally effective initiatives by the young, of which many were quickly taken up by the market, of (iii) a more general unwillingness by the market, in conditions of high competition, to observe the limits and pressures of established cultural reproduction, and yet (iv) the alarm of state and other established institutions at the sources and consequences of such cultural production, have combined to produce a situation of quite remarkable asymmetry.
A Marxist book, an anarchist's guide, attacks on the institution of the family, songs celebrating illegal drugs, films and television plays celebrating physical violence or showing crime as justifiable or successful, can and do become, whatever their varying cultural sources, profitable commodities in a market within a state and culture which officially (and no doubt, within the terms of its insoluble contradiction, really) disapproves of or opposes all these things.
The older though continuing tensions between cultural authority and cultural independence have been transformed by the increasingly dominant social relations of the new means of production and reproduction.
Market freedoms and controls
In many of these phases, and still in some today, the market has played an objectively liberating role, against the older centralized forms of cultural dominance.
This role is still stressed, in many cases justly, by the spokesmen of market relations.
Yet to see only this is to simplify the history to the point of misrepresentation.
For within market relations two new kinds of control, amounting in some cases to dominance, have become apparent.
First there is the fact that when the work has become a commodity, produced to be sold at a profit, the internal calculations of any such market production lead directly to new forms of cultural control and especially cultural selection.
We have become so habituated to market relations that it can seem merely banal to observe that types of work which make a loss will, within market production, be reduced or discontinued, while types which make a profit will be expanded.
These effects can be interpreted as the effects of people's choices, and indeed this is often so.
But the real process is more complicated, since profitable production is not only a matter of how many people will buy but also — and in some arts crucially — a matter of the real costs of production, properly carried out.
Thus, in addition to the general process in which the market registers people's choices and these feed back into selected or discontinued types of production, there is an evident pressure, at or before the point of production, to reduce costs: either by improving the technical means of reproduction, or by altering the nature of the work or pressing it into other forms.
It is here, second, that manifest commercial modes of control and selection become, in effect, cultural modes.
This is especially clear in the later stages of the market, when the relatively simple relations of speculative production have been joined and in many areas replaced by planned marketing operations in which certain types of work are positively promoted, of course with the corollary that other types are left at best to make their own way.
This effect has been most noticeable, for obvious reasons, in the most highly capitalized forms of production.
It is the real history of the modern popular newspaper, of the commercial cinema, of the record industry, of art reproduction and, increasingly, of the paperback book.
Items within each of  these are pre-selected for massive reproduction, and though this may often still fail the general effect is of a relatively formed market, within which the buyer's choice — the original rationale of the market — has been displaced to operate, in majority, within an already selected range.
This works in different degrees in different media.
The cinema and the popular newspaper are the most extreme contemporary examples.
But a degree of alteration of social relations is evident everywhere.
In sophisticated market planning, a certain type of work can be selected at so early a stage, on the basis of a few examples or of some calculated or projected demand, that production, from that stage, no longer originates with the primary producer but is commissioned from him.
This can result in a relatively rapid turnover of cultural fashions, as one project of this kind succeeds another, and this area of relatively rapid innovation — often of a minor kind — has been important in the later twentieth century, as a direct function of the expansion and increased rate of internal circulation of the market itself.
The difference of such innovation from the more normal processes of cultural and artistic innovation is — always in degree, often in kind — a matter of origins.
At its most typical, this new form of innovation is at least primarily a marketing function , and this contrasts sharply with other kinds of innovation, which, governed by internal cultural purposes, often find themselves at the very margin of the market or indeed outside it altogether.
On the other hand, the contrast between market-originated and producer-originated work cannot be made absolute, once market conditions have been generalized.
For producers often internalize known or possible market relationships, and this is a very complex process indeed, ranging from obvious production for the market which is still the work the producer ‘always wanted to do’, through  all the possible compromises between the market demand and the producer's intention, to those cases m which the practical determinations of the market are acknowledged but the original work is still substantially done.
Moreover, the movements of the market can never be separated from more general movements of social and cultural relations.
The entry of new social classes, new age-groups and new minorities into the effective cultural market is commonly the result of much more general social change, to which the market has to adapt.
The interaction of these more general changes with the complex processes of internal cultural production leads, clearly, to many diverse results.
Yet these, finally, have to be set down as complications of the market process, and not as factors which override it.
To take any form of cultural production out of the market, by new patronal or public funding, is a very deliberate decision, with its own, sometimes isolating and conserving, effects.
Typically, moreover, it is marginal, however important and substantial the arts involved (as now poetry, opera, ballet, and an increasing proportion of orchestral music and of theatre).
A new principle of selection, between ‘subsidized’ and ‘commercial’, has effects of asymmetry well beyond the simple economic differences.
The case for subsidy, to override or protect from the market, is characteristically made in terms of the received arts and their received forms.
Innovation, as so often in the market itself, is seen primarily within these received terms.
For of course, though the market is always sensitive to innovations, and must in part of its production promote them, the great bulk of market production is solidly based on known forms and minor variants of known forms.
Often seen as restless and innovative, because of its evident novelties, the market is still, by its nature, profoundly  reproductive both of known demand (‘public taste’ as already crystallized) and of known priorities (usually the compatibility of work with the technical, economic and ultimately social means and determinants of its types of production).
At the deepest level this is its symmetry with the social order within which it operates, and the ‘non-market’ or ‘subsidized’type of production is often an aspect of this symmetry in that by selecting certain kinds of work for partial exemption from the market — kinds valued within the distribution of preferences within a received social order and a dominant social class — it in one sense protects the market from other kinds of social and cultural challenge.
Yet this relation, marked by many forms of co-operation, interaction and two-way movement between the ‘market’ and ‘subsidized’areas, is nevertheless always precarious, for there can be little real doubt that it is the dominant area, the market, which either determines, or emphasizes and de-emphasizes, prevailing types of production, and there are then the familiar asymmetries:(i) between the notion of a necessary ‘high culture’— and the pressures of the market on its continued viability; and (ii) between the notion of plural (‘liberal’) culture and the actual profit-governed market selection of what can be readily distributed or even, in some areas, offered at all.
These asymmetries are continually negotiated and re-negotiated, but it is significant that they seem to have settled down, in our own period, mainly along a line of division between newer and older means of production, with the market dominant in the new reproductive technologies and subsidy most evident in the older ‘live’ forms.
And this outcome is not surprising, since the historical connections between the new reproductive technologies and the cultural dominance of market relations is particularly clear.
(iii) Reproduced and popular culture
We have then to look at a third area of asymmetry, directly connected with qualitative changes in the means of cultural production.
What is usually said about the invention of printing is that it greatly expanded an earlier minority culture, and at last made it into a majority culture.
Yet it is here that we have to distinguish most clearly between a technical invention and a technology, and then further between a technology and its actual or possible social relations.
Already, with the invention of writing, there is a basic asymmetry between use of this powerful new means and ordinary membership of a society.
This becomes more marked as the importance of writing increases but the ability to read rises much more slowly.
Relations between a still predominantly oral culture and this important and growing sector ‘within' it are then especially complex, and the point is soon reached when there is a qualitative difference between the oral area, which all share but to which most are confined, and the literate area, which is of increasing cultural importance but is at once minor and dominant.
Techniques and technologies
The point at which this crucial relation is reached is very variable, in different societies, but we are reminded, everywhere, of the decisive distinctions between a technical invention, a technology and the social relations within which technologies can alone operate.
Thus the technology of writing is not only the series of inventions — a script, an alphabet, and materials for its production — which initiate the process, but the mode of distribution of the work thus produced.
And this mode of distribution is itself not only technical — manuscript copying and then printing — but depends on a wider technology, primarily determined by social relations, in  which the ability to read, which is the true substance of distribution, is itself produced.
The invention of printing, a key technical stage in the technology of distribution, had remarkable early effects in that it made technical distribution much easier but in conditions of relatively unaltered social distribution.
Moreover, in decisively increasing the importance of the literate culture, it had the effect of a new kind of stratification, in which the cultural but also the social importance of the still oral majority culture declined.
Much of the subsequent development of literacy, and the eventually general extension of printed matter, can then only in one sense be treated as an ‘expansion’.
Quantitatively it is indeed so, but the cultural specialization of literacy, and then of the true potential of the invention and the technology, led to significant internal hierarchies.
The most serious cultural creation and the most authoritative social knowledge were ‘in print’.
Access to literacy was determined and directed by institutions formed on these assumptions.
‘Correctness’, even in the matter of speaking a native language, was similarly determined.
Relative social position and relative command of this skill became regularly associated.
Thus the qualitative nature of the expansion was to an important extent controlled and was never a merely neutral extension.
The internal hierarchies of the print system were of course broadly coherent with more general social hierarchies, or they could not have been so effective.
The standardizing, regularizing, authoritative properties often assigned to print as a medium (though many of them are inherent in any writing system) could have full social effect only if they had this broad coherence with general developments in the social and labour processes, to which, however, print was not a mere ancillary, for it was one of the forms of such development.
The industrial revolution, among other things, necessarily produced general literacy.
Passages from the oral.
But what is then especially interesting is that the cultural process of including and incorporating areas of the oral culture into printed forms is very complex indeed, and in some important respects contradictory.
There is plenty of evidence of selection and dilution, and indeed struggles over certain socially sensitive passages from speech to print have continued into our own time.
There is also much evidence of various ideological representations and transformations of earlier oral social forms, as in songs, ballads, tales and confessions.
But the potentials of the technology were never wholly controllable.
There was no way to teach a man to read the Bible — a predominant intention in much early education in literacy — which did not also enable him to read the radical press.
And this press was there to be read because under a range of pressures from open repression to financial disadvantage some men took initiatives to use the technology for their own as opposed to the dominant social purposes.
In many ways, as the technology and its altering social relations became more general, new forms and new areas of experience made their own way into print.
The older coherence of a specialized literate culture was challenged alike by these genuine initiatives and by the eventually widespread reproduction of imputed popular material, in speculative and profitable works designed for an expansion seen not as a changing culture but as a new and decisive market.
Changed access to the media.
Yet, however extended, the basic process of writing and printing retained at least some elements of mediation.
It is, after all, an inherently notational rather then a direct system.
This is where the next phase of development in the means of cultural production is so significant.
For, if in variable ways, the  new technologies of cinema, sound broadcasting, sound discs and cassettes, television, video cassettes and tape recorders all embody systems of access which are direct at least in the sense that they are culturally available within normal social development, without any form of selective cultural training.
Of course this does not mean that the technologies are not embedded in specific economic, institutional and cultural systems, or that they do not constitute specific signifying systems, with their own internal forms.
But in the matter of the relations between a general oral and a privileged literate culture, the shift is crucial.
Within systems quite as impersonal and even more technically complex than the printed book, the manifest cultural relations have this apparent and often real immediacy.
Speech modes, however qualified, and indeed the fully colloquial, become public norms in ways that-contrast sharply with the period of printed public norms.
The tape-recording of this or that speaker is significantly different from a written or printed report of what he said.
In the media which are also visual, a range of resources — physical appearance and the effective means of non-verbal communication — is at least added to the written or recorded form, and the effect is often more than addition; it is a change of dimension which appears to restore presence , which for the alternative advantages of record and durability writing systems had moved away from.
It is true that, much more than they acknowledge, the new systems derive forms and materials from the accumulation of written material, and from some of the specific hierarchies of print, which are still normally coherent with the social order of the new systems as institutions.
Yet, even when this has been allowed for, the balance of forces  between the continuing general oral culture and the selective technically transmitted culture has been in at least some respects altered, and with it the nature of the asymmetry between the institutions of cultural production and the broader institutions of general social and cultural reproduction.
To explore this more thoroughly we must look at the changes in the social relations of cultural production which came with these new technologies.
New forms of cultural production
From the epoch of a privileged literate culture we have derived a stereotype of the cultural producer as an individual; characteristically an author .
The root association of this word with the sense of authority is not accidental; the conception of an ‘author’ is of an autonomous source.
We may know that authors work within determinate social and cultural conditions, but we still emphasize the fact of individual production.
And though we know also that in early periods, and especially and persistently in certain forms — drama, dance, choral song — production was not even in this manifest sense individual but was necessarily of a group kind, still the emphasis on ‘the producer’, ‘the author’, remains predominant, because it corresponds quite directly to the manifest conditions of production in writing and in print, and to certain oral forms which directly preceded them.
The writer, and then the printer, the sculptor, the composer, are manifestly in that set of specific relations, linked directly with the nature of their immediate means of production.
Group production
In those forms which have always depended on group production, there is not only a contrast with these basically individual uses of the immediate means of production, but, just as crucially, a range of developing relationships, many directly related to changes in the means of production, which amount, finally, to a further qualitative distinction.
These changes, at their most general, are, first, the substantial development of the division of labour, inside cultural processes, and, second, forms of class division, related both to the specialized divisions of the process and to the ownership and management of the developed means of production.
We know too little about the internal social relations of some of the earliest collective and collaborative forms to speak with any certainty of that stage.
But in general it can be said that authority and direction within cultural production either derived directly from the integral social organization within which such duties were assigned, or, as in the case of classical Greek drama, were assigned within a civic organization and became, in effect, a process of tender and hire.
Division of labour, at this stage, is primarily professional; there are actors, singers, musicians, dancers, writers.
The problem of co-ordination of these various professional skills was solved in various ways, of which we know very little just because, it seems, no general and abstract solution was stabilized.
Even as late as the Elizabethan theatre, where we find an owner or lessee in contractual or hiring relations with a company or with individuals, the processes of internal control of the production are obscure.
There is no stabilized figure corresponding to the later producer or director, who does not really appear in theatre until the late nineteenth  century.
He had been significantly preceded, however, by the actor-manager: a familiar kind of solution, in which a leading member of one of the professional groups — that group which is or seems dominant in the specific process not only co-ordinates but controls.
There had been earlier instances of co-ordination or control by the dramatist or by the composer.
But also, either substituting for this, or modifying it, there are many cases of practical internal co-ordination by the professional company : a mode now more consciously attempted by modern cultural collectives.
Group coordination
What is eventually clear, however, is that a much more formal and regular division of labour, based not only on professionalization but also on conscious management, corresponds to an effectively new stage in the means of production.
In the case of theatre this is especially clear.
The ‘producer’, ‘director’ or ‘manager’emerged when wholly coordinated production not only of the acting but of new staging techniques, including new kinds of design and lighting, was seen as necessary and desirable.
The earliest figures of this kind were still actors or writers, but the new role rapidly increased in importance, until by the mid-twentieth century the director could see himself, and was often seen by others, as the central productive figure.
A new division of labour
Yet these were still redistributions of role and authority within working professional companies.
The deepest changes came only with the development of the new reproductive technologies.
They are most obvious in cinema and television.
First, the new technology required a much more extensive professional specialization.
Writers and actors, and then designers, were joined by cameramen, sound recordists, editors and a whole range of people with ancillary skills.
At the simplest technical level, the role of a coordinating director became almost inevitable.
But then, second, there was a further division of labour, in the installation, maintenance and some forms of operation of the technology itself: electricians, carpenters, logistical staff.
These can be said to represent only a development from earlier kinds of craft support, but the general situation was qualitatively new, in that work in this area became indispensable, in the advanced technologies, even though there could still be doubt whether such workers were truly part of the cultural production.
It is here that class lines became drawn, often with continuing argument about jobs at or near the point of division.
Printing and ‘writing'
The significant test case is that of printers and other ‘manual’ workers in modern newspaper production.
It is firmly asserted, within existing class assumptions, that such workers have no legitimate concern whatever with the content of the cultural production.
Printers who refuse to print some particular item in a newspaper are denounced as wreckers, and as a threat to the freedom of the press.
What has then happened is a class division, of a stable and organized kind, within cultural production.
On one side of the division there are those who ‘write’, on the other those who ‘print’.
The former process is seen as cultural production, the latter as merely instrumental.
It is ironic to see the terms of this division being renegotiated as newer technology, such as computer typesetting, makes the technical division unnecessary or redundant.
But whatever happens to particular processes, it remains a general condition of modern cultural technology that it both requires social forms of production and  yet, within this, under specific economic conditions, imposes not only a professional but a class division of labour.
Ownership
Specific economic conditions are a further decisive factor in the new reproductive technologies.
One kind of individual artist can own his immediate means of production, though he is then typically involved with others, in market or other relationships, in distribution.
A professional company, in favourable circumstances, can own or lease its immediate means of production, and deal relatively directly with its public, while its technical means are relatively simple.
But in the advanced technologies, up to our own time, it has been almost impossible for working companies to have direct access to their relevant means of production, and a third form of the division of labour then appears, and in capitalist conditions becomes stable and regular.
Beyond professional specialization, and beyond the internal class division within social forms of cultural production, there is this ultimately controlling form of ownership and management, within which the other forms have to operate.
Every kind of cultural and productive worker, within the highly capitalized systems of these advanced technologies, becomes an employee of owners or managers who need not be directly concerned with cultural production at all.
This is of course never only an economic relationship.
Wholly dependent on one or one type of owner or controller of his means of production, the cultural worker in these technologies is in a radically different set of social relations from those of the individual producer or earlier type of company, and fundamental questions of cultural autonomy and purpose are raised in quite new ways.
Moreover, social relations of this new type have themselves  passed through significant stages.
The common early situation of the individual capitalist owner, or proprietary family, was replaced, within conditions of more organized markets, by various forms of combine arrangements, at a significantly greater distance from the immediate producers and in their internal corporative organization exhibiting a crucial new layer of professional management of production, which quickly became dominant.
Such combines are still common, in various forms, but further problems of capitalization, marketing and integration of production have led to the widespread appearance of the conglomerate, within which ownership and control of the means of cultural production become a sector within the wider ownership and control of a much wider (non-cultural) productive and financial area.
The conglomerate is indeed becoming typical of technologically advanced cultural production in the advanced capitalist economies, and its theoretical importance, in this context, is that it is at once dominant in modern cultural production and yet, in its determining forms, radically separate from it; its ‘purpose’(cf. page 67) now primarily elsewhere.
The consequent transformation of the situation of the cultural producer, in some of the major modem cultural forms, is clearly of great importance.
It is a familiar case of one of the basic contradictions of modern capitalism, in which increasingly socialized forms of production are defined and limited by privately appropriated forms of ownership and control.
There is a comparable contradiction in those other eases where the form of appropriation is directly or indirectly by the State, and socialized forms of production are in practice controlled by an imposed management.
It can be seen that problems of this kind are inseparable from major developments in cultural means of production, and especially the major reproductive technologies.
But this does not mean that the technologies  imposed the social forms, which have indeed followed the main lines of general social and economic power.
Even within the necessarily centralized and high-capital technologies, other social forms are possible: for example, public ownership of the means of production combined with leasing of these means to independent (rather than employed? companies and groups.
Alternative forms
For what we have also to notice is that in some of the most advanced technologies — in one sector video and new kinds of print reproduction; in another sector common-carrier types of transmission, such as cable and teletext opportunities for some significant recovery of direct access to their means of production, for some modern kinds of cultural producer, either exist or can be realistically looked for.
In the technical changes of our own period, new forms of access, and new social forms of collective cultural production, are in fact being intensively explored.
These are still only marginally emergent, and are under great pressure from the dominant forms of developed capitalist and state-capitalist modes, which often have the additional advantage that they effectively control the production and the directions of the newest technologies.
Yet at least it can be said that the long and complex history of the relations between cultural producers and their material means of production has not ended, but is still open and active.
Identifications
We can go a long way in the sociology of culture by studying cultural institutions, formations and means of production.
But at some point we are bound to stop and ask if what we are studying, however important it may be in its own terms, is sufficiently central to its presumed subject.
We now have the sociology, it is sometimes said, but where is the art?
This is usually a reasonable question.
It is true that there is one unreasonable apparent form of it, which is intended, really, to halt the whole inquiry.
Certain sociological facts and considerations are rather hastily admitted, usually in a received and well-worn form, and some minor place is reserved for them.
But then, we understand, the real work can begin; we go to ‘the works of art themselves’.
‘The works of art themselves’
Of course, as an everyday decision, something like this is possible.
We can and often should stop reasoning about art, and go instead to look at a painting, listen to some music, read a poem.
But this is quite different from that conceptual shift, in which we are invited to break off the sociological inquiry and move, not to some specific attention, but to a generalized category with its presumed internal rules.
It is  the difference between a necessary empirical shift, when reasoning is taken across to one of its presumed objects and must take the full strain of the encounter, and a deceptive (because falsely generalized) empiricism, in which certain kinds of attention to certain presumptively autonomous objects are held to be justified and protected by the terms of an unargued immediacy.
It is one thing to leave sociological analysis and instead read a poem; it is quite another to leave socio-cultural analysis and forthwith adopt a socio-cultural category whose forms and terms ought, precisely, to be the object of analysis.
For ‘the works of art themselves’ is of course a category, and not some neutral objective description.
It is a sociocultural category of the highest importance, but just because of this it cannot be empirically presumed.
Consider only the very diverse practices it offers to unite or even, in some versions, to make in some sense identical.
Radically different manual practices, directed to radically different human senses (over a range, for example, from sight alone to hearing alone), are presumptively encompassed by this single general category.
The concept would be difficult enough if it were only at this level, where we say that music, dance, painting, sculpture, poetry, drama, fiction, film have crucial properties in common, which suffice to distinguish them, as a group, from other human practices.
But another level is immediately in question, even as we nominate the group.
The case of dance is an obvious example.
There are forms of dance which we all admit as forms of art: for example, classical ballet.
But then there are other forms where this description does not suggest itself, or might not be admitted if it did: for example, ballroom dancing, which would be normally set down simply as ‘a pleasurable social activity’(and as such different from art?).
One early distinction suggests itself: ballet is performed for an audience; ballroom dancing is where we can all join in.
But what would then be the case with an exhibition or competition of ballroom dancing?
The next distinction suggests itself: ballet is a higher, more developed form of dance, and as such is art, while ballroom dancing is at best only marginally so, and normally not at all so.
But then consider folk-dance, ordinarily less developed, formally, than ballet; indeed often no more developed than ballroom dances.
Yet folk-dance is regularly presented, in certain kinds of exhibition and performance, as at least a simple kind of art.
Art as performance?
Is this where the earlier distinction returns: that ‘art’ depends on conscious performance?
It clearly takes us some way, but there are still major difficulties.
Cave paintings, for example, are now generally and understandably seen as art, indeed in many of their examples as major art.
Yet they are commonly sited in dark and inaccessible places, and we really do not know how often, if at all, they were generally seen, within the period and culture in which they were made.
Then take a limiting case: if nobody but the original painter or painters of the great roof bison of Altamira had ever seen this work (and comparable work may still be lying undiscovered), would any of us wish, on our first sight of it, to deny its status as art because it had not been consciously exhibited?
Art as quality?
Is its status then a matter of its superlative material execution?
This is obviously crucial, but it will not serve to delimit art; the same criterion, on its own, would distinguish many works of other manual skills and of engineering.
Indeed often, and only sometimes rhetorically, we speak of such works as works of art — a particular knife, pot, aeroplane, bridge — but usually with the sense that this is an additional quality, when the primary purpose of the object has been already acknowledged.
Meanwhile the category of ‘art’ is normally and even insistently applied to works which have no other purpose but to be works of art
‘Aesthetic’ purpose
This definition by purpose, by an in effect autonomous intention, is perhaps the most common modern justification of the category.
It commands an entire  vocabulary , centred on the specification of the ‘aesthetic ’: a work of art is designed for, and/or has, aesthetic properties and effects.
In fact ‘aesthetic’ in this sense is a new term from the late eighteenth century, moving directly in line with the modern specializing generalization of ‘the arts’and ‘the creative arts’, though the qualities it indicates had often previously been described.
Because of the interlock of terms —‘aesthetic intention’, ‘creative arts’, ‘aesthetic effect’— an effective categorical grouping has indeed been achieved.
But then it should be clear, when we see this as a categorical formation rather than an obvious and neutral description, that what passes, often very effectively, as a  solution brings in its train some particularly difficult problems.
It can seem relatively easy to categorize ‘the aesthetic’.
It is usually done by introducing supporting or specifying terms: either general terms like ‘beauty’ or more particular terms like ‘harmony’, ‘proportion’, ‘form’.
And indeed there can be little doubt that the qualities these terms indicate, as processes and as responses, are very significant and important.
Much might be done in the scientific analysis of these processes and responses, many of which are self-evidently material and physical.
But whether or not this is done we have a great body of human testimony to the reality of what is being (if still generally) described.
Specialization of the ‘aesthetic'
The real problem is not at this level, where the significance of perceptions of colour, form, harmony, rhythm, proportion and so on can be readily confirmed.
The intractable problem is the presumed specialization of these ‘perceptions’— these processes and responses — to ‘works of art’.
For it is common to experience similar or comparable perceptions of the human body, of animals and birds, or of trees, flowers and the shapes and colours of land.
There is certainly interaction between these and the processes and responses of many arts: many works are derived from or stimulated by them; other works articulate new ‘natural’ perceptions.
But even when we have allowed for this, there is no ready way of defining the category ‘art’ from these undoubted and general human perceptions, which we are bound to recognize as more widely applicable and thus not reducible to a specialization.
Moreover there are problems of marginal definition.
In wholly man-made processes, the ‘arts’ run through into the  significant areas of dress, ornament, furnishing, decoration, gardening, where many of the same criteria of beauty, harmony and proportion apply yet where the full definition as ‘art’is usually withheld, within the modern specialization.
At the same time, in a quite different direction, the ‘arts’ run through into areas of human thought and discourse — values, truths, ideas, observations, reports — where, though the ‘aesthetic’perceptions may be still quite relevant, they cannot be and in practice are not taken as wholly defining.
Most of us want, at times, to speak of the ‘truth’ of a work of art as much as, or even more than, its ‘beauty’.
‘Art’ and ‘not art’
The second major problem which follows from the conventional categorization is of great sociological interest.
It is that within the practices thus selected and grouped there is a common further delimitation, by value or by presumed value.
Now of course distinctions between works in the various practices, in terms of the quality of their professional execution or, more generally, of some wider values, are normal and inevitable.
But this does not, without forcing, mean that such distinctions are clear and regular enough to delimit a category, and especially a category as difficult as this: that some works in a practice which has been specified as an art are ‘not art’ or ‘not really art’.
Yet whole socio-cultural theories, of a kind, have been built on this kind of argument.
Thus some novels are ‘works of art’, but others are ‘pulp fiction’, ‘commercial trash’, ‘sub-literature’ or ‘para-literature’, and yet others, between these poles, are ‘routine’, ‘mediocre’or ‘lending-library fodder’.
We can all think of examples to which we would apply these  descriptions and be willing to give reasons.
The terms are harsher in the more popular arts, but the tendency exists through the whole range.
And what we can then see happening is a hardening of specific judgements into presumptions of classes, based now not only on mixed criteria (for there are held to be cases of ‘skilfully executed nonsense’ or ‘professionally brilliant hokum’as well as of ‘clumsy art’or ‘raw but authentic artistic power’) but also, and crucially, on criteria which are incompatible with the original delimitation by the nature of the practice.
Thus a ‘bad novel’ does everything that the category ‘novel’indicates, at the level of generic definition, but then fails to do something else, either in its ‘aesthetic process’or in terms of its ‘seriousness’or its ‘relation to reality’(which, at least explicitly, the original definition had not included).
Moreover, if we bring to this common confusion the elementary historical observation that these presumptive classes of ‘art’ and ‘sub-art’or ‘non-art’tend to shift (all novels, once, would have been in the downgrading classes; particular classes of novel, for example‘science fiction’, move from one side of the divide to another, or are straddled across it; cinema films are ‘commercial popular culture’but then some films are ‘high art’), we become more and more certain that we must refuse that beguiling invitation to leave aside ‘sociological categories’and move to ‘the works of art themselves’.
Moreover we must refuse by a criterion often rhetorically invoked in these doubtful positions; by the criterion of the strictest intellectual coherence and rigour.
The social processes of ‘art’
For what really becomes clear, as we review these effective categorizations, with all their problems and loose ends, is that the move away from the ‘sociological’ is precisely the move we cannot make.
While these difficult categorizations, either in their most serious and sustained forms, or in their commonly received popular forms, retain or attempt to retain their position above society — above the historical socio-material process or the full, undelimited cultural process — they have to be seen not only as intellectually unsatisfactory but as, in themselves, disguised social processes.
Everything is then to be gained by their serious recognition as social processes; moreover as social processes of a highly significant and valuable kind.
The attempt to distinguish ‘art’ from other, often closely related, practices is a quite extraordinarily important historical and social process.
The attempt to distinguish ‘aesthetic’ from other kinds of attention and response is, as a historical and social process, perhaps even more important.
The attempt to distinguish between good, bad and indifferent work in specific practices is, when made in full seriousness and without the presumption of privileged classes and habits, an indispensable element of the central social process of conscious human production.
And when we see these attempts as themselves social processes, we can continue the inquiry, instead of cutting it short.
‘Social’ and ‘sociological’
But first a note of caution.
Some of the social processes we are now coming to consider can be seriously reduced in significance if we take the ‘sociological’ emphasis in too  narrow (and unfortunately common) a sense.
There are important parts of these processes to which this narrow sense is relevant.
The modern distinction between ‘high culture’ and ‘popular culture’, for example, is impenetrable without the closest consideration of the shifting structures of social class.
The categorical transitions from ‘court’ and ‘peasant’to ‘aristocratic’and ‘folk’art reveal directly, in their terms, social associations of a determinate kind which ‘high’and ‘popular’, in significantly blurring ways, still partly retain.
The direct application of normal sociological categories can take us much of the way in these relatively explicit, but also relatively local and shifting, cases.
Yet in some of the most fundamental areas of the enquiry, we find ourselves involved with societal processes which can be said to precede some senses of ‘sociology’.
This is especially so in that area of cultural groupings, selections and emphases, which run through (though of course are not unaffected by) otherwise radically different social orders.
Lukacs on specificity
Consider, for example, the bold attempt by Lukacs (1969) to define the specificity of art by distinguishing three phases of human practice: the ‘practical’, the ‘magico-religious’, the ‘aesthetic’.
Here the ‘practical’ relates to the satisfaction of perceived human needs, within historically determinate social and material conditions.
The ‘magico-religious’ relates to the encounter with perceived human limits (some of them, as seen by others, historically determinate, but to almost all there and then, and to many always, intractable) and the consequent making of images or stories in that distinguishable area.
These remain ‘magico-religious’ while they are offered as, in this area, objectively real, transcendent and demanding belief.
The way is then clear  for a specifying definition of the ‘aesthetic’, which is not the practical satisfaction of a determinate need, but which is also not offered as objectively real and demanding (‘magico-religious’) belief; its images are closed and real in themselves.
Now I have never thought that this bold scheme works, in the categorical terms in which it is offered (I have summarized these, partly in my own vocabulary; for the full argument see Lukacs, 1969).
Too many processes and objects from the ‘practical’ and ‘magico-religious’phases come to demand inclusion in the ‘aesthetic’phase.
Too many ‘aesthetic’ processes and objects overlap, in practice, with the ‘practical’and the magico-religious'.
It is indeed the relative integrity of these phases, in certain periods of human practice, which allows us to see certain subsequent specializations, in periods of altered general practice, as historical rather than categorical facts (and the theory of Lukacs, in terms, as idealist rather than historical-materialist).
Yet the emphasis he is attempting does not then seem irrelevant.
For there is indeed an observable general tendency (however deeply complicated by historical and cultural diversity) to distinguish and to value kinds of work which meet no immediate and manifest need, of an everyday practical kind, and which are at least not necessarily taken as evidence of some metaphysical or non-human dimension of reality.
Indeed this is so clear that I sometimes wonder why so much effort usually goes into attempting to prove it.
Such work can serve societal purposes, of the deepest kind: not as food, or as shelter, or as tools, but as ‘recognitions’(both new and confirming marks) of people and kinds of people in places and kinds of place, and indeed often as more than this, as ‘recognitions’ of a physical species in a practically shared physical universe, with its marvellously diverse interactions of  senses, forces, potentials.
So deep a human interest — in the renewed and renewable means of recognition, self-recognition and identity — can be practised over a very wide range, from the most collective to the most individual forms.
In some of its farthest reaches it has often to be contrasted with routinized or habituated forms of perception and recognition, which can then be falsely specialized as the ‘merely social’.
What matters is the evidence, in many thousands of processes and objects, of constant human practice in this real dimension, necessarily overlapping and interacting with other kinds of practice but never simply reducible to them.
Specificity and specificities
It is from the range and power of this kind of human activity and attention, which we find in so many different kinds of social order and in so many different historical periods, that the impulse to categorize ‘the aesthetic’ begins and seems justified.
Yet just because it is so general and common a process, finding its means and occasions and objects in such diverse ways, and again and again interpenetrating with many of the most practical or most ideological activities, it cannot reasonably be abstracted to one exclusive set of practices or one exclusive intention or set of intentions.
On the other hand this does not mean that everything, including the most specifically artistic and most specifically aesthetic processes, has to be dissolved into some indiscriminate general social or cultural practice.
It is simply that the necessary distinctions are not to be found at the level of categorical separation but rather at the level where they are in fact produced, which is that of both general and specific cultural and social orders.
The arts as social forms
The distinctions between art and non-art, or between aesthetic and other intentions and responses, as well as those more flexible distinctions by which elements of a process, or intentions and responses, are seen, in real cases, as predominant or subordinate, can then be seen as they historically are: as variable social forms within which the relevant practices are perceived and organized.
Thus the distinctions are not eternal verities, or supra-historical categories, but actual elements of a kind of social organization.
It is interesting that such distinctions are most clearly and most confidently made in relatively complex and highly specialized societies.
Indeed there is much evidence to suggest that the distinctions are most actively sought in periods of growing secularization, when the habit of referring all practices, finally, to some central faith and purpose, is loosening or has been lost.
But forms of the distinctions, which are always also emphases of importance, are in fact widespread, in many diverse social orders.
Indeed the first deep form of the social organization of art is, in this sense, the social perception of art itself.
The signals of art
Such perception is always practical, whether or not it is followed by theoretical reasoning.
A vast and ordinarily unnoticed area of the history of the arts is the development of systems of social signals that what is now to be made available is to be regarded as art.
These systems are very diverse, but between them they constitute the practical social organization of that first deep cultural form  in which certain arts are grouped, emphasized and distinguished.
The most common kinds of signal are those of occasion and place .
These are at their simplest, because at their most specialized, in relatively complex and secular societies.
The signal of an art gallery is an especially obvious case.
It is a place specialized and designated for looking at painting or drawing or sculpture as art.
This signal is so established and conventional that it hardly has to be noticed.
Indeed the gallery can be seen as if it were only (which of course it is also) a mere technical device for the objects to be displayed.
Yet consider the difference when we see a drawing or a painting on an ordinary street or house wall.
There is an immediate question as to why it is there: is it what some vandal has done, or some unauthorized dauber, or some impulsive and frustrated artist, or some new policy of bringing art into the streets?
We may often be sure that we can judge by the quality of the drawing or painting, but there are always at least some cases in which our uncertainty is deepened by the absence of the expected signal, that it is or is not intended to be art.
This situation has many ironic effects.
Some artists become so resentful of the conventionalities that come with the signal — the imposition, as it is said, of a merely ‘arty’ atmosphere — that they consciously take their work to other, ‘more normal’places.
Usually, in doing so, they set up alternative signals : that this tent, this stretch of street, this canteen, this waiting-room, is where this different kind of artist wants his work to be seen.
Or the signal can be both accepted and questioned.
In a famous recent case, someone said: ‘If I'd seen this pile of bricks on the side of the road I'd never have thought it was art’.
‘But now you've seen it in an art gallery, do you think it is art?’, someone else asked.
And then there were different answers, from those listening to the exchange.
‘Well I suppose it must be, if they  think so.’
‘Somebody must think so, if they paid that much for it.’
‘It may be to them, but it isn't to me; it's still just a pile of bricks.’
‘Why do they put this rubbish on show, instead of some real art?’
At the margins of the practice, and especially in unfamiliar kinds of work, these variable reactions between the signal and actual responses are quite common.
But over a much wider range than we usually recognize, the signal works without question, because it is a conventional way of answering what would otherwise be (and may still really be) difficult or impossibly difficult questions, about the nature of the work and about the appropriate kind of response.
Signal systems
Consider another case: that of dramatic performance.
For some centuries this has been primarily signalled by a specialized place: a theatre.
The signal system of advertised time of performance, arrangement of seating, raising of curtains and so on is especially coherent.
In one style of play, what happens within these signals is very consciously made to resemble, as far as possible, what happens in everyday rooms and everyday behaviour and conversation; yet the signals hold, this is still a play.
If the same play is put on television (as a television production, and not as simple transmission from a theatre) other kinds of signal, mainly titles, including keywords like ‘play’ or ‘theatre’, are employed.
But there is then sometimes an interesting area of overlap, where the style is employed for what is taken to be other material: the ‘drama-documentary’, the ‘dramatic reconstruction’.
This can lead to a confusion of signals.
There have been long and fierce arguments, inside television, as to whether, when a play is  ‘directly based on a real-life case’, there should be further signals, indicating divergence from the expected norm.
But these are significantly difficult to decide on.
In which direction should the signal point?
That this is, after all, ‘only a play’?
That ‘though it looks like a real-life case, it is really not’?
That ‘all these things really happened, and can be taken as true’?
Simple conventional signals depend, of course, on relatively stable forms, and on relatively settled places and occasions.
This conservatism, however, often leads to conscious revolt, by artists with different purposes, who then either confuse or even omit the known signals.
There is the famous case of the radio dramatization of Wells's War of the Worlds , which, within a confusion of signals, such as use of the convention of radio news reports, was quite widely received as an ‘actuality’ account of an alien invasion.
There is also the interesting case of the experimental company which ‘staged’‘dramatic situations’, such as a fierce marital row, in restaurants, while appearing to be ordinary customers.
Here the total absence of signals led to every kind of confusion, but its point was a testing of the function of such signals: did the normal ‘framing’ of such situations, which at the restaurant table might follow word by word and action by action the scene of a play, inhibit or qualify the responses of ‘others’/‘an audience’?
The sociology of signal systems
The signal systems by which ‘art’ is indicated have then a complex sociology.
There are many integrated systems which become fully institutional: theatre, art gallery, concert hall.
These integrated systems are in general a function of specialization: distinct arts in distinct places at distinct times.
Modern broadcasting systems, carrying all  these arts but carrying also news, discussion, transmitted non-artistic events and ‘factual programmes’, have quite different problems, mainly solved, at an initial level, by conscious internal titling and description.
But as we go back to much earlier periods, the signal systems are complex in different ways again.
Consider English medieval popular drama, indicated, generally, not so much by a place (a theatre) as by an occasion, usually the festival of Corpus Christi.
Performance was in the streets, but many of the normal dramatic signals — costume, effects, rudimentary scene — were given.
Typically also, however, there was common use of preliminary direct address, to indicate both the subject and the fact of its performance.
This function of ‘prologue’(and of ‘epilogue’ or in the medieval case concluding homily) continued into much later drama.
It is on the borderline between a true signal, indicating the nature of the coming activity and establishing specific relations within which it is intended to occur, and that type of signal which is not preparatory or externally indicative but is integrated within the form of a work: a type which we can distinguish as conventions, and which is so fundamentally important that it will be separately discussed, below.
Meanwhile the borderline case is important in understanding the complexity of primary signal systems.
Thus, before medieval drama went into the streets as part of a religious festival, less developed kinds of dramatization of several of the same events — key moments in the Christian history of the world — had been performed in churches, and some of the very earliest of these — the Quem quaeritis ? episodes of the encounters after the resurrection — had been performed within religious services.
What signals were then being given?
The use of ‘dramatic’ means to ‘enact’the presence and the meeting of Christ is surely not to be taken, at this stage, as a signal of ‘art’, in the modern sense.
But can we then be quite sure that at a later stage, when the same kind of performance has been taken out of the service and then out of the church, the signal is unambiguously to ‘art’?
The fact surely is that, within any specific culture, the nature of the signals, and of the shared signifying system within which they must operate, is radically connected with the social organization of a very wide area of perceived reality.
It is often the tensions and shifts of such systems, in periods of significant change, that show this most clearly.
Thus we have to say of medieval popular drama that the sense of ritual ‘presence’, of the kind still indicated by the formalized words and movements of the mass, has significantly changed, but may in some new combination of signals be still to some extent active, in ways that it is clearly -not in later forms and systems.
Thus it is significant that in a more secular drama (affected also by some of the emphases of Protestantism) the formerly habitual direct dramatic presentation of God the Father or Jesus Christ became prohibited or unthinkable.
In an even more secular society, and one in which the signals of ‘drama’(meaning now not ‘presence’ but ‘representation’) were more generally organized and familiar, just these once ‘normal’but then prohibited dramatic presentations have reappeared.
Signals in Greek drama
When there is this kind of historical development of a signal system it is important that it should not be read back in the exclusive terms of later signals.
It is equally important not to reduce intermediate stages to the earliest terms.
The case of  classical Greek drama is especially relevant.
It is important, when reading the plays, not to overlook the specific signal system within which they were performed.
The performances were part of a religious  festival, the City Dionysia, in the Theatre of Dionysus.
Each day's performances began with a sacrifice and libations; the priest of Dionysus sat in the centre front of the audience; the image of the god, normally kept in the temple adjacent to the theatre, had been carried in procession and placed in the theatre; in the centre of the orchestra was an altar.
All these were signals of a religious kind, framing the performances in culturally specific ways.
Yet, while this function must be emphasized, we must not overlook some new kinds of signal.
This drama is often now confused with, or even rendered back to, types of religious ritual in which some of its elements indeed originated.
But in fact the new signals were crucial.
The figures were not priests and worshippers, but actors and chorus in front of an audience.
The reiterated formalities of ritual had been replaced by the specific and (even on the same themes) consciously variable compositions of words and actions by individual dramatists.
The performed plays, and the acting, were in conscious competition for prizes.
None of these signals indicate ritual; they indicate ‘drama ’, in our general sense of art.
Yet this signal system indicating ‘art’ occurred, with sufficient effect, within a still functioning signal system of another kind.
Was the work then a cross between drama and ritual?
Not at all.
In the performances themselves the dramatic signals were dominant; in the organization of the festival the religious signals were dominant.
Complexity of signals
This kind of complexity of signal, directly related to the complexities of a specific social and cultural order, is indeed quite common.
It is only from some insistence, within some other social and cultural order, that signals should always be singular in dimension — indicating ‘pure art’ and the ‘purely aesthetic’in manifestly specializing, and then both emphasizing and excluding, ways — that these historical and sociological complexities are resisted.
Yet even within such an order there are enough complexities of signals, of a different kind — the ‘command performance’, in honour of the already honoured; the ‘private view’— who has been invited to look in this privileged way?; the ‘special performance’, for an audience of a socially selected type — to remind us of the always variable — historically and culturally variable-social organization and social function of art.