

Part Three
1887
ENEMIES
Chapter Six
‘We're in trouble, I won't deny it.’
Esther Ward was clearly agitated, her bony fingers plucking at the frayed leather of the desk-top, and a nervous look in her unusually penetrating blue eyes that sent a shiver through the man standing before her.
‘Richard blames me, I know it.
They all blame me.
It's the chance they've been waiting for.
I know what they're saying…
‘Only men understand the complexities of business’, that's what they're saying.
‘When a woman tries to think like a man, no good will come of it’.’
Thumping her small fist on the desk, she spat the words out.
‘Fools!
Pompous fools!
They know as well as I do that it has nothing whatsoever to do with who heads a company.
All around us development opportunities are drying up.
There's an acute shortage of good land.
Money is harder to come by, and all in all it's a depressing time.
Even Richard, with all his fancy ideas and determination, can't stop the company from going under.’
She chuckled.
It was a most unpleasant sound.
‘He deserves what's coming to him.
He has a few more shocks coming his way yet.
Fool that he is!
It won't be only the company he loses.’
Seeming not to have heard her last remark, Tom Reynolds spoke bitterly.
‘I knew there were problems,’ he said, ‘but I thought things were beginning to look up?’
She had not yet spoken the words he dreaded, but he sensed they were imminent.
Esther shook her head, oblivious of the stray wisp of hair that fanned to and fro across her forehead; hair that had once been a soft shade of brown, but which now was streaked iron grey.
Her features had not softened with the passing of almost three years; if anything her face was more chiselled and her blue eyes harder.
She regarded the man for a while; the wiry frame and sharp shrewish expression, the startling white hair and eyes which, in a certain light, seemed more pink than brown.
Tom Reynolds had been a loyal and useful ally but now his usefulness was almost at an end.
And yet she was reluctant to let him go.
She saw him as a reflection of herself, devious and cunning, her partner in many a conspiracy; the most successful of which had been the manipulation of that slut of a girl in Tyler Blacklock's lodging house.
She gloated inwardly at the memory.
So easy!
So satisfying.
Not only had her clever plan discredited the young man whom Beth had set her heart on, but in the process had driven Richard's daughter to her knees.
She knew how Beth had gone to the lodging house on the night when her own father disowned her; how she had run to her lover only to be turned away from there broken-hearted when the girl claimed that Tyler was the father of her own mythical child.
There was also the unexpected but most gratifying development of the girl's jealous lover and his mate beating Tyler within an inch of his life.
Esther could not have planned that particular episode better if she had intended it.
When she learned from her son that Beth and Tyler were never reunited, Esther was beside herself with pleasure.
There was a hatred for Beth within her; a hatred that spanned more than Beth's own lifetime.
It delighted her to think that the girl had gone into the night, alone and unloved and growing with child.
Indeed, it occurred to Esther that Beth could well be  dead by now.
No matter.
It was no more than she deserved.
If she had come to a pitiful and desperate end, this woman for one would not be sorry.
Now another image raised itself, making her inwardly fume.
If Beth had got her just rewards, Tyler Blacklock had carved himself a very different destiny.
Against all odds, he had emerged from the gutter to haunt her!
Over the years he had not only made himself a small fortune, but in the process gained something of a respectable reputation.
While he rose in stature, the Ward Development Company suffered crippling misfortunes, until now its back was to the wall, and Esther Ward was a desperate woman.
If Tom Reynolds was devastated by her next words, it was no more than she was herself.
‘I'm afraid if things don't soon improve, you may have to find another employer.’
‘What other employer?’
The words exploded from him.
‘You've just said yourself that times are hard in the development industry.
There's not one single company taking on.
They're laying off more like.
Every street corner tells its own story.
You know that!’
He had awful visions of himself walking the streets, demeaning himself to look for work.
In his wildest nightmares he had never thought it would come to this.
And it wouldn't, by God!
Not while he had a canny bone in his body.
‘What would you have me do, then?’
She thrust back the chair and strode round the desk, her two hands locked together and her whole figure trembling with rage.
‘There's no money, damn you.
Do you hear what I'm telling you…there is no money !’
He smiled now, and facing her boldly, said quietly, ‘You conveniently forget, I think.
It is I who am handling the sale of the lease on the office premises.
And, if my memory serves me right, you stand to rake in a tidy sum on that.
Also, have you forgotten the lucrative deal which I again masterminded on that commercial  property north of the Thames?’
He could have gone on, reminding her of his own incredible bargaining skill, and revealing his knowledge of certain holdings still owned by the company, though truth to tell they were neither large nor especially lucrative.
To Tom Reynolds' mind, there were two causes for the rapid downfall of the company.
One was Esther herself, who had never been accepted into what was essentially a man's world, and who, in her desperate efforts to prove them all wrong, had made one too many a mistake.
Unfortunately the damage was already done by the time Richard was fully recovered, and in spite of his commendable efforts to rescue what was left of the business he had built from his own sweat, it was far too late.
The other cause of the present crisis was Ben, a man of few principles, whose only view of life was through the bottom of a tankard, riddled as he was with guilt and arrogance.
‘You see, I know there is money in the coffers,’ Reynolds reminded his employer.
‘I do hope you're not working up to telling me that you won't be able to pay me what I'm due?
That would be very foolish of you.’
The threat was unmistakable.
‘I have no intention of seeing my dues gambled away by your wastrel of a son.’
Increasingly, he realised with a certain satisfaction that this was a family of shame and scandal.
So far, Esther Ward had manage to keep the scandal contained to a certain degree, but he wondered how much longer it could all be brushed under the carpet.
Enraged that he should take it on himself to tell her the state of her own business, and bristling at the manner in which he spoke of her precious son, Esther said sharply, ‘Whatever is or is not in the coffers is nothing whatsoever to do with you!
You're an employee, nothing more, and maybe not even that for very much longer.
You would do well to remember your place.
’ Dismissing him with a  gesture, she began walking towards the door which she meant to bang closed behind him.
When she realised he had no intention of following her, she paused and jerked round her head, staring at him with those glittering blue eyes.
‘Get out,’ she hissed.
‘Oh, you want me to leave, do you?’ he asked with a devious smile, at the same time drawing a large scroll from inside his waistcoat.
‘Surely not.
At least, not until you run your eye over what came my way this very morning.’
Ignoring her repeated instruction for him to get out, he unrolled the scroll and began spreading it over the desk, using the paperweight and penholder to secure its curling corners.
Still, she did not move.
Undeterred, he kept his gaze averted, saying quietly, ‘I have something here which may yet put the company back on an upward spiral.
’ When still she made no move, he chuckled and made as if to put the document away again, pausing when he saw out of the corner of his eye that she was returning to the desk, albeit hesitantly.
‘What is it?’ she asked suspiciously, curiosity getting the better of her.
In a moment she was beside him and leaning forward, her narrowed eyes poring over the detailed plans, and excitement growing within her.
The plans showed a warehouse of enormous proportions.
However, it was not the warehouse itself that was of interest, but the extensive parcel of land on which the building was situated.
Furthermore, the details showed that the building was derelict, and permission was already secured for it to be demolished.
Added to which, the entire parcel of land, totalling some fifty acres in all, was earmarked for residential development, or commercial enterprise.
‘What do you think?’
Tom Reynolds was utterly captivated with himself.
‘Clever of me to acquire such information, don't you agree?’
Then without disclosing how — if he had the money to proceed on his own, he  would not now be displaying that same information on Esther's desk — he pressed her for a response.
‘Of course, if you're not interested, there are those who would snap my arm off to get at this piece of land.’
‘Have you shown this to anyone else?’
‘I'm astonished that you should even think such a thing!’
He sounded suitably offended.
‘Hmm.’
Esther turned her head and glanced up at him, her blue eyes alight with suspicion.
At length she said with a devious manner to match his own, ‘And I'm astonished that the thought had not occurred to you.
No matter.
Either you have not shown these plans elsewhere, in which case I owe you an apology…or you have touted them round, and the fools can't see what's in front of them.’
A fever grew inside him as he gazed on her.
Esther was no beauty, but she had a certain handsomeness about her, a particular wickedness he had not seen in other women.
Wickedness excited him.
Esther excited him.
She was the reason he had remained with the Ward company, even after he was made to suffer the humiliation of having his wages paid by a woman.
Time and again, that woman had shown herself to be as scheming and ruthless as any criminal-minded rogue he had ever come across; with the exception of his good self, of course .
‘I can see I don't need to explain how this parcel of land is only a few hundred yards from the newly designated railway lines.
This is a rare opportunity to acquire a most valuable asset.’
‘I can see that for myself,’ she reminded him, but suddenly her manner was more subdued, her words more cautious.
‘But it's a long-term investment and, as I've only just explained, I haven't got that kind of capital.
Besides, it won't come cheap, I'm thinking.
There'll be others who see exactly what you and I  see.
And no doubt they will have the capital to take advantage of it.’
‘You have the capital.’
‘Not enough.
Besides, I have a house to run, and my husband's medical expenses.
We have outstanding wages and other debts that must be met.
Even with the few remaining assets, there is very little margin to work on.
I dare not spend another farthing, and it would be suicide for me to go to the bank, even if Richard agreed, which he won't.’
She stopped to peruse the plans once more, a greedy glint in her eyes.
‘It would rankle, though, if it went to one of our rivals.
And I do believe I still have some influence with my husband.’
She stared at Reynolds.
‘All the same, it is long-term.
As I say…going for this land could cost me everything.’
She looked at the man, waiting for his reassurance.
She was not disappointed.
In a hoarse whisper that betrayed his obsession with the idea, he told her, ‘If it was me, I'd beggar myself to acquire it.’
Not for the first time, his manner alarmed her a little.
She needed more time — time to think, time to weigh up the consequences.
‘I don't know,’ she mused aloud, stroking the palm of her hand up and down her throat.
‘It would not be easy to raise the capital needed,’ she said at length.
‘I would be forced to deposit certain deeds with the bank.
You realise that if I'm unsuccessful, they will foreclose and we'll be paupered.’
Suddenly, she saw the folly of it all.
‘No.’
Shaking her head, she said, ‘Richard would never take the risk, and I'd be a fool to even consider it.’
‘You would be a fool not to !’
She had unwittingly touched a nerve, sending his memory back over the years, to when he was a young man.
For the briefest and most uncomfortable moment, he was made to think of the father he'd left behind in the North of England, a  man just widowed and with a stepson whom he disliked intensely.
Tom Reynolds remembered how he had quarrelled with his father, a quarrel much like the one he was leading up to with Esther Ward.
He could hear his father's words now: ‘Thomas Arnold Reynolds…if you walk out on me, there will never again come a day when you'll be welcome in my house.’
Fearful that this might well be his last chance to secure his own future, he persisted, ‘Don't be afraid to strike out, Esther.
In this world, you have to grab what you want, before somebody else does.
Besides, how do we know the sale will be well attended?
Not everyone is as perceptive as you and me.
Not everyone will have seen the real value of that land.’
Having worked himself into a highly nervous state, he clenched his fists against his sides, saying in a grating voice, ‘My own father lacked the courage when it came right down to it…
I begged him to strike out when land was there for the taking, but he was a small thinker…a loser.
I have no time for losers !’
There was bitterness in his voice, and a degree of loathing.
Encouraged by the curiosity in her expression, he drove the argument on.
‘What's the alternative?
Will you sit tight in your little kingdom, and watch it crumbling all around you?
The office will be gone soon.
You've already given notice to the work-force, though you haven't paid them their dues.
Most of your capital is spoken for, and the creditors are closing in.
Think about it.
The way things are, you might struggle on for a few months.
A year maybe.
But you're bound to go down eventually.
You must take this opportunity, Esther,’ he urged.
‘Afterwards, you can sit back and watch the investment grow handsomely, before you offer it out to the highest bidder and make a killing.
What have you got to lose?’
There was a long painful silence while she deliberated  on his words.
There was never any question in her mind.
Some time back, when the warning signs were becoming clearer and Richard was incapacitated, she had been cunning enough to transfer certain holdings into her own name.
These represented a tidy sum, not a great fortune but enough for her to be comfortably off.
If it came to it, she would sell up and move away, taking Ben with her.
As for Richard, he had been a thorn in her flesh for too long now.
‘We'll see,’ she said cautiously.
‘We'll see.’
And with that vague promise, she bent her head to study the plans.
If anything was growing at an alarming rate, it was the network of railway lines running out of the centre of London to outlying suburbs.
Any land remotely near such construction held unlimited potential.
Not only would any subsequent residential development be wonderfully placed to take advantage of the new route into the heart of the city — thereby making the houses attractive to those whose business was in the city centre — but past experience had shown more often than not that the railway barons could well pay a fortune for any land they needed.
‘We might be on to something here,’ murmured Esther, her scheming mind leaping ahead.
‘I would certainly hate to see this land knocked down to another developer.’
‘I knew you'd see it my way.’
The man's voice came in an intimate whisper.
‘We think alike, you and I.’ Putting the flat of his hand over the plans, he pushed them aside.
The woman remained in a half-bent position facing the desk, her arms bearing the weight of her body, and her gaze fixed on the table.
She could feel his fingers tracing the curve of her neck.
He could not know how his words had affected her.
She was a woman with many needs.
For too long now, she had been starved of one particular need, the kind a respectable woman should not dwell on for too long, a  deep-down need that only a man could satisfy.
Disillusioned with the ruthlessly ambitious woman he had married, Richard had long ago turned his back on her.
Consequently, her needs had intensified.
The feel of a man's hands on her caused her to shiver; her shivering excited him, made him bolder.
Leaning forward, he pressed himself against her back, his mouth kissing the nape of her neck, and his hands raising her skirt, creeping fingers against her thighs, touching her in that most private part.
Trembling and a little afraid, she gently struggled, vaguely aware that her husband was in the next room.
But she would not be denied, not now.
It was too late.
Frantically he began tearing at the small buttons that ran from her waist to the collar of her dark blouse.
‘No.’
She bowed her head, moaning with pleasure, ceasing her efforts to pull away.
Encouraged by her lack of resistance, he tore all the harder at the blouse.
She could feel his hard member pushing into her spine, the sweat on his face as it rubbed against her neck, and her own need was all consuming.
Laying her hands on his, she stilled them.
Turning towards him, her face flushed, her fingers reached down, searching for and caressing the hard nakedness there.
He was groaning now, his face turned upward, eyes closed, his whole body trembling.
Suddenly, he was bent forward, his hands thrusting apart her blouse, his mouth wetting the dark erect nipples.
Lifting her with incredible ease, he laid her across the desk and prising her legs open, spread his half-naked body over hers.
Now, as he pushed himself into her, she cried out with joy, locking her arms round his neck and thrusting herself forward, making a noise like an animal devouring him, wanting him heart and soul.
Driven by a fever long suppressed, neither of them heard the door open.
Neither saw the man who stood  there, a sad bulky figure in the doorway.
He remained only a moment then, head bowed in shame, Richard Ward turned away.
He did not look at the woman who passed him in the hallway.
His thoughts were too personal, too painful.
Tilly Mulliver had seen the look on his face, heard the sounds emanating from the study, knew what he had witnessed, and her heart went out to him.
Unlike that gentle man she was neither shocked nor surprised because she had seen the way Tom Reynolds silently lusted after his employer's wife; she knew also that Esther was no better.
Pausing to watch the big man stride away, his broad shoulders bent as though beneath a great weight, Tilly despaired that she could do nothing to help him.
She had always considered Richard to be a fine and good man, a man not possessed of ambition, or of the ruthlessness required to succeed in business, a man with principles and a certain dignity.
Unfortunately, it was his high principles that had obliged him to reject the daughter he loved; a sad deed that had left its mark on him.
Watching him stride away, hurt and humiliated by the shocking scene he had just witnessed, she wondered whether she should tell him her secret.
But then she reminded herself of the promise she had made to another whom she loved.
She could not reveal the truth, because it was not hers to tell.
For now, she must keep her own counsel.
When the time came, he would be told.
When the time came, she would no doubt lose him for ever.
But then, that was as it should be.
Someone else had first claim on Richard.
Someone else who loved him every bit as much as she did.
But not more,never more.
On silent feet, she returned to her duties, mindful of her place in the order of things.
It was three o'clock the following morning when Tilly Mulliver was woken from a shallow sleep.
Voices resounded through the house, voices raised in anger.
At first she did not recognise the man's.
‘You're a slut!
God almighty…all these years, and I've been blind to what's been going on right under my nose.’
There was a pause, then a loud bang as though someone had thumped their fist on a table or sent an object flying against the wall.
‘I want you out of this house!
You and that useless son of yours.’
‘He's your son too, Richard Ward, and don't you forget it.
What's more, if anybody leaves this house, it won't be me and it won't be Ben.
If anybody leaves, it will have to be you, I'm afraid.
You see, this house is mine now.
Together with certain other assets…all legally signed over.
You yourself signed the papers.
You gave me power of attorney.
While you were wasting in your sick-bed, it was me who had to make all the decisions.
It didn't bother you then, and now there is nothing you can do, unless you want to broadcast to the world how your own judgement was sadly impaired.
Of course, everyone knows you gave up your place at the helm a long time ago.
Be careful, Richard!
If I thought you were a real threat, you know I would stop at nothing to discredit you.’
Tilly Mulliver had been shocked by the revelations, but she was also delighted that Richard was incensed enough to raise his voice in such anger.
At last, at long last , he had seen his scheming wife for what she really was.
Now, though, his voice was strangely quiet.
‘I hope you appreciate the seriousness of what you're saying?’
‘No!
It's you who needs to know the seriousness of what I'm saying, Richard.
This house and certain parcels of land acquired by me while you were indisposed…they're all in my name.’
She paused, allowing him to digest the information.
‘No doubt if you had made a  speedier recovery, I might not have enjoyed such a free hand; but then, your illness was prolonged by your feverish attack of conscience with regard to your precious daughter!
In spite of the fact that you turned her away, I was afraid that your love and devotion to her might make you forget how she had shamed you.
I don't forget how often you have threatened to throw Ben on to the streets; knowing full well that if he went, I would go with him.
When I saw the opportunity to strengthen my own position and lay claim to that which rightfully belonged to me, I brought you the papers, and, being the trusting fellow you are, you made no bones about signing them.
Of course, you never did read the small print.
Believe me, Richard, there is no court in the land that would believe you did not know what you were signing.
After all, it wasn't your mind that was ill, was it?
Now, you would not want such a thing bandied about, would you?’
‘So you're adding forgery to your many other dubious talents.’
The calmness of his voice belied the cold fury inside him.
He had been all kinds of fool.
And yet he did not blame her.
There was no one to blame but himself.
Now he knew the real extent of her cunning, he was on his guard, his mind searching for a way out of what was a very dangerous situation.
Knowing Esther, she would have executed the whole devious scheme with the utmost care.
He realised with a sense of desperation that he would have to be twice as cunning as his wife if he was to recover that which she had taken from him.
Paramount in his mind was the thought of his daughter.
Even so, Beth had shamed herself and brought the family name into disrepute.
He could not forget that.
‘Forgery!
Oh, dear me, no.
Certainly not forgery.
As I say…you yourself signed the papers.’
‘Then, of course, I did not know what I was signing.’
‘That I can't deny.
But don't reprimand yourself too  much, my dear.
After all, you really were quite ill for a long time.
I must admit, it was rather cruel of me to take advantage of your amiable nature.
But then, if I had waited until you had your full wits about you, you might have realised my intention and signed the house over to your daughter and her bastard.’
‘Beth was wrong in what she did, I won't deny that, and I don't know if I can ever forgive her.
But whatever she is guilty of…she can never sink to your level.
Remember that.
Remember this also: you had better enjoy your little triumphs while you can…because they won't last long.
You have my word on it.’
‘Do your worst.
It can only amount to nothing.’
As the cruel words died away, there came the sound of a door slamming, followed by Esther's tinkling laughter and the spiteful jibe: ‘I can't abide you near me.
You've forgotten how to be a man, Richard.
Do you hear me?
I was a woman today!
For the first time in years…
I was made to feel like a woman.
You're nothing to me.
NOTHING!’
Unable to sleep, Tilly got from her bed.
She put on her robe, lit the candle and went on tip-toe down the back stairs and into the kitchen.
Realising that she would probably be dismissed on the spot if Esther should discover her, she closeted herself in the pantry and proceeded to pour herself a glass of sarsaparilla from the big earthenware jug there.
Still incensed by what she had heard earlier, she began mentally planning a short journey for the morrow.
Bad things had taken place here this night.
Things that she must not keep to herself.
Above her, in Richard's bedroom, she could hear the slow deliberate footsteps striding heavily back and forth across the floor.
‘Oh, Richard, why ever did you stay with such a woman?’ she murmured.
But then she knew why, didn't she?
It always came back to his daughter.
Beth, who was conceived in love, born in shame, and raised in  jealousy and resentment.
‘Wherever you are now, Beth, I hope you never know your father's unhappiness.
I pray you've found a deal of contentment with your young man,’ she murmured kindly.
Suddenly there was movement in the hallway; whispering voices and soft footsteps.
Blowing out the candle, Tilly crept to the kitchen door and gingerly opened it.
The lamps were still burning either side of the front vestibule.
Esther's slight figure could be seen coming furtively through the door and into the recess.
There was a man leaning heavily on her arm; the man was Ben and, as usual, he was the worse for drink.
As they neared her hiding place, Tilly shrank back into the shadows.
Esther's voice was scathing.
‘You fool!
He might have heard you.
When will you realise that everything we have is at stake?
Time and again you've promised not to drink, not to gamble, and still you waste yourself.
Look at you!’
From her hiding place, Tilly saw the dark spreading patch that ran down his collar.
It was not the first time he had come home covered in blood.
‘Oh, you fool, Ben!
You fool!
One of these days you'll get yourself killed,’ his mother cried.
As she passed beneath the wall-lamp, Esther glanced up the staircase, her face drained white and haggard.
‘It's all for you,’ she whispered to her son.
‘All of it.
All the lying and scheming, all for you.
You're the only worthwhile thing in my life.
Beth never belonged here with us.
All of this is yours by right, and I won't let you throw it all away.
I'll make a man of you yet.’
Here her voice fell lower, taking on an edge that frightened the listening woman.
‘I swear I'll make a man of you yet.
Or kill you with my bare hands!’
‘I saw him again tonight.’
He pushed her away, but quickly clung to her again when he almost lost his balance.
‘Who?
Who did you see tonight?’
She was obviously  humouring him, anxious to get him safely into the sitting room.
‘Blacklock…
Tyler Blacklock.’
He laughed, a quiet cruel sound.
‘The fool asked me about Beth.’
‘What did you tell him?’
‘Oh, don't worry.
I told him how deliriously happy she was.’
‘So, Blacklock still believes her to be married and living the good life?
He still doesn't know that her father turned her out?
Presumably he doesn't even know that Beth was carrying his child?’
The idea amused her.
‘You're quite certain you said nothing that might make him suspect?’
‘What do you take me for?’
He lurched against her, flinging both his arms round her scrawny neck.
‘You old bitch,’ he mumbled.
‘You enjoy these rotten little games, don't you, eh?
I'm glad I told you now…it's worth it just to see the look on your face.’
He drew her to a stop and swung her round so he could see her face in the half-light.
‘You hate Beth, don't you?
You've always hated her.
I remember when me and her were kids.
Even when it was me that was in the wrong, you'd always blame her…punish her…shut her away in the cellar or the attic.
Why?
It's always puzzled me.
Why do you hate her so much?’
‘Shut up, you drunken idiot!’
Unknowingly, he had touched a raw nerve.
Thrusting his hands from her shoulders and threading her arm round his waist, she urged him on.
‘If he hears us, we'll both follow Beth on to the streets and that's a fact.’
She had not told Ben that the house was now in her name.
Knowing his weakness for cards and drink, she thought it wiser to keep such information to herself.
He allowed her gently to propel him towards the sitting room, all the while murmuring, ‘Always puzzled me…always puzzled me.’
‘Don't let it bother you, son.
She's not worth a second thought.
She's no good, and never has been.’
Her instincts told her that Ben was suffering a pang of conscience with regard to his part in this little deception.
It wouldn't do for him to reveal the truth to Tyler Blacklock, because then that young man would no doubt turn heaven and earth upside down to find his sweetheart.
He was eligible too, and well on his way to being rich.
The thought of Beth having both the man she loved and an easy life was too disturbing.
‘Well, it's too late now anyway.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Tyler's got himself a woman.
He was at the club with her.
Talking about wedding bells, she was.
Nice enough creature, I suppose — leggy, dark hair.
But she doesn't hold a candle to Beth.
’ He stopped again, leaning heavily on her arm, his voice low and tearful.
‘I'm drunk, Mother,’ he said, ‘but I know what I've done.
And I can't help but wonder whether Beth's all right.’
‘Well, you'd better stop wondering about her, and start wondering about yourself.
Things can't go on the way they are.
I won't put up with it, I tell you.
The business is going downhill fast, and things are even worse between me and your father.
You're no use to me the way you are.
I've warned you before, Ben, either you stop keeping bad company, or…’
He laughed in her face.
‘Or what, Mother dear?
Throw me out, will you?
Disown me?
No…
I don't think you'd do that to your little boy.
You couldn't bring yourself to punish me when I was a child and guilty of all manner of things…you'd rather punish poor little Beth, wouldn't you, eh?
It's me that's in the wrong now.
But you're still punishing her, aren't you?
You still haven't satisfied my curiosity.
What is it with you and Beth?
Why do you loathe her so?’
‘Be very careful what you say, Ben.
It's a dangerous  thing to let your tongue run away with you,’ she told him.
The warning was enough to silence him.
He had never heard her talk like that before, at least not to him.
It had a sobering effect.
Without another word, he let himself be led into the sitting room.
The watching woman waited until the sitting-room door was closed on the two secretive figures.
After a moment she retraced her steps to her own modest quarters.
She did not go straight to her bed.
Instead she stood with her back against the door.
Such things she had heard this day!
Such wicked things.
Tomorrow was her day off; she would have much to report.
First thing in the morning, she would make her way to the big house where she intended to relay everything she had learned.
It was not an errand she would enjoy, because she knew the sorrow it would cause, but her specific task in this household was to be the eyes and ears of her dear companion.
Unpleasant though it was, that was the reason for her being here, that and no other.
Her explicit instructions were not to get involved, nor ever to reveal her real purpose there.
And like a faithful friend, she had carried out these instructions to the letter; with one unforeseen eventuality.
She had come to like Richard Ward, and like had deepened to love.
But he saw her only as part of the furniture, and so her guilt was lessened.
In that one respect only she had failed her dear friend.
But though she had wished things might have been different, she consoled herself with the knowledge that it could come to nothing.
And no one would ever know.
‘She's mending now, Miss Mulliver, but she was real poorly…cried out for you, she did, but I had no way of knowing how to contact you.’
The maid was growing more and more flustered.
She was desperate to ensure that Miss Mulliver should not think her irresponsible.
‘Poorly, you say?’
Tilly Mulliver's only concern was for the state of her friend.
‘I hope the doctor was called.
What did he say?
When did this happen?
It's only been a week since I was here, and she was in perfectly good health then.’
Without stopping to take off her hat and coat, she hurried down the hallway with the little maid scurrying behind her.
In a moment the two of them were running up the wide curved stairs.
‘I knew this would happen!
I should be here…my place is with her.’
She had never liked the arrangement that had installed her in the Ward household, but having heard the tragic story, and knowing how much it meant to the woman who had rescued her from a life of loneliness, how could she refuse?
‘I did call the doctor, madam…straight away.’
Not used to rushing about in such a manner, the maid was breathless.
‘He said I was just to keep her warm in bed, and feed her on soft broth.
She were only poorly for three days.’
Anxious to be seen as having made all the right decisions, she added with a little pride, ‘There weren't no need for a nurse, 'cause I looked after the mistress myself…stayed up all night when the fever took her…mopped her brow and talked nice and low ‘til she come through it.
This morning I boiled her a nice fresh egg, and she ate the lot.
Like I said, the mistress is mending well now.’
If she thought to gain praise for her endeavours, she was disappointed.
‘Madam’ was only interested in hurrying to her friend.
‘It's all right, Margaret.’
Tilly was relieved at the sight which greeted her as she entered the bedroom; a large bright room where the sunlight found every corner, and the furniture was regal.
‘You can leave us now,’ she said, taking off her outdoor clothes and handing them to the maid.
‘But I would welcome a pot of tea and a slice of your fruit loaf.’
She glanced at the woman sitting in the bed; a long-limbed creature with gentle brown eyes and  chestnut-coloured hair that was now streaked with silver.
‘I understand you've had only a boiled egg this morning,’ she said meaningfully, then returning her attention to the maid, ordered, ‘Make that tea for two, Margaret.
And a double helping of your delicious cake.’
‘Very well, madam.’
The maid gave a knowing little nod and backed out of the door with a smile on her face.
She was glad Miss Mulliver was here.
There wasn't another soul in the whole world who could handle the mistress like her, and, if the truth be told, she had been really concerned about the mistress's bird-like appetite.
‘I'm not at all hungry,’ the woman protested, but then her whole face lit up in a brilliant smile as she held out her arms.
‘But, oh, Tilly…you don't know how glad I am to see you.’
When the other woman folded herself into the delicate embrace, she was shocked at how thin her friend had become.
‘Oh, Elizabeth, why didn't you send for me?’ she demanded, gently drawing herself away yet keeping the long pale fingers entwined in her own small hand.
‘If I had known you were ill, nothing on this earth would have kept me away.’
She was saddened and alarmed by the white face and big dark eyes that stared back at her from a thinner face than she remembered.
‘Now, you're not to fuss,’ Elizabeth reprimanded.
‘You know how I can't stand to be fussed over.’
She slid her fingers from her friend's grasp and pulled herself up in the bed, a smile lighting up the ageing beauty of her face.
‘What news have you?’
‘No news at all,’ she warned, ‘until I know how you've been…and whether you are on the mend.’
She had been sitting on the edge of the bed, and now she leaned forward to take the other woman's hand again.
‘What ails you, Elizabeth?’ she asked in a tender voice.
‘You were in good health when I saw you only a week ago today.’
‘Something and nothing, that's all it was.’
She laughed, but to the listening woman it held a hollow sound.
‘It might even have been Margaret's fruit cake, for all I know.
’ When she saw Tilly would not be so easily put off, she sighed loudly.
‘Oh, Tilly…it really was ‘something and nothing’.
The fever came on me out of nowhere.
I have no idea what caused it.
The doctor seems to think I took a chill while out walking on Tuesday last.
If you remember it was a blustery day, and you know how easily I take cold.’
‘Then what in God's name were you doing out on such a day?’
‘I just felt the need.
There was no particular reason.
I was not on an errand, if that's what you mean.’
For the briefest moment her eyes clouded over.
‘I would never do that again.
I should never have done it on that day.’
A look of alarm spread through her features.
‘Oh, Tilly, it was a foolish thing…supposing he had seen me standing outside his house?’
She gasped now, putting her fingers to her mouth as though to stifle the horror of her thoughts.
‘What if she had seen me?’
‘No one saw you, Elizabeth,’ Tilly assured her, ‘and no one knows how close you are.’
‘They must never know!’
‘They never will…unless you want them to.
Certainly, they will never know from me.’
Here she paused, looking deep into Elizabeth's eyes.
‘Would it be so terrible if they knew?’
‘Don't even say that!
You don't know.’
Her voice broke in a cry.
‘You can't know what dreadful memories would be unleashed.
Such jealousy, such pain.’
She shook her head vigorously.
‘No!
I could never do that to him.
Not to him.
Not to…
Richard.’
As always when she mentioned his name, her eyes filled with tears and she bowed her head, as though steeping herself in memories that were both painful and exquisite.
‘You still love him, don't you?
After all these years, you still love him.’
Realising her own love for the same man, there was a sadness in Tilly Mulliver's voice.
‘I will always love him.
You know that.’
Surreptitiously wiping her eyes, Elizabeth asked eagerly, ‘What news have you?
How is he?
And Beth…what of Beth?’
‘Goodness me!
So many questions, and I'm hardly in the door.’
Tilly regarded the woman with concerned eyes.
‘First, tell me, Elizabeth, are you really mending?’
She suspected that her friend had been more ill than she admitted.
‘Yes.’
The answer was given with conviction.
‘When you come next week, I'll be up and about, as good as ever.’
‘I don't mean to leave my next visit for another week, Elizabeth,’ she insisted.
‘In fact, I had intended to persuade you to give up this present arrangement.’
She fell silent for a moment before going on quietly, ‘I want to come home, Elizabeth.
I miss being with you.’
‘No!
Oh, dear me, no.’
There was desperation in her voice.
‘I miss you too, but you must stay near him, at least for a while longer.’
She had not told her friend the truth.
Her illness would develop.
Soon, she would be at peace.
Until then she must know his every move.
She needed to live his life with him, if only through the eyes and ears of her dearest friend.
Through shame and fear she had lost him once, a long time ago.
She must not lose him again.
‘Please, Tilly.
You know I wouldn't ask you to do this unless it was important to me.
Please, a while longer.
You've been such a good and loyal friend to me all these years, and I know it was wrong of me to ask something so demanding of you, but…’
The tears threatened and she could not say the words.
‘All right, Elizabeth.
I know what you're trying to say.’
Miss Mulliver knew this woman like she knew  herself, and loved her dearly.
‘Of course, I'll do as you ask…for a while longer.’
She had long understood that it was not a healthy situation for any of them, and the sooner Elizabeth realised that, the better.
She could have refused to go back to the Ward house, but she owed this woman everything.
After her own parents died and she was left destitute, Elizabeth had found her wandering the streets.
Out of the goodness of her heart, and perhaps because she also was lonely, she had taken Tilly home to be her companion.
That was ten years ago.
Since then the two of them had become almost inseparable.
Until the day, some time back, when Elizabeth had discovered where Richard and Esther Ward lived.
She had told Tilly the whole story, about the man she adored, and whose child she had brought into the world.
She told about the shame, and the heartbreaking decision she was forced to make under duress.
She revealed how, since that fateful day, her life had not been worth living…the loneliness, the bitter regrets and the lingering shame that rose above all else.
When she saw the post of maid in general to Esther Ward advertised, she used all her powers of persuasion to convince Tilly that it would only be for a very short time: ‘Just so I know how he is…how my daughter Beth is faring.’
Against her better judgement, Tilly had agreed.
Now she was afraid that Elizabeth's initial interest had become a dangerous obsession.
Today, though, was not a suitable time to raise the subject of it all coming to an end.
Also, Tilly had decided that she could not now reveal the news she had brought with her this morning; shocking news, news that told how Richard had been cheated and deceived by his own wife…and devastating news of Beth…how she was not safe and happy with Tyler Blacklock, as they had first thought, and how she also had been betrayed, both by  her own brother Ben, and by the woman who had raised her from a child.
How could Tilly tell of these things?
How could she explain the loathing in Esther Ward's voice, and the awful contempt in which she held both Richard and Beth…the very people whom Elizabeth idolised?
Tilly realised now that she could never tell her these things, and yet, she knew that the gentle Elizabeth had a right to know.
But not now.
She could not tell her yet; not until Elizabeth was completely strong again.
With a sinking heart, she also realised that she must go on living with the Ward family, at least for now.
And after all Elizabeth had done for her, heaven only knew it was little enough to ask in return.
Besides, her own secret affection for Richard Ward was calling her back.
And so she would return, to watch and listen, and to hope against hope that all would come well for both Richard and Beth.
She smiled now, a smile that put her friend at ease.
‘I won't let you down, Elizabeth,’ she said fondly.
‘You know that.’
And yet she felt bound to warn, ‘But, there has to come a time soon when you must let go of the past…or go to Richard and Beth with all that is in your heart.’
Elizabeth shook her head, a great sadness on her.
‘I can't go to them.
I can never go to them.’
‘But why?
I have never understood why.’
‘Because I sinned against them both all those years ago.
I sinned and brought shame down on all of us.
It was shame that crippled four lives.’
Now, when the memories poured over her, she faltered.
‘Shame is a terrible thing, Tilly.
It never goes away.
I have no right to intrude on their lives.
Not now.
Not ever.’
She would not be on this earth much longer.
It was too late for confrontations.
‘But, oh, I do cherish the little things you tell me…the things he laughs at, the way he strides out with pride.
Wrong though it is, I still love him.
You keep him alive in my  heart.
Through him…through you, my dearest friend, I have a purpose in living.’
As she spoke, joy brightened her face, and the love she still felt for this man was alive in her every word.
‘And Beth…so lovely, you say?
So delightful.
Sometimes, I would give everything just to let her know the truth.’
The tears coursed down her face.
‘She would never forgive me, and neither would Richard.
I made my decision a long time ago, and now I have no rightful place in their lives.
I've caused enough heartache.
I won't be the cause of any more.’
‘Oh, Elizabeth, Elizabeth!’
Embracing her friend, Tilly asked herself whether, given the same circumstances, she herself would have acted any differently?
The answer was the same as on every previous occasion she had asked herself that question.
When she was young and maybe a little wilful, Elizabeth had made what she deemed to be the right decision, and she had suffered because of it.
Now, almost a quarter of a century later, she was suffering more than ever, because she could not forget, and because she needed to feel close to the ones she still loved.
Who could blame her?
Who could say she was wrong?
Certainly not Tilly.
She had her own shame, and could not rid herself of the guilt that came from loving a man who was not hers to love.
She felt no wrong in inventing things to tell Elizabeth.
If she could ease her pain, then she would gladly make any sacrifice that was asked of her.
If it had not been for Elizabeth taking her in off the streets and giving her a home, then Tilly's own life would have been empty.
She adored Elizabeth, this good kind soul who had asked for little in return.
‘In a moment you can tell me all about Richard.
But first, is Beth happy with her young man?
What was his name…
Tyler?
Yes, that's right.
I remember now.’
Suddenly she was young again, living through her daughter, like every mother does.
‘And tell me again how  she has a look of me.’
The questions spilled out excitedly and her dark eyes shone.
‘You will tell me everything, won't you, Tilly?
You won't leave anything out?’
‘No, I won't leave anything out.’
Her conscience pricked her as she went on to lie, telling Elizabeth everything she wanted to hear.
Good and happy things that would not cause her heartache.
Things that took her back to when she was young.
Things that filled her with joy and drew her into the everyday lives of the two people she had loved for so many lonely years.
Through her friend, Elizabeth captured so many dreams, building memories that were, by their very nature, second-hand.
But she cherished them, and hung on every word that Tilly uttered.
‘Richard looks so proud and handsome,’ she related, and when it was said, it came from the heart, because it was what Tilly herself saw, the man whom Elizabeth had never stopped loving, and the man who had captured her own heart.
When it came to telling Elizabeth about Beth, how she ‘seemed happy enough’, Tilly prayed it was so.
Elizabeth listened with rapture to everyday incidents of family life.
Richard and Beth were hers at last, the family she had been cruelly denied; because of love, and guilt and shame, they were closer now than they had ever been.
Elizabeth had lost a lifetime of belonging.
It was snatched from her by a woman without heart or conscience, a woman driven by greed.
Esther Ward had more reason to be ashamed than her vulnerable sister Elizabeth, for she had taken advantage of the forbidden love which had grown between Elizabeth and Richard, and she had never once opened her heart to the innocent girl-child who was born out of that love.
Yet she saw only admirable virtues in herself, and badness in others.
‘Liverpool!’ she cried with surprise.
After they made love, he had left the warm bed and her possessive arms.
Like so many times before, he had gone to the window where he stared out across the night sky, his thoughts a million miles away.
When, sensing that he had left her alone in more ways than one, the woman asked him to come back to bed, he had not turned to look at her but instead remained silent a moment longer.
After an agonising lull, he told her quietly, ‘So often I've left London, only to return, yet I can't settle.
For a long time now I've intended going North.
There are growing opportunities there, especially in the major cities where, like London, the population is spilling into the suburbs.
As yet the land is still relatively cheap.
Its potential isn't even tapped.
So far I've been very fortunate in that I've been in the right place at the right time; buying land and property in a subdued market then selling it on when demand is high.
There have been ups and downs, yes, but on the whole my fortunes have grown.
There's an auction in Liverpool soon.
I'm tempted to attend.’
He nodded as though reassuring himself.
‘Yes, I have a good feeling about it.’
Clambering out of bed, the tall dark-haired woman flung a silk robe around her slim figure.
Going to him, she wound her arms into his smoking-jacket and snaked them about his naked body.
‘I love you,’ she murmured.
He smiled into her eyes, his heart filled with kindness and gratitude; but not love.
He could never love any other woman.
Not when Beth was so alive in his mind.
‘I know,’ he whispered.
‘And you would still leave me?’
He smiled again, a sad, lonely smile that told her he was still not hers.
She believed he never would be.
‘Come with me, if you want to,’ he whispered.
He owed her that much.
‘Not as your wife though?’
He shook his head, ‘Is that so important?’
Now it was her turn to lapse into thought.
Being the wife of Tyler Blacklock was important.
But she would never admit it.
During the year they had been together, she had seen him time and again in the dark quiet hours when he believed himself to be unobserved.
She had watched him, standing by the window, tortured, lonely, a man in pain, a man in love.
But it was not her he was in love with.
‘No,’ she lied.
‘It's not important.’
Relieved, he drew her into the haven of his arms.
‘You're a good woman,’ he told her.
She laughed dryly.
‘But not the marrying kind, is that it?’
‘Something like that.’
‘It's her, isn't it?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I don't know who she is, Tyler.
I only know that she has your love, and that she is a very lucky woman.’
She asked a question then that tore him apart.
‘Why aren't you with her instead of being with me?’
He shrugged his shoulders, but gave no answer.
‘She's married.
Is that it?’
She saw the agony in him.
‘Oh, Tyler, I'm sorry.
You've been good to me.
I should learn to mind my own business.’
Drawing her tighter to him, he assured her, ‘If you want to come North with me, you can.
You know that, don't you?’
‘Of course I want to come with you,’ she told him.
‘Don't decide to settle there though, will you?’
She shivered.
‘North seems a long way away, and they tell me it's cold there.’
When he laughed, she tugged at his arm.
‘The bed's still warm though.
‘Not yet,’ he said, gently freeing himself.
‘In a while.’
Disappointed, she turned away and slid back between the sheets.
From there, she peeped at his tall muscular figure, so solitary, always alone.
Except for the woman he kept hidden in his heart.
Chapter Seven
‘To hell with you!’
Luther Reynolds clenched the sides of the chair, his large fists curling and uncurling, and his fiery dark eyes glaring at the determined face of David Miller, the stepson he had come to resent with such bitterness that he could taste it.
Yet he must contain the depths of his feelings, his hatred, his fervent wish to see his stepson come to a sorry end.
It wasn't easy, having David under the same roof.
But there were times when he had to hold his tongue, if only to ensure that he could keep on using this fool for his own ends.
It amused him to see how the gullible idiot deferred to him, even when they were in the midst of a vicious argument.
David Miller was never vicious though; he was too lily-livered for that.
‘Useless!
That's what you are,’ the old man screeched now.
‘You never were any bloody good to me.’
He moaned aloud and rolled his eyes to the ceiling.
‘God give me strength,’ he yelled, instantly turning his attention back to the younger man who stood before him, and whose woebegone expression would have been comical were it not so pitiful.
‘What the hell are you staring at me like that for, you ungrateful bugger?’ shouted the old man, thrusting his powerful frame forward in a threatening gesture.
‘If it weren't for me giving you a roof over your head after your mother had the gall to die on me, you would have ended up in the bloody workhouse!
And what thanks do I get, eh?
None at all, that's what.
None at all.
Nothing but whining and  whingeing , trying to run my life…
My life!
Bloody cheek.
How would you know what I'm capable of?
You're useless.
Do you hear me, Miller?
I said you're useless.’
Here his voice took on a devious note and his eyes slanted so that all light and expression were shut out.
‘Where is she?
Where's that wife o’ yours, eh?’
When David appeared to ignore the pointed question, he asked again in a lewd voice, ‘Worn her out, have you?
Oh, I heard you again last night…pushing your attentions on her…mating like dogs.
But there aren't any brats to show for it, are there?
You still haven't proved yourself a man, have you, eh?
With three years to make your mark, your wife's belly should have been permanently swollen.’
He cocked his head sideways and looked at his stepson with a wicked expression on his face.
‘She doesn't like it, does she, eh?
That fancy wife of yours doesn't like you touching her, does she?
Well, I can't say as I blame her because if I were a woman,I wouldn't like your paws on me either…and that wife of yours is no ordinary woman either.
Special, isn't she?
Too bloody good for the likes of you, wouldn't you say?
Haughty and beautiful, isn't she?
Proud , that's what she is…too sodding proud.
No woman on this earth has any right to be proud, least of all one who comes to her husband with three brats in tow.
But she's proud all right.
And you're going the same way, I can see that!
But you're making a mistake if you think you'll ever be a better man than me.
You're too weak.
You've always been too weak…got no spunk, and never have had.
So don't think you're man enough to tell me what to do.
What!
Even bent and old like I am, I'm a better man than you'll ever be.
‘I'm going to that sale, because I want that land.
I want it badly, and I can't trust you to get it for me.
Oh, yes, I mean to be there.
I'll show the buggers that old man Reynolds isn't done yet.
I can still give them a run for their money.
Every time they put in a bid, I'll be there to force the scoundrels beyond their limits…and I'll keep on forcing until that land deed has the name of Luther Reynolds written on it.
It's land I'm after, not houses.
I'm done with buying houses built on somebody else's land.
You never really own any part of it, don't you see?
Look at Larkhill.
I'm buggered every which way I turn because the ruins are mine, but the land beneath is somebody else's.
I can't rebuild without paying through the nose for the privilege, and even if I did build, getting rent is like getting blood from a stone!’
He jerked his head angrily.
‘I'm caught between a pig and a poke, blast it.
It's land that makes the profit.
Land, that's what I want.
And don't you tell me I'm not fit to go to this bloody auction!’
His eyes were bulging out of his head, and if he could have easily sprung from the chair, he might have locked his hands round the younger man's throat.
As it was, he sat bolt upright, his cane propped against the chair and his legs jutting rigidly before him.
‘I'll be there, I tell you.
What's more,you'll be taking me, because if you refuse I'll have the lot of you out of this house before you can turn round…you, that haughty bitch you married, and the three bastards she brought with her.
Now then, what have you to say to that?’
His lips clamped together and he raised one corner of his thin mouth in a spiteful leer, his large bald head nodding deliberately to and fro while he waited for the younger man's response.
‘If David doesn't take you, then I will.’
Beth's quiet voice defused a situation that David was incapable of handling; she knew that.
Worse, Luther Reynolds knew it also.
Now, when the old man jerked his head round in astonishment, she looked past him to smile  encouragingly at her husband, saying, ‘Forgive me for interrupting, David, but I was within earshot and, as you know, I take great exception to Mr Reynolds’ particular brand of cruelty.’
Beth's forthright remarks brought a roar of laughter from the old man.
‘Oh!
‘Cruel’ am I?’he said mockingly.
‘How's that then…pray do tell me, Mrs Miller?’
He laid emphasis on the ‘Mrs’, at the same time bowing his head in a servile manner.
‘And why would you want to take me to this auction?
Do you see yourself as being given some sort of payment, eh?
Or perhaps you've an idea that you might worm your way into my affections, is that it?
Well now, if that's your little game, you can bloody well think again!
You'll not get a penny of my money.
Not now, and not ever.
I'm warning the pair of you…my solicitors have got their instructions.
When I'm put beneath the ground, every penny I own…every piece of property, every square inch of land, every stick of furniture and even the clothes on my back…it's all to go my son.
My real flesh and blood.’
‘Your real ‘flesh and blood’?’
Beth made a puzzled face.
‘Oh!
You mean the son who deserted you when he realised you might be a burden on him?
The son who helped himself to your money before running off?
That brave young man who hasn't contacted you these many years?
Why, of course you must leave all your worldly goods to him.
It would be unthinkable for you to consider David here, who has been more of a son than you ever deserved…the stepson who stayed by your side when your own son deserted you; and who even forgave you when his beloved mother died because of your neglect.’
There was a cold fury in her voice now.
‘Shut your mouth, woman!’
His eyes grew bulbous and a small trickle of spittle crept from the corner of his mouth.
‘Shut your wicked mouth, or get out of my house, do you hear?’
He lurched forward with intent to  swipe at her but lost his balance and was thankful to fall heavily back into the chair.
After enjoying so many years of unquestioning servility from David, it infuriated him to know that Beth did not feel threatened by him.
‘If that is what you want, Mr Reynolds, then I'm sure David can be persuaded to leave with his family,’ Beth told him icily; though in fact she despaired of ever persuading him to leave this house.
She had long realised that while Luther Reynolds lived, David would always be there to pander to his every whim.
But she was not intimidated by the old man's manner which could sometimes be childishly cajoling, sometimes violent as it was today.
Nor was she concerned by his threat to put them out of the house.
Almost from the day she and the children had been brought to this large dilapidated dwelling on Buncer Lane, Luther Reynolds had made it painfully clear that they were not welcome.
Not a single day or night had passed without him making life as difficult and miserable as was possible.
But he had stopped short of throwing them out, because then he would only be punishing himself.
Whether he liked it or not, this despicable old man was dependent on his stepson.
‘No, Beth.’
The gentle-hearted David was shocked by the cold vehemence between these two people whom he loved more than anything else in the whole world.
‘There'll be no talk of us leaving.
This is our home, and this is my father.
He needs me.’
‘Need you!’
The old man sneered, but he was more subdued.
‘Have I ever said I bloody well need you?’ he demanded.
Secretly, though, he was thankful that David had intervened.
Although he would be glad to see the back of the lot of them, it wasn't yet time.
Lately, he had been of a mind to trace his son Arnold Thomas, but until such a day as he might be fortunate in that respect, he had no one except the lily-livered David.
And, though  he would never admit it, his stepson was the only person he could trust to handle his business interests.
‘Now, don't be foolish, Father,’ David gently reprimanded.
‘If I wasn't here to take care of things, how on earth would you manage?
And what would happen to the business, eh?’
He knew only too well what would happen; no doubt his stepfather would have the daily help to come in and take care of him, but as far as the business was concerned, it would likely be whipped from under him by the many land sharks who would prey on the defenceless old man without the slightest compunction.
The thought was horrifying to David.
During these past ten years, he had learned a great deal about his stepfather's business; not only did he trudge the streets collecting money, which he then took to the bank after it had been religiously recounted by Luther, but he was the one who made all the entries into the ledgers; he was the one who always met with accountants and reported back to his stepfather, who constantly grumbled that he was ‘too ill and racked with pain' to weigh himself down with the burden of meetings and ridiculous men in ridiculous suits, with their ridiculous ideas that a man should always invest the money he earns with the sweat of his brow…
‘Twaddle!’ the old man would say.
‘There's only one place for money, and that's a safe place…a place where it can make a healthy profit without being subjected to the fluctuation of bonds and shares and suchlike.
Never take risks.
That's always been my way.’
And he never did.
He was too wily, or too much of a coward.
‘So you'll do as I ask, and take me to the auction in Liverpool next week?’
Luther Reynolds sensed his stepson's weakness, and he knew the argument was going his way.
He was wily enough to recognise that he did need his stepson; more than David himself would  ever know; or at least needed him until his own son could be found and persuaded home.
All the things that bloody woman, Beth, had said were true, but his old mind was not so sharp as it once was.
His body was fading and he had need of his own son beside him.
Yes, Arnold Thomas had done a bad thing in deserting him just when he needed him most, and he had been a rogue of the worst kind to have stolen money into the bargain; but if he could only find his son, he would tell him that all was forgiven, and that he wanted him here, in his rightful place, at the helm of his father's business.
Unbeknown to his stepson, the old man had already been scanning the local papers with a view to hiring some kind of enquiry agent to search far and wide for the son who had absconded all those years ago, but as yet he had not been given the opportunity to do anything positive.
However, it was only a matter of timing.
Meanwhile he had to tread very carefully, because if David suspected that his talk of cutting him out of the business was more than just talk , there was no telling how he would react.
Even a worm occasionally turns.
He knew the man whom he had grudgingly raised from a boy.
David was loyal to a fault, and in his naive understanding quietly expected the same kind of loyalty in return.
The old man silently cursed himself for blurting out his intentions just now…about how he would leave nothing to David, yet everything he had to his own undeserving son.
The woman knew he meant every word he said, but he was counting on the fact that she would never convince her husband of it.
In future he must guard his tongue or risk everything.
And it went without saying that, if he was not prepared to take a risk with his money, he most certainly was not prepared to take a risk which might lose him the one person he could trust.
David might not be his real kith and kin, but he was honest, and he was hard-working…willing to be at his beck and call and to  labour long hours, with only a pittance for his troubles.
Luther knew that he might search long and hard, from one end of the earth to the other, but he would never find such an incredibly forthright and loyal employee.
Instead, he might be cursed with one who would rob him blind and charge him three-times the wages for the privilege.
So, with the exception of the boy Matthew, who was marked with the same ruthless stamp as himself, he grudgingly tolerated the ‘intruders’ brought under his roof, and whom he had come to resent beyond reason; perhaps because he saw in them his own failure as a family man.
Or, and this was more likely, he found Beth too lovely, too desirable, too much like the women he had longed for as a young man, and never had the fortune to find.
Twice he had wed, and neither woman had truly satisfied him.
Beth stood before him now, a dignified creature, her slim shapely figure taut with anger, her wild brown hair loose to her shoulders, and her dark flashing eyes daring him.
He wanted her!
Had wanted her since that first day.
But wanting only frustrated him more.
Want was all he could do, for his body had long ago ceased to function in that way.
But his mind was quick, and his memories were all intact; and the longing never really went away, that awful persistent longing that could find outlet only in frustration and anger, and a wish to do bad things; to hurt and to insult like he did now while he waited for David to concede defeat and agree to take him to the auction after all.
‘I don't want you here,’ he snapped at Beth.
–This is between me and him.
What the hell has any of this to do with you, anyway?’
‘Oh, but it has everything to do with me,’ she replied.
Realising the vindictive nature of this man, and knowing how he had conditioned her husband since he was a child, Beth felt obliged to look out for the interests  of those she loved.
Less than one month after she and David were married, and knowing that he himself would never have the courage to ask, Beth had gone to Luther Reynolds with a certain proposition.
‘Either you increase my husband's wages to reflect the work he does on your behalf, or I might find it my duty to persuade him to look for other employment, perhaps with one of the many property owners hereabouts.’
She hoped such a threat would put the fear of God in him, not least because he had a particular loathing for competition, and the idea that his own stepson might join forces with the opposition and take with him all manner of secrets was too much to stomach.
The princely sum of one guinea a month was agreed on, and though it was not as much as Beth would have liked, it was a welcome increase, and one that positively staggered her disbelieving husband.
As a result, she had been able to put away a few shillings every week, and over these past three years the shillings had mounted until now the bag of coins which she kept hidden under the bedroom floorboards had swollen to a tidy sum.
Her biggest regret was that she found it necessary to keep its existence from David.
Somehow she could not help but suspect that he would think it immoral to squeeze extra wages out of his stepfather, only to hoard them beneath the floorboards.
Beth had soon discovered that David Miller had many weaknesses, but the one that concerned her most, and gave her reason to fear for the future, was his blind love for and loyalty to the monster who had raised him.
It was an unnatural devotion which, to her mind, could end only in disaster.
A strange relationship, it was built on love and hate, uniquely tender on one side, and unspeakably cruel on the other.
More and more, Beth found herself acting as the buffer between them, and  curiously enough, at times when she sought to protect him, it seemed as though she was actually having to fight her own husband.
She looked at him now, a pathetic and solitary figure almost like a small boy as he stood before the man who had always dominated and manipulated him; certainly, there was an air of obedient subservience as he fidgeted uncomfortably, his dark brown hair falling lankly over his forehead and vivid brown eyes large with sadness.
He seemed so thin and haggard.
Beth remembered how Maisie had said David Miller was ‘going on forty I shouldn't wonder’.
The fact was, he was ten years younger.
David had been eighteen when his mother died, after a surprisingly short illness, which Luther Reynolds had insisted was, ‘Nothing more than a cold.’
The weight his stepfather had put on the young man's shoulders had made David seem much older than his twenty-eight years.
Never once had he shown him any kind of affection.
And still David would not hear a word against his beloved stepfather.
Aware that she was causing David a deal of agony just being in the same room as Luther, Beth turned to him now, saying with some tenderness, ‘And you, David?
Would you rather I left the room?’
For a brief moment, she actually thought he would defy the old man, but then her heart sank when he sheepishly replied, ‘Perhaps it would be for the best, dear.’
Having said that, he self-consciously dropped his gaze from her disappointed eyes and turned it to the multi-patterned carpet.
Pausing just long enough to sweep the old man's triumphant face with an antagonistic look, Beth turned from them both and went, head high, out of the room and into the hallway, where the late March sunshine found its way through the tall arched windows, and where the air seemed relatively  fresh compared to the musty damp smell of the old man's den.
As Beth went through the house, from the wide spacious hallway and into the dark-panelled sitting room, it struck her again how lovely the old place could be.
Buncer Lane itself was a delightful road, flanked on both sides mostly by detached houses, with fancy lead-light windows and wide impressive doors.
The houses were surrounded by gardens, some with a little front wall, and some with high laurel hedges, or holly trees that scratched you as you walked by.
Luther Reynolds' house was the largest of them all, a red-bricked dwelling with pretty decorative fan-lights above the windows and door.
Some time ago he had ordered that the front garden be flagged over, and now the weeds were pushing up between the paving slabs and the stones themselves had sunk in the ground at one end.
There was little that could be done to improve the overall unkempt appearance, except to dig the whole lot up and start again, but, as Luther Reynolds told David on one occasion, ‘I don't use the bloody garden, so why should I waste precious money on it?
And so it remained, an eyesore and a danger, although Beth herself regularly cleared the weeds from the path.
The house consisted of two reception rooms, each furnished with black oak monstrosities that created a dark and depressing atmosphere.
Then there was a smaller room at the front of the house where the old man counted his money, and which he called his ‘den’, and, to the rear of the house the kitchen, a large, well-designed place with windows on two sides; one looking out to the side of the house where the undergrowth reached waist height, and the other two situated at each end of the wall that overlooked the rear garden.
When Beth first came to the house, the rear garden was derelict.
After a little more than a year, she alone had transformed it into  a place where the children could play in safety, a stretch of patchy grass with a few well-cared-for roses round its border, and an immensely high wall skirting the garden from one end to the other.
Beth had persuaded David to mend the rustic oak bench, and it was here that she would spend her happiest times, sitting beneath the old apple tree, watching the children at play.
Looking out of the window on this pleasant Sunday afternoon, she smiled as she saw the three children engaged in various activities at the far end of the garden.
Her son Richard, whom she had named after her own father, was now a sturdy three year old, with a serious nature for one so young, although he had a mischievous and exasperating streak.
With his thick black hair and sea-green eyes, he was the living image of Tyler.
Every time Beth looked at him, the pain almost cut her in two.
The love that had been denied her was always there, together with fond recollections of the father who had never seen him.
The torment never really went away, but she had learned to live with it.
Even now, as she smiled at her son's antics — he was laughing and clapping his little hands together and making mischievous faces at Cissie, who adored him — memories of Tyler besieged her heart.
‘I can't forget you,’ she murmured softly.
‘After all this time, I still love you.’
She wondered at her own weakness in craving for a man who had professed his love for her and made her with child, only to walk away without even a backward glance.
In all fairness, Tyler had not known about the child.
But then, would he have cared?
Hadn't he also got his landlady's daughter with child?
And didn't he desert her in the same heartless way?
All of these things Beth constantly reminded herself of; together with the fact that she was now a married woman and should reserve all her thoughts for the man who had put a ring on her finger, even though she had  a son, and both of Maisie's children.
In spite of all the weak traits in his character, David Miller had kept his promise to Beth.
‘I'll take care of you,’ he had said, ‘I'll help you to raise Maisie's children.’
He had done all of that, and she would always stand by him because of it.
Yet, somehow, in her secret heart, he never seemed to reach the same stature as Tyler Blacklock.
Beneath all the doubts, all the hurt, there still lingered something…something she could not put a finger on.
Now she had stopped denying her love for Tyler.
Hidden away, pushed to the darker recesses of her mind, it was a tangible presence that gave her a degree of comfort in the terrible loneliness of her marriage.
Yes, she still loved him.
She probably always would.
Not for the first time, Beth asked herself how she could so readily condemn David for being so weak as to love someone who had treated him in such a callous and despicable manner, when she herself was guilty of the very same weakness!
She had affection for David, and a deep gratitude towards him.
She endured his lovemaking, sometimes she even enjoyed it, but for the greater part she could not love him in the way he truly deserved.
Inside, she was like his stepfather's room…dark and secret, allowing David into only a small part of it.
She felt guilty, always guilty, thinking how she should be opening her whole heart to him.
But then, how could she, when her heart was already given?
From her vantage point, Beth watched the children a while longer.
She gave thanks to God for her precious son, and for the opportunity to raise Maisie's two children.
If she had any misgivings, they were for Matthew.
He had never forgiven her for intruding in what he had seen as his family, his responsibility, the only inheritance his father had left him.
These past three years he had grown sullen and morose, keeping himself at a distance, always watching her, silently blaming her  for Maisie's tragic death.
With his dark brown hair and expressive violet eyes, he was an incredibly handsome boy, not yet fifteen, but tall and with a broad back which was a legacy from his boyhood in the mines.
Only last year, on the instructions of Luther Reynolds, David had brought the boy out of the mines and begun to teach him the way of business; Matthew often accompanied him on his rounds, and though he made little attempt to befriend David, the boy worked, and learned, and spent so many hours closeted in the ‘den’ with the old man, that Beth was obliged to voice her concern.
All the same, her protests went unheeded, and each day that passed she could see Matthew becoming more and more influenced by old Luther.
Sometimes she would lie awake in the dark hours when David was sound, asleep, and talk to her old friend Maisie.
‘I'm so sorry, sweetheart,’ she would whisper, ‘I feel I've failed you where Matthew is concerned.
But he's so bitter, so filled with resentment, and I can't promise that I will ever be able to change that.
But I won't give up, I promise you that, Maisie…
I won't give up.’
With a lighter heart, she would tell Maisie of her other child, Cissie, who was now going on thirteen, a lovely girl who was the same forthright and delightful character as her mam before her.
Beth's attention focused on the girl now, slim, her hair more fair than dark, but fine like Maisie's.
She was playing with Richard, teasing him with a fallen branch from the apple tree, and snatching it away when the child made to grab it.
Their laughter was a tonic to Beth, and she was glad that Cissie had finally begun to forget that terrible night when Maisie was killed, along with poor Meg, and another neighbour who perished while asleep in his bed.
For many months afterwards, Cissie had suffered awful nightmares, when she would scream for her mam.
It seemed to Beth as though nothing would  ever console her.
But she showered the girl with love and affection, sitting with her night after night, to talk and reminisce, recalling Maisie's antics, and laughing and crying together until after a while Cissie began to emerge from her grief and the bond between her and Beth grew ever stronger.
Matthew, though, allowed himself no respite from his black crippling grief; he kept it close, deep inside him.
He never talked of Maisie, nor of that night, and whenever Cissie broached the subject of their mam, his reaction was violent.
He would lash out at her and afterwards hide himself away in some shady corner where he would sit, his head lowered to his knees, engulfed in a dangerous brooding mood that lingered until the day's end.
After a while, Cissie learned not to speak of Maisie, but she confided her sadness in Beth.
‘Matthew doesn't love me any more,’ she would whisper.
‘But I love him…even though he makes me afraid sometimes.’
He made Beth afraid too.
Yet she suffered his grief with him, wanting to share his sorrow, hoping that she could alleviate some of his pain.
She knew he was suffering, because even though he tried to hide it, Beth saw it in his eyes.
She tried so hard to help him, to talk with him and show him how much she cared…how much they all cared.
But he would not let her near, and her heart was saddened because of it.
Only the old man got through to Matthew, and even though David argued his stepfather was showing only kindness, and ‘had the boy's interests at heart’, Beth was not convinced.
Time had only confirmed her fears.
And yet it was not all bad news, she reminded herself, because Matthew was no longer condemned to go underground in order to earn a living, and David had told her how amazed he was at ‘the boy's remarkably quick mind and business acumen’.
All the same, in spite of David's assurances, Beth was uneasy.
Her instincts warned her that no good could come of this unhealthy alliance between Matthew and the old man.
She looked at the boy now.
Isolated from the other two, he was leaning against the apple tree, his hands deep in his pockets and a surly look on his face.
His eyes were watchful, unfriendly.
Now and then he would smile, as though enjoying some dark secret thought.
Shaking her head forlornly, Beth turned away.
Suddenly, the still afternoon air was rent by a piercing scream, then the sound of the child crying and Cissie's angry voice: ‘Go away, Matthew!
You're horrible…horrible!’
Swinging back to the window, Beth was horrified to see the girl pressed against the apple tree with her arms wrapped protectively round the little boy, the two of them bent double, cringing together while Matthew flayed them viciously with the branch.
Even from where Beth stood, she could see the blood trickling down Cissie's arm.
In a minute she had rushed from the house and was running down the garden.
‘STOP THAT!’ she yelled, but Matthew took no notice.
Instead, he laughed aloud and beat them all the fiercer.
‘Mummy!
Mummy!’
The boy clung to Cissie, his eyes wide with terror as he cried out.
His cries became screams of pain when the branch whipped against his face, causing blood to spurt from his nose, staining his shirt with crimson raindrops.
‘Keep down, Richard…
Cissie!
Keep your faces down.’
Beth feared for the children's sight as she lurched forward to grab the branch.
If she thought Matthew would stop once she had hold of the other end, Beth was badly mistaken.
Far from letting go, he wrestled like a mad thing, kicking out with his boots and laughing like a maniac when the branch flicked across her throat and drew blood.
But if he was determined, Beth was equally so.
Gripping the sharp branch with both hands, she  worked her way along it until she was close enough to see the whites of his eyes.
His laughter was terrible to hear.
In that moment, she thought he had gone completely mad.
But then, without warning, he turned his head and spat across the garden, simultaneously snatching his hands from the branch and sending Beth crashing backwards into the tree trunk!
The force of the impact knocked the breath out of her.
‘You rotten coward, Matthew!’
Cissie was the first to recover, and there was no doubt she would have chased him to the ends of Kingdom Come if Beth hadn't thrust out an arm to stop her.
‘He deserves a proper thrashing,’ Cissie protested, fiercely indignant that she had been unable to defend herself while her cowardly brother took delight in whipping her.
‘He's bad, Beth.
Matthew's turned out real bad.’
And though she would dearly have loved to deny it, Beth remained silent.
Cissie was right.
Maisie's son had turned out bad.
‘Nothing but a prank, I tell you.’
Luther looked deep into the boy's eyes and smiled wickedly when he saw the truth lurking there.
Shifting his attention to David, who was still holding the boy by the scruff of his shirt collar, he told him solemnly, ‘He's different from you, isn't he?
You were never spirited, even as a boy.
So I don't expect you to understand how harmless the incident was.’
‘It was a wicked and spiteful thing to do.’
David was urged on by Beth's insistence that he ‘talk some sense into the boy, or watch him go from bad to worse’.
David's answer had been to bring the boy before the old man.
He wondered now how he might explain to Beth that his stepfather saw no real harm in what Matthew had done.
In fact, David himself believed it would have been far better to have let the whole matter drop.
The old man was right as always.
In all probability it really had been nothing more than a prank.
Luther Reynolds now addressed the boy.
‘Did you mean to be wicked and spiteful?’
‘No, sir.’
‘Did you set out to hurt the children in any way?’
‘No, sir.’
‘And…
’ Here, he hesitated, his narrowed eyes sending messages to the boy ‘…do you intend to say sorry?’
The boy did not answer immediately.
He returned the old man's stare, his expression at first defiant, but then his hard features relaxed into a knowing smile.
‘Yes, sir,’ he replied quietly.
‘Good!’
The old man sank back into the chair, a look of satisfaction on his face.
‘Say it then…
‘I AM SORRY’.’
He felt himself in danger of laughing out, loud, so cleared his throat and addressed the boy in a firmer voice.
‘Go on.
Say it, damn you!’
He stared as Matthew mutinously bit his lip, lowering his gaze to the floor and fidgeting from one foot to the other.
After what seemed a long time, but was in fact only seconds, an almost inaudible whisper issued into the room.
‘What was that you said?
I didn't hear you!’, the old man bellowed, enraged.
‘I said…
I'm sorry.’
The boy was visibly shaken.
‘There!
He's sorry,’ Luther told his stepson, smiling freely now and licking his lips like a dog might lick the juice of a bone from his chops.
‘Will that satisfy your good lady?’
When it appeared that David was unsure, he roared, ‘Damn and bugger it, man!
The boy has said he's sorry.’
Each word was accompanied by a clenched fist thumping on the chair arm.
‘What more do you want?
Would you rather I thrashed him within an inch of his life?
Should I cut off his fingers for daring to draw blood from your precious wife?’
‘Well, no, of course not.
You know I couldn't stand the boy being submitted to physical punishment,’ David  was quick to assure him.
‘Two wrongs never made a right.’
He himself was satisfied with Matthew's apology, and wanted the unpleasant business over and done with; but the thought of Beth waiting outside the door made him unusually bold.
Turning to the boy, he said firmly, ‘If you ever again raise your hand to either of the children or your mother, I shall…
’ His courage wavered as the two of them continued to stare at him, each daring him to go on.
‘I shall…’
The old man intervened, ‘Yes?
You'll what?’
There was disgust in his voice and, much more humiliating, a suggestion of amusement.
It was this that made David Miller bristle.
‘I shall flatly refuse to take him with me on my rounds,’ he declared.
There!
It was out.
And he felt all the better for it.
The old man sniggered.
‘Do you hear that, boy?’
‘Yes, sir.’
The boy kept his glance on the floor.
‘So you had better behave yourself, hadn't you?’
‘Yes, sir.’
Craning his neck, the old man looked up at his stepson.
Without speaking a word, he continued to scrutinise the young man and to feel greatly satisfied when he saw how he was unnerving his victim.
What he saw in David was not a man, but a boy.
A frightened boy, a boy who, in spite of trying with all his might to please the man who had married his mother, had only succeeded in doing the exact opposite.
When he was small, David Miller had been every bit as spirited and mischievous as any boy, but he had been bullied into believing otherwise.
The result was a timid, indecisive creature, a thing to be ridiculed.
Just for a second, for one brief surprising second, the old man admitted to himself that it was he who had created this pitiful excuse for a man, and his conscience, that bothersome thing which he had buried long ago, rose to haunt him.
The experience was a frightening and unwelcome one.
‘Get  out!’ he yelled.
As David prepared to usher Matthew before him, there came another instruction.
‘Leave the boy with me.’
He chuckled, ‘Perhaps I can make him see the error of his ways.’
Coming down the stairs, Beth saw her husband emerge from Luther's den.
She saw the disappointment on his face, and realised with a sinking heart that the boy would not be punished.
Soon, the sound of low wicked laughter echoed through the house and, hearing it, Beth's blood ran cold.
‘Oh, Maisie,’ she murmured, raising her dark eyes heavenward.
‘What have I got us into?’
Turning her footsteps, she hurried towards the kitchen where she had already begun preparing the tea.
As she went along the hall, she wondered how she might persuade Maisie's son to be a better person.
She had tried.
God alone knew how she had tried.
The sad truth was, Matthew enjoyed being cruel.
Luther Reynolds had fostered a sadistic streak in him that frightened her.
Time and again, she had cast her mind back to before Maisie was lost in that tragic fire.
The questions she asked herself were always the same.
Had he changed so much since Maisie's death, or was he always vindictive?
If so, why hadn't she seen it in him?
Why hadn't Maisie seen it in her son?
Beth had convinced herself that it was all her fault.
If she hadn't come into the family…his family , would Matthew have turned out the way he was now, or would he have grown into a fine young man with a greater sense of responsibility towards his sister?
And, the greatest guilt of all, if she had not been in Maisie's house…if Maisie had not been tending to the birthing…then the fire would not have happened and that darling woman would be alive today.
That was the truth!
Beth could never dwell on it too long.
It was too painful, too heart-breaking.
That was why she could not,must not , give up on the boy.
She had made a promise to Maisie, and somehow, whatever it cost, she would try with all her might to keep that promise.
Nothing on God's earth would turn her from it.
In spite of his loathing for her, in spite of the wickedness that had taken hold of him, Beth would persevere.
She had to!
The boy had lost the father he adored, and soon after had lost his darling mother also.
His hatred since was channelled towards Beth, and, in all truth, she could not blame him for it.
He was so very young, so hurt and confused by all that had happened in his life, it seemed only natural that he should want to lash out.
And if it was her he was lashing out at, so be it.
She was strong enough to take a certain amount of punishment if it meant that, in the end, Matthew would rid himself of that core of hatred which was slowly eating him away.
One thing Beth would not tolerate, though, and that was his deliberate cruelty towards the children.
Richard was only an innocent babe, and as for Cissie, there was no more delightful child on this earth.
As Beth had reminded the boy on more than one occasion, his sister also had lost her parents, and the home she had been raised in.
Secretly, Beth admired Cissie's strong character, and the way she had come to terms with the tragedies in her life.
It was a pity that Matthew was not made of the same admirable stuff.
And yet, she believed with all her heart that there was a great deal of goodness in the boy, buried beneath the sorrow and the hurt.
In the kitchen she found Cissie occupied in laying the table, while Richard was already seated there, his small chubby arms folded before him and his watchful green eyes following Cissie's every move.
When he realised his mammy was at the door, he swung his legs out of the chair and came rushing to greet her.
With a cry, she swung him up, a squealing, squirming bundle, throwing his arms round her neck and covering her face in smacky wet kisses.
‘Hey!
Let me breathe then,’ she laughed, giving him a big hug before putting him to the floor.
As he ran back to climb into his seat, she thanked God for blessing her with such a healthy and adorable son.
Richard would soon be four years old.
The boy had grown sturdy and handsome, his green eyes and dark hair so reminiscent of his father.
Sometimes the fact was a source of comfort to Beth.
At other times, mostly when he smiled in that particular way of Tyler's, leaning his head sideways and looking at her with incredible love in his sparkling green eyes, she found it unbelievably painful.
The warm, delicious smell of home baking emanating from the kitchen made Beth realise just how hungry she was.
Saturday was the day when she and Cissie rolled up their sleeves and turned out enough pies and bread to last the whole week, more often than not with the dubious help of Richard.
Somehow, the wonderful aroma lingered on for days after.
If Maisie had taught Beth anything at all, she had taught her how to look after a growing family.
Beth had thought her son and Cissie were still in the garden, so was pleasantly surprised to see the two of them already in the kitchen; Richard eagerly awaiting his tea, and Cissie fussing with a place setting.
‘Well, now, you have been busy, haven't you?’
Beth remarked.
‘Thank you, Cissie.
You've done a wonderful job.’
Glancing at the table, she saw that the girl had done everything just as she had shown her…the big brown teapot had pride of place in the centre of the table, with the pretty rose-patterned milk jug and sugar bowl beside it.
There was the bone china three-tiered cake stand, each layer nicely laid out with slices of home-made cake.
On the larger bottom tier were several rather chunky pieces of Beth's fruit loaf, baked in the manner which Maisie had taught her; then came the apple cake wedges; and finally, making  a pretty pattern on the smallest top tier, the tiny sponge cakes, each one displayed in a pretty white doily and finished with a half cherry on top.
There were several other plates dotted about the table, one containing best gammon sandwiches, another holding generous helpings of pork pie, and the others mostly displaying white and brown triangles of bread and butter, to be heaped with a liberal spoonful of the plum preserve from the small barrel-shaped pot nearby.
Cups and saucers were arranged at just the right angle beside the small plates, and the bone-handled knives were correctly positioned to the right of each plate.
While Beth regarded the beautifully laid table, Cissie stood opposite, her big blue eyes proud and smiling.
Suddenly, a look of horror spread over her face.
‘Oh!’ she cried, flinging herself towards the drawer in the table and snatching out a handful of spoons.
‘I forgot to put the teaspoons out.’
She quickly dropped one into each saucer before standing back and looking at Beth with a forlorn expression.
‘I've done it again,’ she said, twisting her lips in that way she had of showing disappointment with herself.
‘I coulda swore I'd remembered everything.’
Clenching her small fists, she folded her arms across her chest.
‘The surprise is ruined!
I've spoilt it, ain't I?’
Suppressing the chuckle that might well have relayed the wrong message, Beth went to her.
Putting her arm round the girl's painfully thin figure, she said warmly, ‘It's a wonderfully set table, Cissie.
I couldn't have done better myself.
I'm very proud of you, sweetheart.’
‘Honestly?’
The smile returned to Cissie's face.
‘Honestly.’
Beth chuckled now.
‘What's a teaspoon between friends?’
Laughing and relieved, Cissie clung to her a moment longer.
‘Oh, Beth, I do love you,’ she said: the two of them laughing all the more when a little voice  piped up from its place at the table, ‘I do love you too!’
They waited tea for another twenty minutes, before Beth addressed the two impatient children with the solemn words, ‘If the others don't have the good manners to come to the table at the proper time, then we'll start without them.’
And that was just what they did, although Beth only picked at her food, her heart too full to eat.
She was not altogether surprised by her father-in-law's absence, because right from the start he had taken particular pleasure in taunting her in this way.
‘Of course I'll be joining you for Sunday tea,’ he would say charmingly, then would purposely keep them waiting until, fretful and concerned, David would leave his place at the table to remind his stepfather, only to be told that they should: ‘Start without me.
I'll be along.’
But to this day he had not once sat down at a table prepared by Beth, and both she and David knew only too well that it was a deliberate snub.
Worse, Luther would lock himself in his room until the table was cleared and the kitchen was empty.
Then he would go in there, turn everything out of the cupboards, eat his fill, and leave the place looking like a herd of swine had trampled through it.
Beth had long ago given up the idea of winning the old man over.
In fact, she was quietly grateful for the fact that he chose not to sit down to table with them.
The ordeal of suffering his ogling eyes on her at mealtimes would have been too much, even for someone with Beth's strong constitution.
It had not taken her long to realise that here was a vindictive old villain, bent on making her life as miserable as he possibly could.
Over the years she had learned to stay two steps ahead of him.
Her first step was to leave the kitchen exactly as he left it; if he thought she had any intention of clearing his mess up behind him, then Luther was very much mistaken.
The kitchen was a great echoing place, with high beamed ceilings and quarry stone floor.
There were two grand old pieces of furniture in there, a huge square pine table with thick bulbous legs and four small drawers beneath the overhanging table top and a pine dresser of enormous proportions, with a cupboard beneath, two stout deep drawers and four shelves that reached to ceiling height, each stacked with blue willow pattern plates and festooned beneath with pretty china cups hanging from hooks.
From the brown hide couch in the sitting room, and the two matching armchairs set either side of the old range, the pretty cottage paintings and floral drapes throughout the house, the many ornaments that decorated every room, Beth was able to glimpse the nature of the woman who had lived and died here — David's mother.
There was a certain warmth and cosiness in this great dilapidated old house that only a gentle soul could create.
On the one occasion she had broached the subject of his mother, David had looked at her with cold eyes, saying in a hard voice, ‘My mother was her own worst enemy.
She must have known she was dying and yet she did nothing to help herself.’
That was the only time she ever heard him sound like Luther.
It was also the last time she ever mentioned his mother.
When David first brought her to this house as his wife, Beth had hoped she could fit in, make this place a proper home for all of them.
Sadly, she was frustrated at every turn, and all her efforts went to waste.
Luther Reynolds ridiculed David in front of her, belittling him in such a way as to destroy any respect she might have had for her husband; although she could not help but like him a little.
He was a strange man, still lonely in spite of taking her for his wife, and kept his own counsel, never discussing his thoughts with her, keeping his troubles deep, and always ensuring that she had whatever she  needed.
In that respect, David Miller kept the promise he made her.
Yet she was lonely too.
Oh, she had the children, and she treasured every moment with them, but she was unfulfilled, possessed of a deep longing which she could not understand.
There was something missing in her life.
Warmth maybe?
A companion who would sit and chat with her, like she and Maisie used to chat?
A lover who would hold her close and whisper in her ear?
Someone she could share all her intimate thoughts and dreams with?
All of these things amounted to one person…
Tyler Blacklock.
In spite of her determination to forget the man who had wronged her, never a day went by without her thinking of him, remembering, longing for such a love again.
And all the while, her son Richard was there to remind her…sleeping, waking, looking at her in that special way that was Tyler's.
He touched he heart, awakening the love, stirring the pain.
And then there was Matthew, always resentful, always looking to hurt; and her father-in-law, leading the boy into bad ways, moulding him in the same pattern as himself.
Luther was the devil in disguise.
From the start, Beth had seen him for what he really was.
Right away they were sparring, wary of each other.
The first time she discovered the awful mess he had deliberately left in the kitchen, Beth was determined she would not be used as a skivvy.
When David had asked her to clear the mess away, for fear of inciting his stepfather's rage, Beth had astonished him by refusing.
‘If he wants to behave no better than an animal, then let him wallow in it,’ she told him, and no amount of cajoling would persuade her otherwise.
Confused by her rebellious attitude, David himself had cleaned up the kitchen behind his stepfather, and so the pattern was set.
Luther would wait until dark, when the rest of the family had vacated the kitchen, then would  take everything from the larder, spreading it on the table, spilling it on the floor, and generally inflicting mayhem on a hitherto spotless environment.
After he had taken his fill and sampled everything, he would then collect a jug of ale from the pantry and depart along the hallway with the tap-tap of his walking cane making an ominous rhythm on the tiled floor; the sound becoming muffled as he made the difficult journey up the wide ornate staircase to his bedroom.
Once there he would guzzle his ale, and cough and belch, and laugh and curse, until his bloated body was overwhelmed by slumber, and the house grew peaceful once more.
On every Sunday previously the pattern had been the same.
When the kitchen was clean and the children put to bed, Beth and David would go to the sitting room, where he would sit at the circular table, head bent over documents and rent books.
But now the meal was over, and David had only just made an appearance.
She was clearing the table when she heard the slow deliberate footsteps of her husband approaching the kitchen.
When the door creaked open, she did not turn around but carried on with her task.
‘We waited for you,’ Beth told him.
‘We were disappointed that you decided not to join us,’ she said, keeping her eyes intent on the table.
She hoped with all her heart that he was not going the same way as his stepfather; and yet, the signs were already there.
The same secretive manner, the way he considered his own wishes to be paramount, the odd furtive way he stared at her when he thought she was not aware of it.
David Miller had unwittingly, or maybe deliberately, mimicked so many of Luther's attitudes.
Thankfully, though, there still remained one stark difference between the two men; because where Luther had a cruel and vicious streak in his character, David was a gentle soul, generous and accommodating to a fault.
‘I'm sorry, Beth,’ he replied softly, crossing the room and coming to stand beside her.
When she paused in her work and turned to look at him, he saw the disappointment in her dark eyes.
‘It was not intentional, I promise,’ he told her.
‘I got to glancing through the ledgers, and before I knew it, the time had flown.’
He slid his arm round her narrow waist and bent to kiss her on the forehead.
‘Forgive me?’ he asked.
Beth nodded.
‘Consider yourself forgiven,’ she said, knowing from experience that there would be no point in saying otherwise.
‘I can't speak for the children though.’
‘Where are they?’
He turned to look out of the window.
‘You'll find Cissie and Richard in the garden.’
‘And Matthew?’
He quickly returned his attention to her, his quiet brown eyes growing anxious.
‘Did he come to the tea table?’
Returning his gaze with a directness that answered his question, Beth shook her head.
‘And Father?’
Again, she shook her head.
‘That doesn't concern me.
We did not miss your father,’ she said in a hard voice that betrayed her contempt for the man.
‘But something has to be done about his influence over Matthew.
It's a great source of worry to me, David, and the boy won't hear me out.
You know he blames me for his mother's death?’
‘That's nonsense.’
He knew of Matthew's bitterness towards Beth, and deplored it.
But if Maisie's son would not listen to her, he would not listen to David either.
‘As for my father's influence over the boy, I do believe you're exaggerating, Beth.
He has shown Matthew a great deal of kindness, and you have to admit that, were it not for my father's offer of friendship, Matthew would be a very lonely soul.
After all, he refuses to mix with boys of his  own age, and rarely leaves this house except when I take him on my rounds.’
‘Doesn't that give you cause for concern?’
Beth asked pointedly.
‘That an old man is all the ‘friend’ Matthew has?
Has it not occurred to you that it's your father who dissuades Matthew from making friends of his own age…talks him out of seeking other work?
Don't you realise he doesn't want the boy growing away from him?
Think of the many hours when the two of them are closeted in the den.
Ask yourself what they do, David.
What do they find to talk about for so long?’
‘What are you implying?’
‘I am implying that it's unnatural, and I want you to talk to your father.
Heaven knows I've tried talking to him, but it gets me nowhere.
I don't like what's happening, David, and I want it stopped.’
She felt him recoil from her.
‘The trouble is you see only bad in my father,’ he retorted.
‘And you see only good!’ she snapped.
It was no use.
David would not intervene, she knew that now.
Neither the old man nor the boy heeded a word she said.
She had tried everything…appealing to common sense, persuasion, threats…but it all fell on deaf ears.
Now, as on other occasions, David had scoffed at her fears.
All she could do was to keep vigilant, and to hope against hope that Matthew would soon tire of the old man, or that the old man would soon tire of deliberately using the boy in order to antagonise her.
Maybe, if she appeared to be unruffled by his underhand behaviour, Luther would seek other means by which to destroy her peace of mind.
‘There's no point in continuing this conversation, Beth.
I can see it will only raise ill feeling between us.’
David remained close for a brief moment, perhaps hoping that she would retract her words, but Beth only looked at him in that certain proud manner which  told him she would not change her mind.
Disgruntled, he turned sharply away, leaving her staring after him and shaking her head, disappointment and frustration written on her face.
A few moments later, squeals of laughter and delight heralded the arrival of Cissie and Richard; the kitchen door burst open and they tumbled in one behind the other, the boy first, and the girl pretending to chase him, her hands making pointed ear shapes behind her head, and her small pretty features twisted into a fearsome expression.
‘Oooh…
Ooooh!’ she wailed, her voice growing louder the more he screamed.
When the boy fell into Beth's arms, Cissie collapsed in a fit of laughter, grabbing the boy to her, and the two of them rolled about the floor, giggling and fighting.
‘Well, thank you very much, Cissie Armstrong,’ Beth chided good-naturedly.
‘Now that you've got him all excited, it'll be hours before he can get off to sleep.’
‘I'll read to him, then.’
‘About monsters and hobgoblins, no doubt!’
Beth laughed.
‘Not a good idea, I think.’
‘No, Beth!’
Cissie seemed astonished that she should think such a thing.
‘I wouldn't read frightening things like that to him.
At least, not just before he goes to sleep.’
Cissie had a love of reading, especially since Beth had helped her to master the longer words that she had never really understood.
‘And Richard likes me to read to him.’
She addressed herself to the boy now.
‘Don't you?’ she asked.
He nodded his dark head and turned to Beth.
‘Please, Mammy,’ he said, his handsome green eyes appealing.
A deal was made between the three of them.
Richard could play outside a while longer, while Cissie and Beth washed the dishes.
Afterwards, Beth would choose a story, and Cissie would read it to the boy until he fell asleep.
Normally this was Beth's favourite time …when her son was lying sleepy in his bed and she would read him a story about creatures and little people; gentle stories that soon sent him into a peaceful slumber.
Cissie also loved to read to him, and considered it a real treat when Beth gave the privilege over to her.
There had grown between Cissie and the boy a strong abiding love that was wonderful to see.
It was a source of great pleasure and comfort to Beth, especially since Cissie's own brother appeared to have turned his back on her.
It was a sad thing to Beth, and one which only made her all the more determined to draw Matthew back into the family fold.
To that end, she tried to keep alive Cissie's love for her brother, although it was proving more and more difficult as the girl frequently pointed out, ‘He ain't the same, Beth.
He ain't like my Matthew no more.’
It was eight o'clock when Cissie collected the tin bath from the outside shed.
Already, the darkness was closing in, and there was a real winter nip in the air.
When she returned to the kitchen, she found Beth sprinkling a shovelful of coals on to the fire.
‘Draw the curtains, Cissie, and keep the cold out.’
In no time at all, the fire was blazing cheerfully, the curtains were drawn against the night, and Beth was pouring the water from the kettle into the bath; a spill of cold water from the ewer, then another drop from the kettle, and the water was just the right temperature, the warm steam rising nicely and filling the room with a comfortable warm smell.
‘Come on, Richard,’ she told the boy.
Going to the chair where he was already dropping off to sleep, she gently pulled him to his feet and began peeling the clothes from his back.
‘I'm tired…don't want a wash,’ he mumbled, leaning his small sturdy figure against her, and twisting both hands into his dark hair until it made a tangled mass.
Ignoring his protests, Beth stripped away his undergarments and lifted him into her arms.
‘We'll make it a quick wash then, shall we?’ she asked, kissing his warm round face and pressing him to her.
When he murmured and clung to her all the more, she was tempted to put him in his night-shift and take him straight to bed, but Sunday night was bath night, and he would sleep all the better for it, she thought.
Setting him to his feet, she tested the bath water once more.
Satisfied, she helped him into the bath and began soaping him all over; as usual, he bawled loudly when it came to washing his hair.
Next came the rinsing, then the part he liked best of all…standing naked before the warm fire, while his mammy dried him with the soft towel that wrapped round him like a cloak.
In no time at all, he was scrubbed shiny, dressed in his night-shift, and seated in the big armchair, with the heat from the fire drying his hair and making him feel all sleepy.
‘I'll take him up to his bed, Cissie,’ Beth told her, at the same time taking the boy by the hand and leading him towards the door.
‘Mind you wash all over.
I'll be down in a minute.
Meanwhile, stay away from the fireplace, like I've always told you.
I'll help you dry your hair when I come down.’
Beth was always very careful to put a safety screen across the fire, but ever since the tragedy that had taken Maisie, she suffered from a real dread of accidents.
Once, when she caught Cissie with her head down, drying herself in the heat from the fire with her hair hanging over her eyes and dangerously close to the flames, her heart had turned somersaults.
‘Don't worry, Beth,’ Cissie called after her.
‘I won't even be washed by the time you come down.’
‘Oh, yes, you will, my girl!
And don't use any more hot water, or there'll be none left for me,’ Beth told her sharply.
She knew Cissie well enough to recognise a ruse when she saw one.
Cissie hated going to bed, and  she hated getting up in the morning, but she thoroughly enjoyed lazing in the bath, and finding every excuse not to say goodnight.
‘I want to see you washed and almost dried by the time I come down.
I don't want you turning up late for the shop tomorrow morning.
It's your first day, and you need to make a good impression.’
Cissie had been most reluctant to surrender her independence and take up employment in Moll Sutton's flower shop.
Beth, however, was determined that she should enjoy a more stable position, with a regular wage; though even she had to agree that it was merely a pittance.
Beth had long been concerned about Cissie's ‘wanderings’.
There were too many unsavoury characters lurking about, and Cissie was not only young and pretty but had a friendly loving nature that could easily lead her into trouble.
As she went from the room, Beth could hear Cissie moaning behind her, and knew they would be going through the same old argument when she returned to the kitchen.
Smiling to herself, she led the boy across the hall and on up the staircase, then along the galleried landing towards the far end of the corridor and Richard's room which was situated between the larger room that was Cissie's and the bright pretty room that was Beth's and David's.
He would have preferred that the children be positioned a greater distance away from them, but she had insisted, particularly in view of Cissie's broken nights and fits of terror following the fire in Larkhill.
Her nightmares had deeply affected Richard, and so Beth had told her husband, ‘Either they stay close by where I can hear them should they need me…or I'll arrange for the children,and myself , to move to the east end of the house.’
She was not surprised when he withdrew his objection.
For some time now, and urged on by the old man's taunts, he had been intent on fathering a child of his  own.
David's need for a son had become an obsession.
It was an ordeal for Beth to be used for this night after night, but she comforted herself with the knowledge that he truly loved her and was always both gentle and considerate.
She felt guilty that the love between them was all one way, and yet there was nothing in this world that she could do to change her feelings.
What she felt for David was not love but gratitude, with maybe a scattering of affection.
The kind of love he wanted she could never give, and had never made any pretence of.
In her heart, Beth sensed that he knew the way of things, and this only made him all the more determined to have a son of his own.
He had never insisted that Beth's son call him ‘Daddy’, and she was immensely thankful for that.
Richard was Tyler's son.
One day in the future, when he could understand, she would tell him about his father; she hoped she might be able to explain the facts without revealing how Tyler had deserted them.
Often she had seen David looking at her son, a look that was filled with longing and, sadly, a measure of envy.
Beth had a love for children, but how she wished she could have borne them for the man she loved, instead of the man she was indebted to.
All the same, if it happened that David made her with child, she would bear the child proudly, and be glad that she had brought him a degree of happiness.
So far, though, there was no sign of it.
‘Can I have a story, Mammy?’
In the light from the lamp the child blinked his weary eyes, his question muffled by a long noisy yawn.
Tucking him deeper into the bed, Beth leaned forward to kiss his face.
‘I promised, didn't I?’ she reminded him, going to the dresser and opening the drawer there.
Taking out the small leatherbound book, she held it beneath the flickering light.
‘A tale from Lamb,’ she muttered, opening it on the first page.
‘Cissie won't be  coming up for a while,’ she said, making her way back to the bed, ‘do you want to wait?
Or shall Mammy read it?’
The last word was shaped by her smile.
The child was already fast and hard asleep.
Going on tiptoe to the dresser, Beth replaced the book, then taking the oil-lamp with her, drew the curtains; but not right across, for she knew how the boy liked a chink of moonlight to shine through.
After another fond peep at his sleeping face, she crept out of the room, softly closed the door, and gathering up her skirt in order not to trip over the hem on the way down the stairs, swiftly retraced her steps back to the kitchen and Cissie.
When Beth pushed open the kitchen door, she was taken aback to see that Cissie was not alone.
Matthew was there.
Cissie was kneeling on the rug, her back to the fire and her slim body bent forward over the bath.
Her hair was dipping into the water and, stooping above her, Matthew was carefully pouring water from the jug, making a cascade over her hair as it washed the soapy water back into the bath.
For some reason she could not instantly understand, Beth was riveted with shock.
Neither Matthew nor the girl was aware that she had come into the room, and as Beth's eyes went from the unique expression of wonder on the boy's handsome face, to the girl's slender form…the small budding breasts, and the young limbs that were already shaping into those of a young woman…a strange sense of revulsion shivered through her.
‘Matthew,’ her voice startled him.
As she came forward, he almost dropped the jug, his face pink and confused as she continued to stare at him.
Taking the jug from his hand, she said in a cool voice, ‘I'll take care of Cissie.’
So many unpleasant thoughts were spilling through her mind that Beth was made to recall her husband's words with regard to Luther…
‘You see only bad in him’.
Was that really true?
And was it also  true that she saw only bad in Maisie's boy?
A rush of guilt caused her to temper her attitude.
‘Perhaps you would be so kind as to empty the bath for me later?’ she asked, forcing a half smile and putting herself between Matthew and his sister.
‘I don't think so,’ he replied sullenly, unrolling his sleeves and going to the chair, where he collected the burgundy waistcoat given to him by the old man.
‘I have other things to do.’
Pushing his arms into the waistcoat, which he then buttoned up the wrong way in his confusion, he pointed to the girl who had lifted the veil of wet hair from her face and was peeking out of one eye.
‘I thought the children were already in bed,’ he said guardedly.
‘Luther sent me to see if it was all right, for him to come and get himself something to eat.’
At the mention of the old man's name, Beth's hackles rose.
‘Well, you can tell him it's not all right!’ she snapped.
‘What's more, he, like you, was asked to join us for tea.
If the pair of you would rather stay away, then so be it; but you must not be surprised if the rest of us refuse to be inconvenienced by such behaviour.’
No sooner were the words out of her mouth than she regretted them.
Every time she vowed to get closer to Matthew, she only succeeded in driving him further away.
However, she had been somehow unnerved by finding him here in this way.
One other thing had to be said, and she said it now.
‘What do you mean, Matthew…you thought the ‘children’ were in bed?
You would do well to remember that you yourself are little more than a child.
Certainly, you are not yet a man, although I've no doubt that one day soon, you will make a fine young man.’
She was visibly astonished when a strange little giggle broke from him, after which he stared at her defiantly.
It struck her then just how quickly he really was becoming a man.
In all these months when Matthew had kept out of her way, he had changed  from the boy she had known when she first came to Maisie's house.
Now, Maisie's beloved son had grown much taller, possessed of the broad shoulders of a man, his face having acquired a gaunt handsome profile that held a certain arrogance.
The eyes that were violet like his mother's were strangely secretive, seeming to frown and smile at the same time.
The way he looked at her now disturbed Beth deeply.
Suddenly, he shrugged his strong shoulders, before deliberately turning his back on her and strolling from the room.
Beth had a mind to go after him, but then Cissie called out, ‘I'm cold, and my hair's dripping all over the place.
’ Beth went immediately to her assistance.
Intent on getting the girl dried before she caught a chill, she did not see Matthew push open the door to stare at his sister, then at Beth.
When the door quietly swung to, she paid it no mind.
There were too many thoughts pressing on her, too many instincts that bristled inside her.
Before she finished here and made her way to the sitting room, there were certain things she must say to Cissie, and she must say them without alarming the girl, yet, at the same time, make her aware that she was no longer a child, that she already had the mark of a woman on her.
Beth called herself all kinds of a fool, for she herself had not realised how quickly the girl was growing up.
From now on, when Cissie was taking her bath, that door would be locked, just as it was when Beth herself was bathing.
The men, Matthew included, always had a strip-wash in the outer scullery.
‘Right then, my girl.’
Dipping her two hands in the neck of Cissie's night-shift, Beth drew out the long brown locks, spreading them over the collar and fanning the hair out as it was not altogether dry.
‘Get yourself off to bed.
Like I said, I don't want you being late your first day at the shop.’
She had spoken to Cissie about  ensuring that the door was locked in future when she was taking a bath.
Beth had been surprised to know that Cissie herself had been thinking along those very same lines, and it only told her that she was right about Maisie's children — they were growing up fast.
She had not realised it until now.
Cissie had also been entertaining secret hopes that Beth just might change her mind about sending her to work at the flower shop.
When she saw that her hopes might come to nothing, she was horrified.
‘Oh, Beth!
Must I go and work in that shop?
I'd rather be out and about, finding my customers in the market-square or the boulevard.’
‘You want to learn all there is to know about selling flowers, don't you?’
‘Yes…but…’
‘And you want to be the best flower-seller in the whole of Lancashire, don't you?’
‘You know I do.’
‘Then you can learn a great deal by working in Moll Sutton's shop,and get paid in the process.’
‘I can't learn no more than I already know!’
Cissie protested.
‘What exactly do you know, Cissie?’
‘Well…
’ Beth's forthright question had taken her by surprise.
‘I know which are tulips and which daffodils, and I know what to charge…a tanner for a big bunch, threepence if they're past their best bloom, and a penny for a sprig of heather.’
Her grin ran from ear to ear.
She felt very pleased with herself.
‘Do you know anything about how the flowers appear in the warehouse?
Or where they all come from?
Or what they cost to buy in?’
When Cissie looked like breaking in, Beth went on, ‘What about cartage…and how long will they keep in certain conditions?
What margin of profit is there?’
She paused to let the girl reflect on her  questions.
‘Well?’ she asked at length.
‘Do you think you know as much about selling flowers as Moll Sutton?’
‘I know if I happen to find a bunch that's been thrown out 'cause it's past its best, I can likely get a threepenny piece for it at the railway station.
That's good profit, ain't it?’ she remarked cheekily.
‘Ah!
But it won't buy you a shop, now, will it?’
Beth was quick to point out.
‘Wouldn't you like to know how Moll Sutton made so much money that she could get herself a shop?’
‘Naw.
I don't want a shop, Beth.’
Cissie was adamant.
‘I only want to sell me flowers wherever I find meself a customer.’
‘You can argue until you're blue in the face, my girl,’ Beth told her firmly, ‘but it won't do you any good.
In my book, if you set your heart on a particular way to earn a living, then you should find out everything you can about it.’
They were her father's words and she had never forgotten them.
Sensing Beth's quieter mood, Cissie was intrigued.
‘What do you know best?’ she asked, slipping her arm round Beth's slim waist as the two of them sauntered to the door.
‘Oh, I know a bit about land development,’ she confessed, ‘and I suppose I know about children, and the things your mammy taught me.’
‘What did your own mammy teach you, Beth?’
It suddenly occurred to Cissie that Beth had never spoken about her own parents.
‘You have got a mammy, haven't you, and a daddy?
Why don't you ever talk about them?’
Her big blue eyes swivelled upwards, watching Beth's changing expression.
She felt guilty when she sensed Beth's deep sadness.
‘Aw, I'm sorry.
Me and my big mouth, eh?’ she said, lowering her gaze and wishing she knew when to hold her tongue.
Hugging the girl close to her, Beth replied quietly, ‘It's all right, Cissie.
It's only natural that you should want to know about my parents.’
She laughed softly in a bid to put the girl at ease.
‘After all, I know all about you , don't I?’
She fell silent for a moment, grateful when Cissie decided not to press her.
At the door, Beth held the girl at arm's length, then, looking into those mischievous blue eyes that betrayed Cissie's delightful nature, told her softly, ‘One day, Cissie, I will tell you all about my family, I promise.
’ In her mind's eye she saw the face of her father, and her heart was heavy.
‘Now off to your bed, young lady.’
Cissie had seen Beth's sadness.
‘You know I love you,’ she said with childlike simplicity.
Beth's dark eyes grew moist as she pulled the girl to her.
‘I know,’ she said.
‘And I love you too.’
‘Goodnight, Beth.’
Reaching up, Cissie kissed her lightly.
‘Goodnight, God bless.’
After Cissie had gone, Beth closed the door and stood with her back against it, her eyes downcast.
In her innocent curiosity, Cissie had opened old wounds.
After all this time, Beth had hoped that the memories would be less painful.
They were not.
And yet, if she could turn the clock back, would she change anything?
Would she not want to know the joy she had experienced in Tyler's arms?
That wonderful love they had shared and which had given her the precious gift of a son.
How could she not want that?
If her relationship with Tyler had brought her a deal of heartache, it had also brought her so much more.
No, she would not want to change that…only to have it go on, with Tyler wanting her as much as she wanted him.
But that was not to be.
Tyler's love was only a passing thing, or he would be here now, loving her, helping to raise their son, and making her lonely life complete.
‘Put it behind you, Beth, once and for all!’ she told herself firmly.
‘You must let the past go or you'll drive yourself out of your mind.’
So many times she had told herself that, and each time she knew it was an impossible thing to do.
It wasn't just Tyler.
It was her father, and her brother.
It was Esther Ward, the mother who had never really been a mother.
There was something in her that made Beth afraid.
She had always felt that, although she never knew why.
She suspected that something had happened many years ago between her parents, something strange and secretive that had left its mark on them both.
There was no way of knowing what.
From an early age, Beth had sensed the quiet sadness in her father, and the resentment in her mother.
No!
More than resentment.
What she sensed in her mother was a dreadful loathing.
If only Esther had shown her daughter the love she craved, Beth would have returned that love, and things would have been so very different.
Whatever it was that had happened between Richard Ward and his wife, it must have been a bad thing because, to Beth's mind, it had brought nothing good.
Even the marriage itself was devoid of love.
Even as these thoughts careered through Beth's troubled mind, she was forced to compare her own marriage with that of her parents.
Wasn't it strange how history seemed to repeat itself?
The clock on the mantelpiece struck the tenth hour.
The house was quiet.
Beth felt refreshed after her bath, and content in the knowledge that all three children were safe in bed.
This was the time she enjoyed most; when she could relax in the cosy drawing room, with its pale green walls and deep floral armchairs, and with the cheery fire-glow sending out waves of warmth that made her deliciously sleepy.
It had been a long, tiring day…first this big house to be cleaned, then the uphill trek to church and Sunday service; next came the lunch, which  took hours to prepare and only minutes to devour; this was followed by the inevitable mountain of washing up.
There followed a short time for recreation, which Beth enjoyed with Cissie and Richard; then there was the mending to do, and the tea to prepare; afterwards, there were the children to wash and bed.
In spite of it being claimed that Sunday was the Lord's day and therefore a day of rest, all in all it was one of the most tiring days of the week.
Without realising it, Beth's thoughts turned to her husband.
She had hardly seen him all day.
It crossed her mind that he might well be keeping out of her way after his failure to secure some kind of punishment for Matthew's cruel and unacceptable behaviour earlier in the day.
Suddenly, her thoughts materialised as David came into the room, bringing a cold blast of air from the outer hallway.
‘Ah!
There you are, my dear.’
He appeared delighted to see her.
Closing the door behind him, he strode into the drawing room, a broad smile on his face as he went straight to where Beth sat.
Kissing her tenderly on the forehead, he remarked sharply, ‘What with one thing and another, I've seen very little of you today.’
Separating the tails of his jacket, he seated himself in the opposite chair, a frown creasing his forehead as he glanced about the room.
‘The lamp isn't lit,’ he said with surprise.
‘Why isn't the lamp lit?’
He rose with the intention of going to light the lamp, which was in its usual place in the centre of the table.
‘No…please.
I would rather you didn't,’ Beth told him.
‘As you wish,’ he said, returning to his seat.
Anticipating his question, she added, ‘I prefer the firelight.’
For a moment he remained silent, his curious brown eyes quietly appraising her; he thought Beth looked  especially lovely tonight.
She was wearing a taffeta skirt of burgundy, with a pretty close-fitting cream blouse that complimented her rich chestnut hair and dark eyes.
As always, on a Sunday evening after she had bathed, she had left her hair loose.
It tumbled over her slim straight shoulders in deep shining waves that reached almost to her waist, and her beautiful, heart-shaped face shone like a child's.
‘You look very lovely,’ he murmured, his voice husky, his eyes betraying the need inside him.
The compliment might have delighted any other woman, but the whispered words made Beth's heart sink.
Tonight she had wanted to be alone with her memories.
She raised her head, hoping he might realise how tired she was; her dark eyes were looking into his, exciting him all the more.
In the firelight's glow, her eyes appeared uniquely beautiful, shining and alive, possessed of magic.
Aware of his thoughts, she quickly looked away.
In a moment, he was beside her, his hands caressing her hair, his body pressing against her, the roughness of his jacket brushing against her face, abrading her skin, the warm smell of cloth invading her nostrils.
Now, his hands stroked her neck, fell to her breast and followed the small tight curve there.
He was breathing harder, then he was on his knees before her, his open mouth finding her lips, pressing…probing.
His fingers wrapped themselves round her ankles, sliding upwards, making her skin tingle.
Shame swept through her, shame, and disgust…and desire.
Pulling away, she struggled from the chair, from his searching hands.
But he would not be rejected.
‘Go to your bed,’ he told her.
There was anger in his voice, and a love so desperate that it smothered her.
Without a backward look, Beth went from the room, along the softly lit hallway and on to the bedroom which she shared with her husband.
She knew he would not be  far behind her.
She wished she could take her son and Maisie's children, and go from this place.
A woman with three children…where would they go?
How would they live without money?
Oh, she had the bag of coins beneath the bedroom floorboards, but it was no fortune, and with four mouths to feed it wouldn't last very long.
She was trapped!
Who would offer a woman and three children a roof over their heads?
She thought of Matthew, of her promise to Maisie.
‘Take care of the childer.’
Beth was convinced that Matthew would run away if she took him from this house, then what would become of him?
She thought of Tyler, and there was bitterness.
She remembered David's kindness, and there was gratitude.
He was her husband…for better or worse, he was her husband.
And she was a woman.
Where was the shame?
There should have been none, but there was.
There was!
She never watched him undress.
Somehow, it made her feel wanton and increased her shame.
Every sound, every movement, told her what he was doing…the shoes placed neatly side by side, the braces flicked down over his shoulders, the trousers carefully folded and laid across the back of the wicker chair, his footsteps coming to her over the creaking floorboards; every sound, every movement…he was touching her now, warm, tickling, smooth, his naked body moving up and down against her, his voice in her ear, soft and loving, fingers probing, his mouth on hers; the gasp of excitement when he entered her, jabbing, hard, growing excited.
‘I love you,’ he murmured.
‘Love me Beth…love me…love me;’ But there was no love in her heart.
No love.
Only a loneliness too painful to bear.
Tears coursed down her face, but he did not know.
There was much he did not know.
‘Shh!’
The old man slid his gnarled hand over Matthew's face.
‘Don't make a sound.’
His voice was like grated glass, near and frightening.
The warm acrid stench of his breath was unpleasant to the boy.
In the flickering candlelight, the withered features took on a grotesque appearance.
Trapped beneath the twisted fingers, Matthew wriggled uncomfortably, his brown eyes round and bulbous with fear.
‘It's only me…
Luther,’ the voice whispered hoarsely.
At once Matthew relaxed, his eyes creasing in a smile as he wondered what the old man was up to.
When the fingers drew away, the boy's spittle clung to them, making a delicate spidery line that soon snapped and fell apart.
‘Shh!
Not a sound,’ the old man warned as the boy climbed out of bed and quickly dressed.
Holding the candle before him, Luther led the boy to the far end of the landing, his awkward movements impeding his progress.
Intrigued, and a little afraid of the gyrating shadows that loomed like feathery figures on the walls beside them, the boy kept close to the bent figure, curiosity alive in him, and a strange excitement driving him on as it always did when he was with the old man.
‘Where are we going?’ he asked in a whisper.
He had never been this way before.
Occasionally pausing to gather his breath, the old man half-turned and put his finger to his lips, his thick unkempt eyebrows throwing weird shapes over the sockets of his eyes.
The gesture was enough.
Matthew remained silent, going stealthily after the crooked figure as it squeezed through the tiny opening, then upwards with difficulty, climbing the narrow winding staircase that seemed never-ending.
After what seemed an age, they came into a small room where the roof beams straddled above them like great barren trees, and the wind whistled through the tiny cracks where the moonlight shone through.
‘Where are we?’
The boy dared hardly speak.
His every limb was shaking.
Suddenly the old man grabbed him and whispered in his ear, ‘Shh!
Shh!…look, there.’
He found himself looking towards the floor but could see nothing, and so shook his head.
The old man's face wrinkled into a grin.
He pointed again, pushing Matthew to the floor.
‘Oh!’
He could see it now…the softest light in the room beneath.
Carefully, oh so softly, the old man and the boy folded to their knees.
‘It's them…mating like dogs.’
Luther chuckled, an ugly sound.
‘She doesn't like it, though,’ he rasped, his rubbery lips touching the boy's ear.
Instinctively, the boy pulled away.
‘See there.’
The words were mouthed; they must not be detected.
Intrigued, Matthew bent nearer to the light, pressing, his face to the chink in the floorboards.
For a moment he could not see clearly…and then he did!
Far below, the tiniest candle-flame sending out the smallest light, flickering, subdued.
In the bed, there were two figures; the man was paramount, rising and falling, moaning and whispering.
Beneath him the woman's face was pale and passive, her arms bent above her head, her rich hair spilling over the pillow.
In a moment the man was still.
The next moment he was climbing from the bed, the ferocity of his passion still evident on him.
The woman turned away.
Tears glistened in the flickering light.
‘There!’
The old man was beside himself with excitement, his hand trembling so that the candlelight danced and spurted like shooting stars.
‘Did you see?’ he asked in a whisper.
‘DID YOU SEE?’
He licked his lips, mouth hanging open, trembling.
When the boy gave no answer, the old man took him by the arm and propelled him to the far end of the room, down the narrow stairway, through the tiny door and back to the safety of his own bedroom.
‘Say nothing!’ he warned the boy before leaving.
‘Or I'll  not take you again.’
He smiled, a wicked ugly smile, and then he was gone.
It was a long time before the boy could settle.
There was a crippling sense of guilt on him.
He had seen things this night that touched him deeply.
He had seen two people making love.
The experience had shattered him.
He had heard the joy of one, and seen the tears of another.
It was the tears that haunted him.
‘Why did you cry, Beth?’ he murmured into the silence.
There was no answer.
Only a deeper silence that sucked him in.
Suddenly he was crying too, deep racking sobs that took him back to a night long ago, soon after his father was killed.
He recalled he had suffered a terrible nightmare; so vivid that even when his eyes were open and he was screaming for his mammy, the nightmare would not leave him.
Only when Maisie came to hold him and soothe his fears did he feel safe.
She said something to him that night…something he would remember to his dying day.
‘Yer mammy's here, darlin',’ she had whispered, ‘and yer mammy won't ever let yer cry alone.’
In his despair, Maisie came to him now, that familiar loving face with its bright violet eyes and a profusion of greying hair that was never in place.
‘Bless yer heart.’
He could hear her voice as though she was here in this room, her own unique aroma all around him.
‘There ain't nothing wrong wi’ crying, sweetheart, but yer must always share yer troubles wi' them as love yer.
Don't cry alone.
Don't ever cry alone.’
Oh, how he missed her, how he loved her.
‘Oh, Mam!
Mam!’
His own cry opened a door in his heart and the crippling pain spilled out.
Long into the night he sobbed, weeping for what he had lost, and for what he had become.
When morning dawned he knew he would never again follow the old man up to that room.
He would get himself a job, and he would be the man his mammy had always  hoped he would be.
But he did not belong here, in this house.
Right now he had no idea what would become of him, yet this much he did know — there was a sense of peace in his heart at last, and the bitter core of hatred had melted with his tears.
All the same, there was still a hardness in him towards Beth.
Much as he wanted to, and much as he had been moved by her tears, he could not find it in him to forgive her.
Deep down, he still blamed her for taking his mammy from him.
The bitterness was still there.
He believed it always would be.
But not the badness, not any more.
Not now his mammy had spoken to him.
Chapter Eight
On 14 July 1892, Maisie's son boarded a merchant ship and sailed away from his homeland.
The sun was shining, and the docks at Liverpool were thronged with people.
People laughing, people crying, some boarding vessels, others disembarking, and others waving goodbye to their loved ones.
In the distance, a band was playing, though the music was drowned by the lusty yells of porters and traders all plying for business.
Beth stood alone, a quiet solitary figure, heavy with child, biding her time until she might be called to say goodbye.
Just as she had predicted, Matthew had become a fine young man, tall and strong, and markedly handsome, with his wayward mop of brown hair and those dark violet eyes that still held a world of bitterness whenever they looked on her.
As she gazed intently towards the small group that was her family, a great sadness filled Beth's heart.
In these past two years and more, since Matthew had been employed with David, distancing himself from the old man and returning to the family fold, Beth had never stopped hoping that one day he might turn to her with affection.
But she had hoped for too much, and Matthew remained unforgiving, not actively unfriendly towards her but always out of her reach.
It was a sorry thing, and one which caused her a few silent tears.
But for all that, Beth was delighted at the way he had come to share the love of his sister, Cissie, and her  own son, Richard.
His relationship with David also was a good one, in which he benefited from the older man's advice and experience.
When he expressed his desire to go to sea, David had attempted to dissuade him, saying, ‘It's a hard life, Matthew.
Much more demanding than overseeing a terrace of houses and collecting rents.’
He spelled out the dangers without being too alarmist, but it only served to make Matthew more determined to become a sailor.
Eventually, it was David who found him a good ship and carefully guided him through the process.
Now the day had arrived, and it was time for Matthew to say goodbye.
Beth never took her eyes off the little group; Cissie, who was now a young lady of exceptional prettiness and who was hugging her brother for the umpteenth time; and Beth's own son Richard…now six years old and growing more like Tyler every day; and David, a quiet man, a man who was too gentle, a man still dominated by the monster who had raised him.
In different ways she loved them all; even her weak-natured husband, who showered all of them with affection, and who was filled with excitement that, at long last, he was about to become a father in his own right.
Beth looked forward to the birth of their child; with Richard growing so fast, she missed that special feeling of holding a small warm being in her arms.
She would not claim to be content, because contentment came with having the man you loved lying beside you on a cold night; it came with that certain wonderful intimacy which Beth had experienced once long ago, and which was lost for ever.
Contentment came when your life was fulfilled, which hers was not.
But she had found a deal of happiness in her family.
If she had had it in her power to change anything in that one moment, it would be for Matthew to come to her as a friend.
She was both proud and fearful for him and, as she continued to look on him, thought of the vast and mighty oceans he would cross, the loneliness of such journeys, and prayed he would not regret his decision to leave them.
‘Mammy!
Mammy!’
Richard was running towards her, dodging between the legs of many passing travellers, a broad grin lighting his face and an air of excitement about him.
In a moment he had gripped her hand in his and was pulling her away from the bale on which she had been resting.
‘Come and say goodbye,’ he urged, tugging at her with all his might.
‘David says you're to come and say goodbye to Matthew.’
In his enthusiasm he lost his cap and when Beth stooped with difficulty to retrieve it, she almost lost her balance as he insisted on pulling her forward.
‘Quick, Mammy…quick!’ he cried.
And so Beth allowed herself to be taken at an awkward pace along the wharf and on to where David and Cissie were saying their final farewells.
Unfortunately, when Beth was only a few feet away, Matthew raised his head and his eyes met hers.
He appeared sad for a moment, but then his neck stiffened and his eyes grew harder.
Beth sensed the hostility, and instinctively paused.
At once, Matthew swung away and was quickly gone from sight, leaving Cissie chasing down the wharf to catch one final glimpse of her brother.
‘Oh!
He's gone, Mammy.
Matthew's gone.’
Richard was crying now, pressing his face into the deep folds of her skirt.
Beth was crying too, crying inside, and she wondered whether she would ever again see the young man who had been left in her care.
‘God go with you, son,’ she murmured.
‘We'll always love you.’
The tears threatened, but she fought them back.
This was not a time for tears.
It was a time for thanking God that Matthew had turned his back on the badness that might have dragged him down.
Besides that small miracle, her own regret at having lost him seemed very small.
‘Well, the lad's away,’ David emerged through the  crowd to tell her.
‘All we can do is hope he'll be safe.
I would rather he'd stayed at home with us, but it was his choice, and he's not a child any longer.’
Cupping his hand beneath Beth's elbow, he looked deep into her eyes and said in a quieter voice, ‘Don't feel bad.
I'm sure he'll turn to you, in his own good time.’
‘I hope so,’ she murmured.
‘Oh, I do hope so.’
One last lingering look at the place where she had last seen him, but he was gone from sight, gone from her now.
Turning away, she smiled when Cissie began softly singing, and her heart was filled with joy that at least she still had her and Richard.
Strange, though, how it was Tyler and not David who was uppermost in her thoughts in that moment.
But then, he was always with her.
He was with her now…skipping along beside her, holding her hand, laughing and chattering, smiling at her with those winsome green eyes.
In Richard, she had the very essence of his father.
That was a blessing she gave thanks for every moment of every day.
There were many regrets in her life, but her beloved son was not one of them.
‘Let's go home,’ she said, returning the boy's loving smile.
‘I think you've had enough excitement for one day.’
‘Oh!
Can't we stay and watch the ships, Mammy?’
‘Now, Richard, you heard what your mammy said,’ David reminded the boy quietly.
‘It's time we all went home.’
It was Cissie's turn to persuade him.
‘I'll read you a story if you like,’ she said, mischievously flicking at his cap.
‘That is…if you can catch me!’
Laughing aloud, she took to her heels, and made for the outer doors.
Screaming for her to stop, the boy went after her, his short sturdy legs quickly gaining ground; but that was exactly what Cissie had planned.
When she allowed him to ‘catch’ her, the two of them rolled about on a pile of hessian rope, screeching and laughing, until  David reminded Cissie that she was ‘a young lady of certain years’and that Richard should remember how he had only been allowed to come to the docks on the understanding that he be on his ‘best behaviour’.
And, such was their remorse, the two of them were instantly subdued.
When David led the little group out onto the street, where he quickly hailed a Hansom cab, Cissie had linked arms with Beth, and was walking tall and proud like a ‘young lady’ should.
Richard was holding Beth's other hand, but he was not so composed because everything around him was too exciting for a boy of such tender years, and so he skipped, and laughed, and sang, and teased Cissie about her ‘po-face’.
And Beth walked between them, a smile in her heart, and a twinkle in her eyes.
From a distance, the tall dark-haired man watched with disbelief, his handsome green eyes following Beth's every step.
In that first heart-stopping moment when he realised that it really was her, his impulse had been to run to her, to grab her in his arms and smother her with kisses, to chide her for not waiting until he came back to make her his wife.
He wanted to tell her he had never stopped loving her, that never a single day had passed without him thinking of her, wanting her in his arms or by his side, sharing the success which life had bestowed on him.
‘Beth…oh, Beth.’
He shook his head slowly from side to side.
Reproach mingled with anger — anger that she did not wait, anger that another man should so easily have taken the woman he loved, anger that she should be heavy with another man's child.
According to Ben, she had waited for him and he had failed her; never mind that the real fault was not his, or that he had lain at death's door, or that he had been loath to go to her as a cripple, with nothing to offer but a life of struggle.
The fact remained that  he had waited too long.
Like a fool, he had wanted to return for Beth, carrying the world to place at her feet.
Now, he had the world, but it was a lonely, loveless place without her.
In the pursuit of his fortune, he had deliberately travelled many long and distant journeys, always seeking to escape from memories of Beth and their time together.
He had quickly learned that it was a futile exercise, for she was with him wherever he went.
He looked at her now, thinking that time had made her more beautiful.
Even though her hitherto slim figure was heavy with child, there was a beauty about her, a certain dignity, that made him proud.
Dressed in a gown of deepest blue that complemented her dark eyes and rich hair, she was the loveliest creature he had ever seen.
Tearing away his gaze, he studied the children at her side.
He wondered about the pretty fair-haired girl — a relative of Beth's husband, perhaps?
Certainly she was too old to be Beth's daughter, although it was obvious that the girl had a great affection for her.
The boy, though…five, six years old?
A handsome little fellow and filled with mischief as boys should be; no doubt this was Beth's son, and, taking into account the years between, no doubt begot in the early weeks of Beth's marriage.
He could see the man now, striding ahead of his family, a tall fellow in a black tail-coat, sombre trousers and high grey hat.
It was impossible to see his face, but Tyler assumed the man to be Beth's husband, Wilson Ryan, who according to Ben was a man of considerable reputation in the millinery world, not without fortune, and most certainly the ideal partner for Beth.
Tyler Blacklock had little interest in the millinery world, for he hardly ever wore a hat and so did not move in such circles; neither had he made enquiries with regard to Beth or her husband.
As he had told  Ben: ‘I'm glad she's happy.’
And he was.
He never sought to discuss her.
It would have been too painful.
He wondered in passing what Mr Ryan might be doing so far north; perhaps seeking to expand his chain of hat shops?
After all, wasn't that the very reason why Tyler himself was here…to expand his own business by bidding for a valuable piece of land which was shortly being offered here in Liverpool?
His curiosity was short-lived, for he could think only of Beth.
If only…if only.
No!
Beth was content with her family.
Nowadays, she probably never even gave him a second thought.
Yet he could not forget her.
God only knew how he had tried to replace her in his thoughts and in his heart — striking relationships with one woman after another, lurching from one crisis to the next, building his business with her in mind…driving himself like a man demented and amassing a fortune, yet knowing all the time that he was striving for the impossible.
However many women he took to himself, they were not Beth.
Not his true love.
And yet, he could not accept that he would never again hold her in his arms.
But he must accept it!
He must!
But then if he did, what was there worth living for?
Without Beth, there was no purpose.
And so he went from day to day, from one business deal to the next, pouring his heart and soul into his land agency business, trying to forget, always trying to forget, but being made to remember all the more.
And now here she was, and he was all at odds, wanting to go to her, knowing he could not.
Like a phantom she moved in his sight, lovely and compelling, her dark beauty drawing him against his will, his thoughts calling out to her.
In that moment Beth turned and looked into his face.
It was like a hammer to his heart, seeing her dark eyes widen with surprise, her hand spread across her mouth  as though to stifle a cry.
He stepped forward, but then his companion returned, smiling up at him, taking his arm possessively and wanting to leave.
Afraid and thrown in turmoil he allowed himself to be drawn away, but he could not push that lovely face from his thoughts.
In his shocked heart, Beth went with him, her dark eyes burning into his, astonished at first, then intensely accusing.
Over and over he told himself: ‘You failed her, and she hates you for it.
Now, there is no place in her life for you.’
‘What's the matter, Beth?’
Cissie had been stripping the excess leaves from the stems of a bunch of slender white tulips, which she then lovingly arranged one by one in an earthenware vase.
For some minutes now she had been disturbed by the way Beth was pacing to and fro in front of the great fireplace, a deeply thoughtful expression on her face, and her whole manner one of extreme agitation.
‘Is it the babby?’
Cissie asked now.
‘Is the little tyke up to its tricks again?’
She knew Beth had suffered many sleepless nights of late, because she herself had been kept awake into the small hours, thinking of Matthew and wondering how he was faring.
‘No.
The child is quiet,’ Beth told her.
‘Then is it Matthew?’
Cissie wanted to know.
‘You've been restless since that day at the docks, when we saw him off.’
Beth shook her head.
‘No, it isn't Matthew, although I pray he made the right decision.’
All the same, Cissie was right in one assumption: Beth's peace of mind had been shattered on that particular day.
All these years, she had carried Tyler's image in her heart, and suddenly there he was, looking at her, startling her, his gaze finding its way into that secret part of her that she had always kept hidden.
If she had entertained any doubts  before, they had gone for ever.
She still loved him .
In spite of the fact that he had let her down badly and most devastating of all, even though he now had a new love — Beth still pined for him.
Since that day she had not been able to sleep, or to think straight.
Of all the people in the world she least wanted to see, yet most wanted to see, Tyler had walked back into her life to turn it upside down.
Their eyes had met for only the briefest moment, but it had seemed like a lifetime.
She wanted to hate him, but she couldn't.
She wanted to go to him, but she couldn't.
For all her life, Beth would cherish the time they had had together, and she would always regret their parting, and yet, and yet, he was a scoundrel of the worst kind.
Time and again she told herself she was fortunate to see the back of him, so often she reminded herself of the despicable way he had behaved.
It didn't matter.
Oh, she knew well enough that if he were to walk through that door now, she would not entertain him; her pride would not let her.
But secretly she would go on loving him.
She could never change her deeper feelings because he was still a part of her growing up, part of her life, her first awakening of passion.
Nothing could take that from her, and so she clung to the memories.
Fate had parted them for ever, but she would never know any other man in the way she had known Tyler.
He was her first love.
And he would be her last.
‘If it ain't the babby, and it ain't Matthew, what else is troubling you?’
Cissie laid the flowers on the rug and came to stand before Beth, her pretty face frowning.
‘Something's bothering you, I know,’ she said quietly.
‘Won't you tell me, Beth?
Won't you let me help?’
When she saw the pain in the dark eyes, she went on, ‘Please, I ain't a child no more.’
‘Oh, Cissie…
Cissie, what a comfort you are to me.’
Reaching out her arms, Beth enfolded the girl to her, resting her face against Cissie's fair hair and saying in a softer voice, ‘Do you remember years ago when you asked about my family?’
‘Yes, I remember…when I said you never talked about your parents, and you told me that one day you would tell me all about them.
Only you never did.’
She was astonished to see the tears flowing down Beth's face.
‘Oh, it's your family, ain't it?’ she cried.
‘Some'at's happened to make you feel bad.’
Choking back the tears, Beth forced a small laugh.
‘No, it isn't my family, bless you,’ she said, adding thoughtfully, ‘although…in a way, I suppose, it is.’
She took a deep breath, her mind assailed with doubts.
She wanted so much to confide in Cissie, to share her secret, and after all Cissie was right in saying she was no longer a child.
She was turned fifteen now, and had a wise old head on her shoulders; in many ways, the girl reminded Beth of Maisie; like two peas from the same pod they were.
Beth did not fool herself that it would be an easy thing to talk about what she had kept hidden all these years, but somehow she felt it would be a natural thing for her to confide in Cissie.
‘Come and sit here with me.’
Beth moved towards the settee, the girl followed.
When the two of them were seated, Beth told her, ‘You're so special to me, Cissie.
You're very perceptive, because there are things playing on my mind, and yes…it would help me so much if I could talk them over with someone.
I've never been one for making friends, you know that.
I was always a solitary child, and my making friends was frowned upon.’
She smiled.
‘It's hard to escape from the teachings of your childhood.’
‘Were you not happy as a child, Beth?’
Cissie thought of her own happy childhood.
She had come to forget the horror of a certain night, and all her memories were pleasant now.
‘No, Cissie, I was never happy as a child.’
‘Will you tell me about it?’
Again Beth hesitated, thinking it wrong that she should use this lovely girl in order to lessen her own burden.
Suddenly the decision was taken out of her hands when the door was flung open and there was David, grey-faced and tired, his sleeves rolled up and his hair dishevelled.
Whenever he buried himself in the ledgers and account books, he lost all sense of time.
Often he would go hours without food, keeping the study door locked against all intruders, and invariably emerging dog-weary and irritable.
Today was Monday and, as always on a Monday evening, he was kept busy balancing the books from the rent collection on Friday; already, he had spent most of the day closeted in the study with his stepfather.
Looking at him now, Beth could tell that something was wrong.
‘What is it?’ she asked.
‘Is everything all right?’
‘Of course it is,’ he replied tersely.
‘Is there any reason why it shouldn't be?’
‘Well, no.’
The private moment between herself and Cissie was lost.
‘I made a fish pie.
Enough for you and your stepfather,’ she told him.
Beth still saw it as her duty to provide for the old man, though he rarely ate anything she prepared.
‘I'll arrange a tray,’ she said, rising from the settee.
When David had gone into consultation with the old man earlier, she had been instructed not to disturb them.
She had learned from experience that it was unwise to argue.
‘No food,’ he told her, ‘just a pot of tea.
And a jug of cider for my stepfather.’
He glanced at Cissie.
‘No doubt you'll bring it in,’ he said.
‘Beth should stay off her feet wherever possible.’
His gaze roved round the room.
‘The boy?’
‘I put him to bed half an hour ago,’ Beth explained.
He nodded, his expression still serious.
‘The tea, Cissie,’ he reminded the girl.
‘And a jug of cider…now , if you please.’
Without another word, he departed the room and returned to the study where Luther was waiting for him.
‘Hmh!
What's the matter with him ?’
Cissie asked, staring at Beth with a puzzled look.
‘He's got a face like a fish on a slab.’
‘That'll do, Cissie,’ Beth gently chastised.
‘Do as you're asked, there's a good girl.’
‘Then we can talk?’
‘I don't think so.’
Beth was oddly relieved that she had not confided in Cissie; not that she didn't trust the girl, but because she had never spoken to anyone about her family, or her reason for leaving them all those years ago.
Before she and David were married, Beth had secured his promise that he would never probe into her past, and would not pester her with regard to young Richard's father.
He had kept his word — although she knew there had been times when he was sorely tempted to ask her the questions that must have played on his mind.
To discuss these things now, with Cissie, seemed in Beth's view to be wrong.
She was not proud to have been the cause of splitting her family up; nor could she forget how her father's love had turned to disgust; and how could she easily reveal the shame which she had brought down on the Wards?
How could she possibly expect a girl of Cissie's years to understand how a woman could love so deeply that there seemed no shame in it at all?
Maisie had asked her to ‘look after the childer’, and that must be her main concern.
Her own sordid story could only be a bad influence on such a young and impressionable mind.
Beth knew how Maisie had believed her to be a widow.
That impression was passed on to the children, and then to David.
Beth never denied it.
She thought it best to let well alone.
David was a man of high principles, and if he suspected  the truth, that she had conceived her son out of wedlock, well…it didn't bear thinking about.
‘When you've taken the tray, Cissie, I think you had better finish your flower-arranging, then get yourself ready for bed.’
‘But it's only eight o'clock!’
Cissie was pouring the cider from the larger jug into the smaller one.
As she turned, surprised and disappointed at Beth's instructions, the cider spilled over.
With a moan, she replaced the jug and mopped up the mess.
‘You know how long it takes you to wash and get yourself into bed, Beth reminded her.
‘And don't forget you have a busy time ahead of you tomorrow.
Isn't it Preston market-day?’
Beth held the door open while Cissie manoeuvred her way through it with the wooden tray.
She was not surprised when the girl turned to her with the dark remark, ‘I wish he hadn't come in just then.’
Beth remained silent.
Contrary to Cissie's opinion, she herself was glad that David had stopped her from opening her heart to this impressionable young girl.
‘You're a good friend,’ Beth murmured.
‘And do you promise that if you need a shoulder to cry on, you'll come to me first?’
Laughing softly, Beth gave her a gentle push.
‘Promise,’ she said, adding with more urgency, ‘Get that tray along to the study, or there'll be murder to pay.’
‘I'm no thief, damn you!’
The voice echoed through the house, waking everyone from their slumbers, and shocking Beth to her roots.
In the six years and more that she had been David's wife, not once had she heard his voice raised in such dark anger.
‘Mammy!
Mammy!’
The boy's frantic call spurred her on.
Clambering out of bed, she grabbed her robe, wrapping it round her swollen form as she went in haste  along the landing towards her son's room, calling to him, ‘It's all right, sweetheart.
Mammy's here.’
In a matter of minutes, she had gathered the frightened child in her arms, soothing him, lulling him back to sleep.
But then the uproar began again, this time the voice of the old man.
‘You're a liar!
A bloody liar.
What kind of man are you, to steal from the hand that fed you all these years?’
The boy was past sleep now, his trembling form clinging to Beth and his green eyes wide with fear.
When Cissie appeared at the door, Beth held out her arms and the girl fell into them, and there the three of them remained huddled while the unholy row raged below.
David's face was drained white.
He had never before been accused of stealing and it did not sit well with him.
His brown eyes dark with anger, he stared the old man out.
‘In all the years you've known me, I've never taken what wasn't mine,’ he said in a hard voice.
‘Since I was old enough to carry a money-bag, I've trudged round the streets, knocking on every door of every property you own…aye, and sometimes I've had a fist in my face for the trouble, but never once have I let you down.
Never once have I dipped a finger into that money-bag, however fat it bulged and however heavy it weighed; it was always brought straight home to you…every farthing that crossed my palm.’
He gasped as though someone had stabbed him through the heart.
‘And now you say I've thieved from you?
Never!
Not while there's a breath left in my body would I steal from anyone…let alone my own father…’
He stopped when he saw the twisted grin on Luther's face, and it made him remember with a falling heart that this man was not his real father.
Suddenly all the anger emptied from him, and in its place there was anguish.
He  shook his head and continued to stare at the old man, but there was pleading in his voice now.
‘You know I would not steal from you,’ he said quietly.
The old man was breathing hard, his pig-like eyes fixed on the other man's face.
He hated him.
Oh, how he hated him!
At the same time, he needed him.
‘All I know is, there's money missing!’ he growled.
‘And if you ain't got it, then who the bloody hell has?
Answer me that, go on!
There's four guineas missing here.’
He gestured towards the numerous piles of shiny coins spread out before him.
‘Four guineas, I tell you, and you don't leave this room until they're accounted for.’
He leaned forward and crooked his bony arms round the neat piles of money, protecting it, coveting it, his eyes fixed on his stepson's face.
He made a strange sound, like that of a wounded animal, dropping his face into the money and swivelling his eyes upwards.
‘You're robbing me,’ he accused in a pitiful voice, ‘robbing a helpless old man of his livelihood.’
‘No!’
David took a step forward, stretching out his hand as though he might touch the old man, but a hard forbidding glare stopped him in his tracks.
Taking the ledger from under his arm, he opened it at the relevant page and slid it on to the desk.
‘I swear to God…
I checked every coin.
There's no mistake, see for yourself.’
Grabbing the pile of cloth money-bags from the corner of the desk, he turned them upside down one by one.
‘Examine the edger again,’ he begged.
‘It's all there, I tell you.’
Luther waved his arm impatiently.
‘Get out,’ he said.
‘Not satisfied with stealing my money, you're trying to tell me I'm senile into the bargain, is that it?’
He cocked his head to one side as if he had just realised something awful.
‘You want me put away, so you can take everything!’
His back stiffened and he swept the money towards his chest.
‘You and that wife o’ yourn …you want me put away.
You want to finish me off.
That's why you took the boy away from me…sent him away to sea.’
‘Now you're imagining things.’
David's anger was returning.
‘Matthew went to sea of his own accord.
As for putting you away, nothing could be further from my mind, Father.
Even if I didn't love you as I do, I know my duty.
As long as I live, I'll take care of you, you can be sure of that.’
‘Fine words, easy said.
I've no doubt you'll ‘take care of me’…and I know why, you canny bastard!’
Luther laughed without opening his mouth, making a deep rattling sound that was frightening to hear.
‘You'll ‘take care of me’ because you see yourself as getting it all when I breathe me last, don't you, eh?
Well, you're a bigger fool than I took you for.’
He paused, enjoying the confusion on the younger man's face.
Suddenly his withered features crumpled into a surprising smile.
What he said was even more surprising.
‘In all truth, I can't see that you'd steal from me,’ he muttered cautiously, smiling deeper when the other man visibly relaxed.
‘Mebbe you lost the money,’ he said, ‘but no matter.
It's only four guineas.
I'll stop it from your wages at the end of the month.’
It pleased him to see the shock his words delivered, and before David could protest, he lied, ‘You've been a help to me since my old bones went crook, and I'll see you get your dues when the time comes.
But there's something else playing on my mind at the minute.’
He sat back in the chair.
‘You know the land that's coming up for auction?’
‘You mean Tobias Drew's properties?’
The old man had pointed the article out to him some time ago, but David had thought it unwise to consider such a large project.
‘I intend to bid.’
‘You know my thoughts on that, Father.
You've  already built your holdings up to over a hundred houses, plus some useful parcels of land.
I'm worried that you're taking on too much.’
‘Oh, aye?
Concerned for my health, are you?
Or is it that you're worried about having to work a bit harder for the grand wages I give you…wages that's been strangled out of me by that bloody woman o’ yours?’
‘That's uncalled for.
I won't deny I find it harder to keep pace, what with collecting the rents, keeping the books ready for the accountant, and overseeing the more recent purchases, like the six acres of land in Accrington which we're negotiating to sell on.
Then there's the matter of Larkhill, and the houses that were made derelict by that tragic fire.’
‘Bugger Larkhill!
If it weren't for that bloody fire, you'd never ‘a’ brought that damned woman and her brats to this house.’
Sensing he was going too far, the old man was more cautious.
‘Water under the bridge,’ he mumbled.
‘As for Larkhill, I don't want to know.
I've told you…that's your responsibility.
I'm sick to death of the worry it's brought, what with the  lease-owners demanding money from me, when I've no bloody rents to collect there…
I don't know which way to turn.
They want to finish me, that's what it is!
The buggers want to see me go under.
I've asked 'em to sell me the land so I can develop it but they won't see sense.
They're keeping me to the contract…wanting their pound o’ flesh.
I tell you it's an impossible situation!
The agent knows you've got full authority as far as Larkhill's concerned.
Do what the hell you like with it, only I don't want it being a bloody millstone round my neck.
The authorities are already threatening me with letters claiming the derelict houses are a public danger.’
Unlike his stepson, who favoured building houses for sale or rent, Luther Reynolds was a cold and calculating  thinker, a man who thought with his emotions; a legacy, no doubt, of being starved of love for so many years.
Much later, when the children were asleep and the house was quiet once more, Beth lay in bed beside her husband.
His head was lying in the crook of her arm and the flat of his hand was spread over the bulge of her stomach.
On coming upstairs, he had turned to her for comfort, desperate to make love, needing to feel the growing swell of her body that was his own flesh and blood and, as always, he was moved to tears by it.
He was quiet now, his physical needs satisfied, and the hurt cried out of him.
Beth lay very still.
Her arm was aching from his weight, and her body was sore from his eager lovemaking.
Inside her, there was a small life forming, something precious and wonderful; but there was also a deadness in her, weighing her down like a physical burden, a burden that grew harder to bear with every passing day.
The house was so quiet.
So deathly quiet, the eerie stillness broken only by the gentle snoring of the man beside her.
She turned towards the window.
The curtains were partly open, allowing the merest glimmer of moonlight to creep in.
Her thoughts began to wander.
Somewhere out there, in a room perhaps much like this one, Tyler was with his woman.
His image rose in her mind now.
The years had not changed him too much; he was still as she remembered, the same virile, darkly handsome man who had won her heart, held her as close as any man could hold a woman.
As close as he was now holding the other woman…the other woman .
Her lips formed the words, a small cry.
‘Oh, Tyler.’
Torturing herself, she pictured him now, him and the other woman, lying in a bed much the same as the one she herself was lying in…making love.
He whispering endearments in his lover's ear, the joy of lying in each other 's arms…the ecstasy afterwards, the contentment of just being together.
Beth remembered it all as though it was only yesterday; it was etched on her mind and in her heart for all time.
She wondered if he ever thought of her.
She was curious as to how he felt when he saw her at the docks the other day.
He must have noticed that she was with child.
Was he just the slightest bit jealous?
Maybe he was riven with guilt?
Did he think her attractive still?
Was there even the slightest echo of the love they had known?
But, no, of course not!
How could there be?
Turning from the window, she gazed on the face of her husband, a kind face and not unattractive, with its straight features and good skin, and the unruly mop of hair that tumbled over his forehead; he stirred in her arms, whimpering like a child, and pressing himself against her.
Suddenly, the very touch of him was obnoxious to her.
Sliding her arm from beneath him, Beth got out of bed and, wrapping her robe about her shivering form, went first to the window, where she looked out at the moonlit night.
Then, not wanting to return to bed, she made herself comfortable in the wicker armchair, her eyes gazing on her husband's sleeping face.
‘How like a child you are,’ she murmured, unable to quell the feeling of disgust that he sometimes wrought in her.
His needs were insatiable.
Yet she had needs too.
Needs he could never understand.
She did not want a child to walk through life beside her.
She needed someone strong of heart, someone to talk with, to make plans with, someone who made her laugh, who understood her in the way a man understands a woman.
David could never do those things.
He would not know how to.
From somewhere in the lower regions of the house, laughter told Beth that Luther Reynolds was still awake.
The thought made her shiver deep within herself.
Glancing once more at the figure in the bed, she could not bear the thought of climbing in beside it.
Instead, she curled deeper into the chair, closed her eyes and was soon asleep.
Downstairs, the old man gathered together the piles of coins and laid them in the tin chest.
He then placed the ledger on top, and locked the articles into the sturdy cupboard beside the chimney breast.
Afterwards, he returned to the desk, where he opened one of the smaller drawers, and from it counted out a number of shiny coins…totalling four guineas in all.
Chuckling wickedly, he thrust them into his waistcoat pocket, collected the lamp from the desk top, and quietly departed the room.
‘I'll go to Liverpool,’ he whispered as he hobbled up the stairs, ‘and I shall outbid all of them.’
His face was a study in cunning as he told the paintings of his ancestors, ‘It's all for him…all for my son Arnold Thomas.’
He chuckled again.
‘The bugger said I'd never make a businessman.
Well now, Arnold Thomas will eat his harsh words when he's living in the lap o’ luxury.’
A small sound caused him to turn his head ‘What's that?’ he said into the darkness.
It was only the night, the sound of an old house creaking, and the dark deceit in his own cold heart.
Unnerved, he pushed forward.
His voice was the merest whisper as he stared down the landing towards a particular door, his mind imagining the two people behind it; two people he resented beyond words.
‘Sleep in a warm bed while you can, because you'll be in the gutter soon enough, the lot of you.’
He chuckled as he went on his way.
‘Wherever you are, son, your old father means to find you, to put things right between us before his old bones is laid into the  ground,’ he muttered.
‘I still ain't forgiven you for what you said, but when all's said and done, blood's thicker than water.’
Discounting all the years during which his stepson had sacrificed a life of his own to follow an old man's dictates, he pressed on to his bed.
‘There's much to be done,’ he mumbled to himself.
‘Much to be done.’
Two weeks later, on the morning of the auction, a determined knock on the door sent Cissie flying headlong down the hallway from the kitchen, with Beth in close pursuit; young Richard was already upstairs with his newly appointed day-tutor, and David was closeted in the den with Luther, going over the final details for the auction.
‘It's two men,’ Cissie whispered, peering through the keyhole, her blue eyes squinting into the daylight and a look of mischief on her pretty face.
Much to Beth's disapproval, Cissie had lately taken to observing visitors through the narrow chink, seeming to derive great pleasure from the knowledge that they could not see her.
She began giggling.
‘Rough-looking blighters, they are,’ she told Beth who was now alongside her.
‘Come away from there!’
Beth chided, tugging at the girl's smock and edging her away.
But then she opened the door and was ready to agree with Cissie; the visitors really were ‘rough-looking blighters’.
‘Top o’ the morning to yer,’said the older one, grabbing his tatty beret off his black unruly mop of hair.
‘Would there be a Miss Elizabeth at this ‘ere address?’
‘Yes,’ Beth replied in a curious voice.
‘There would.’
‘And is that yourself?’
‘It is.’
The fellow smiled a broad toothless smile, looking from Beth to his companion, then back again.
‘Ah, well.’
He dug deep into his jacket pocket, the grin fixed on his face and his bloodshot eyes regarding Beth with interest; at length he drew a mangled envelope from his pocket and, flourishing it grandly, explained, ‘This ‘ere's from a lad we come across in a foreign port.’
He made a loud noise through his cavernous nostrils.
‘The lad asked a favour of an old shipmate, and being as he was most polite, how could that shipmate refuse, I ask you?
How could he refuse, eh?’
He glanced at his young companion; a thin scrag of a man, with a long thin nose and small sunken eyes.
‘Well, you couldn't refuse, matey,’ this companion acknowledged.
‘Not seeing as how politely the young feller asked an’ all.’
He smiled at the other man, then smiled at Beth, then at Cissie who, struck with horror at the thin man's strikingly unpleasant face, pressed herself closer to Beth.
‘Accept the letter then, Miss,’ the older man insisted, holding it out for Beth to take.
‘The lad said you might be glad of word as to his daring adventures.
A nice enough lad…
Matthew.
Aye, that were it…the lad's name were Matthew.’
‘Matthew!’
Cissie had only now realised that these two merchantmen had brought news of her brother.
‘Oh, Beth.
It's a letter from Matthew!’
In her great excitement she thrust herself forward and grabbed the older man by the hand, which she shook up and down, crying, ‘God bless you, sir.
God bless the pair on you.’
‘Well, I'm buggered!’ said the scraggy one.
‘Whoever woulda thought a lad could leave such a pretty little gal to go off on some faraway adventure, eh?’
He glanced at his mate, then feasted his eyes on Cissie once more.
‘Thank you both,’ Beth told them, at the same time stepping between the men and Cissie; she did not like the way the younger man was regarding the girl.
Reaching into her skirt pocket, she brought out a silver  shilling which she placed into the older man's hand.
‘Please divide that between you,’ she said.
‘And I really am most grateful for your errand.’
Knowing when he was dismissed, the older sailor turned to leave, taking the other fellow with him.
Ramming the cap back on his head, he nodded.
‘Good day to yer, Miss.’
‘One thing.’
Beth hesitated to keep them lingering, but she had to ask, ‘The boy…
Is he well?’
The sailor chuckled.
‘First of all, the ‘boy’ ain't such a ‘boy’no longer…life on board a ship in the middle o' the ocean ain't for no boy.’
He displayed his empty grin once more.
‘I reckon you'll find this ‘ere boy will come back a man.
And, yes…
’ He fidgeted and gave a sideways look to his mate ‘…yer could say as ‘e were well.
Aye, yer could say ‘e were well enough.’
With that, he swung away and strode quickly out of sight, the thin fellow hurrying beside him.
Once away from Beth's searching dark eyes, he turned to his mate and said, ‘That boy does have the makings of a man, it's true.
But, like a man, he'll need to learn that yer don't break yer heart over them as you've left behind, 'cause yer tied to your ship fer as long as the cap'n says so.
And yer learn ter keep the tears inside.
That way, yer fellow shipmates don't take the tar outta yer, and make yer life one long misery.’
He shook his head forlornly.
‘Oh, aye…the lad has the makings of a man.
But he's still a long way to go, poor little sod.
But then, we all ‘ave to learn the hard way, more's the pity.’
He grinned, ‘Still, we managed to keep all that to us selves, didn't we, matey?’
‘We did right, I reckon, 'cause there ain't no sense in causing upset, that's what I say.’
‘What does it say?’
Cissie was impatient to know the contents of the letter.
She was on Beth's heels all the  way back to the drawing room, and now, when Beth was seated in the big armchair and eagerly slitting open the envelope with the tortoise-shell letter-knife, Cissie was kneeling on the floor beside her.
‘Go on,’ she was urging.
‘Read it.
Tell me what it says!’
Unfolding the letter, Beth swiftly ran her dark eyes over it.
Satisfied that it contained nothing which might distress the girl, she read aloud:
Hello, Beth
I thote you and Cissie, and everywun there, wuld like to know how I wus geting on.
Well, I'm on bord ship just now, and I'm keping watch with an old hand by the name of Mr Margetson.
He's a gud frend to me and the uther yung fellers.
I'm wurkin hard and lurning to be a sailor, so you can be prowd of me.
I don't know wen I'll see you agen, but I'm sorry for the things I did, and I'm ashamd.
Tell Cissie I luv her, and Richard.
David is a gud man.
God bles all of you, Matthew
When Beth finished reading, she sat still and silent for a moment, her heart aching, and her mind alive with memories of her old friend.
She prayed that Maisie could somehow see how well her boy had done for himself, and how he had come to regret the hatred that almost destroyed him.
When she raised her head, there were tears in her dark eyes; Cissie's eyes, too, were bright and full.
The letter had subdued them both.
Without speaking, she crooked her hand round the back of Cissie's head, pulling her close until the girl's head nestled in the dip of Beth's shoulder.
‘Oh, Cissie,’ she murmured, ‘aren't you just so proud of your brother?’
‘I wish he'd come home,’ Cissie replied with a small sigh.
Then, raising her head slightly, she placed the flat  of her hand against the round bulge beneath Beth's blue gown.
‘Do you think our Matthew'll be home afore the babby comes?’
‘It all depends how far away he is,’ Beth explained.
‘It may be impossible for him to get home in just a few months.’
‘That sailor said Matthew would come home a man.
We won't know him, will we, Beth?’
‘Of course we'll know him.’
She laughed softly.
‘Don't forget, we all change.
Every day we change a little, but you wouldn't expect Matthew not to know us, would you, eh?’
Cissie shook her head.
‘All the same, I wish he'd come home,’ she insisted.
‘The sea makes me frightened.’
She recalled the docks, and the way the sea screamed and wailed like a soul in torment, throwing itself against the piers with a wild vengeance that struck terror into her young heart.
‘It's like a real person,’ she said, ‘it gets angry, and it drowns people.’
‘That's a fine way to talk, Cissie Armstrong!’
Beth told her in a reproachful voice.
‘Matthew's gone to be a sailor.
Sailors know all there is to know about the sea.’
She held the girl at arm's length.
‘Are you saying Matthew won't make a fine sailor?’
Beth's ploy worked.
At once, Cissie was indignant.
‘Our Matthew'll make the best sailor there ever was!’ she declared.
Now, when Beth smiled knowingly, the girl saw how she had been manipulated, and soon the two of them were laughing.
Luther did not laugh, though.
When David proudly took the letter to him, he scanned it and threw it aside.
‘The young bastard!’ he hissed.
‘Not one word for old Luther who took him in!
Never a mention of the one who spent many an hour teaching him the way of things.
Ungrateful bugger!
Serves him right if the sea rises up and drowns him!’
No sooner were the words out of his mouth than he glanced anxiously about, his unattractive features relaxing when he saw that his words had fallen only on his stepson's ears.
If ‘that bloody woman’ had heard him utter such a curse, she would have ripped into him with a piece of her mind, then he would have whipped her with his tongue, then this sop of a man before him would have got between them, and afore you knew it, there would be a full-scale war waging — and in the heat of the moment he might foolishly betray his devious plans to boot the lot of them out of his house and out of his life.
And that would be soon as ever he had his own son safely established back under this roof, where he should have been all along!
For the moment, he was canny enough to see the wisdom of keeping his stepson sweet, and that would not be achieved by stirring up a hornets' nest.
As for Matthew, the old man had to admit that, despite his anger at the boy for having deserted him, he still felt a murmuring of affection towards him.
He chuckled inwardly, thinking that maybe the boy was not altogether lost to him.
Boys had a way of doing things in a great hurry and then regretting them afterwards.
Adventure might seem exciting, but all too soon it could seem like a prison sentence, especially when it meant living aboard a ship with all manner of rogues and scoundrels.
Happen it wouldn't be long afore he was back here, and then they would see.
Yes, indeed…they would see.
‘The lad made his choice,’ he told his stepson now.
‘I've other things on my mind at the minute.’
Draping a cloak round his crooked figure, he leaned on his cane and shuffled awkwardly to the door.
‘Let's be having you!’ he grumbled, impatiently donning his top hat.
‘Or have you forgot we've a sale to attend?’
A thought suddenly occurred to him.
‘You remember what I told  you?
I've no intention of paying for a Hansom all the way to Liverpool.
The railway's cheaper, and it'll get us there just the same.’
‘No, I've not forgotten,’ David sighed wearily.
There were times when he almost believed that Luther feigned his disability.
Certainly he seemed surprisingly agile in that moment.
He still could not understand the old man's fever to acquire yet more land.
‘The Hansom will take us to Blackburn Railway Station, then from there we'll travel to Liverpool and should arrive with time to spare.’
‘Good!
Then don't stand there dithering, you bloody fool.
Let's be away!’
He groaned.
‘If it weren't for me old bones and the fact that I might be overlooked when the bidding starts, I wouldn't want you within a mile of that sale room.
Sometimes you're worse than bloody useless.’
He flung the door open and waved his cane impatiently.
‘Come on!
Come on!’ he snapped, thumping the end of his stick on the floor and glowering from beneath his unkempt eyebrows.
As they passed the kitchen, Cissie came rushing out.
‘Don't go without me!’ she reminded them.
Usually Beth accompanied her to town, but, seeing as the Hansom would be going right by the flower-shop, she had arranged for Cissie to be dropped off there.
As the party filed through the front door, the girl called out, ‘Cheerio, Beth.
I'll see you later.’
Beth was standing in the kitchen doorway, the dishcloth in her hands and a serious expression on her face.
‘Bye, sweetheart,’ she returned, at once shifting her gaze to David.
Neither of them smiled, but each knew the other's thoughts.
Beth had heard the manner in which the old man had addressed her husband, and it would have gladdened her heart to hear him snap back; just for once to tell the old villain to ‘Go to Hell!’
Yet, she knew he wouldn't.
He looked at her  now, a sheepish half-smile on his face that said, ‘I'd better not antagonise him further by passing a minute with you.’
Instead, he allowed the old man to usher him along and occasionally jab at him with his stick.
Beth could not bear to witness such humiliation, and so she averted her gaze and returned to her work.
She heard the front door close.
Putting the dishcloth on the drainer, she spread out her hands on the rim of the sink and leaned her weight forward.
Glancing at the big old wall-clock, she saw that it was still only eight-thirty.
The day loomed unending before her.
Young Richard would be kept busy with his learning for some considerable time yet, Cissie would not be ready to come home until tea-time, and David had warned her that it would be late when he and his ‘father’ returned, especially as Luther had expressed a desire to ‘celebrate afterwards’.
He obviously meant to have the land that was being auctioned, and when he set his sights on something Luther Reynolds usually got his way.
By ten-thirty, Beth had cleared away the breakfast things, washed the dishes and stacked them into the big dresser, wiped down the kitchen table, taken the coconut matting from the floor and hung it over the line outside where she beat every speck of dust from it before replacing it over her freshly scrubbed quarry tiles; all that done she was now enjoying a cup of tea, before setting about the drawing room.
She felt strangely restless, wanting to throw herself into every small task that awaited her throughout the house.
There was an energy about her, a drive that told her, ‘Keep going, Beth.
Don't give yourself time to think…to think about Tyler!’
When the daily help came through the back door and into the kitchen, she found Beth sitting at the table, breathless and dishevelled.
‘Why, Mrs Miller!
Whatever  have you been doing?’
A quick glance told the plump jolly creature that most of her work had already been done.
She was horrified; not only because she could see how Beth had thoroughly exhausted herself, but because she had been taken on two weeks ago by Mr Miller, who had told her categorically, ‘I don't want Mrs Miller tackling any of the heavier domestic tasks, you understand?
Her condition is advanced now, and one can't be too careful.’
He had explained that, ‘Mrs Miller is a woman not used to being idle and will sweep clean through the house with fearsome enthusiasm if she isn't watched.
Be here on time and do your work well and I might consider hiring you on a regular basis once the child is born.’
Eager to secure the position, the girl had fervently assured the master, ‘Depend on me, sir.
I'll watch Mrs Miller like an 'awk.
I shan't let her do a thing, cause I'll be two steps afront of her all the time.’
She had been taken on straightaway, and was now settled in the position.
Having just wed, and her husband laid off from the cotton mill only four days since, her wages were now the only ones coming in, and she lived in fear of being put out of work.
‘Don't fuss, Peggy,’ Beth told her.
‘I can't see the sense in leaving all the work to you, when I have so much time on my hands.’
‘But, if you'll pardon me, ma'am…it's what the master pays me for.
He partic'ly said I wasn't to let you lift a finger about the house.’
She nervously dipped the top half of her body forward in a half-hearted curtsey.
‘Mr Miller'd skin me alive if he could see you now,’ she said in a pitiful voice.
‘You look fair worn out.’
She glanced from one end of the kitchen to the other, noting the sparkling sink without a cup or plate in sight, and the gleaming table top, then the freshly scrubbed floor that was still damp in the corners; the coconut matting  beneath her feet bristled from its merciless thrashing.
‘The master was most partic'lar,’ she said lamely.
‘Most partic'lar.’
Smiling mischievously, Beth leaned forward.
‘I won't tell if you won't,’ she whispered as though imparting a secret.
Pointing to the chair opposite, she told the girl, ‘Come and sit with me a while, Peggy.
Tell me all about your weekend.
Has your husband managed to find a position yet?’
When the girl made no move, she realised that instead of putting the poor creature at her ease, she had only succeeded in heightening her anxiety.
‘Begging yer pardon, ma'am, but…well, I'd rather get on with me work, if yer don't mind.
That is…begging yer pardon.’
She repeated the half-curtsey, her big round eyes going over Beth's face and a sense of panic taking hold of her.
She didn't like the unusually high colour of the mistress's face.
‘Are yer all right, ma'am?’ she asked, looking desperate.
‘Of course I'm all right,’ Beth reassured her.
‘Hard work never killed anyone that I know of.
And please, Peggy…
I would rather you didn't curtsey.
It makes me nervous when you keep dipping unexpectedly like that.’
Suddenly, a wave of tiredness swept through her and she closed her eyes for a moment, during which the girl remained quiet, but visibly agitated and eager to be getting on with her work.
Sighing wearily, Beth opened her eyes and told her, ‘You're right, Peggy.
I think I went into the work with a little too much exuberance this morning.’
She smiled warmly, and not for the first time the girl thought how incredibly lovely her mistress was.
She had a nice nature too, not like some of the gentry; although, of course, the Reynolds weren't really ‘gentry’ as such.
Everyone knew the story of how old man Reynolds had come up from nothing to be a landowner.
There  was a time when he owned only this great mausoleum, and that piece of derelict land at the bottom of Shorrock Hill.
That son of his…what was his name?…
Arnold Thomas, yes, that was it.
Well, the story was that Arnold Thomas was the ambitious one, while the old man was content to live on the money he got from leasing the land to them as paid the price, usually folk who wanted a storage area or distribution centre.
At one time, Mr Jarvis the coalman paid a pretty penny just to park his waggons there.
But Arnold Thomas smelled a bigger profit from the up-and-coming developers who were looking to build back-to-backs for the mill-workers.
The old feller would have none of it!
Time and again they argued, with the son wanting the land sold on the open market, and old Luther arguing that he would ‘do what the bloody hell I think fit with me own land!’
He were always a bit of a tyrant.
In fact, Peggy remembered her own mam saying as how there were certain folk, including herself, who believed it were Luther Reynolds' fault when his second wife died of the fever.
Weeks she'd been badly, and he wouldn't hear of spending a penny on a doctor.
After the poor woman died and his own son deserted him, the old man took his bitterness out on the little stepson left behind.
Yet, in spite of everything, David Miller grew up to idolise the old rascal.
Looking at Beth now, the girl was made to wonder whether she had ever regretted coming to this house.
Certainly, there were times when the mistress had a strange faraway look in her eye, a look that belied her busy nature and preoccupation with the children she adored: a haunted lonely look.
She seemed to find it difficult to make friends, and the fact that she hardly ever wandered far from the house only added to her loneliness.
‘You rest there a while, Mrs Miller,’ the girl said with  unusual boldness, ‘and I'll make you a fresh brew of tea before I start on the drawing room.’
She frowned at Beth when an awful thought suddenly occurred to her.
‘You ain't already been in there as well, ‘ave you, ma'am?’
Her whole body relaxed when Beth told her with a measure of amusement, ‘No, Peggy, but I might well have done if you hadn't come in when you did.’
‘Then, is it all right if I get on, begging yer pardon, ma'am?’
She flushed with guilt when Beth took a few moments to reply.
Against her better judgement she added hastily, ‘I'll stay if you really want me to.
If you're lonely, ma'am, that is?’
Deliberately ignoring the girl's last comment, Beth replied in a more serious voice, ‘I'm sorry if I've made you anxious, Peggy.
You go about your work.’
She pushed her chair back and stood up, one hand across the bulge of her stomach and the other holding the small of her back.
‘If you should need me, I'll be in my room,’ she said.
She had risen this morning with the intention of going into town and meandering among the shops, perhaps treating herself to a new bonnet, or buying Cissie those pretty boots she had so admired some days ago when the two of them had walked up and down Ainsworth Street, browsing in all the shop-windows; afterwards, Beth might have called in to the delightful tea rooms at the comer of the boulevard.
Now, though, she only wanted to sit in her room a while.
Later, when her son was finished with his learning, she and he might make their way to Corporation Park, where they could stroll through the gardens and enjoy the sunshine of a beautiful July afternoon.
With this thought in mind, Beth went from the kitchen and along the landing, then up the stairs towards her room.
Outside the nursery, she paused and quietly inched open the door.
Seated at his tiny desk beneath the window, Richard was intent on the word-pictures being  held up by the kindly faced tutor.
Unobserved, Beth closed the door and went softly into her own room.
Here she went to the dressing table where she sat down and regarded herself in the mirror.
Looking back at her was a young woman in her thirtieth year, with trim shoulders and strong handsome features.
Her hair was loosely coiled into the nape of her neck, and at her throat was a pretty cameo brooch given to her by her husband last birthday.
As though suddenly observing a stranger, Beth looked down at her hands, small dainty hands that were now red from scrubbing the floor.
She looked at the bump beneath her gown, and touched it with tenderness.
Sighing, she raised her head and stared once more into the mirror, into those dark eyes that rarely revealed what was in her soul.
In the secrecy of that room, where she had lain so often in David's loving arms, her eyes now betrayed all.
Soft tears blurred the image in the mirror.
When they spilled over, she did not wipe them from her face.
Instead, she remembered what Peggy had said just now: ‘I'll stay if you're lonely.’
The ghost of a smile flitted across her sad features.
Another ghost walked her heart, reawakening old wounds, reviving old memories.
‘Lonely?’
She nodded her head and smiled, murmuring the words which no other living soul would ever hear.
‘Yes, I am lonely…lonely for him.
Lonely for what might have been.’
Shaking off the nostalgia that threatened to overwhelm her, she went to the window and threw it open, startling a tiny robin that had been resting on the sill.
As it flew away, the songs of many starlings filled the air.
The sun was already hot on her face, and down below in the garden two doves stalked the lawn, looking for titbits.
Soon, July would be gone, she thought, and with it, the turning of the year.
Suddenly, she felt lighter of heart, ready to face the truth she had long denied herself.
Yes, there were things she would never experience  in life, special things which a man and woman in love might enjoy; she would never carry Tyler's child again, nor would the two of them grow old together, content in each other 's love.
But she was blessed in so many other ways.
She had her health and strength and the tiny life forming inside her; she had security and a comfortable home; then there was Cissie whom she adored, and her own darling son who was so like his father that her joy in him must always be mingled with pain.
Besides all of that, Beth reminded herself that she had the love of a good man; although, sadly, she could never return his love, she was bound to remain by his side until the end of her days.
Looking up to the blue sky, she watched the many birds flying overhead, chattering and screaming as they passed out of sight.
The world was beautiful.
Life was beautiful.
Now, as she prepared to close the window, the robin returned, standing only inches from her hand and eyeing her with great deliberation, his tiny head cocked to one side and his bright eyes glinting in the sunshine.
Suddenly her mind was made up.
In no time at all, she was hurrying down the hallway towards the nursery, where she swept in to announce, ‘It's such a glorious day, Mr Turnbull, I think we'll cut short Richard's lessons and I'll take him out in the sunshine.’
The tutor appeared unsure, but the boy jumped up from his place, rushing to Beth and grabbing her by the hand.
‘Where are we going, Mammy?’ he cried excitedly.
‘Can we go to the park?
Can we?’
‘First, we'll go down to the kitchen and pack a small picnic,’ she told him, ‘then, yes…we'll make our way to Corporation Park.’
He gave a squeal of delight, turning round on the spot and throwing his little arms around her.
‘Can we stay all day?’ he said breathlessly.
‘I want to feed the ducks, and I want to play in the sandpit.
Can I climb the cannons?
Oh, can I, Mammy?’
The questions tumbled from him as he went hand in hand with Beth, down the stairs and into the kitchen, where Peggy was soon caught up in the excitement.
‘I'd best fetch the smaller basket,’ she said, ‘on account of your condition, begging yer pardon, ma'am.’
Soon, the wicker basket was packed with fruit, slices of pork pie, daintily cut sandwiches and a small earthenware jug of sarsaparilla.
‘Gotta have enough, ma'am,’ Peggy remarked.
‘Small boys have such enormous appetites, don't they?’
It took Beth only a few minutes to put on her bonnet and best shawl while Peggy dressed the boy for outdoors.
Soon, the two of them were ready and going through the front door.
‘Begging yer pardon, ma'am,’ Peggy whispered hesitantly, ‘you won't go climbing no steep hills in Corporation Park, will yer?
Not seeing as yer…
I wouldn't want anything to go amiss,’ she finished, blushing bright pink.
‘Bless you, Peggy.
Of course I won't go climbing hills,’ Beth assured her with a light peck on the cheek to show that she was not annoyed at the girl's being so forward.
With that, Beth and her son went hand in hand out of the house and down the street, the boy's constant chatter filtering back to the watching maid and causing her to smile.
‘Have a good time!’ she called out, over the hustle and bustle of passing carriages.
Beth's smile in return gladdened the girl.
She had been so worried about the mistress, and it wasn't just because of the way she had torn into the work this morning, nor because of the bairn growing heavy inside her and making life uncomfortable.
No, the girl's instincts told her there was something else that deeply disturbed the mistress, something secret that maybe even her own husband didn't know about.
Craning her neck, she caught a last glimpse of Beth and the child.
She looked so slim and young in that  cream shawl above her blue taffeta gown, with the pretty frilled bonnet over her gleaming hair; she had a way of walking, thought the watching girl, with just a little envy…so easy and graceful, even though she was with child.
Now and again the small boy at her side would look up, and Beth would lean towards him, no doubt answering his lively questions.
All the way down the street he jumped and fidgeted and laughed and chatted, and Beth held his hand, keeping him close, keeping him safe.
After all, Tyler's son was the most precious gift of all.
The woman loved the feel of his nakedness, the muscles in his chest hard against her back and his arms wound round her thighs.
Softly, so as not to wake him, she turned her long slim form until she was face to face with his sleeping figure.
For what seemed an age, she studied his features, strong lean features which she had come to know so well.
She had never loved any man, never really wanted to.
She had not wanted to love this man, especially when she knew he could never love her back.
And yet, she wanted him like she had wanted no other.
Not for the first time she wondered cynically whether she craved Tyler Blacklock because he was tall, darkly handsome and unattainable, or because he was fast becoming a very rich and influential man.
Certainly, it was these qualities that drew her to him in the first place, but now…these were not the true reasons why she stayed with him.
She had tried hard not to fall in love with him, preferring to play the field and maybe trap a man whose heart was fancy free.
She laughed softly.
Things never turned out the way you wanted them to.
This man was different from any other she had known.
He was thoughtful and caring, but strong-willed and quick-minded.
From a lonely boyhood to being left for dead in some alley, he had never looked  to others for strength.
Instead, like the powerful and determined man he was, Tyler Blacklock had risen above it all to become a formidable but respected businessman.
Tenderly, she stroked his face, running her slender fingers over the newly grown stubble on his chin, tracing the classical lines of his nose with the tip of her finger, and all the while gently thrusting herself against him, arousing him, wanting him.
Placing her mouth over his, she murmured teasingly, running her fingers along the nape of his neck, watching his face so she could smile into those magnificent green eyes when they opened to gaze on her.
Soon he was responding to her love-play, softly moaning, his arms tightening about her and his nakedness fusing harder with hers.
Suddenly his moan became a soft, broken cry.
‘Beth…oh, Beth.’
He felt her stiffen in his arms.
His eyes flickered open to see the horror on her face.
At once he pulled away, confused and angry with himself.
Sitting on the edge of the bed, he bowed his head, clasping his hands over his face.
‘I'm sorry,’ he told her simply.
She made no reply but climbed out of bed.
He watched as she poured water from the jug into the bowl and quickly washed and then dressed; not once did she look at him or speak one word.
He knew how she must be feeling, and he hated her.
But he hated himself more.
She had been a good companion; she did not deserve this from him.
‘Are you leaving?’ he asked quietly, his loneliness intensifying.
‘What the hell do you think?’ she demanded, swinging round to face him, her eyes blazing.
When he looked away, she realised she would lose him for ever.
She didn't know if she could bear that.
In the wake of his softly spoken words her anger subsided and she went to him.
‘Don't let me leave,’ she said.
‘You can stop me if you've a mind to.’
He looked at her now, dark eyes green as the ocean  depths, unfathomable, like the man himself.
‘You must do what you think fit,’ he said, rising from the bed and brushing past her; her gaze followed him, sweeping his nakedness.
There was no anger in her now, only fear.
‘You won't go away penniless,’ he promised her.
‘You know that, don't you?’
The emotion in his voice was not unkind.
But it was not love, she realised that.
Cupping his hands in the large jug, he splashed cold water over his face and chest, rubbing it up and down his arms before towelling himself down.
Taking his trousers from the chair-back, he slid his legs into them and buckled the belt round his waist.
‘Do you really want to leave?’ he asked.
‘You know I don't.’
Her relief was evident in the small cry she made.
‘Oh, Tyler…must it always be like this?
Must she always come between us?’
He gave no reply, but went to the window and drew back the curtains, letting the morning light spill into the room; a room which, without being pretentious, bespoke his new standing in life, a large, well-furnished room, with a grand bed and expensive decor, and velvet curtains with fancy frills.
When he turned to look at her with some compassion, she walked the few steps that kept them apart and, staring at him with desperate eyes, insisted, ‘That woman in the docks…it was her , wasn't it?
She's the one you can't forget.’
He shaved his face clean and combed his thick unruly hair, then continued to dress, hurriedly now, for she was touching on memories that were precious to him.
‘For God's sake, Tyler, why can't you put the past behind you?’
In her desperation she was relentless.
He fastened his boots and shrugged his broad shoulders into the dark jacket.
He was ready.
‘I'll see you to the station,’ he said, ‘if that's what you really want.’
He went from her now, with that familiar slight limping stride that only made him more attractive.
‘When I've  seen you safely on the train, I should still have time enough to get to the auction.’
‘Is it all you can think about…buying land…building your fortune?’
She almost spat the words out.
‘Is it for her?
Is that why you drive yourself, Tyler?
For her?
Do you live in hope that your fortune might tempt her away from her rightful husband?’
Even before she'd finished speaking, she knew she had gone too far.
In one stride he had her in his grip.
For one awful moment she feared he would strike her; instead he looked down at her, his contempt far more painful than a blow.
‘I'm sorry.
I didn't mean that,’ she whispered.
Her voice was sincere, but in her heart she meant every word she said.
Everything he had ever done was for the woman he could not forget.
‘I should not have said that,’ she reluctantly admitted.
When he released her it was with such force that she almost fell to the floor.
She had never seen him so agitated.
‘We'd best get started,’ he said.
The rage had gone from him and she was afraid that it was all too final.
She could see her easy life becoming harder.
The years passed quickly and too soon beauty was a fading thing.
She hesitated and he understood.
‘You don't have to leave now,’ he reminded her, his voice softer, a smile playing about his handsome mouth.
‘But our relationship can never be a permanent one.
I've never led you to believe otherwise.’
Suddenly she wanted permanence more than anything.
She had tasted the fear of being cast out, and it left a bitter taste in her mouth.
Why couldn't he love her?
Why was it so impossible for him to make their relationship more secure?
The anger was rising in her again.
‘This woman…wasn't it long ago?
She's probably forgotten you.
Can't you put her firmly in the past?’ she wanted to know.
He had been standing by the door which was now  partly open.
He was preparing to leave.
He quietly closed the door and, leaning his back to it, he dropped his gaze to her upturned face, before tilting his head upwards and staring at the ceiling, his anguished thoughts in turmoil.
She had asked why he could not put Beth firmly in the past.
How could he give her an answer when he did not know the answer himself?
Looking into her face he repeated her words on a long drawn-out breath.
‘Put her in the past.’
He shook his head.
‘If only I could.
But, don't you realise, the past is the present, and the present is the future?’
He laughed cynically.
‘We can never dismiss yesterday as though it never happened, because we carry it with us from moment to moment until the end of our days.’
‘Surely you must know you can't have her?
She's content with her family around her.
You must accept that she wants no part of you.
Not now, not after all this time.’
Reaching out, she touched him, a compassionate look in her eyes.
‘She has no love for you, Tyler…no need of you, can't you see that?
Don't you know that whatever was between you is over for good?’
‘I know it.’
‘Then forget her!’
She edged closer to him, her voice soft and pleading.
‘Make a life with me, Tyler.
You said yourself that I'm good for you.’
‘I know that too.’
‘Then…?’
He reached out to touch her, but his arms fell loosely by his sides.
His eyes appraised her face, a lovely face, a sad face — because of him.
He regretted that, but the awful truth was only a murmur away.
‘I love her.’
His voice was a mere whisper, but such was the effect of his words on the woman that he might have shouted them from the rooftops.
She knew she had lost him.
The slender hold she'd had on him was broken because of her impatience.
Silently  she cursed herself for being such a damned fool.
Yet she had known from the start that he would not be easy to keep; he was a man deeply in love, relentlessly loyal to that one love, with no room for any other woman.
Her frantic mind recalled the young woman at the docks, and she was not surprised that he adored her.
Even with child the woman was incredibly lovely, a graceful creature with an aura of that unique beauty few women possessed.
But more compelling were her dark expressive eyes, eyes that had widened with shock on seeing Tyler there, eyes that might have spoken to him of anger but instead had betrayed something much deeper, and far more dangerous.
Until now, the woman had been careful not to reveal how she had witnessed what passed between him and that lovely creature at the docks.
She had seen something in those dark tragic eyes, something akin to the anguish betrayed now in Tyler's.
She did not pretend to understand such depth of feeling.
It made her both uncomfortable and afraid, and now she could see the delicate security she had achieved slipping through her finger.
She would try anything…anything to hold on to it.
When she spoke now, there was a cruel plan forming in the back of her mind.
‘I can't bear to see what's happening to you,’ she told him.
‘How you drive yourself…punish yourself.
Don't you realise how ruthless you're becoming?
Can't you see how your bitterness is changing you?
Oh, Tyler…
Tyler!
You're so very different from the man you once were…warm and giving, enjoying the rewards which your hard work brought you.
Now it's only the work!
You don't laugh any more, Tyler.
You've closed your heart and locked her inside it.
All this time you've been living a dream, and now you've seen that dream in the flesh you torment yourself even more.’
She looked at him and felt his pain, but he had shut her out again.
There was nothing more to be said.
Unless…unless…
Careful, though, she must bide her time, think it through.
He did care for her, she knew that, but was it enough?
Was it enough?
She had to take the chance before it was too late.
‘I'm with child,’ she lied, her voice trembling slightly, the words echoing through the silence that had descended between them.
When he remained silent but stared at her, visibly shaken, his dark green eyes seeming to see right through her, she began crying.
‘I'm afraid,’ she murmured.
‘What will I do?
Where will I go?
Are you angry?’
His answer was to take her in his arms and press her close to him.
‘Maybe it really is time I settled down,’ he said, holding her at arm's length and smudging her tears away with his thumb.
She raised her head, astonished and relieved that he had not seen through her.
But, then, men were always blind to a woman's wiles.
There was a moment's silence before he smiled.
‘If you want to be wed in London…you'd best get packed.’
‘You mean it!’
Her little plan had worked.
He would never know the truth, because there were many ways a woman could fool a man.
‘You really mean it?’ she asked breathlessly.
‘We're going to be wed?’
Her eyes were big and shining.
In that moment she had no conscience.
She only knew her good fortune lay in that Tyler Blacklock was an honourable man.
He laughed, a sad bitter sound.
‘We wouldn't want my son to come into the world without his father's name now, would we, eh?’
Exultant, she want to the bed and withdrew the portmanteau from beneath.
It took only a few minutes to pack their belongings.
Another few minutes and she was ready to leave with him.
During this time he had remained by the door, his expressionless gaze following her every move.
She stood a while, intently  regarding him, her hand steadying the portmanteau on the bed, and only the merest glimmer of guilt colouring her face.
Afraid that he might guess at her deceit, she began talking, laughing, making plans, distracting his attention from what she had wickedly led him to believe.
Buttoning the long fitted jacket over her expensive cream gown, she went to him on determined footsteps.
Her heart leaped.
He was so handsome.
And now, he was hers.
‘I'll make you a good wife, Tyler.’
She was gabbling now.
‘You won't regret it.
Oh!
It'll be wonderful, you'll see.
She threw herself into his arms, sighing deeply when he half-heartedly returned her embrace.
Her triumph would have been short-lived if she had seen the smile slip from his face and a look of regret shape his expression; his quiet eyes were drawn to the window, to the skyline beyond.
And his heart soared to wherever his Beth was in that moment.