

1
Sunday, 29 February, 1920
It was half-past midnight, and some time before sunrise Ebenezer Judge knew that he was going to die.
Where the dock opened on to the river, the port and starboard lights winked red and green, reflected in the puddles.
Eb could not scream for help, because his jaws were gagged with a handful of dirty cotton-waste, and every time he slipped on the wet paving-stones, they hauled him back to his feet with a blow and a curse, dragging him with them.
He tried to break free, but he could not; there were too many of them, manhandling him along the narrow jetty.
The Punishment Squad had got him, and there could be no escape.
He did not put up any resistance when they flung him down on the rainswept slabs, and tied his ankles with a thick cord.
This was the worst sentence of all; the retribution for any man convicted of treachery towards the Brotherhood.
He longed to protest, ‘It's all a mistake!
I never broke my oath — I swear I never turned against you!’
But they had stopped his mouth, and he could not speak in his own defence.
He knew what would happen to him, because he had seen it all before.
In the old days, he and his brother Josh had been in charge of the Punishment Squad.
He remembered how Izzy Kleiber had fought and kicked right to the end — until the moment when they lifted him up, then lowered him over the outer wall of the harbour, where the greedy river licked its oily lips and waited, invisible in the darkness below….
That was when Kleiber had given up the struggle and collapsed, limp and helpless as a rag doll.
Now Ebenezer Judge understood what he must have felt, as a dozen willing hands hoisted him on high, held him for an  instant in mid-air, then let him down, inch by inch, until the back of his head knocked against the stone wall and the freezing water lapped over his boots.
He remained like that for a few seconds longer, while they tied his wrists to a pair of iron rings bolted into the wall, and then they let him go and left him dangling there — half in, half out of the river.
Somewhere above his head, a deep voice intoned the ritual words: ‘For the Judas who turns against his Brothers — the man who betrays us by revealing the innermost secrets of our Guild — the punishment shall be as follows….
Such a man shall be exposed to wind and weather, suspended between the high and low tidemarks, from night until morning — so that he may take time to consider his wickedness, and repent….’
The tide was on the turn now.
Within the next few hours the water would rise, and his body would turn to ice as he was submerged, inch by inch, in the merciless waters of the Thames.
His chest — his shoulders — his throat would be covered by the rising tide, and then….
Oh, Jesus !
An unexpected wave broke over his head.
The water rushed into his mouth and nostrils, and he could not breathe.
He fought for air — his lungs were bursting — the pain was unbearable — he knew that he was drowning….
‘Dear God Almighty, have pity.
Help me — help —’
His wife, Florrie, shook him awake.
‘What is it, Eb?
What's the matter?’
For a moment he did not know where he was: the darkness lay upon him like a leaden weight, crushing him as if he were under a ton of river-water.
His heart hammered as he choked out the words: ‘Drowning….
Dreamed — I was drowning…’
‘You're soaked through with sweat, right enough.
Let me fetch you a clean nightshirt,’ said Florrie, throwing back the bedclothes.
‘No!’
He stopped her, his chest heaving.
‘Wait a bit— don't leave me….
Get me breath back….’
‘You've been having a nightmare, that's all,’ said Florrie.
‘What was it all about?’
I thought they'd hung me up by my arms,’ he began, and  then he stopped short, remembering that the Punishment Squad could not do that to a crippled man with one arm.
Ebenezer Judge had resigned from the Brotherhood when the Great War began; he volunteered for the army, and was sent to Flanders.
Years later, he came home with his right arm blown off by a shell, and ragged lungs after a poison-gas attack: he would never work on the docks again.
‘Well, go on.’
Florrie was still trying to understand what had upset him.
‘Tell me about it.’
Now he was breathing more regularly, but he shook his head.
‘Nothing to tell,’ he said.
It wasn't the first time he'd had this nightmare; it was happening more often nowadays.
But how could he tell Florrie, without explaining what had happened on that night, long ago?
When Izzy Kleiber was punished for his treachery, they only meant to give him a cruel ducking and a bad fright; no one had taken into account the heavy rains.
The tide had risen a foot above the usual high water mark, and when they came to cut him free in the morning, they found him hanging on the outer wall — drowned.
Eb Judge had carried that secret with him ever since.
He couldn't confess it to Florrie; he could never talk about it to anyone except Josh, who had been there with him — and he was not on very good terms with his brother, these days.
Unlike Eb, Josh had come back from the war in one piece, hale and hearty.
No doubt he slept soundly at night — Josh wasn't the sort of man to be tormented by bad dreams.
‘All right then,’ Eb said at last.
‘Go and fetch me a dry shirt, then p'raps we'll get some rest.’
A little more than half a mile away, on the other side of the Isle of Dogs, Ebenezer's sister Ruth was also awake.
She tried not to make a sound, because she didn't want to disturb her husband.
As landlord of the Three Jolly Watermen public-house, Connor O'Dell worked long hours and needed his sleep.
She wouldn't wake him — but she wished her nagging pain would go away.
‘Ruth — are you awake?’
She was startled by his deep Irish brogue, so close to her ear.
‘Yes.’
‘I thought as much.
I could tell by your breathing.’
He rolled a little closer on the big feather mattress in the big brass bedstead, and put his arms round her — carefully, because he had to take special care of Ruth now.
‘What's wrong with you at all?’ he asked.
‘D'you have a guilty conscience, maybe?’
She relaxed, safe within the circle of his embrace — the familiar warmth of his body, his hands holding her, stroking her tenderly.
In spite of his great strength, after nearly a year of marriage she was still surprised and touched by his gentleness.
‘I dare say that's it.’
She smiled a little in the darkness.
‘It must be my sins making me restless, unless it's something I ate.’
He lifted himself on to one elbow, looking down at her; a finger of light from the street-lamp outside crept between the curtains, touching her face.
‘Are you telling me you've a pain?’ he asked anxiously.
‘Only a bit of one.
I expect it's indigestion — I shouldn't have had that bread and cheese so late.’
‘You're sure that's all it is?
You don't want to go taking chances in your condition.’
‘Go along with you!’ she teased him.
‘I'm as strong as a horse, you know that.
Anyone'd think I'd never had a baby before.’
‘You never had my baby before,’ he said quietly.
For Ruth had been married to Connor's brother Sean, and her first child — a fine boy called Danny — had been born four years ago.
Sean was the first man who ever made love to her, and Ruth had thought she loved him too, but it was not a happy marriage and when Sean was killed in France, just before the Armistice was signed, she realised that she had been denying her true feelings for years.
She had loved Connor from the day she set eyes on him; and he loved her too, though as long as she was his brother's wife, he would never admit it.
When she became a widow, everything changed.
As soon as he was out of uniform, Connor applied to take over the management of the public-house from his parents — Mam and Da were getting on in years, and Da wasn't a well man — but the Brewery were not prepared to lease the pub to a bachelor.
So Connor declared his feelings at last, and in due course he and Ruth were married and now, almost a year later, she was going to have his child.
‘Will I make you a hot drink?’ he suggested.
‘If it's indigestion, that might help.’
‘Are you sure you don't mind?’
‘Why would I mind?’
He got out of bed; Ruth heard him pulling his old flannel dressing-gown and thought once again how very lucky she was.
If only this pain would go away, everything would be perfect.
Quietly, Connor crossed the room, opening the door cautiously so as not to waken his parents in the big bedroom at the other end of the landing.
That was when they heard the sound of breaking glass.
It was not a loud noise, just a muffled thud, followed by a faint tinkle.
‘What was that?’ asked Ruth.
It might have been a cat knocking an empty tumbler off the bar — except that they didn't keep a cat, and all the glasses had been washed up and put away before they went to bed.
‘I'll go and see,’ said Connor.
He knotted the cord of his dressing-gown and left the room.
For a powerful man, he could move very quietly when he had to.
He took the stairs slowly, trying to remember if it was the third or the fourth step from the bottom that creaked when you put your weight on it.
Taking no chances, he avoided them both in one long stride.
At the foot of the stairs, he paused.
Straining his ears, he could just hear a metallic scratching noise.
A draught whipped his bare legs, and he glanced over his shoulder, along the passage; there was a hole in the little window beside the back door, just large enough for a hand to come through and turn the key in the lock….
And through the archway that opened into the saloon, he saw a flicker of light.
He advanced warily, without making a sound.
In the bar, a single candle threw grotesque shadows across the ceiling.
Two men with their backs to him were trying to force open the cash-register.
The taller man had worked a knife-blade into the drawer.
It sprang open, and he cursed under his breath.
‘If you'd asked, I could have saved you the trouble,’ said Connor pleasantly.
‘We empty the till each night at closing time.’
Startled, the intruders whirled round, backing away.
It was clear which of them was the leader — broad-shouldered and heavily built, he lifted the knife menacingly and said, ‘Where d'you keep it?
Where's the money?’
‘Have a bit of sense!
If you know what's good for you, you'll make yourself scarce before you wake the whole house….
Better cut and run before the coppers arrive.’
‘Shut your face!’
The man took a step towards him, and Connor saw his hands were shaking; candlelight glittered on the shivering blade.
‘Hand over the cash, or you'll be sorry.’
Connor laughed, and went to meet him.
As the knife flashed down, aimed at his heart, Connor deflected the blow with his left forearm.
The blade skidded aside, ripping the thin material of his dressing-gown and grazing his shoulder, but he scarcely noticed it.
The knife clattered to the floor, and he threw in a right-hook to the jaw that sent the man reeling back against the counter, gasping, ‘Pick it up, Mike — quick!’
His accomplice hesitated a second too long, and Connor kicked the weapon into the corner, then followed up his advantage.
It was a while since he had used his fists in the fairground boxing-booths or in the army regimental championships, and a thrill of excitement surged through him — but his opponent's reactions were sluggish, and his lumbering attempts at counter-blows had no weight behind them.
Connor drove home a pile-driver blow to the solar plexus; the man's knees buckled, and he sank to the floor, with no fight left in him.
‘You leave him alone !’
The voice behind him surprised Connor; it was a boy's voice, with an uncertain crack in it.
Looking round, he saw that the young accomplice had retrieved the knife and was pointing it at him like a gun, stammering: ‘You'd better let him go, d'you hear?’
‘Mother of God — you're only a kid.
Give me that before you land yourself in worse trouble.’
Connor held his hand out, looking into the boy's eyes, adding, ‘Mike — is that your name?
Right, now, give it here and don't be a damn fool.’
After a moment of uncertainty, the boy lowered his head, unable to meet Connor's steady gaze, and handed the weapon over.
‘Thanks.
How old are you?’
‘Fourteen,’ said the boy huskily.
‘And how'd you get mixed up with that layabout?
He'd no right to drag you into this sort of caper.’
‘Don't you talk about my dad like that!
He could break you in pieces, only he's not been well….
Since he came home from the war, he can't get any work, see?
There's me and Mum to keep, and no money coming in.’
The man on the floor was staggering to his feet and Connor understood why he could not defend himself — he was half starved.
‘Don't talk so much, son — don't tell him nothing.’
He threw a sullen glance at Connor.
‘Wotcher going to do with us?
Police, is it?
Keep me here if you want, but let the boy go.
He's done you no harm.’
By way of reply, Connor walked across the room, drew back the bolts on the street door and flung it open.
‘Get out, the pair of you, before I change my mind.’
The man didn't need telling twice, and as the boy began to follow him, Connor suddenly remembered: at some time during the evening, when the saloon till ran short of change, he had put in some silver of his own and taken out a fiver — then stuffed it in a pewter tankard on the shelf for safekeeping.
On impulse, he called the boy back.
‘Mike!
Take this, and try to talk some sense into your dad if you can.
And don't let me see your faces round here again — understand?’
The boy pocketed the money and ran out of the pub after his father.
With a sigh, Connor shut the door and bolted it, then blew out the candle and went upstairs.
He felt a trickle of blood down his arm from the scratch on his shoulder, and pulled the torn sleeve more tightly round it, hoping Ruth wouldn't notice the damage and make a fuss.
Then he remembered the hot drink he'd promised her.
Well, he'd see to that presently, after he'd explained the delay.
Entering the bedroom, he wondered how much he should tell her — but there was no need for that.
Ruth was sitting on the edge of the bed, a towel in her lap and her nightgown bunched up round her waist.
In the dim light from the street-lamp her face was very white — and the stain of blood upon the sheets looked almost black.
Instantly, he was at her side.
‘Dear God, what's happened?’
‘I don't know.
The pain's been getting worse and I can't stop the bleeding.’
‘I'll go for the midwife!’
‘No — a doctor.
I need a doctor, Con.
I'm afraid I — I might be going to lose the baby.’
The rain was pouring when Ebenezer banged the door-knocker of his brother's house in Denmark Place.
Raindrops hit the surface of the road and danced upon it like spinning coins.
Standing on the front seat, Eb felt a rivulet of ice-cold water run down the back of his neck, and found that he was underneath a leaking gutter.
He pulled up his coat-collar and edged closer to the door, muttering impatiently, ‘Get a move on, can't you?’
Footsteps approached along the passage, and Josh's wife Mabel appeared in the doorway, looking surprised.
A plump, foolish woman of thirty, with a turned-up nose, Mabel passed through life with an expression of permanent astonishment.
‘My goodness gracious!’ she exclaimed.
‘Fancy seeing you, Ebbie — and on a day like this, too!’
‘If you'd be good enough to stand aside, I'd be obliged,’ he said sharply.
‘This weather does my chest no good at all.’
‘February Fill-dyke — isn't that what they say?’
She stood back to let him in.
‘Can I help you off with your coat, or aren't you stopping?’
‘Of course I'm stopping!’
One-armed, Eb resented having to depend on other people to assist him.
‘You don't think I came over here just to say good morning, do you?’
‘I didn't know what to think.’
She removed his wet topcoat, and gave it a shake before hanging it on the hall-stand.
‘We generally see you in Chapel, Sunday morning — and it's not even ten o'clock yet.’
‘I want to talk to Josh first.
We'll go to Chapel later on.’
‘If you say so.
He's in the kitchen, with the boys.
Would you like to go through?’
Eb brushed past her and entered the back-kitchen.
Joshua, in vest and trousers with his braces dangling, was at the scullery sink with half his face covered in lather, peering at his reflection in a cracked mirror and wielding a cut-throat razor.
‘You're quite a stranger and no mistake,’ he greeted his brother over his shoulder.
At the kitchen table, twelve-year-old Jimmy and ten-year old Bertie were playing a game of Snap.
They looked up curiously at Ebenezer, but said nothing.
‘You let them play cards on a Sunday?’ commented Eb sourly.
‘What would Father say?’
‘What the old man don't know won't hurt him,’ said Josh.
‘Budge up, boys, make room for your uncle.
Pull up another chair.’
Eb interrupted him.
‘I'd be grateful if Mabel and the boys would go round to our house for a while.
I want a word with you in private.’
They all turned and stared at him.
‘You mean now?’
Mabel looked more astonished than ever.
‘But I haven't even put the joint in the oven yet.
We've got a nice piece of beef, and it'll take two hours at least.’
‘You can attend to that presently, can't you?’ snapped Eb.
‘Put your coats on and go round to Jubilee Street — Florrie will give you a cup of tea and a biscuit.
I told her to expect you.’
‘But, Ebbie…’
She began to argue, but he cut her short.
‘When we've had our talk, we'll come round and join you — it shouldn't take long.
Chapel-meeting doesn't start till eleven; you'll have plenty of time.’
Mabel looked helplessly at Josh, hoping for support, but her husband wiped the lather off his cheek with a comer of the dishcloth and said doubtfully, ‘I dunno, I'm sure.
What's this all about, Eb?’
‘I told you — I've got to talk to you in private.
It's a Brotherhood matter.’
‘Oh?
Well, in that case, I suppose…’
Josh shrugged.
‘you'd better run along, Mabel.
Come on, boys, look sharp.
Get your coats on.’
It took several minutes before they were ready to leave, and even then Mabel hovered in the doorway, saying plaintively, ‘You won't be long, will you?
That joint's got to go on by a quarter to, or goodness knows what time dinner will be ready.’
‘We'll be as quick as we can.’
Eb was making himself comfortable at the head of the table.
‘Thank you — off you go.’
As the front door slammed behind them, Josh finished drying his face and hands and began to put on a clean shirt and a stiff collar.
‘Well now!’ he said.
‘I can't remember when you last came round here on Brotherhood business — what's this in aid of?’
Eb's yellow face set into hard lines.
Before the war, he had been one of the most prominent members of the Dock workers' Guild, acting as principal deputy to their father, the Chairman, but after he was disabled and discharged from the army, he was forced to take other work, helping Florrie to run their Aunt Emily's corner grocery shop.
In his heart, he still regarded this as women's work, and felt humiliated that it was now Joshua who acted as Marcus Judge's chief assistant at the dockyard.
‘It's only partly Brotherhood business,’ he admitted unwillingly.
‘But it is personal.
Very personal.’
‘Something to do with Father?’
An unwelcome thought occurred to Josh, and he looked alarmed.
‘Here — you're not going to tell him, are you?
About the boys playing cards?’
Eb permitted himself a half-smile.
‘I dare say I might manage to forget that,’ he said.
It amused him to think that, although Marcus Judge was no longer taking an active part in the running of the Brotherhood, leaving most of the day-to-day organisation to his son, Josh was still afraid of the old man.
But perhaps it was not so surprising.
For twenty years Marcus Judge had been the most powerful figure on Jubilee Wharf, second only to the Wharfmaster himself.
It was Marcus Judge who had created the Brotherhood and selected likely candidates for it, and it was Marcus Judge who decided upon punishment when a man's work was unsatisfactory, when he was guilty of negligence, dishonesty or — worst crime of all — treachery.
Marcus never carried out these punishments himself; he gave the orders, and his trusty ‘inner circle’ of officers carried them out.
Small wonder, then, that Marcus Judge was still feared and hated by so many men in the Isle of Dogs.
Joshua broke in upon Eb's reflections.
‘Are you going to tell me what's up, or aren't you?
You look as if you're a bit under the weather, Eb — not feeling too grand, p'raps?’
‘No, I'm not feeling too grand, as you put it.’
Eb felt his chest constrict and snatched a breath, then croaked: ‘I had that dream again last night.’
‘What dream?
What are you talking about?’
‘You know very well what dream!’
He began to pant.
‘I dreamed about Izzy Kleiber and the Punishment Squad, only in the dream I was Izzy Kleiber, and I was drowned….’
Josh's face darkened.
‘Well, what about it?
Like you say, it's not the first time — and it's only a dream, for God's sake!’
‘You dare to take His name in vain?’
Eb's voice had an underlying note of hysteria.
‘Are you no longer a god-fearing man, Joshua?’
Irritably, Josh knotted his tie and straightened it.
‘I do my duty, if that's what you mean.
I go to Chapel every Sunday and I say my prayers, but I'm not superstitious like some people I could mention — and I don't believe in dreams!’
‘Don't you make mock of dreams.’
Eb leaned forward, lowering his voice.
Between every phrase, his lungs wheezed like broken bellows.
‘The Scriptures tell us to beware of dreams — think of Joseph and his brethren.
Dreams are the  key to understanding — that's why I must find out what my dream means!
Is the Almighty sending us a warning?
Am I in danger, Joshua?
Is the Brotherhood in danger?’
‘Get away — don't talk so daft!’
‘Listen to me !’
Eb's hand shot out, clutching his brother's arm and pulling him closer.
‘Suppose it's a sign that everything's going to come to light?
Suppose the police were to find out what really happened to Izzy Kleiber?’
Josh pulled himself free and straightened up.
‘You must be soft in the head.
How could anybody find out?
Anyway, it was an accident.
We never meant to finish him off.’
‘No sin goes unpunished.
I believe there's trouble ahead for us, Joshua.
I believe the whole story's going to come out.’
‘Pull yourself together, man!
How could it come out, after all this time?
The only one who might have talked was Cousin Saul — and he's dead and gone, too.’
Saul Judge was first cousin to Eb and Josh.
A man of various talents, he had run a ramshackle ship-chandlers establishment at Cyclops Wharf on the West Ferry Road.
He augmented his meager income by plying for hire as a ferryman, ferrying passengers across to Greenwich, and sometimes he followed a more grisly trade.
He was nicknamed ‘The Resurrection Man’ because he would row up and down the river by night, fishing up floating bodies — and picking their pockets before he handed them over to the police and claimed his reward.
It was Cousin Saul who took charge of Izzy Kleiber's corpse, and then ‘found’ it some time later — the victim, apparently, of a riverside accident.
And it was Cousin Saul who had blackmailed Ebenezer, extorting money from him in return for his silence about Kleiber's death.
‘Saul could have reported us, but now he's six feet under, so we're safe as houses,’ concluded Josh.
Then his face changed, and he added reluctantly, ‘Unless….’
Eb picked him up quickly.
‘Unless what?’
‘You don't suppose your young Tommy might talk, do you?
I always did say you were a fool to tell him.’
Eb and Florrie Judge had one son, Thomas, and when Tom was sixteen he discovered that Saul had some hold over  his father.
When Eb told his son the truth, Tom went to Cyclops Wharf, determined to put a stop to the blackmail that was making his father's life a misery.
There was a quarrel and in the struggle, Saul was killed.
Tom ran away to sea to start a new life, under a new name, in America.
‘Tom would never say a word.’
Eb's breath rattled, and he could hardly speak.
‘He'd do anything for me — even killed a man for my sake.’
‘Then you've got nothing to worry about, have you?’
Joshua put on his black jacket and checked his reflection in the mirror; the picture of a respectable Chapel-going citizen.
‘Stop working yourself up over nothing, and let's be on our way.’
‘No, wait — hear me out.
Why do I have this dream about drowning?
It must mean something .’
Fetching his hat and coat, Josh began to laugh.
‘P'raps it means you're going to be drowned’ he suggested playfully.
‘Come on, let's go!’
Ruth lay on her back and tried not to move, because even the slightest movement was torment, but when the spasms of pain stabbed her it was hard to keep still.
She clenched her fists, determined to suffer in silence.
Everyone had told her she couldn't be in a better place, but they kept saying she must be patient a little while longer — and she didn't know how much longer she could bear it.
When Connor threw on some clothes and left the Watermen at a run, in search of a doctor, he left his mother to hold Ruth's hand and try to comfort her.
She had no idea how long they waited like that, with Mary O'Dell wiping the sweat from her face with a cool washcloth, speaking gently in her soft Irish singsong as if Ruth were a child, for by now her memories had blurred together; faces swam into focus through waves of pain, then disappeared.
She remembered Con coming back with a doctor she had never seen before.
He examined her swiftly and impersonally, and sent for an ambulance.
After that everything got very confusing.
She had an  impression of being lifted up from the bed — she had cried out in agony, feeling as if she would break in half — and laid upon a stretcher.
As they bundled her down the stairs she must have fainted, because the next thing she could recollect was being wheeled along an endless corridor that smelled of disinfectant.
There were lights at regular intervals in the ceiling, with patches of shadow in between, and stripes of light and dark followed each other overhead as they trundled her along.
Then she remembered someone taking off her nightgown, and a brisk woman in a white starched uniform saying something about going into the theatre — and she saw the doctor again, talking earnestly to a man in a long white gown who was pulling on a pair of rubber gloves….
And suddenly, there was Con, looking quite out of place in these surroundings, and strangely unlike himself.
He was holding her hand and staring down at her with an extraordinary expression on his face that she had never seen before.
She licked her dry lips and managed to whisper, ‘What's going to happen now?’
‘They're going to operate.
But it's going to be all right— there's nothing to worry about.
You'll be all right.’
‘And the baby?’
She forced out the question.
‘What about the baby?’
He didn't seem to hear her but kept repeating, ‘All right.
You'll be all right….’
But she knew that he was lying to her.
‘Am I going to die?’ she asked.
‘You must tell me!’
He shook his head, and said nothing.
That was when she understood why he looked so strange.
It was the first time she had ever seen fear in Connor O'Dell's eyes.
She wanted to pray, but she was so exhausted, the words wouldn't come out right.
Instead, she heard herself saying, ‘Where's Mum?
I want my mum — where is she?’
It was nearly midday when the worshippers came out of the Emmanuel Chapel after the prayer meeting.
The heavy rain had subsided during the morning, but the pavements were still wet underfoot and a fine haze of  moisture hung on the wintry air.
On the other side of the road, a taxi waited in the drizzle, its black hood glistening.
The Reverend Mr Evans stood under the shelter of the porch, shaking hands with his congregation as they emerged.
‘Powerful sermon, Reverend!’ said one man.
‘Plenty of food for thought in that.’
Some people were already turning their thoughts to food of another kind, impatient to get home.
Florrie tugged at the empty sleeve of her husband's coat, pleading, ‘Do hurry up, Ebbie.
You know you don't like roast potatoes if they're overdone.’
‘Our dinner won't be ready yet,’ fretted Mabel, following them out.
‘It didn't go in till nearly eleven.’
Behind her, Joshua said cheerfully, ‘It won't hurt us to eat a bit later for once.
I might go for a stroll to get up an appetite — the exercise'll do me good.’
‘In this weather?’
Mabel looked more astonished than ever.
‘I dare say you won't be walking very far,’ said Eb, smiling at his brother.
‘Down to the Ferry House public bar and back again.
That's your idea of exercise, eh, Josh?’
Joshua glanced anxiously over his shoulder.
Their father disapproved of alcohol at any time, but to enter a public house on the Sabbath was completely unthinkable.
‘Keep your voice down, can't you?’ he murmured, but his two sons had sharp ears.
‘Can we come too, Dad?’ asked Jimmy.
‘We don't mind waiting outside the boozer, do we, Bertie?’
His chubby young brother jumped up and down.
‘Buy us a ginger-pop, Dad.
Go on, be a sport!’
‘Quiet, the pair of you!’ barked Joshua.
‘Don't let Grandfather hear you talking like that.’
Then he broke off as a newcomer appeared, working his way through the throng of people leaving the Chapel, against the tide.
They all fell silent as they recognised him.
Bare-headed, his dark curly hair sparkling with raindrops, Connor stopped in front of Joshua and said urgently,
‘Where's your mother?
I've got to speak to her.’
Joshua bristled angrily.
‘What the hell are you doing here?’
‘Language, dear!’
Mabel squeaked in dismay.
‘Remember where you are!’
Ebenezer moved closer to his brother, facing Connor ‘What gives you the right to ask for our mother?’ he wanted to know.
Connor ignored him, addressing Joshua.
‘I have to see her — it's urgent.
Isn't she here?’
‘That's no concern of yours.
You know well enough you're not welcome in this family,’ began Joshua.
‘Throw him into the gutter, Josh!’ urged Ebenezer.
‘Go on — teach him a lesson!’
Slowly, Connor closed his fists, and Joshua's muscles tensed, while the two boys egged him on.
‘Go it, Dad.
Give him what for!’
‘What is the meaning of this?’
The voice was unmistakable, and they all turned towards the figure in the doorway.
As he came out of the Chapel, his sons stood back to let him pass.
Over six feet tall, and square-shouldered, Marcus Judge was still an imposing character.
Although at sixty he was becoming a little stooped, and his hair and beard that used to be jet-black were turning to silver, the force of his personality was undeniable.
‘You are in the shadow of God's house,’ he reminded them sternly.
‘How dare you engage in a brawl?’
His voice was not loud, but so penetrating that every syllable was distinct.
‘We were sending this chap about his business,’ explained Ebenezer.
Joshua chimed in, ‘It's O'Dell, Father.
Ruth's husband.’
‘I know who he is.’
Marcus came up to Connor, face to face.
We have met before — and we have nothing more to say to one another.
‘I've no time to argue with you,’ said Connor.
‘I've a taxi-cab waiting across the road.’
‘What are you saying?
What do you want with me?’
‘It's not what I want.
It's for Ruth — she's in the London Hospital, in Whitechapel Road.
She wants to see her mother.’
‘Ruth?
What's happened to her?’
Unnoticed, a little apple-cheeked woman with white hair had come out of the Chapel, and now she took her husband's arm.
‘Don't distress yourself, Louisa.’
Marcus patted her hand.
‘If Ruth is unwell, that's very regrettable, but there is nothing we can do for her.
Come along, my dear, we must go home.’
He tried to move away, but Louisa clung to his arm, saying, ‘No, wait, Marcus.
If Ruth's ill….’
‘Your daughter is asking for you, Mrs Judge,’ said Connor.
‘I've come to take you to her.’
Marcus Judge glared at him under beetling brows.
‘Must I tell you again?
We have no daughter.
The day Ruth walked out of this family — when she went over to the Roman Church — she cut herself off from us.
Even so, we would have taken her back, like the lost lamb that went astray, but she spurned our forgiveness.
There is no more to be said.’
Louisa Judge held her ground, asking Connor, ‘What's wrong with her?
Is it something serious?’
He nodded.
‘She was expecting our baby.
They say it's in the wrong place.
She's in a bad way — bleeding, and in terrible pain.
They have to operate….
The doctor says it's her only chance, but it's touch and go, seemingly, and she's asking for you.’
Marcus Judge lifted his face to the dark rain-clouds, and intoned: ‘She is in the hands of the Almighty.
May He have mercy upon her.
Come, Louisa.’
But she removed her hand from her husband's arm and said, ‘You'd better go home, Marcus.
I'll see you later.’
Staring incredulously at his wife, he began to protest.
‘Louisa, I forbid you —.’
She did not give him time to finish.
Holding her head high she met his gaze, saying simply, ‘Don't be silly, dear.
If Ruth needs me, I must go to her.’
She turned to Connor.
‘Did you say you had a cab waiting?’
By the time they reached the hospital, it was all over.
Ruth was no longer in the operating theatre; she had been moved into the maternity ward, and the Sister came out to meet them.
‘Mr O'Dell?
Your wife's very tired — she's bound to be weak, after losing so much blood — but you can see her for a few minutes.’
She glanced at Mrs Judge.
‘I'm afraid she's not allowed any other visitors.’
‘I'm her mother,’ said Louisa.
‘Ah, I see.
Well, in that case….’
Connor burst out impatiently: ‘How is she?
Is she all right?’
‘She's come through the operation very well.
And so has the baby.’
‘A baby?’
He could not believe his ears.
‘But I thought — I was afraid that —.’
‘You've nothing to worry about, Mr O'Dell.
You have a fine daughter.’
The Sister smiled.
‘You should be very proud of them.’
2
‘What a lovely day.’
Ruth lifted her face to the sun.
‘And just look at those flowers — it feels as if the winter's really over at last.’
‘Don't you believe it,’ grunted Connor.
‘There's a biting east wind off the river.
Let that sunshine fool you into taking off your coat, and you'll be in bed with pneumonia before you know it.’
‘Tell your Dad from me he's a gloomy old moaner.’
Ruth smiled at her son who skipped along beside them, swinging on Connor's hand, while Ruth pushed the new baby in her shiny new perambulator.
‘Gloomy old moaner!’ repeated Danny gleefully.
‘Dad's a gloomy old moaner.’
Of course, Connor was not Danny's father, but since the wedding a year ago the lad had taken to calling him ‘Dad’, and seemed to have forgotten Sean altogether.
‘Fine thing, encouraging the children to poke fun at me,’ Connor grumbled.
‘Ah, why not crack your face and give us a smile?’
Ruth teased him.
‘You should be feeling cheerful — Easter Sunday's a special day.’
They didn't often have a chance to leave the pub together, but this afternoon she was determined to have a family outing, so as soon as the dinner-things were washed up, they had come for a walk to the Island Gardens.
At the southernmost tip of the Island — which wasn't an island at all, being surrounded by the Thames on only three sides — a little strip of greenery had been preserved as a public park.
Today, buds were bursting on the trees and in the flower beds a show of early daffodils danced to the tune of the river breeze.
‘Listen!’
Ruth lifted a finger.
‘I can hear music….
Didn't I tell you this was a special day?
There's a band playing, just for us.’
‘Is it 'cos of my birthday?’
Danny wanted to know.
He had celebrated his birthday a couple of weeks earlier with balloons and four candles on an iced cake, and he was hoping the festivities might be going on indefinitely.
‘Not likely,’ said Connor.
‘Some poor devils trying to earn a few coppers, by the sound of it.’
The music grew louder, and the O'Dell family stopped to watch the band as they went by.
They were a motley crew half a dozen young men in shabby clothes, some still wearing khaki tunics and caps and one of them with a placard across his chest saying:Ex-Service — please help .
One played a bugle, another scraped a fiddle and two more blew on combs-and-paper, while the percussionist thumped a bass drum with a cymbal attached to the rim.
Their leader played no instrument, but sang a set of unfamiliar words to a familiar war-time tune:
It's a long way to the pawnshop —
It's a long way to go.
It's a long way to the pawnshop —
Where all our mothers go.
Goodbye, coat and weskit — farewell, watch and chain.
If you don't keep an eye on your trousers,
They'll go there — the same!
He rattled a tin cup as they passed.
‘Spare a tanner, guv'nor.
Ex-soldiers, down on our luck.’
 Connor plunged his hand into his pocket and produced a few coins, which he tossed into the cup.
The man touched the peak of his cap and the band moved on, striking up Roses of Picardy as they wandered away.
‘Thank you, Con.’
Ruth slipped an arm through his.
‘I know you don't approve of giving money to people in the street, so that was nice of you.’
‘Nice?’
He spat out the word like poison.
‘Myself, I'd call it disgusting.
They shouldn't have to go round begging!
The Government ought to take care of them, it's the least they could do…but as long as there's eejits like me to fork out a bob or two, the authorities won't do a thing.’
‘You see, Danny?’
Ruth turned to her small son.
‘He may be an old moaner, but he's got a heart of gold.’
‘Not at all.’
Connor allowed himself a crooked smile.
‘I gave 'em the price of a pint or two, in hopes they might come and spend it at the Watermen!
Maybe it'll keep them from breaking in and rifling the till.’
Ruth threw him a warning look, which meant: ‘Not in front of Danny!’
When she came home from the hospital, she had noticed new locks and bolts on the doors, front and back.
Eventually Connor told her about the intruders and they had agreed not to discuss the burglary in front of Danny.
Now he said firmly, ‘I don't believe in running risks.
Matter of fact, I'm thinking of having a telephone installed as well .
That way, we can call the police if there's any trouble, or send for an ambulance if we've a need to, which God forbid.’
By now they had reached the end of the Gardens, and found several people admiring the view across the river.
On the opposite bank, Greenwich Palace shone in majesty; the sun was setting, turning the white walls a glowing pink.
‘How about a nice portrait, sir?’
The voice had a slight foreign accent.
‘You and your good lady, with the Palace in the background?’
A bespectacled street-photographer was working his way through the crowd, trying to persuade them to have their pictures taken.
Seeing the two young children, he redoubled his efforts.
‘Now there's a bonny baby, and the boy's a handsome little chap.
You'd make a very fine group.’
Then he looked more closely, and exclaimed: ‘Ruth — I didn't recognise you at first!’
‘Ernest, how are you?’
She greeted him warmly, and turned to her husband.
‘Con, you remember Ernest Kleiber?’
‘We have met,’ said Connor, as they shook hands.
‘Though I knew your brother better.
We worked together on the docks in the old days, before —.’
Ernest's smile faded.
‘Before Izzy was killed.
Yes, I know.’
Six years had done nothing to soften the horror of Israel's death; Ernest Kleiber would never come to terms with that.
But he made an effort to put it from his mind, asking, ‘And so — these are your children?’
‘Yes.
This is Danny.
Say ‘how d'you do’, Danny,’ Ruth urged.
‘How do you do?’
Danny shook hands with the stranger, then introduced his sister.
‘This is our baby.
I'm four, and she's nothing.’
‘He means she isn't one yet.
She's only five weeks old born on the twenty-ninth of February.’
‘Upon Leap Day?’
Ernest smiled.
‘Does that mean she only has a birthday every fourth year?’
‘Yes, it'll be a big saving in presents,’ Connor remarked dryly.
‘Don't be so mean!’
Ruth scolded him.
‘She'll celebrate her birthday on the twenty-eighth, won't you, my lovey?’
Only the tip of a pink nose was visible above the cot blanket, but Ernest declared, ‘She is a beautiful child, to be sure.
What is her name?’
‘She's Lilian Mary O'Dell,’ Danny told him.
‘Lilian, because it's my mother's second name — and Mary, after Connor's mother,’ Ruth explained.
‘That's very nice.
Do you remember Izzy's wife?’
‘Sarah?
Of course— I was with her the day her baby was born.
His name's Benjamin, isn't it?’
‘Ah, yes, Ben will be six in August.
You must come and see us — we're still in my parents’ old house, just off Poplar High Street.
It needs a lot of work, I'm afraid, but perhaps one day, when our ship comes in….’
The Kleibers had come over from Germany some years before the war, and settled in Poplar.
Old Aaron Kleiber built up a little tailoring business, and for a time Ruth had worked for him as a seamstress, together with Sarah Vogel, another immigrant, and Rosie O'Dell, Connor and Sean's half-sister.
In due course, Izzy and Sarah were married, but when the war broke out there was a lot of anti-German feeling in the East End.
Their house was attacked by a mob and the family were interned for the duration of the war as ‘enemy aliens’.
‘I believe your mother died while she was in the camp — I  was sorry to hear that,’ said Ruth.
‘I hope your father is keeping well?’
‘Alas, my father died also, soon after we returned to Poplar.
The new upheaval was too much for him; his heart could not stand the strain.’
Ruth made the sign of the cross.
‘May he rest in peace.’
‘Oh, yes — I am sure my parents are both at peace now.
It was the end of a long struggle; there will be no more bespoke tailoring or fine sewing in the old workshop.’
‘You never thought of following in your father's footsteps?’
‘Oh, I've no talent in that line!’
Ernest indicated his old fashioned camera and tripod.
‘All I can do is take pictures.’
‘You used to run a little photographic shop in Silmour Street,’ Connor remembered.
‘Have you started up again?’
‘I wish I could.
That would take capital, and I do not have much money.
Street-photography is all I can manage, these days.’
‘Well, we'd be very pleased to have our picture taken,’ Connor told him.
‘How about doing one now?’
‘Oh, please.’
Ernest was embarrassed.
‘Don't feel you have to.’
‘But it's a good opportunity!
Lift the little ‘un out of the pram, Ruth, and we'll all have our picture taken.’
So the family posed stiffly, gazing into the camera, while Ernest removed the lens-cap and vanished under the black velvet hood.
‘Watch the birdie!
Don't move, please — quite still.
Thank you — that's all.’
‘I didn't see any birdie,’ said Danny suspiciously.
‘He must've flown away so quick, we didn't spot him,’ said Connor.
‘I hope the exposure was long enough.
The light's beginning to fade.’
Ernest packed up his camera, folding the legs of the tripod.
‘I should have a print for you in a day or two.
Why don't you call in on Wednesday afternoon, Ruth?
Sarah will be so pleased.
You know where we are, don't you?’
‘Of course.
Is it just the three of you living there?
You and Sarah and Benjamin?’
‘We also take in paying guests from time to time,’ said Ernest awkwardly.
‘It helps to make ends meet.’
‘What a good idea.
But I really meant,’ Ruth hesitated, then took the plunge, ‘isn't Rosie with you, then?’
The name fell into the conversation like a pebble dropped in a pond.
For a moment no one spoke, and the rings spread out, fading slowly.
‘I have not seen Rosie since the war,’ said Ernest in a low voice.
‘You remember?
I came to the Watermen to ask if you had any news of her.’
‘When she left the Island, she turned her back on the family and we've never heard from her since.
She went up West, to look for a job in one of the big department stores.
You said you would try to find her.’
‘I did try — many, many times.
Day after day, I walked up and down Oxford Street, Regent Street, Kensington.
I went to all the big shops, but it was hopeless.
Nobody had heard of Rosie O'Dell; I was looking for a needle in a haystack.’
He shivered a little, and turned up the collar of his mackintosh.
‘It is turning chilly now the sun has gone down; your baby mustn't catch cold.
I will tell Sarah you are coming to visit us on Wednesday afternoon.
I am so glad to have met you again.’
He bowed slightly, then shouldered his camera and was soon out of sight.
As they watched him go, Connor said, ‘It makes you think.
A few years ago he had a flourishing little business going in that shop of his, and now look at him.
On his uppers.’
‘A few years ago, he had Rosie with him.’
‘Who's Rosie?’ asked Danny inquisitively.
Something about the way they spoke of her aroused his interest.
‘Aunt Rosie's your Dad's sister,’ Ruth told him.
The small boy frowned.
‘If she's Dad's sister, why doesn't she live in our house?
Lilian's my sister — and she lives with us.’
Your Aunt Rosie had to go away,’ said Connor.
‘Come on, it's high time we were heading for home ourselves.
It'll soon be dark.’
As they retraced their steps, Ruth couldn't help wondering if they would ever be able to tell Danny and Lilian the truth  about their Aunt Rosie when they grew up.
It was not a story they were proud of.
For Rosie O'Dell was not Mary O'Dell's daughter.
Mary had a sister, four years her junior — bright, stylish Moira Phelan.
Moira studied shorthand and typing and got a job as a secretary in the office of Mr Henry Marriner, a successful businessman.
When she found that she was pregnant, she turned to her older sister for help, and since the O'Dells knew that Mr Marriner had been paying court to Moira, they assumed he was responsible for her condition.
When the baby was born, the O'Dells adopted her — a darling little girl, dark and pretty — and brought her up as their own, with Connor and Sean.
Eventually the truth came out.
Rosie had been the result of one reckless moment of love between Moira and Mary's husband, Patrick O'Dell; an occasion never repeated and best forgotten — until twenty years later, when the shocking news exploded like a time-bomb.
The revelation almost destroyed the O'Dell family.
It was a long while before Mary could forgive her husband's infidelity, and she had never seen or spoken to her sister since then.
But the one most deeply hurt was Rosie herself.
Not only had her real mother rejected her at birth and given her away, but worst of all, her adoptive father whom she had loved so much now turned out to be her real father, a cheat and a deceiver.
Ashamed, confused, uncertain of her own identity, Rosie O'Dell had walked out of the house and never returned.
For some time she stayed with the Kleibers.
When Ernest set up shop as a photographer, she had gone to work as his assistant and their friendship blossomed into romance.
If war had not broken out, they would have married, but when the Kleibers were sent away to prison-camp, her last hope of love and security collapsed; that was when she left the Island and went up West.
Ruth shook her head, trying to put these unhappy memories from her mind.
When the little family reached the Watermen, Connor unlocked the side door of the pub and helped Ruth in with the pram.
‘What's for tea?’
Danny sniffed the air.
‘Gran's been making a cake!’
He roared down the passage to the back-kitchen, where Mary O'Dell hugged him and promised him a slice of fruitcake still warm from the oven, if he was a good boy and ate up all his bread and butter first.
Lilian was fast asleep again, and Ruth managed to lift her out of the pram without waking her.
‘I'll take her straight upstairs and put her in her cot,’ she began, but Connor put out a hand, stopping her.
‘You're still brooding about Rosie, aren't you?’ he said.
‘I can't help it.
She was always a good friend to me.
I hate to think of her now — alone and unhappy, perhaps.’
‘Maybe she's not unhappy — maybe she's not alone either,’ said Connor.
‘If you ask me, it's Ernest you should feel sorry for.
He's the one who's lonely and unhappy.
He's still in love with her.’
On Tuesday morning, in Jubilee Street, Florrie carried out her daily chores — with one minor difference.
She fried a rasher of bacon, a sausage and a slice of bread, then cut them up small enough for Eb to eat with a fork.
Generally, he came downstairs to wash and shave while she was doing this, but today she took him up a tray so he could have his breakfast in bed.
Florrie did not eat anything herself — a cup of tea was all the breakfast she ever wanted — and as soon as she had finished, she put on her coat and hat and left the house.
Then she made her way to the little corner grocery shop, five minutes' walk from Jubilee Street.
This was the shop which had been run by Eb's Aunt Emily ever since she was widowed, thirty years earlier.
Emily had never had a head for figures, and her brother-in-law, Marcus Judge, had kept an eye on her finances from the beginning, gradually acquiring a controlling interest in the business.
When her son Arnold went off to war, Emily felt completely at a loss, and was grateful for any help that was offered her.
As Ebenezer was also serving in the army, Florrie moved into the flat above the shop, together with her schoolboy son  and Arnold's young bride, Maudie.
Before long, Maudie had a baby — and soon after that, a telegram arrived saying that Arnold had been killed in action.
The next few years were difficult for them all, but when Eb came home, gassed and disabled, he had done his best to put the shop back on a business footing — going in every day to work behind the counter, keeping the books, and not letting customers run up bills they couldn't pay.
Today, when Florrie arrived at the corner-shop and rapped on the closed front door, Aunt Emily lifted the roller-blind and peered shortsightedly at her through the glass.
‘All on your own, dear?’ she said, when she unlocked the door.
‘Isn't Ebbie with you?’
‘No, he'll come on later.
I said he should have a bit of a lie-in; he had another bad night again.
Moaning and groaning in his sleep, he was — I felt quite worried for him.
But I thought I'd come round first, to help you open up and get things straight.’
‘Thank you, dear.’
Emily lowered the blind again.
The shop didn't open till eight, but there was a lot to be done before then.
She rambled on, ‘We had a broken night, too.
Little Trevor was sick three times — too many sweeties before bedtime, I expect, so I'm all behind like the cow's tail this morning.
Maudie had to change his nightie twice.
She's still upstairs, getting him dressed.’
Florrie took off her hat and coat and hung them up, saying, ‘I'll make a start on the bacon, shall I?’
‘If you would, dear, then I can weigh out some packets of tea.
Mind yourself on that machine — the blade's ever so sharp.’
Emily always repeated this warning, although she was the only one who had ever cut herself on the bacon-slicer.
As they went on with their work they gossiped happily, like two birds twittering to one another from different branches of a tree.
With a rat-tat at the door, a few envelopes dropped on to the doormat.
‘Postman's early today,’ said Emily, going to pick them up.
She turned them over one at a time, trying to decipher the handwriting.
‘Oh dear, more bills from the wholesalers, by  the looks of them.
Hello — this one's got a funny stamp on.
I've never seen one like this before, have you?
Oh, I do believe it's American….
Would that be a picture of George Washington?’
‘Shouldn't think so.
Hasn't he passed on by now?’ said Florrie, craning over her shoulder.
‘I don't recognise the writing,’ began Emily and then, as Florrie gasped and took the letter from her: ‘Why, whatever's the matter?’
Florrie was staring at it, open-mouthed and trembling, unable to reply.
‘You've gone quite pale, dear.
Are you feeling poorly?’
Emily fussed over her.
‘Shall I get you a glass of water?’
‘No, I'm all right.
It's just…
I know that handwriting.’
‘How could you?
We don't know anybody in America.’
Florrie nodded slowly.
‘Yes, we do.
Josh told me once, that's where Tommy went.
His writing's more grown-up well, he'd be two years older now — but I'd know it anywhere.’
‘Are you sure?’
Emily's hand fluttered helplessly to her face, fingering her lips.
‘Oh dear, Marcus said we must all try and forget about Tommy.
Ever since that awful night when Saul died, and — Tommy went off, Marcus says he's not one of our family, not any more.
We must put him out of our hearts for ever, he said.’
‘How could I do that?
I'm his mother!’
Florrie gazed at the letter in her hands.
‘But I'm not the one he's written to — it's not addressed to me.
It says:Mrs Maudie Judge .’
Emily screwed up her eyes, trying to focus on the envelope.
‘So it does.
Oh, Florrie — how dreadful.’
‘I don't understand.
Why should he write to Maudie instead of me?’
‘I think perhaps they'd begun to get rather fond of one another.
Too fond, I mean.
You know the pendant she always wears round her neck, shaped like a heart?
He gave her that for Christmas, just before he ran away.
I said it wasn't proper for her to keep it, but she wouldn't listen.’
Florrie looked up, wide-eyed.
‘You mean there was something going on between them?
But he was only a boy!
He'd just turned sixteen — and she was a married woman, with a child.’
‘A widow,’ Emily corrected her.
‘And not much more than a child herself — only five years older than Tommy.’
Then, as Florrie stuck her finger under the flap of the envelope and began to tear it open, ‘Oh, do you think you should?
It's not meant for you!’
‘He's my boy — I've a right to know what's become of him!’
Florrie scanned the letter, her lips moving silently.
When she had finished, she turned to Emily in blank dismay.
‘Whatever shall I do?’
‘What does he say?’
Emily asked.
Florrie held out the letter, but Emily shook her head.
‘I left my glasses upstairs — I can't make out his writing.
You tell me what's in it.’
Laboriously, Florrie began to read aloud.
‘My dearest darling, I don't know whether I should be writing this to you, but I still think of you every day of my life, first thing when I wake up and last thing before I go to sleep.
You are never out of my mind.
‘I would have written sooner, but I was afraid of getting you into some trouble.
Then I remembered you always get up in the morning before Aunt Emily, so I'm sure you will find this before anyone else sees it; and I want you to know that I am alive and well.
As you see from my address, I'm living in Yonkers now, and have a pretty good job in a cannery, working in the packing and despatch department.
‘I rent a room in the house of our foreman, living as one of the family, which was a stroke of luck; a boarding-house would cost more.
This way, I live cheap and put some money in the bank every week.
When I've saved enough, I plan to come home and marry you, like I said I would.
‘I don't spend much — I stay home most nights.
Don't worry, I have no lady-friends; there will never be anyone but you, Maudie.
Loving you was the best thing that ever happened to me: I could never go with anyone else.
‘I promise I will come back to you one day.
I realise I must be wanted by the police for Saul Judge's death, but it was not murder.
I had to do it in self-defence, or else he would have killed me.
One day I will tell everyone the truth about that night, and clear my name.
‘We must be patient till then.
Wait for me, my dearest darling You are mine and I am yours.
I will always love you.
Yours ever.
Tom.’
Emily held on to the edge of the counter to support herself and whispered, ‘I was afraid this would happen.
I was afraid they'd been carrying on.’
‘You should have put a stop to it!’ said Florrie accusingly.
‘Why didn't you tell me?’
‘At first I didn't suspect anything.
Only afterwards, when Tommy disappeared and Maudie seemed so heartbroken, then I began to wonder.
What are you going to do with that letter?’
‘What do you think I should do?’
Emily racked her muddled brain, and had a sudden inspiration.
‘I tell you what.
Give it to me, and I'll take it round to Louisa, presently.
She'll know what to do for the best.’
They agreed that for the moment they would say nothing about it to Ebenezer.
There was always the danger that he might mention it to his father — and that was bound to lead to more trouble.
They both felt that, as Marcus's wife, Louisa could be relied upon to give the best advice.
Some time after the shop opened, Eb arrived for work, grey-faced and haunted.
Emily gave Florrie a meaning look and said, ‘Now you're both here, you won't mind if I slip out and do a little shopping?
I've one or two calls to make as well.’
As fast as her rheumatic legs would carry her, she toddled round to the Rope Walk, to the house where Eb and Josh and Ruth had been born and brought up.
Louisa opened the front door, and saw at once that her sister was upset.
When they sat down at the kitchen table, Emily perched on the edge of her chair, and her hands were never still.
She kept fidgeting with her bonnet, dropping her hat-pin, taking off her gloves and putting them on again.
At last Louisa could stand it no longer.
‘What's wrong?’ she asked.
‘Are you going to tell me or aren't you?’
‘Oh dear, it's so unfortunate….’
Emily glanced over her shoulder and lowered her voice.
‘Marcus isn't at home, is he?’
‘No, of course not.
He's gone to the Wharf, as usual.’
The routine at Jubilee Wharf remained unchanged.
Each morning at seven the members of the Brotherhood presented themselves at the dock-gates, and Josh called out their numbers, allowing them in one at a time to report for work.
Though Marcus no longer took part in this process, he never missed a single morning; he liked to know everything that was going on — how many cargo-ships berthed for loading or unloading — how many hours taken to clear each one — how many men needed on every job.
‘Marcus won't be home till tea-time,’ said Louisa.
‘Why do you ask?’
‘Well, Florrie and me, we were wondering what we should do.
You see,this arrived today — first post.’
Diving into her beadwork reticule, she produced the letter with the American stamp, and slid it across the red chenille tablecloth.
Picking it up, Louisa said, ‘But it's addressed to Maudie.’
‘I know, that's what makes it so awkward.
Florrie opened it….
You'd better see for yourself.’
Louisa frowned.
‘I don't like prying in other people's letters.
Who's it from?’
‘Tom,’ whispered Emily.
‘He's in America.
You've got to read it.’
Something in her face made Louisa unfold the letter.
When she had finished reading it, she looked up, asking, ‘Has Maudie seen this?’
‘No.
We didn't know whether to give it to her or not.
What do you think?’
‘It's addressed to her — that makes it her property.’
‘But it says such shocking things!’
‘That's no business of ours.
This is between Maudie and Tom; you've no right to keep it from her.’
Louisa put the letter on the table, but Emily was reluctant to pick it up.
It lay between them, a scrap of paper that had travelled halfway round the world, and could finish up as evidence in a murder trial.
They had been so intent upon it, they never heard the back door open and shut, or saw the shadow at the scullery door until Marcus Judge said, ‘Good morning, Emily.
I didn't  expect to find you here.
I dare say you weren't expecting to see me, either?’
Emily gave a little moan of fear, and Louisa said quickly, ‘What's happened, Marcus?
Why aren't you at the Wharfmaster's office?’
‘There were no boats in or out today.
After the Easter holiday, you'd think the Wharf would be twice as busy, but trade's getting worse all the time.
It seems the country can't afford imports, and we've precious little to export, either, so we had no work to give our men.
Joshua had to send them home empty-handed.’
While he was speaking, Emily tried to pick up the incriminating letter and slip it into her bag, but Marcus stopped her.
‘May I see that letter, Emily?’
Still fumbling with the clasp of her bag, she gasped, ‘No, Marcus.
It's nothing — nothing of any importance.’
‘The letter, if you please,’ he repeated inexorably.
She had to hand it over.
He read it in silence, then looked from his wife to his sister-in-law, and back to his wife again.
‘So, I come home to find you plotting behind my back.
What were you intending to do with this letter, Emily?’
‘I came to ask Louisa's advice.
You see, Tom sent it all the way from America, so I thought —‘
‘Perhaps I haven't made myself clear.
Thomas Judge is no longer a member of this family.
He has put himself beyond the pale — I have forbidden you to speak of him.’
‘He's still Florrie's son,’ Louisa cut in gently.
‘Florrie has no son!
Don't you understand what I say?
Thomas Judge does not exist.’
He walked to the old-fashioned kitchen range, where red-hot coals glowed behind the bars of the grate.
Crushing the letter into a ball, he dropped it in.
It flared up, then became black ash.
‘That belonged to Maudie,’ said Louisa.
‘Maudie?
Ah, yes.’
He turned to Emily.
‘Had Maudie read it?’
‘No.
I brought it straight here.’
‘Very well.
You will not tell her.
You will speak of this to  no one.’
Returning to the table, he put his hands together in an attitude of prayer.
‘You will repeat these words after me:I hereby solemnly swear before Almighty God ….’
They echoed each phrase as he continued: ‘…that I will never mention the existence of any such letter to anyone else — now, or at any time in the future, so help me, God .’
Obediently, they bowed their heads and he dusted his hands as if they had been contaminated.
Then he turned to his wife and addressed her in words that cut like a knife.
‘I did not expect this from you, Louisa.
I am bitterly disappointed.’
‘Can we leave the table, please, Mutti?
We've finished our tea.’
Benjamin Kleiber gave his mother a pleading look, and pushed aside his plate.
‘Benjamin, you must not be rude.
Daniel is our guest perhaps he would like some more cake.’
Danny O'Dell shook his head, and Ruth prayed that her son would not say with devastating candour: ‘Your cake tastes funny’— then breathed again as he said politely, ‘No more, thank you, Mrs Kleiber.
Can we go and play now?’
‘Very well.
Take Daniel to your room, Ben, but you mustn't make a noise.
Miss Hoffmann is resting.’
The two small boys scrambled down from their chairs and raced for the door.
Ben was almost two years older than Danny, but small for his age, while Danny seemed likely to take after his father, so they were very nearly the same height.
‘I am glad they get on well together,’ said Sarah Kleiber.
‘Ben is a solitary boy; he needs to make new friends.’
The two youngsters shouted gleefully to one another as they raced upstairs.
Their feet clattered on the uncarpeted boards, and Sarah threw up her hands in mock despair.
‘Poor Miss Hoffmann!
Why can't small boys be still and good, like your daughter?’
Ruth looked down fondly at Lilian, who lay placidly on her lap sucking her thumb, and she smiled.
‘Oh, this one can  make herself heard when she wants to, believe me!
Is Miss Hoffmann one of your paying guests?’
‘That's right.
Most of our lodgers go out to work during the day, but Miss Hoffmann is not in good health.
She was interned, like us, and the hard winters were specially trying for her.
She has never been really well since then.
That is why she spends so much time in her room.
I asked her if she would like to come down and have tea with us, but….’
Sarah looked round the long dining-room.
Bare, and sadly in need of redecoration, it was not very welcoming.
She sighed.
‘You must see great changes since you were here last.’
Ruth did not know what to say.
It was not only the house that had changed.
Once, Sarah had had a kind of beauty — pale-skinned and dark-haired, with big lustrous eyes.
Now the light had faded from those eyes, and her complexion was sallow.
She looked drawn and tired, as she asked: ‘Can you remember how it was, when Aaron and Miriam were alive?’
‘I remember it very well.
There used to be a round dining table here — mahogany, wasn't it?— and a sideboard along that wall.’
‘That was where they kept their best china; Miriam was so proud of her dinner-service.
Of course, that all went during the war.’
Sarah began to stack the plates from the table — plain white china, cheap and practical.
‘We needed a bigger table anyway.
This is an old trestle-table Ernest found in the workroom at the back, when he opened up the house again.
It was used as a sewing-bench in the old days, but we're glad to have it.
Sometimes we sit down as many as seven or eight for breakfast or supper.’
‘But what became of the Kleibers’ furniture — and the dinner-service?’
Sarah shrugged.
‘When the house was standing empty, people came and smashed the windows.
After that, they broke in and began to steal whatever they could carry away — little things at first, like crockery and silver, but later on the furniture went as well .
When Ernest came home, he could not believe his eyes.
There was damp everywhere.
The paper was peeling off the walls, ceilings coming down….’
She tried to smile.
‘We've done the best we can to put  things right.
I learned how to put up wallpaper — I became quite expert at it!
But the house still needs a lot of work, and at present Ernest cannot afford it.’
‘I was hoping to see Ernest here this afternoon,’ said Ruth.
‘What a pity he had to go out.’
‘It's a fine afternoon — and early-closing day, so he decided he should take his camera along to the Tower of London.
There are always sightseers there — sometimes they like to be photographed with the Beefeaters.’
‘What a good idea….’
Ruth looked round for a clock, but there was no clock in the room.
‘What time do you expect him to come home?’
‘Not until quite late.
It's a long walk from the Tower to Poplar.’
‘He walks?
It must be miles — why doesn't he take a bus?’
‘He doesn't like to waste money on bus-fares.
And he says he enjoys walking; he often goes for long walks by himself.’
Sarah seemed as if she were about to say something else, then thought better of it.
Standing up, she began to load the tea-things on to a tray.
‘Do you mind if I clear the table?
I must get ready for supper; our lodgers will be coming in presently.’
‘Let me help with the washing-up,’ said Ruth.
‘I'll put Lilian back in her pram, then I can wipe while you wash.’
‘Oh no, you mustn't.
You're a visitor!’
But Ruth wouldn't take no for an answer, so Sarah went to put the kettle on.
When Ruth followed her into the kitchen, she looked around; like the rest of the house, it was clean but very sparsely furnished.
It could not be easy to produce meals for seven or eight lodgers under such spartan conditions.
Putting the remains of the cake back into the larder, Sarah asked anxiously, ‘Did you think it tasted a little stale?
I always keep it in a tin, but even so….’
Ruth assured her that the cake had been delicious, and they made a start on the washing-up.
Looking through the window over the sink, Ruth could see the little paved yard leading to the workroom where she had struggled to learn the craft of fine hand-sewing, so long ago.
‘Does Ernest use the workshop now?’ she wondered.
‘There's not much of it left.
You remember it had a glass skylight?
Before we came back, Ernest had such plans.
He hoped to convert it into a photographic studio — and then he found that there was not a single pane of glass left, and the rain had got in.
It was a big disappointment.’
‘Poor Ernest.
It's all so terribly unfair.’
‘Yes, poor Ernest.’
Sarah tipped the last of the washing-up water down the drain and said shyly, ‘If you don't mind me asking, do you ever hear anything of Rosie these days?’
Ruth shook her head.
‘Ernest asked me that.
We haven't been in touch with her for years.’
‘I'm so sorry — he didn't tell me that.
In fact I'm surprised he asked you.
He never speaks of her, now.
It's a subject we do not talk about.’
She dried her hands on the kitchen towel, adding, ‘I worry about Ernest.
It is not right he should live as he does in this house, with nobody but strangers to talk to.
He is so very lonely.’
‘But he has you for company,’ began Ruth.
‘He does not talk very much to me.
I have a separate life of my own.
I'm lucky, I have Benjamin but Ernest has nobody.
When he came out of the prison-camp at the end of the war, he believed Rosie would be waiting for him and when he could not find her, I think it broke his heart.’
For a moment Sarah fell silent, then she suddenly turned to Ruth.
‘But how stupid I am!
I talk of Ernest, and forget the most important thing of all.
Before he went out, he made me promise to give you this.’
She opened a drawer of the kitchen-dresser and pulled out a photograph, which she gave to Ruth.
It was the family portrait they had posed for on Easter Sunday afternoon: Connor, Ruth and Danny, staring glassy-eyed into the camera.
Only Lilian, safe and snug in Ruth's arms, looked completely at her ease.
‘It's wonderful,’ said Ruth.
‘Now, where did I put my handbag?
How much does Ernest charge for a group photo?’
‘There's no charge,’ said Sarah.
‘It is a present for you and your family, with Ernest's very best wishes.’
‘He's a professional photographer — I must pay him for his work!’
‘He would be most offended.
He said you have always been a good friend to him; he is very happy to do something for you, in return.’
Next morning, when the O'Dells sat down to breakfast, the photograph had pride of place on the kitchen mantelpiece.
It had been much admired, for Mary brought it out time and again to show to favoured customers in the saloon bar.
‘I'll have to get a frame for it,’ said Connor, ‘before you wear it to pieces, passing it around.’
‘Don't you be so cheeky!’ said his mother.
‘And you watch yourself with that fried egg.
I'll not let you go to visit the Company with dribbles of yolk all down the front of your suit.’
Across the table, Danny giggled and Connor quelled him with a look.
‘Stop your nagging, Mam.
I won't disgrace you, never fear.’
Once a year, the landlord of the Watermen had to put in an appearance at the Head Office of the Brewery in Farringdon Street.
It was more of an annual rite than a business meeting, and always concluded with expressions of mutual goodwill and handshakes all round — provided the pub continued to show a profit.
Nevertheless, visiting the Company was an important occasion in Mary O'Dell's calendar; when her husband was the landlord, she always fussed over him beforehand, ironing his best shirt, starching the collar, sponging his blue serge suit and tucking a clean handkerchief into his top pocket.
Now that her son had taken over, she showed every sign of treating him in the same way, much to his discomfort.
Ignoring Connor's assurances, Mary turned to Ruth.
‘And when you get there, make sure he goes to the Gentlemen's Cloakroom and has a good wash before the interview.
Those Underground trains are always black with soot, and they're bound to notice if he's got grubby hands.’
The landlord's wife was expected to accompany him on the trip to Head Office.
Although Mary had gone to Farringdon Street each year with Patrick, and was always greeted cordially when they arrived, the actual interview was a strictly  male affair.
She had to sit in the waiting-room, on a slippery horsehair sofa, while it was going on.
Con exploded.
‘For pity's sake, Mam, you'll be telling her to wipe my nose next!’ which sent Danny off into another fit of giggles.
‘He won't let you down, I promise,’ Ruth chimed in soothingly.
‘I sincerely hope not,’ said Mary.
‘Anyhow,you're looking very nice, my dear.
I always like you in that blue dress.’
‘You're sure you can manage without us this morning?’
Ruth continued, ‘because I'm sure the Company don't really want to see me.
I could easily stay here to help out in the public, if you like.’
‘Not at all.
I shall be running the saloon — it'll be like old times, and we've the new barmaid in the public.
We'll manage fine.’
‘If you have any awkward customers, you can call up the potboy from the cellar, can't you?’
‘There'll be no awkward customers as long as I'm in charge!’ said Mary grimly.
‘And you'll be back soon after midday, I expect.’
‘A bit later than that,’ said Connor.
‘I've been thinking, it's a long time since the two of us went out together, so I'm taking Ruth for a bite to eat.
Da tells me they used to do a decent lunch at the chop-house by Holborn Viaduct.’
‘Oh, we don't have to eat out.
It's a terrible waste of money,’ began Ruth.
‘Don't interrupt me, woman — I've not finished yet.
When we've eaten, we're going to do some shopping.
That blue dress of yours looks well enough, but you've had it a while now; you need something new to wear.
You presented me with a daughter lately it's high time you had a present yourself.’
‘A new dress?’
Ruth's face glowed.
‘Oh, Con — it's a lovely thought, but I really don't need it.’
‘Don't go talking him out of it,’ said Mary.
‘It may be a long time before you get another offer like that!’
‘No more arguments, Mrs O'Dell — my mind's made up,’ said Connor.
‘I thought we'd see what Gamages have to offer.
It's only a hop and a skip from the Viaduct, and they have a good selection of the latest fashions.’
‘And how would you know that, might I ask?’
Ruth enquired.
‘Rosie once told me Gamages was the best.
I don't know if she ever bought anything there, but she enjoyed window shopping.’
‘Fancy you remembering,’ said Mary.
‘It's true enough — Gamages was her favourite.’
‘I never knew that,’ said Ruth.
A silence fell, and then she pushed back her chair and stood up, saying, ‘Very well.
If you're set on it, we'll go to Gamages.’
On the journey, she sat in the Underground carriage next to Connor, saying very little, watching the other passengers.
‘You're quiet today.’
Connor glanced at her.
‘Not worrying about the children, are you?’
‘Oh, no.
Your mam's so good with them — she'll make sure Danny doesn't get into mischief and see that Lilian has her bottle at the right time.’
‘Then what are you pondering so deeply?’
Ruth smiled.
‘Nothing special.
I'm enjoying a day out with my husband, that's all.’
Her reply was truthful enough, but it was not the whole truth.
She did not want to tell Connor that she had a private plan in mind; it was such a very long shot, and might come to nothing.
The visit to the Brewery Company presented no problems, and they were in and out of the office within half an hour; when they went into the chop-house on the stroke of twelve, they were the first customers.
Ruth looked down the menu and was scandalised.
‘I could cook you the same food for a quarter of the price.
Honestly, it's a wicked waste.’
But he told her to stop grumbling and enjoy herself, and she had to admit that the spring lamb with mint sauce was very tasty.
It was still early when they went in to Gamages and headed for Ladies' Gowns.
Ruth wandered through the department, studying the dresses on display — and the young ladies behind the counters as well— but she could not see a familiar face.
Eventually she found a dress that appealed to her.
It was low-waisted, in deep chestnut georgette with touches of lace at the collar and cuffs — smart enough for evening wear but simple enough for the daytime, too.
‘I'll have to try it on, to make sure it suits me,’ she told Connor.
‘Fair enough — I kept you waiting at the Company office.
But don't be too long, will you?
I feel like a bull in a china shop, with all these young women gawping.’
One of the assistants took Ruth into a fitting-room and helped her into the dress, then stood back to admire the effect.
‘Oh, yes, madam — it might have been made for you.
And the colour goes with your hair, don't you agree?’
‘It's perfect…but I wonder, while I'm here, could I have a word with the lady in charge of the department?’
The assistant looked alarmed.
‘Our manageress?
Is there something not to your liking, madam?’
‘No, no.
It isn't about the dress at all— it's a personal matter.’
Puzzled, the girl went off, and a few minutes later a grey haired woman in black entered the cubicle.
‘Can I help you, madam?
What seems to be the problem?’
‘There's no problem.
I like this dress very much, and I'm sure my husband will like it too, but I'm hoping you might be able to help me.
I'm trying to trace a member of our family who moved to this part of London during the war, looking for work.
She was always interested in fashion, and this was her favourite shop, so it's quite likely this would be the first place she'd come to.’
‘How long ago would this have been?’
‘Almost exactly five years — in May, 1915.
She was twenty then, a pretty, dark girl with curly hair and an Irish brogue.’
‘Could you tell me her name?’
‘Rose O'Dell.
Everyone called her Rosie.’
‘Rosie O'Dell….’
The manageress nodded.
‘As soon as you described her, I felt sure it must be Miss O'Dell.
Yes, she worked here for a time.’
‘But not now?’
‘I'm afraid not.
She only stayed for a few months, then she became unwell and had to give up the job.
We all liked her.
We were sorry to see her go.’
‘You mean she never came back?
Did she leave any forwarding address?’
‘No, nothing like that.
She went quite suddenly.
We never saw or heard from her again.’
Ruth's hopes, which she had built so high, collapsed like a house of cards.
There was only one crumb of comfort; she was very glad that she had not said anything about it to Connor.
3
As the spring tides rose, flowing into summer, the Island began to blossom: pots of geraniums appeared on window sills and girls sewed new ribbons on to last year's straw hats.
Hearts beat faster, and along the streets, footsteps lightened and quickened on the paving-stones.
Only Ebenezer's heart grew heavier, and his steps dragged and faltered.
The women at the corner-shop remarked upon the change that had come over him, and could not account for it.
At midday, he always took a half-hour break, sitting in the kitchen armchair with his feet up on a stool, nibbling toast and dripping and preparing for another long afternoon behind the counter.
Today Florrie and Emily, busy cutting bread and making cups of tea, exchanged glances.
‘Another slice, Ebbie?’ suggested Florrie.
‘No, I don't want any more.’
He pushed his plate away, the remains of the dripping toast congealing, half-eaten.
‘I've no appetite at all.’
‘How about a nice cup of tea, dear?’ said Emily, filling the teapot.
‘I'm sure you won't say no to that.’
‘I'm not thirsty either,’ he rasped, and his breath rattled in his lungs, reminding him of the dream that kept coming back, night after night.
‘You ought to force yourself to have a little something,’ his wife told him.
‘You're doing no good, starving yourself like that.’
‘Will you leave off nagging?’ he snarled at her, and she took a step back.
‘I'll eat and drink when I feel like it!
It's no concern of yours what I do.’
‘She's only telling you for your own good, dear,’ Emily interposed.
He looked as if he were about to turn on his aunty as well, but at that moment they were interrupted by a clatter and a crash and the wail of a child.
‘Dear me!’
Emily was glad of an excuse to change the subject.
‘There's little Trevor in the wars again — what's he up to now?’
‘Mischief, as per usual,’ grunted Eb, but she was already on her way to her beloved grandson.
‘What is it, ducky?
Tell Gan-gan what's the matter.’
While the others snatched a midday break, Emily's daughter-in-law Maudie took her turn of duty in the shop, and she always had her small son with her so she could keep an eye on him.
Unfortunately Trevor was a restless child, and easily bored.
Today, while Maudie was filling a grocery order to the delivered by hand, he had decided to amuse him self by trying to clamber up the shelves, and succeeded in pulling down several tins of treacle.
Worse still, one of them had lost its lid and a sluggish, syrupy lake was already spreading across the floor.
‘It wasn't Trev's fault.
He didn't mean to — it was an accident,’ said Maudie, all in one breath.
‘It can't be helped, dear.
I'll clean up the mess,’ sighed Emily then, more urgently: ‘Oh no, Trevor.
Don't tread in it, whatever you do!’
But she was too late: Trevor was already paddling in the treacle, and Maudie swooped down to pick him up.
‘I'll give him a good wash, and change his socks and shoes,’ she said.
‘Then he can come with me while I run these groceries round to Marbury Road.
It'll do him good to get out for a while; it's being cooped up indoors all day makes him fidgety.’
As she passed through the kitchen on her way upstairs with a protesting armful of Trevor, Eb asked darkly, ‘How soon does that child start school?’
‘He's down for next September,’ Maudie replied over her shoulder, and vanished quickly up the stairs.
‘The sooner the better — perhaps they'll teach him how to behave!’
Eb struggled to his feet.
‘If Maudie's going out, I suppose that means I've got to get back behind the counter.
No peace for the wicked, as they say.’
‘You stay where you are, Ebbie,’ his wife told him.
‘Emily and me can take care of the shop; you have a rest while you can — you look quite washed out.
Here, why don't you have a nice read of your newspaper?’
‘Load of rubbish.’
Eb tossed the daily paper on to the floor, as he slumped back into his chair.
‘I'm sick and tired of reading the news.
Country's going to the dogs — men out of work everywhere — there's no money about….
This shop's takings are down by half, compared to this time last year.
When are we going to be told some good news for a change?’
Florrie gave him a long, searching look.
With every day that passed, he seemed to grow more depressed, and she was trying to think of something — anything — that might cheer him up.
Suddenly she made up her mind.
Closing the door into the shop, she glanced up the stairs to make sure Maudie wasn't within earshot.
‘I can tell you one bit of good news,’ she began nervously.
‘You can?’
Eb looked her over and gave a mirthless laugh.
‘You know something the newspapers haven't got hold of, is that it?’
‘Yes, I do.
I'm not supposed to tell you, 'cos your father said as how we'd all got to put it out of our heads, but…’ she leaned down towards him, like a conspirator.
‘A letter came from our Tommy the other day.
He's alive and well in America — at a place called Yonkers.
Funny name, isn't it?’
‘Tom wrote you a letter?
Show it to me!’
‘I can't do that.
Your dad burned it in the stove and he made your mum and Aunt Emily swear not to talk about it no more.
But I never had to promise, so that's why I thought it might cheer you up a bit.
Tommy's doing all right out there, working in a factory and saving money.
And he says as soon as he can afford the boat ticket, he's going to come home.’
She hesitated, then decided to skip the details concerning Maudie.
‘He's going to explain he never meant to kill Cousin Saul that night.
He did it in self-defence.
That's why he wants to tell the police the whole story — everything that happened — then he'll be able to clear his name and be a free man again.
There, that's good news for you, isn't it?’
She looked at her husband hopefully, expecting to find an  answering smile on his face but he remained as he was, sunk back among the cushions of the armchair, as if turned to stone.
On his face was an expression of absolute terror.
He drew in several great gulps of air before he had enough breath to gasp out: ‘Don't say any more.
Don't ever mention the boy's name again.
You mustn't tell a living soul what you just told me.
Not a word — understand?
Not one single word ….’
‘How d'you want it done this time?
Your usual?’
Ruth sat on an upright bentwood chair in front of the wash stand in her bedroom, and stared at her reflection in the looking-glass.
‘Yes, just a shampoo and set,’ she said.
‘I can do you some nice curls at the sides as well,’ added Gloria.
‘I've brought my tongs with me today.’
‘Oh, you needn't bother about that,’ said Ruth.
‘Con says he doesn't like my hair frizzed up too much.’
‘I never frizz your hair!’
Gloria bridled.
‘You know I don't…but a few soft curls over each ear look very becoming — everyone says so.’
‘Well, I'm not sure.’
‘Trust me!’ said Gloria firmly.
‘Don't worry, I won't heat the tongs too much and singe your hair off.
I know what I'm doing, just a gentle hint of curls — no more than that.
By the time I've finished, your husband's going to fall in love with you all over again.’
Ruth laughed.
‘All right, then.
Just a gentle hint.’
Her cousin shook out a towel and tied it deftly round Ruth's shoulders, then unpacked her combs, brushes and scissors, laying them out on the dressing-table along with the setting lotion and the curling-tongs.
She poured some warm water from the washstand jug into the basin, tipped in a little shampoo, and began to work up a lather; and as she worked, she talked.
‘How's all the family keeping?
How's Connor?
And the two kiddies?’
‘They're all very well.
Con had to go to the Magistrates Court this morning.’
‘Oh, no.
He's not got into trouble, has he?’
‘Certainly not — what an idea!
He's got to apply for an extended licence so we can stay open an extra hour on August Bank Holiday, that's all.
So Mary's looking after the children while I have my hair done.’
‘Yeah, I caught a glimpse of your ma-in-law on my way in.
She lifted her lip at me — I think she meant it for a smile.’
‘Don't be so unkind.
Mary O'Dell's a blessed angel — I won't hear a word against her.’
‘Oh, she's been good to you, I'm not denying that, but she can't stand the sight of me — never could.
And I'm sure I never gave her any reason to be so high-and-mighty!’
Ruth said nothing.
She was not going to dig up ancient grievances or remind Gloria of days gone by, when she used to come into the Watermen with half a dozen different gentlemen-friends in tow or, which was even worse, unaccompanied and on the look-out for a lonely man who might take a fancy to her.
At that time, Gloria had caused her mother, Emily Judge, a great deal of shame and sorrow.
She had walked out of the corner-shop and set off on the primrose path, which led rapidly downhill.
A year later, she finished up in hospital, sick and disillusioned, rejected by the so-called friends she had picked up along the way.
That was when Ruth got to know her better, and to like her better; and a few months later, Cousin Saul had married Gloria, taking her to live at the ramshackle old warehouse on Cyclops Wharf.
After two major operations, Gloria could no longer have children, but one day Saul brought home a baby he had found abandoned on the mud-flats at low tide.
They adopted the child and brought it up as their own, christening him Matthew after Saul's late father.
‘And how is Matt?’
Ruth enquired politely, with her head in the basin as Gloria washed her hair, then rinsed it with another jug full of water.
‘Right as nine pence.
I left him with our next-door neighbour — she's very good with him.’
‘No prospects of selling the warehouse yet, I suppose?’
‘Not a whisper.
And the longer we wait, the more dilapidated the old place looks.
It'll fall down round our ears one of these days, if we don't watch out!
When you think how optimistic I was, this time last year….’
When Gloria had got over the first shock of Saul's horrifying death, she put the warehouse up for sale, together with the contents of the ship-chandlers shop on the ground floor, confident that she would soon find a purchaser.
The property proved hard to sell, however.
It needed too much spent on repairs, and the stock was old-fashioned and out-of-date.
The only offers Gloria received were absurdly low, and she rejected them indignantly.
All the same, she realised she had to earn a living to support herself and Matt, and hit upon the idea of setting herself up as a hairdresser.
She had always been interested in beauty culture and hair-styling, so she took a job with a small hairdressing parlour in Stepney to learn the tricks of the trade and when she felt she knew enough, gave in her notice and advertised her services:Lady clients visited in the comfort and privacy of their own homes .
Naturally, one of her first customers was her Cousin Ruth.
‘Now then — you can start to dry yourself with that towel, while I heat up the tongs.’
Gloria had brought a portable spirit-lamp with her.
She lit it, then arranged the curling-tongs upon the little grid at the top, asking: ‘By the by— how's Mr O'Dell?
I never seem to see him around the pub these days.’
‘Poor old Pat — he hardly ever leaves his bedroom now.
He's got so much older these last few years.’
‘How old would he be exactly?’
‘Funny you should ask that.
He'll be fifty-one tomorrow.’
‘Lord save us, d'you call that old?
Fifty-one's no age at all!’
‘I know, but he's not well.
It hit him very hard when Rosie left home — and then when Sean got killed in the war….
He seemed to turn into an old man before his time.’
‘Awful how it takes some people.’
Gloria wiped the tongs clean with a scrap of paper, twirling them in a circle until they had cooled slightly, then she coiled a strand of Ruth's hair round the tongs and when it was tightly curled, fixed it in  place with two hairpins.
Suddenly she exclaimed, ‘Ooh, that reminds me of something I meant to show you.’
She put down the tongs, and began to rummage through her bag.
‘There's a picture in the latest Ladies’ Companion .
I buy it every month — well, I have to keep up with all the latest styles, don't I?’
She flicked over the pages of the illustrated magazine.
‘Where's the dratted thing got to?
I'm sure this is where I saw it….
Ah, here we are!’
Folding back the page, she passed it to Ruth.
‘This season's evening-gowns — direct from Paris,’ she explained, pointing to a large photograph.
Three young ladies posed against a rose-covered arbour, showing off three daringly low-cut dresses.
‘Very smart, but I don't think they'd be quite suitable for pulling pints in the saloon, do you?’ remarked Ruth, about to hand the magazine back.
‘Never mind the dresses, I'm talking about the girl!
That dark one on the right — doesn't she put you in mind of anybody?’
Ruth looked again, and caught her breath, while Gloria chattered on.
‘It was you mentioning her just now, reminded me.
I suppose it couldn't be her, could it?
If not, it's her double.’
‘That's Rosie,’ said Ruth.
‘No doubt about it.’
‘Think so?
They haven't printed her name.
Besides, what would she be doing, wearing Paris gowns and getting her picture in the paper,?’
‘I don't know — but I'm going to find out.’
‘How can you do that?’
‘The magazine must have an address and phone-number.
Would you leave it with me?
I can get on to them and ask.’
‘Oh, yes — you're on the telephone now, aren't you?
I'd feel a proper fool talking into one of those things, but I suppose you're used to it.’
‘Well, we've had it for several weeks now.’
Ruth was not going to admit that she had never actually made a phone-call herself, but there had to be a first time for everything, and since Connor was out, this would be the ideal opportunity.
When the shampoo and set was finished and Gloria had  gone, Ruth went into the little office behind the saloon and closed the door carefully.
Then she sat at the roll-top desk with the magazine in front of her, took a deep breath and lifted the receiver off its hook.
The girl's voice in her ear startled her; it was so clear and so close.
‘Number, please?’
‘Oh, yes.
I want the office of the Ladies’ Companion , please in Fetter Lane.’
Patiently, the operator asked: ‘Do you have the phone number, please?’
‘Oh, I'm sorry — yes, I've got it here.’
She read it out from the printed page.
‘It's Central — one thousand and twenty one.’
‘Central one-oh-two-one.
Hold the line, please.’
Ruth waited for what seemed a long time.
There were various clicks and buzzes and the peal of a bell, followed by a different female voice.
‘Ladies’ Companion .
Good morning, can I help you?’
Ruth explained as briefly as possible that she was trying to get in touch with a relative — the young lady on the right of the group in the picture on page twenty-two.
‘I'm sorry, I can't give you that information.
We only publish the photographs.
That one was taken for us at Kristof Laszlo's studio — you'd have to ask him about it.’
‘Oh, well.’
She had done it once, she could do it again.
‘Do you have his telephone number?’
‘Mr Laszlo's a very busy man; he doesn't care to be disturbed.
I think it would be much better if you wrote a letter in the first instance.
I can give you the address of his studio, if you like.’
So that was that.
When Ruth replaced the ear-piece on the candlestick telephone, she reread the address she had copied down: Manette Street, off Soho Square.
She began to compose a letter in her head, then rejected the idea.
To write and receive a reply would take so long — her letter might be ignored completely.
There was only one thing for it; she would have to go to Manette Street and enquire personally.
‘…
And finally, brethren, let us ask the Almighty to look down upon us and our endeavours with His special favour, beseeching Him that He may send a blessing upon our daily tasks, and that in His infinite wisdom He may smite our enemies, and destroy those who would destroy us.
Amen.’
The assembled group of men repeated Amen after him, and Marcus Judge resumed his seat.
There was a reverent silence, broken only by the hissing of the gas-jets in the wall-brackets, and then Josh stood up, acknowledging his father's prayer.
‘Thank you, sir.
Well, gentlemen — the evening's business is now concluded, and I am hereby closing the meeting.’
The Inner Circle of the Brotherhood broke up, scraping back chairs and muttering to one another as they filed out of the Guild Office.
Marcus turned to his son.
‘Are you ready to leave, Joshua?
Perhaps you'll accompany me as far as the Rope Walk?’
‘Not tonight, Father, I'm staying on to do some work.
There's the question of the membership to be sorted out.
We've too many men on our books and not enough work to go round.
We're going to have to cut back.’
Marcus knitted his brows.
‘I sincerely hope it will not come to that.
Our strength lies in numbers, Joshua.
Put your trust in our Lord and Master, and He will provide.
Didn't you read the newspaper?
Now that Poland has decided to wage war upon the Russian Bolsheviks, she has turned to our Government for assistance.
That means that arms will be sent to the Baltic — more work for us all.
Another war…it's the very thing we need to keep us busy.
An answer to prayer, my son never forget that.’
Remembering his own recent war-service, Josh was tempted to argue but knew it would be a waste of breath.
He simply said, ‘Yes, Father — I dare say.
But I think I'll stay and get on with some paperwork all the same, if you don't mind.
Good night.’
His father nodded curtly and went out without another word.
Josh stifled a yawn and opened the Register of Membership, running down the long list of names and  pencilling question-marks against those who were old or infirm or generally unreliable.
After a while, he heard a tentative knock at the door and looked up.
The man in the doorway was certainly old and infirm, and none too reliable either, but when he ceased to be of any use to the Guild as a working docker, they had found him a sinecure job as night watchman on the Wharf.
‘Yes, Fred?
What is it?’
‘Begging your pardon, Mr Josh, sir.’
The old man hobbled into the circle of light, turning his cloth cap in his hands.
‘I didn't like to interrupt when you're busy, but I thought as you ought to know — we got an intruder hanging around.
I'm sure I heard footsteps, down by the jetty.’
‘The main gates were locked, weren't they?
How could anyone break in?
Unless he came over the wall — and there's broken glass along the top.’
‘'Scuse me, sir — when the meeting finished and the other gentlemen went off home, the gates was left open for a few minutes.
Somebody could've slipped in then without me noticing.’
‘I see.’
Josh sighed.
‘All right, I'll take a look round.
Lend me that lamp, will you?’
Fred handed over the old bull's-eye lantern he was carrying, and asked, ‘D'you want me to come along with you, sir?’
‘No, thanks, Fred.
You get back to your hut — I think I can manage.’
Not for the first time, Josh wondered how much use an aging and lame night watchman would be in an emergency, but he put this thought aside and set off on a tour of inspection.
The night was very dark.
Low cloud blotted out moon and stars, and there was a damp mist off the river, shrouding the dock like a blanket.
The beam of the bull's-eye lantern did not penetrate the gloom very far, and Josh decided to switch it off.
It would not be of much help to him, and it would alert any intruder that he was on his way.
He moved stealthily through the darkness, making his way cautiously towards the jetty.
The mist was cold and clammy, but at least it wasn't raining  tonight.
He tried not to think of that other night, more than five years ago, when he and Ebenezer had walked this same path, on their way — or so they thought — to release Izzy Kleiber.
The image in his mind's eye was as sharp as ever.
He could still recall the sodden weight of the man, hanging from the iron rings upon the outer wall — the struggle to haul him up — the rush of water spewed from the gaping mouth as they turned him over….
Jolted out of these memories, he was startled by a movement a few yards ahead, along the jetty.
A face emerged, staring at him, greenish and hollow-eyed, and the hair at the back of his neck stood on end….
‘My God!’ exclaimed Josh.
‘Josh — is that you?’ asked Ebenezer simultaneously.
Relief and anger swept through Josh.
‘What the hell are you doing here?’
‘I've been waiting for you.
I waited till the meeting was over, then I came in — the gates were still open.
I've got to talk to you, Josh.’
‘For Christ's sake, can't you leave me alone?
If you're going to tell me about that bloody dream again —.’
‘It's not the dream.
Something's happened….’
Eb broke off, racked by a fit of coughing.
‘You must be barmy, hanging around on a night like this you'll catch your death.
Here, come indoors and get yourself warm.’
The two brothers went back into the Guild Office, and Ebenezer began to gasp and splutter, telling his story as best he could: what Florrie had said to him about Tom's letter and what Tom had threatened to do….
‘He's going to come back to London.
He's going to tell everything he knows — clear his name, he calls it.
It's all going to come out, Josh, every bit, when he tells the police what he and Saul were fighting over.
He doesn't care if he drags us down with him, as long as he clears his precious name!
A dutiful son — turning against — his own father!’ he panted, clutching at his brother for support.
Josh tried to calm him down.
‘Take it easy, man, you'll kill yourself if you carry on like this.
Look at you — shivering with  cold and wet.
What you need is a good stiff drink inside you, to warm you up.’
Eb shook his head violently.
‘You know I'm teetotal.
If Father could hear you now….’
‘This is strictly between you and me, Eb.
I'm going to take you to a little place that'll sell us a bottle of scotch in the back room, and nobody any the wiser.
That's what you need — whisky, for medicinal purposes.
Come on, no arguments.
You may be my elder brother, but for once you're going to do as you're told!’
When the Watermen closed its doors, Connor locked up for the night and made his way upstairs.
He found Ruth already in bed, leaning against the pillows in the gentle yellow glow from the oil-lamp on the dressing table.
‘Now there's a pretty sight,’ he said, as he began to undress.
‘You look like a princess, so you do!’
‘Stop your teasing,’ she told him.
‘You're only saying that because Gloria did my hair so nicely this morning.’
‘Nothing of the kind.’
He sat on the edge of the bed to take off his boots.
‘You know I don't like to see it all frizzed up like that.’
‘Well, I'm sorry, but I like it like this,’ she said.
‘Anyhow, the curls never stay in long.
Listen — I've had an idea about your da's birthday.’
‘Don't you start!
Hasn't Mam been on about it every day this week?’
‘Yes, she said he needs some new pyjamas — his old ones are so worn through they're hardly decent — so I went out and bought him a pair.’
Grinning, Connor pulled off his shirt and stepped out of his trousers.
‘Meself, I don't know why he bothers with such things at all.
As far as I remember, the wearing of pyjamas isn't mentioned anywhere in the Ten Commandments, is it?’
Naked, he climbed into bed beside her.
Ruth fended him off, holding him at arms length.
‘No, seriously — listen a minute, will you?
I've been  thinking, we really ought to persuade your father to get dressed and come downstairs sometimes.
If we keep giving him pyjamas and dressing-gowns, we're simply encouraging him to stay in bed all day long, don't you see?’
‘Not exactly.
What are you driving at?’
She tried again.
‘Look, we've got him some pyjamas — all right, but why not give him something else as well ?
How about a smart shirt, and a new tie?
It might be a way of tempting him down to sit in the bar, sometimes.’
Connor nodded.
‘Sounds like a good idea, but you've left it a bit late.
It's his birthday tomorrow.’
‘I know that.
I thought, if you've no objection, I could slip up to town after breakfast and go to one of the big stores, and buy him a really handsome shirt and tie.’
‘Aha!
So that's your secret plan!’
Connor pulled her closer to him.
‘You're after an excuse to go on the prowl round those fashion-shops again — isn't that the truth of it?’
Smiling, Ruth gave in to him.
‘Oh, you're too clever by half.
How did you guess I'd got a secret plan?’
Half a mile away, in another bedroom, Mabel Judge opened her eyes to find her husband looming over her, silhouetted against the landing light.
‘What time do you call this?’ she asked.
‘Wherever have you been?’
‘I told you I'd be working late tonight,’ he said.
‘And then Eb called in.
He was feeling a bit low, so I did my best to cheer him up.’
She sniffed.
‘You've been drinking again.
I can smell it on you.’
‘Yes — I persuaded poor old Eb to take a drop, and it's done him a power of good.
He's as happy as a sandboy now.’
‘Eb drinking?’
Mabel looked astonished.
‘What will Florrie have to say about that?’
‘Florrie's not going to know; I've brought him back here.
He can have Jimmy's bed for tonight.’
‘But where's Jimmy going to sleep?’
‘He can double up with Bertie when he gets back.
I told him to get up and put some clothes on — he's on his way round to Florrie's now, to say that Eb's staying with us.
And I'm  going to carry Eb upstairs and get him settled.
Don't worry, I've got it all organised!’
Ebenezer was dimly aware that he was being carried up the narrow staircase.
His head banged against the wall when they reached the landing, but for some reason it didn't hurt at all.
He smiled foolishly as Josh undressed him and put him to bed; he was feeling blissfully contented, but he couldn't focus on anything very clearly.
When he closed his eyes, the room seemed to be turning over and over, like the Big Wheel at the fairground….
Still, what did that matter?
He lay on his back, waiting for sleep to overtake him.
He just felt slightly sick — a little bit nauseous….
Then he slipped into a deep sleep, and all at once the warm feeling of happiness deserted him and his stomach heaved as he recognised the same old nightmare returning: the walk along the jetty, the cruel hands dragging him to the edge, the utter helplessness as they lowered him into the icy water, the wave that broke over his head — and at last, that terrible choking sensation.
He longed for the dream to end, desperate to wake up and find himself safe in bed.
But this time it seemed that the dream would never end.
Early on Tuesday morning, Ruth took a train and was in the Gentlemen's Outfitting department at Gamages soon after the store opened.
Fifteen minutes later, with a neat package under her arm, she caught an omnibus to Charing Cross, then completed her journey on foot.
When she reached Soho, a policeman directed her to Manette Street; a narrow alley between two tall buildings.
A small brass above a doorbell bore the words:Kristof Laszlo, Photographer.
Please ring .
— so she pressed the button.
Somewhere inside the building, an electric bell shrilled but after that nothing happened.
There was no sound except for a pigeon burbling to itself in the road, pecking at horse-dung.
Perhaps there was no one at home.
Perhaps nobody had heard the bell.
Perhaps Mr Laszlo was so busy he could not  be interrupted.
Screwing up her courage, Ruth rang again and was rewarded by the sound of footsteps.
Then the bolts were drawn and the door opened a couple of inches, as far as the safety-chain would allow — and Ruth's heart leaped.
Rosie O'Dell peered through the narrow gap, her eyes half-shut against the glare of daylight.
She was still in her night dress, with a paisley shawl thrown round her shoulders.
‘Who is it?
What do you want?’
‘Rosie — it's me.
May I come in?’
Rosie's eyes widened.
She stared at Ruth, scarcely able to believe what she saw.
‘Oh!
Yes, of course.
I never dreamed….
Hang on a second.’
She fumbled with the chain.
Released, the door swung open and the two women embraced, laughing, and on the edge of tears.
‘Come in, come in!
Oh, it's so good to see you….’
Ruth followed her into the hallway and was immediately aware of disorder; open packing-cases and an assortment of clothes and furniture piled up in every inch of space.
An ancient staircase led to the upper floors of the building, and beyond that, the long hall opened into a large, well-lit room.
She caught a glimpse of a camera-tripod, and lamps in huge reflectors, surrounded by yet more boxes and bales.
‘Have I come at a bad moment?’ she asked.
‘Is everything being packed up for the removal men?’
Rosie looked puzzled, then broke into a familiar, dimpled smile.
‘You mean the mess?
Take no notice — it's always like this.
I tried to tidy up a bit when I first came to work here, but I soon found out I was wasting my time.
Come on in, I'll find you a chair.’
She led the way into the studio.
Rapidly clearing away some bric-à-brac — a fan, a mandolin, a rusty bird cage — from a velvet throne, she invited Ruth to sit down, and settled herself on the edge of a dress-basket.
‘Now then — begin at the beginning.
How did you find me?’
Ruth explained about the Ladies' Companion and her telephone-call, and went on to ask:
‘How long have you been working as a photographic model?’
‘Oh, a couple of years,’ said Rosie vaguely.
‘Before that I was modelling clothes for some of the best fashion-houses in London — and in Paris too, sometimes.’
‘Goodness, that must have been exciting.
How did it happen?’
‘Oh, I just bumped into some people, who knew some people….
It's all a question of luck, really.’
She pulled a face.
‘Mind you, I wasn't always lucky.
I've done my share of drudgery along the way — waitressing, skivvying, working in shops.’
‘I know you were at Gamages for a while.
That's the first place I tried, when I started looking for you.
They told me you didn't stay there long — you were taken ill, weren't you?’
‘Like I said, I've had my ups and downs.
But never mind about me — I want to hear about you!
You're looking very well.
How's Sean keeping?’
‘Sean?
Oh dear, I should have realised.
There's so much you don't know.’
She told Rosie everything that had happened: how Danny was born, and how Sean was killed in France — and how, six months later, she had married Connor….
And now they had a baby daughter.
Rose listened, open-mouthed, and at the end of this recital she jumped down from the wicker basket and hugged Ruth all over again.
‘I'm so happy for you,’ she said.
‘And for Connor.
Tell him from me, he's a lucky man….
So the two of you are running the pub now?’
Her voice altered.
‘And what about the rest of the family?
How are they?’
‘Mary's very well.
She's a proud grandma — you can imagine!
As for your father….’
Ruth hesitated.
‘Did you know it's his birthday today?’
‘I hadn't forgotten.
You always remember things like birthdays, somehow.
How is he?’
As gently as she could, Ruth told her that Patrick had taken to his bed many years ago, finishing, ‘It seems as if he'll never get any better.
He needs something to bring him back to life something to live for.
A real birthday present.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I mean — Mary has forgiven him for what happened.
Don't you think you might find it in your heart to do the same?’
There was a silence, and then Rosie said huskily, ‘Dear God, what a thing to ask.
It's been such a long time.
So much has happened since then.’
‘That's why I thought it might be worth suggesting.
After all, it's water under the bridge now, surely?’
‘I don't know….
I'll have to think about that.’
Rosie glanced down, and apologised belatedly for her attire.
‘I'm sorry — I'm only just out of bed.
We were rather late last night.’
Ruth looked round the studio.
‘I thought this was where you work.
Do you live here as well?’
‘Um, yes, more or less.
For the time being, I do.’
She broke off as a man's voice called from the staircase: ‘What's all this dam’ talking?
Can't a man get any peace around here?’
It was an unusual voice — part Cockney, part mid-European — and the owner of the voice was equally bizarre.
Short and square, with greasy black hair and a Van Dyke beard, he wore a sea-green smoking-jacket over a frilled shirt and wine-coloured velvet breeches.
The shirt was unbuttoned, revealing a hairy chest, and his feet were crammed into a pair of Persian slippers with pointed toes.
Seeing Ruth, he stopped short.
‘An’ who is this young lady, please?’
‘My sister-in-law, Mrs O'Dell.
Ruth, this is Kristof — Mr Laszlo.’
‘Charmed to be making your acquaintance, dear lady.’
He bowed low, lifting Ruth's hand and brushing it with his lips.
‘Such a delightful surprise.’
Then he glared at Rosie, adding, ‘But what you are doing in your night-clothes this time of day?
Whatever will the dear lady think of you?
You must get dressed immediate!’
‘Yes, all right— I'm just going.
Could you make Ruth a cup of coffee?
I won't be two ticks.’
Rosie ran upstairs and Mr Laszlo beamed upon Ruth, revealing a row of gleaming white teeth and some gold fillings.
‘You like coffee?
Or you prefer something stronger?
A glass of plum brandy, maybe?’
‘No, really — nothing at all, thank you.’
‘Suit yourself!’
He shrugged, spreading his arms wide, then threw himself down upon a threadbare chaise-longue, his hands behind his head.
‘This is big surprise for me.
Rosie never tell me she has no sister-in-law.’
He looked Ruth up and down, openly appraising her, to her great embarrassment.
‘An’ she never tell me she has such a beautiful sister-in-law, neither.
Do you do the same line of work, maybe?
Modelling for pictures — huh?’
‘No, I don't.
I help my husband run a public-house,’ said Ruth, then added firmly: ‘And I look after our two children.’
‘Pity.
I could do a lot for you, my dear.’
He gave a prodigious wink.
‘If you ever change your mind, you know where to find me — huh?’
Ruth tried to steer the conversation into other channels.
She asked, ‘Have you been in London long, Mr Laszlo?’
‘Ten bloody years ago, I come from Hungary,’ he announced cheerfully.
‘And four of those bloody years I spend in a bloody prison-camp — if you'll pardon the expression.
What for they want to lock me up?
They think maybe I'm going to throw a bomb at the King and Queen, or what?’
It was a relief when Rosie rejoined them, now wearing a smart dress in cherry-red shantung, and a black hat with a saucy feather.
She came into the studio, apologising for keeping Ruth waiting, and pulling on a light summer jacket.
‘You going somewhere?’ asked Mr Laszlo.
‘Why you not tell Kristof?’
‘Because I only just made up my mind,’ replied Rosie.
‘It's my dad's birthday today — I'm going to wish him many happy returns.’
‘Oh, Rosie, he'll be so pleased!’
Suddenly Ruth had an idea.
‘Before we go, do you have a telephone?
I think perhaps I should talk to Connor first, so he can break the news gently to Patrick and Mary.
It might be too much of a shock if we burst in on them without any warning.’
Going back in the train, Ruth made sure that no one else was listening, then ventured to say: ‘I know it's none of my business, but are you and Kristof — you know what I mean together?’
‘Of course not!
Well, anyway — not like you mean.’
Rosie averted her face.
‘At least, it's nothing serious.
He's never serious about things like that.
Oh, we get on well enough.
As soon as he found out I knew about cameras and all that, he realised I could make myself useful round the studio, so I sort of moved in.
It was what you might call convenient — for both of us.’
Ruth said, ‘I gather he was interned during the war, as well?’
‘Yes, he was, but that's not the reason I —’ Rosie stopped, then began again.
‘That's just a coincidence.
It doesn't mean anything.’
‘Doesn't it?
I notice you never once asked me about Ernest.’
Rosie turned to her.
‘Have you seen him?
Is he all right?’
‘I've seen him; I don't think he's very happy.
He still misses you dreadfully.
He'd give anything to see you again.’
‘No.’
Rosie's voice was hard, and very definite.
‘I could never do that.
You mustn't tell him you've seen me — that's all over and done with.’
‘Don't say that.
I'm sure he still loves you.’
‘Don't you understand —that's why !
I let him down, Ruth.
I should have waited for him….
But it's too late now — I won't ever see him again.’
At noon, Florrie couldn't wait any longer and went round to Josh's house to find out what had happened to Ebenezer.
Mabel ushered her in, speaking in hushed tones.
‘Josh told me not to disturb him.
He'll be sleeping it off all morning, he said.’
‘But it's nearly dinner-time!
He's not still in bed, surely?’
‘I'm afraid so.’
Mabel sighed.
‘You know how men are when they've had a glass too many.
He'll be like a bear with a sore head when he gets up.’
‘Are you suggesting my husband's been drinking ?’
Though she was usually timid, this accusation outraged Florrie.
‘He's a Rechabite, you know that!
He never touches alcohol — he's signed the pledge!’
‘I expect that's why it hit him extra hard — not being used to it, you see.
Josh only gave him some whisky for his own good.
He'd got chilled to the marrow last night and he needed a drop of something to keep out the cold.’
‘I never heard such a thing!
I don't care what Josh says, I'm going to wake him up.
He's supposed to be at the shop.
Me and Aunt Emily's been working our fingers to the bone, waiting for him.’
Pushing past Mabel, Florrie climbed the stairs and knocked angrily on the door of Jimmy's bedroom.
There was no reaction from within.
‘I told you, didn't I?
He's dead to the world,’ said Mabel, over her shoulder.
‘We'll soon see about that,’ retorted Florrie, turning the handle.
The room stank of bile and alcohol.
Mabel pulled back the curtains, and sunlight streamed in.
Florrie gave a faint, inarticulate cry.
Still in his underclothes, Ebenezer lay sprawled across the bed, his head hanging down over the side, his one hand clawing at his throat.
His eyes were wide open, staring blindly at the ceiling — his face was a mottled blue.
A doctor was summoned at once, but it was too late to save him.
Some time between midnight and dawn, Ebenezer Judge had dreamed his dream to the end, and choked to death — drowning in his own vomit.
Ruth and Rosie arrived at the pub as it was closing for the afternoon.
Rosie was very nervous and Ruth did her best to reassure her, promising to make the reunion as simple as possible.
In fact, it all went off smoothly.
Connor had already prepared the way for them, and Mary was in her best dress, with baby Lilian on her lap and Danny at her side when they walked into the kitchen.
‘Hello, Mam,’ said Rosie quietly.
‘How are you?’
‘All the better for seeing you,’ began Mary, in a voice quite unlike her own, hoarse with unshed tears.
She stood up, handing the baby to Ruth, and took Rosie in her arms.
‘I should be very cross with you — worrying us the way you did.’
Then the tears came at last, and she couldn't say another word.
The two women held one another, laughing and crying at the same time, while little Danny pulled at Ruth's skirt, wanting to know, ‘Who's that lady, Mam?’
Mary broke free, dried her eyes, blew her nose and informed him, ‘This is your Aunt Rosie….
She's come home.’
Rosie too was wiping away tears; she gazed round the old familiar room and asked, ‘Where's Connor?
I thought he'd be here.’
‘He'll be back directly.
I think he had to go and see a man about some business,’ said Mary.
‘So now — do you feel ready to come upstairs and say hello to your da?
Ruth will have told you — he mostly spends the day in bed, but as this is such a special occasion….’
When they went into the big bedroom, Patrick was seated in an armchair facing the door, dressed in his blue serge suit waiting for Rosie.
With great difficulty, he levered himself on to his feet.
‘No, no, I need no help at all— I can manage on my own,’ he grunted, short of breath, letting go of the chair.
He opened his arms to his daughter.
‘Come and give us a kiss, my darling.
It's great to see you.’
They clung to one another as if they could never be parted again.
There was so much to say — there was too much to say.
Mam and Da wanted to know everything about Rosie's life since they saw her last — where had she been, what had she done — but she only shook her head.
There would be plenty of time for all that later.
‘You'll not be running away again just yet?’
Patrick asked anxiously.
‘Not just yet,’ Rosie told him.
Meanwhile Ruth was downstairs, looking after her children.
She glanced up with a smile as Connor came in, but her smile disappeared when she saw who was with him.
‘What's wrong?’ asked Connor quickly.
‘She's not gone already?’
‘No, she's upstairs, but….’
‘But what?
I had to go and find Ernest, didn't I?
He's as much right to be a part of this as anyone.’
Awkwardly, Ernest bowed to Ruth.
‘I hope you don't mind me intruding upon a family occasion, but Connor explained —‘
‘Yes, I understand.’
Ruth could not think what to say to him.
‘It's only, when I suggested to Rosie that she might like to see you….’
She could not go on, and Ernest's face fell.
‘I see…
I should not have come.
Forgive me.’
Ruth tried to soften the blow.
‘I'm sorry, but she's bound to feel a little strange at first.
She probably says things she doesn't mean…
I do think it would be better if you went home now, Ernest.’
‘If you say so.’
His shoulders drooped and he turned away.
‘Stay where you are!’
Connor's face darkened.
‘I invited you here — if anyone's at fault, it's myself.
Why wouldn't she see him, for God's sake?’
‘It's not fair to spring this on her without any warning,’ began Ruth.
‘Perhaps if we give her a little more time?’
Then the door opened again and Rosie burst into the room, her face radiant: ‘What d'you think?
Da says he's going to come down for tea with —’
She could not continue; at the sight of Ernest, her voice failed her.
He looked so much older than when she last saw him — tired and thin — his hair receding, a pair of wire-framed spectacles upon his nose.
She threw an agonised, reproachful look at Ruth and seemed about to run out of the room, but with three words Ernest stopped her.
Ignoring everyone else, he walked up and took her hands in his, saying simply: ‘I love you.’
Unable to look into his eyes, she hung her head, whispering, ‘I thought I'd never see you again.’
‘I prayed that I would see you again,’ he said, ‘so I could ask the question I should have asked five years ago.
Will you marry me?’
4
Gloria came to do Ruth's hair on the first Monday of every month.
When she arrived at the beginning of July, they had a great deal to talk about.
‘You remember Con's sister, don't you?’
Ruth asked, with a twinkle in her eye as Gloria walked into the saloon bar.
Wearing an apron, with her sleeves rolled up and her hair tucked under a duster, Rosie stopped polishing the brasswork on the beer-pumps long enough to throw her a cheerful smile.
‘Hello!’ she said.
‘How are you keeping?’
Gloria stared, her mouth agape, then turned to Ruth in bewilderment.
‘I don't understand.
I thought you said —‘
Ruth laughed.
‘Well, don't look so surprised!
It's only because of you that she's here at all.
You're the one who spotted Rosie's photo in that magazine.’
‘You mean that's how you managed to find her?’
As briefly as possible, Ruth told the story and Rosie chimed in, ‘But now I've left Soho, and moved back with the family, to help out as a part-time barmaid.’
‘Now I know you're pulling my leg!’ exclaimed Gloria.
‘Don't tell me you've given up being a fashion model!’
‘I have so,’ Rosie assured her, ‘and believe it or not, I've never been as happy in my whole life.’
She did not propose to gratify Gloria's curiosity any further; the memory of her meeting with Ernest was too precious to talk about — the most terrifying moment of her life, and the most wonderful.
She could still see him standing there, blinking shyly through his glasses and saying, ‘Will you marry me?’
She did not even notice when Connor and Ruth took the children out of the kitchen, closing the door softly behind them; she could see nothing but the hope and the love that shone in Ernest's patient, trusting face.
In abject misery, she lowered her head.
‘Please don't say that,’ she begged.
‘Don't ask me.’
‘Why shouldn't we be married?’
He drew a sharp breath, as a new and appalling idea struck him.
‘Do you mean there is another man?
You love somebody else?’
‘No, it's not that….’
She tried to find a way to explain without hurting him too much.
‘I was so afraid, when you went away.
I thought it was the end of everything — I thought I'd be alone for the rest of my life.
And then, after a while well, I made new friends.
Other men….’
He could hardly hear her; he came closer still, putting his hand under her chin and lifting her head.
‘You don't have to tell me any more,’ he said.
‘That's all finished now.
I love you more than anyone else could ever love you.
You and me — we belong together.
Forget about the years in between.
You're here at last— nothing else matters.
Only say that you still love me.’
Their faces were a few inches apart — and then they were in each other 's arms and she whispered, ‘Yes — I still love you.
Yes — I will marry you.
Yes….’
The next day, she and Ruth went back to Manette Street to pick up her belongings and she explained to Kristof that she had decided to return to her family.
He took the news philosophically.
He had been fond of her, but there were other pretty girls in the world, waiting to be photographed.
He told her she was a fool, and wished her luck — then he gave her a gold sovereign and a bottle of champagne as a farewell present.
They drifted apart as casually and amicably as they had drifted together in the first place, with no ill-will on either side.
And, as Ruth told Gloria later, ‘She's got something else to look forward to…her wedding day.’
By now they were upstairs in the front bedroom, and Gloria was pouring hot water into the washbasin, preparing the shampoo.
‘Is that a fact?’
Gloria tested the temperature.
‘Ow!
That's nearly boiling — I'll put in a drop of cold.
So she's only here temporary, so to speak.
Well, that explains it.
Some rich toff she met up West, I dare say?’
‘Not at all.
She's going to marry Ernest Kleiber.
You know, he used to have a photographic shop at Cubitt Town.’
‘Oh yes, of course!
She lived there with him over the shop, didn't she?
So that's all on again, is it?
I never could understand what she saw in him — a bit thin and weedy, to my way of thinking.
What a waste.
A pretty little thing like her, with her picture in the papers — she could have had her pick of men.
Still, there's no accounting for tastes.’
When Ruth's hair had been washed, she noticed Gloria getting out the curling-tongs and stopped her.
‘You won't be needing those — I don't want curls today.’
‘Why ever not?
The last time you said you liked them.’
‘Yes, I know, but Con's not very keen so we won't bother.’
‘Well, it's up to you, of course, but I think curls give you a bit of sparkle.
You're looking rather washed-out today, if you don't mind me saying so.
Perhaps it's 'cos you're in black black — doesn't suit some people.’
‘I thought I ought to.
For a few weeks, anyhow, as a mark of respect.’
‘You mean on account of Ebenezer?
Yes — sad, wasn't it, him going off like that.
Mind you, he'd never been in good health, not since they sent him home from France.’
‘Did you go to the funeral?’
‘No, I didn't.
Well, Eb and me wasn't that close.
He didn't approve of me, and to be honest I never much cared for him, either.
Besides, I didn't fancy going to the Chapel and having all the family looking down their noses at me.
You didn't go yourself, did you?’
Their eyes met in the mirror above the washstand; Ruth shook her head.
‘I wouldn't have known about it at all, except that Mum sent me a little note to tell me he'd passed away — in his sleep, she said.
I knew I wouldn't be welcome at the funeral so I sent some flowers, and I got Father Ryan to say a mass for him instead.’
‘That's nice.
Of course, there was a lot of carry-on about the way Eb went, from what I hear.
Seemingly, the night it happened, your brother Josh bought a bottle of scotch and got Eb squiffy.
Naturally, he tried to hush it up after, but your  dad got to hear of it from the doctor and he didn't half go for Josh — you can imagine.
But then those two don't see eye to eye about anything these days.
There's been a lot of trouble at the Brotherhood, they say — them two quarrelling at meetings.’
‘What do they quarrel about?’ asked Ruth.
‘Ask me another.
Could be political, perhaps — there's been a lot of rows about politics lately.’
As a rule, political matters were not discussed at the Three Jolly Watermen.
That evening, Connor was behind the counter in the saloon when he heard angry voices in the public bar.
Leaving Rosie in charge, he went to investigate and found a three cornered argument in progress.
A stocky, energetic young man with a shock of red hair was thumping on a table-top and proclaiming in a strong Welsh accent: ‘I'm simply asking, when are we going to get our rights, like we was promised?
A fair rate for the job and a standard working week — answer me that!’
Facing him, an older man tried to shout him down.
‘You don't know what you're talking about, you and your Bolshevik friends!
The dockers have got a national rate of pay now, and a forty-four-hour week — what more do you want?’
Sitting at a table between the two men, uncomfortably close to this violent exchange, Patrick O'Dell tried to pour oil on troubled waters.
‘Give it a rest, lads, for pity's sake!
Agree to differ, and shake hands on it, eh?’
Since Rosie's return to the Watermen, Patrick had had a new lease of life.
He was up and dressed every day, and spent each evening in the corner of the public bar with a pint pot in front of him, keeping a benevolent eye on the satisfied customers.
But tonight, the customers were not all satisfied.
The Welshman pointed an accusing finger at his opponent, retorting, ‘What's the good of a national rate if we can't afford to live on it?
You know as well as I do that the Wharfmasters are living off the fat of the land on their company profits, but  how are the dockers expected to support their wives and kids on seventy-two shillings and sixpence a week?’
Behind the counter, a young barmaid tried to make herself heard.
‘Let's have a bit of hush, gents, if you please!’
Unheeding, the Welshman went on, ‘How are their wives expected to feed a family on a lump of cheese not big enough for a mouse, and a handful of peas that wouldn't satisfy a guinea-pig?
As Ernest Bevin said at the Labour rally the other day —‘
A roar went up from the customers, some of them calling out: ‘Hooray for Ernie!’ and others yelling: ‘Down with the Bolshies!’
Patrick O'Dell pulled himself up from his chair, trying to intervene.
‘We'll have no politics in this house, so will you shut your row, the pair of you!’
‘You stay out of this — it's none of your business!’
The Welshman shook him off impatiently.
‘Who d'you think you are, to lay down the law?’
That was enough for Connor.
In one stride he crossed the bar, and had the young man's collar in one hand, the other knotted into a fist beneath his jaw.
‘I'll tell you who he is,’ he said.
‘He's my da and he's the boss here — and if he tells you to shut your row, you'll do as you're told.’
A hush fell over the room, and the young man pulled back, staring at Connor.
Then his face changed, and he said in an awestruck tone, ‘I know you….
You're Connor O'Dell.’
‘What's that to you?’
Connor let him go, and settled his collar with ironic courtesy, arranging it round his flaming scarlet necktie.
‘I know you too, my bucko — you're a troublemaker.’
‘And we'll have no politics and no religious disputation here — that's the rule of the house,’ said Patrick, sinking back into his chair, still a little flustered.
‘You tell him that, son.’
‘I've no wish to argue with you,’ said the young man, with the beginning of a smile on his lips, ‘but I'll be proud to shake you by the hand, Connor O'Dell.’
Rather at a loss, Connor said, ‘Very well — shake hands and that's an end to it.’
‘I hope not.
I hope it will be my privilege to buy you a drink as well.
What will it be?’
Still more mystified, Connor replied, ‘Since you're feeling generous, I'll take a half-pint of our best bitter…but if we've met before, I have to admit I don't remember the occasion.’
‘A half of best for Mr O'Dell!’
They moved across to the bar together, and the stranger explained, ‘No, we've not met, but I've watched you a good many times — in the ring.’
Light dawned at last.
‘You've seen me fight?’
‘Of course.
The first time was when you were at Poplar, in the boxing-booth — it must be seven years ago.
I was thirteen then, and you were a hero to me in those days.
A bit later on, I saw you touring round with the army recruiting drive, giving demonstration bouts.
I wanted to join up, like you — I even tried lying about my age, but I didn't have any luck.’
‘That's a matter of opinion,’ said Connor.
‘Come and sit down, and let me introduce you to my father.’
They settled with their drinks at the corner table and the young man shook hands with Patrick, apologising for his bad manners.
‘Think no more about it, my lad.’
The old man nodded and smiled.
‘You're very welcome — haven't the Irish and the Welsh a lot in common, when all's said and done?’
‘Whereabouts do you come from, Mr —?’
Connor hesitated.
‘I was born in the Rhondda valley, at a little place called Treorky — and the name's Pritchard, Huw Pritchard.’
‘And what are you doing so far from home, Mr Pritchard?’
‘My dad was killed in the pit, and my ma died soon after, so Gran sent me to London.
She didn't want me to get work at the colliery, and she had cousins in Limehouse — the Williamses, in Three Colt Street.’
‘Of course!— the Welsh Dairy!’ said Connor.
‘So you came up to London when you were still a boy?’
‘To begin with, I worked for the family, pushing the churns round the streets on the milk-cart, but then I got too old for that, and I applied for work with the Dock workers Guild at Jubilee Wharf.’
‘You're talking of the Brotherhood?’
Connor raised an eyebrow.
‘They don't take kindly to outsiders as a rule.’
‘No, but Mr Evans spoke up for me.
He's our Minister at the Emmanuel Chapel — the family are all Baptists, see?
I was very grateful when Mr Judge took me on.’
‘From what I heard you say a few minutes ago, you're not feeling quite so grateful for the job now.’
‘Oh, the job's not bad — I'm not complaining.
The trouble is, I'm a member of the Dock workers’ Union as well, and the Brotherhood doesn't always fall in with what the Union recommends.
According to Mr Bevin, our Deputy Leader, we ought to —‘
Patrick cleared his throat loudly and Huw broke off, grinning.
‘Sorry, I'll get off my soapbox.
All I'm trying to say is that the Brotherhood think they're a law unto themselves.
They only stick to Union regulations when it suits them.’
‘In that case, wouldn't you do better to apply to another wharf?’
‘I suppose I might.
But I like the crowd I work with — some of them, anyhow.
I'd rather stay in the Brotherhood and try to persuade them to adopt the national agreements.’
‘I wish you luck,’ said Connor dryly.
‘You're going to need it.’
‘But let's not talk politics now,’ said Huw impatiently.
‘There's a thousand things I want to ask you, Mr O'Dell.
I thought when the war was over, you'd go back to prizefighting.
You could have been a British Champion by now— why did you give it up?’
Connor took a long swig of beer and wiped his mouth before replying.
‘That's a long story,’ he said finally.
At the end of the evening, Mary O'Dell came downstairs and found Ruth making cups of cocoa for the bar staff.
‘You'll have a cup too, won't you?’
Ruth asked.
‘How about Mr O'Dell — would he like one?’
‘I won't say no for myself, but the old fellow won't stay  awake long enough to drink it,’ said Mary.
‘I helped him into bed, and he was half asleep before his head touched the pillow.’
‘Did you hear any sound from the children's room when you came past the door?’
‘Not a murmur.
I peeped in, and they're both far away in dreamland.’
Rosie came in and joined them, flopping into the armchair.
‘I'm dead beat!
I've been run off my feet tonight.
I was helping Con in the saloon, and then he went off to sort out a spot of bother in the public, and I've hardly seen him since.
He'll be in directly — he's just going round locking up.’
She stretched out her arms and yawned.
‘Oh my, I'm not used to all this hard work.
I've got out of the habit.’
‘It won't be for much longer,’ Ruth encouraged her.
‘Another couple of months and you'll be a lady of leisure again.
Have you settled on the wedding day yet?’
‘Some time in September, that's all I know.
Ernest's got to fix the date with the Registrar.
The sooner the better, as far as I'm concerned — I can't wait!’
As Ruth passed round the cocoa-cups, Mary said unhappily, ‘I wish you'd wait a little longer, my darling.
What's the hurry?
Why does it all have to happen so quick?’
‘What is there to wait for?’ asked Rosie.
‘Ernest loves me — I love Ernest.
We want to get married as soon as possible.’
‘Yes, but in a Registry Office…
I'm sorry, I know you think I'm old-fashioned, but I can't bear the thought of you not marrying in church — not having God's blessing upon the pair of you.’
‘But Mam, you know very well we can't do that — Ernest being Jewish, and me a Catholic.’
‘What kind of Catholic do you call yourself, being married by a civil servant?’ demanded Mary.
‘I'm only saying, why not take a bit more time before you make up your mind?
Maybe Ernest will come round.
He might see the light and be received into the Faith.’
‘He'll never do that.
He's been brought up strictly, he goes to synagogue — I respect him for that.
In fact, after we're married I shall probably start going there myself.’
‘You're not serious?’
Horrified, Mary crossed herself.
‘You don't mean you'd change your faith?’
‘I might — what's wrong with that?
If it's all right for Ernest to change his religion to marry me, why shouldn't I do the same for him?’
‘It's not the same at all!’
The words burst from Mary.
‘How could you turn away from Our Lord Jesus Christ and His Mother?
Jews worship the God of Moses, I know that — but what about the New Testament?
How could you live without Bethlehem — without Gethsemane — without the Resurrection?
How could you pray in a church without a statue of Our Lady — without the blessed Saints — without even a crucifix?’
She turned helplessly to her daughter-in-law.
‘Ruth, say something!
Can't you explain to her?’
Ruth shook her head.
‘I'm the last person you should ask.
You were happy for me when I changed my religion shouldn't we be happy for Rosie?’
Diplomatically, she tried to shift the conversation to firmer ground.
What was Rosie going to wear for the ceremony?
What did they want for a wedding present?
Where were they planning to hold the reception afterwards?
‘If you haven't already arranged something else, I know Con would be glad to let you have the wedding breakfast here in the Watermen,’ she added.
Rosie said she felt sure Ernest would be very pleased.
She began to count how many guests they had to invite: members of the immediate family, of course, all their old friends and neighbours….
Greatly daring, Ruth said, ‘Can I make a suggestion?
There's one person you may not have thought of, and this would be the ideal opportunity to invite her.
To hold out the olive-branch, so to speak.’
Rosie and Mary both turned to look at her.
Ruth did not have to finish what she had begun to say; she saw from the look in their eyes that they understood her.
‘No,’ said Rosie, her happiness fading.
‘Never,’ said Mary.
They knew that Ruth was about to suggest Mary's sister Moira — Rosie's natural mother.
‘If she ever set foot in this house, I'd walk out of it,’ Mary continued.
She did not raise her voice, or express any anger; it was a plain statement of fact.
Rosie was equally adamant.
‘I don't ever want to see her again,’ she said.
It was useless to argue.
Picking up her cup of cocoa, Rosie said, ‘It was just an idea.
I think I'll go up now — tell Con I've gone to bed, will you?’
Lying in bed, she thought back over the conversation, blaming herself for having interfered in such a private matter.
But she had been fond of Moira, and guessed how much anguish the rift in the family must have caused her.
It seemed unfair that Mary, Patrick and Rosie had all been reconciled, and that Moira alone was excluded — banished from their affection for ever.
‘I suppose I shouldn't have mentioned it,’ she told herself.
‘After all, it's no business of mine.’
She wondered if she should confess to Connor what she had tried — and failed — to do, but when he came into the bedroom at last, she felt at once that this was not the right moment.
He seemed preoccupied, hardly looking at her as he got undressed.
Trying to break through his silent mood, she said, ‘Gloria did my hair this morning.
How do you like it?’
He glanced at her briefly, hardly seeing her.
‘Very nice,’ he said, with no expression whatever.
‘I told her I didn't want any curls this time….
What do you think?’
‘Very nice,’ he said again, and got into bed, still immersed in his own thoughts.
‘I'm glad you like it,’ she said in a small voice.
‘Good night, Ruth,’ he said, then he rolled over and went to sleep.
One Friday morning towards the end of the summer, Josh sat in the Guild Office, going through the wages list and making up the pay-packets to be doled out at the end of the day.
The only sounds in the room were the scratching of his  pen-nib as he made each entry, and the chink of coins as he counted them out of the cash box — and the heavy breathing of Marcus Judge, who sat at the other side of the desk, his eyes fixed upon his son.
Finally Josh put down his pen and asked wearily, ‘Are you planning to stay much longer, Father?’
‘Do you have any objection to my presence here?’ countered the old man.
‘No, not exactly, but there's nothing for you to do.
And it's putting me off, having you watching me like a hawk all the time.
I don't know how long I'll be — you'd much better get off home.’
‘I prefer to keep you company.
As long as I am with you, I can be sure that you will not be led astray by the demon drink.’
‘For God's sake, Father, can't you ever let me be?’
Marcus rose to his feet, seeming to tower over his son.
‘How dare you take the Lord's name in vain?
How dare you blaspheme before your own father?’
Josh set his jaw grimly, refusing to be browbeaten.
‘I am not blaspheming.
I asked you, in the name of Almighty God, to stop tormenting me and punishing me.
Why can't you leave me to get on with my work in peace?’
‘I shall never leave you, as long as you are caught in the toils of Satan.’
Marcus's words came from deep in his chest, booming like the notes of an organ.
‘I will not cease to wrestle for the salvation of your immortal soul.’
‘All right!
But while you're doing that, I'm trying to get the wages made up for —’ began Josh, then exploded irritably as someone knocked at the office door: ‘What is it now?’
The door opened, and Huw Pritchard walked in.
They stared at him, for he had only reported for work half an hour earlier.
‘Excuse me, sir — and you, too, sir.’
Huw threw a polite nod in Marcus's direction.
‘Could you spare a minute?’
‘I'm warning you — if it's about the overtime payments again,’ threatened Josh.
‘It's nothing to do with pay, sir.’
‘That makes a change.
Well, what's the trouble this time?’
‘I've just started work on the day-shift at Number Five Warehouse, loading the Prince Albert , sir.’
‘I know that.
Who gave you permission to take a break?’
‘Nobody, sir.
But I had to find out.
The Albert is bound for Danzig tomorrow, on the morning tide, they say.
Is that right?’
‘Yes, she's going to the Baltic.
Why?’
‘We were given special safety rules — fire precautions — no smoking — all that.
The lads say there's explosives in those crates — weapons and ammunition going to Poland.’
Josh's patience was wearing thin.
‘What are you driving at, Pritchard?
Yes, the Government's sending armaments to help Poland in her fight against the Soviet, but I can't for the life of me see what that's got to do with you!’
‘Only this, sir.
Me and my mates, we don't think Britain ought to be taking Poland's side against Russia.
They've got trouble enough out there, I reckon, and that's why we're not working with any cargo that might be used against our Russian brothers.’
‘Your Russian brothers?’
Josh put his head in his hands.
‘God give me strength!’
Marcus opened his mouth, but before he could speak, Josh cut in quickly: ‘I mean that, Father.
I'm praying that God will give me the strength to put up with this chap, spouting his everlasting Socialist claptrap.’
‘I'm not trying to preach Socialism to you, Mr Judge, I'm simply telling you that as long as there's armaments being loaded from Number Five Warehouse, I won't be working there today.
And neither will some of the others.’
‘You can do as you please,’ said Josh, through gritted teeth.
‘You can go home and whistle for your wages, if that's what you want.
As far as I'm concerned, you and your Bolshie friends can do what you blooming well like — and that's not swearing, Father.’
Marcus walked majestically to the door and flung it wide open, saying to Huw Pritchard: ‘You will leave this room at once.
You will not report for duty again until you have apologised for your insolence.
Now get out of my sight.’
Huw nodded calmly.
‘Right you are, gentlemen.
I'll be off, then.
I just thought I should let you know how things stand, that's all.’
When the door shut, Marcus growled quietly, ‘That young man must go.
Strike his name from the list.’
Josh shook his head.
‘No need for that.
He's a good worker; he puts his back into the job and he gives value for money.
He'd be a loss to the Brotherhood if we expelled him on account of his blessed principles.’
‘He must not be allowed to glory in sinful pride and get away with it —’
‘I didn't say he'd get away with it.
There's more than one way to kill a cat….
Don't you worry, he'll repent of his wicked ways all right, you leave that to me.’
The following morning, Connor went out for a stroll before breakfast.
One of Danny's birthday presents had been a puppy — a rough-haired mongrel with a dash of Airedale, the shaggy muzzle of an Irish terrier and paws like a wolfhound.
They couldn't decide what to call the animal, but Danny said at once that his name was ‘Barker’— so that was that.
Barker grew very quickly, and had to work off a tremendous amount of energy every day, and since Danny was much too young to take him out for walks, this duty fell upon Connor.
He pretended to grumble about it, but privately he enjoyed the early-morning outing across the Island to West Ferry Road and back again.
On fine days, he took the long way round by Jubilee Wharf.
Today, as they approached the dockyard entrance, Barker began to yelp, sniffing excitement in the air.
There were half a dozen men outside the gates, engaged in a noisy altercation.
Some of them were carrying placards, with slogans that read:Stop the war against Russia, No guns for Poland and Help for the Soviet people .
The others were trying to drive the protesters away, and a fight seemed likely to break out at any minute, until a pair of uniformed police constables appeared, and stood watching them from the other side of the street.
Connor recognised one of the men on the picket-line, and hailed him.
‘Morning, Mr Pritchard.
Standing up for your rights again, I see?’
‘Trying to, Mr O'Dell!’
Huw waved his placard cheerfully.
‘We've had some success already — turned away more than a dozen chaps, we did, once they understood what we were on about.
They'll never get the Albert loaded before the high tide, now they're short-handed.’
‘Another triumph for the working man, eh?
Well, I wish you luck.’
Connor whistled to Barker, who was investigating a nearby lamp-post, and walked on.
He was amused and oddly stirred by the Welshman's enthusiasm, but he couldn't help thinking that his triumph was likely to be short-lived.
As it turned out, he was mistaken.
The Prince Albert was not the only ship to be held up by a dockers' strike: at the East India Docks, the Jolly George with a similar load of armaments for Poland, was prevented from sailing.
The Labour Party made its voice heard, and a storm of protest blew up in Parliament.
In Downing Street, the Cabinet began to have second thoughts.
At the Kleiber household in Poplar, these dramatic events passed unnoticed: Ernest and Rosie had more important matters in mind.
Suddenly the wedding day, which had seemed so far away, was almost upon them.
Ernest felt unhappy about just one thing: he resented having to begin married life in this cheerless old house, under the same roof as Sarah and little Ben, together with any assortment of strangers who might happen to lodge with them.
‘If only I had some money put by,’ he told Rosie, as he was taking her home to the pub one evening.
They walked hand in hand through the warm summer dusk, their arms entwined, her head upon his shoulder, listening to the drowsy lullaby of ships' hooters from the river, and smelling the scent of soft tar upon the roadway.
‘If I had a proper job, and a regular salary, it would be different.
I wish I could buy us a house — just a little place, big enough for you and me, where we could be all by ourselves.’
‘One day we'll have somewhere of our own,’ she told him.
‘That's something to look forward to.’
When they reached the Watermen, Mary and Ruth wouldn't let Ernest into the kitchen, but made him wait in the  bar.
They had been working all the evening, sewing Rosie's wedding-dress, and it would be terribly unlucky if the bridegroom set eyes on it before the great day.
They had bought a paper pattern, and followed the instructions carefully; it would be the most beautiful dress ever seen.
Night after night they sat in the kitchen, adding frills of lace and clusters of tiny artificial pearls.
When Ernest left, Rosie tried it on and the two dressmakers stood back to survey their handiwork.
‘The hem dips a bit on one side.
Better take it up — you don't want to trip on it when you're walking up the aisle.’
Mary broke off sadly.
‘What am I saying?
I don't suppose they have aisles in them Registry places….’
As devout Catholics, the O'Dells preferred not to attend the civil ceremony, but that didn't stop them doing everything they could to make the reception an unforgettable occasion.
The wedding breakfast was a feast, and the champagne flowed like water; the party went with a swing from beginning to end.
After the speeches and the toasts, someone began to play the piano in the saloon and Ernest led his bride into the middle of the floor, to lead the dancing.
He had never had much practice as a dancer, and stepped on Rosie's toes once or twice, but she didn't care.
He was the man she loved, and she felt as if she were floating above the ground.
At the height of the festivities, the street door opened and Huw Pritchard came in, looking for Connor.
Patrick tried to explain that this was a family party and a private occasion, but Huw said, ‘I know.
I'm sorry, but I just heard some good news.’
Connor joined them, asking: ‘What's happened now?’
‘You were right, what you said about a triumph for the working man.
It's in all the evening papers — look at this!’
He unfolded a copy of the Star and handed it to Connor.
The news item was on the front page: the British Government, which had been sending aid and supplies to Poland to assist her fight against the Russian Soviet, had changed its policy.
It would no longer be giving the Poles practical support in the war.
‘And you feel this is all down to you, I suppose?’
Connor teased him.
‘I'm not saying that — but we did our bit, didn't we?’
Connor slapped him on the back.
‘You did indeed.
Sit yourself down, my lad.
Private party or not, I'd say this deserves a drink.’
Ruth happened to be passing, and Connor stopped her, introducing the young man.
‘Mr Pritchard, I'd like you to meet my wife.
Ruth, this is Mr Huw Pritchard — a member of the Labour Party, a member of the Emmanuel Chapel congregation, a member of the Jubilee Wharf Brotherhood — and a thorn in their flesh too, I shouldn't wonder!
And I'm about to give him a beer, because he's got good reason to celebrate, this night.’
Connor went off to draw a couple of pints behind the bar, as Ruth shook hands with the young man.
He had a fresh, open face, and stars in his eyes, and she took a liking to him at once.
They tried to start a conversation, but it wasn't easy to make themselves heard above the music and chatter.
By now everyone was dancing, and it seemed quite natural for Huw to ask: ‘Would you do me the honour, Mrs O'Dell?’
When Connor came back with a pint pot in either hand, he found his wife in the arms of the young Welshman, and stood smiling, watching them dance together to a song that had become all the rage in the last few years:
If you were the only girl in the world,
And I were the only boy,
Nothing else would matter in the world today….
Half an hour later, Rosie was dreamily humming the same tune in the back of the taxi-cab that was taking her and Ernest home to Poplar; they had slipped quietly away from the party, leaving the pub by the side door.
Ernest kissed her gently, then quoted the words with a sigh.
‘A garden of Eden, just made for two…
If only that were true.’
‘Perhaps our wishes will come true, one of these days,’ she  told him.
‘Perhaps we'll be able to start up in a shop again, like we did at Silmour Street.’
For a moment he said nothing, then asked quietly, ‘Did you know that old shop's to let again?
I walked past it the other day, and there was a board up outside.’
‘What were you doing, walking along Silmour Street?’
‘Nothing special.
When I'm out for a stroll, I often go round by Cubitt Town.
I like to remember the old days when we were together, for the first time.’
He kissed her again.
As the cab passed a street-lamp, the light flashed across his face; Rosie saw the unhappiness he was trying to hide, and asked, ‘What's the matter?’
‘Oh, I wasn't going to tell you this, but I went to the bank and asked to see the Manager.
I explained about the shop; I thought he might give me a loan to set up in business again….
I was hoping to surprise you — a sort of unexpected wedding present, but it was no good.
He said money's very tight these days; he couldn't help us.’
She held him a little closer.
‘It was a lovely idea, anyway.
And we will get a place of our own one of these days — I'm certain of it.’
Back at the pub, Connor had been busy serving drinks all the evening, but by this time things were quietening down.
He looked round for Huw Pritchard, but couldn't find him.
Ruth was helping behind the bar, washing up glasses, and he asked her, ‘Did the Welsh lad take himself off?
I never saw him leave.’
‘It was while you were down in the cellar, changing over the barrels,’ she told him.
‘He had to go — there's some sort of emergency at the Wharf, I think.
Funnily enough, it was one of my nephews brought him the message — Josh's eldest boy, Jimmy.
He said Mr Pritchard had got to report to the Guild Office right away.’
‘This time of night?’
Connor frowned.
‘The place will be locked up.’
‘Jimmy said they'd left the gates open specially….’
When Huw reached the entrance to the dock, the gates appeared to be shut, but as soon as he put his hand to them, they swung open and he found that the chain and padlock had been taken off.
He went through and crossed the yard.
Outside, there had been occasional patches of light from the street-lamps, but in here, among the buildings, there was no light at all and he made his way uncertainly, groping through the darkness.
His footsteps seemed unusually loud on the cobblestones, setting up a confusion of echoes from the brick walls so that he had the eerie sensation that he was not alone, and that other solitary walkers surrounded him.
Huw felt an unaccustomed tremor of fear, and tried to shake it off.
Who ever heard of a grown man being frightened of the dark?
He began to whistle a tune that had been dancing through his head ever since he left the pub:
Nothing else would matter in the world today,
We would go on loving in the same old way…
But that did nothing to raise his spirits; ghostly reverberations of his own whistling returned to mock him, and he fell silent once more.
Then he stopped.
He was almost sure he had heard another whistle, in a low key, somewhere ahead of him.
He waited, listening, but it was not repeated so he pressed on.
When he reached the steps leading up to the front door of the Guild Office, he found the place in darkness, with no sign of life.
Perhaps the boy had made a mistake — perhaps he was supposed to report directly to one of the warehouses instead.
But he mounted the steps anyway, and knocked on the door to make certain: the sound was sudden and startling, but it died away quickly, with no response from within the building.
As he stood there, wondering what he should do, he caught a faint rustle — a movement, somewhere behind him.
Instantly, fear welled up in him again, and he realised that he had walked into a trap.
Before he could make a run for it, a voice said urgently:‘Right — get him!’
Then they jumped on him, pulling him down the steps.
He tried to fight back, but there were too many of them — he could not tell how many, for the attack came from all sides at once.
They had wooden clubs in their fists and steel-capped toes to their boots, and they used them viciously.
Huw slipped and fell under the rain of blows, and pain exploded in his skull — and then the miracle happened.
A piercing whistle shrilled through the night air, and at the same instant the darkness was pierced by the white light of a bull's-eye lantern.
Someone yelled in panic, ‘It's the rozzers!’
Dazzled, shielding their faces, the gang of men scattered in disorder.
They did not wait to be caught, but took to their heels in a moment of wild confusion and went clattering away across the cobbles.
Then, for a few seconds, nothing happened until the beam of light lifted and turned, shining across the face of the man with the lantern.
Connor tucked the dog-whistle back in his breast pocket and said briskly, ‘Right, my bucko.
Let's see how much damage they've done to you.’
He helped Huw on to his feet.
Dazed, the boy blinked at him, panting, ‘Is it only you?
On your own?’
‘Sorry to disappoint you, but it's not the Metropolitan police force.
Do you think you can manage the walk back to Three Colt Street, if I give you a helping hand?’
A month later, the boarders were sitting round the long table in the Kleibers' dining-room, having breakfast.
The morning mail had just been delivered, along with the daily newspaper.
As Rosie and Sarah passed the toast and the boiled eggs, Ernest turned to a visiting industrial engineer from Tallin, and said: ‘This will interest you, sir.
I see here that an armistice was signed on Wednesday, between Poland and the Russian Soviet.
We must be thankful that another war is over.’
A murmur of general conversation broke out, in a mixture of English, German and Yiddish.
Rosie touched Ernest's shoulder, and held out an envelope.
‘This came for you.’
She looked troubled, and pointed to the address printed on the back flap:Horner & hardiman , Solicitors .
The names were vaguely familiar; he fancied he had seen  them written up in gold lettering upon an office window in Stepney.
Puzzled, he tore open the envelope.
It was not a long letter, written in an old-fashioned copperplate hand.
He read it through once — twice — then stood up, pushing back his chair.
‘Rosie, my dear, could I have a word with you in the kitchen?’
She followed him from the dining-room, and Ernest shut the kitchen door.
She asked anxiously: ‘Is it bad news?’
He shook his head.
‘It seems not.
See for yourself.’
She took the letter from him, and read it silently.
Dear Mr Kleiber, I have been requested by a client to approach you, concerning a matter of business.
I venture to write and enquire if you would oblige me by calling at this Officer, at some time convenient to yourself: I am not at liberty to offer any further information at this juncture, but I think I may say that our meeting will be to your advantage.
I remain, sir, your obedient servant, K. B. Hardiman for Horner and Hardiman, Solicitors.
5
‘And to finish off, how about a group picture?
Mothers and babies all together,’ suggested Ernest.
‘We're not babies!’ said Danny indignantly.
‘I'm five!’
Trevor smiled in a superior way, pointing out, ‘Ackcherly, I'm nearly six!’
To avert an argument, Ruth cut in firmly: ‘And Ben's nearly seven, so I'm quite sure Uncle Ernest knows you're not babies.
He was thinking of Lil.’
Lilian, unconcerned at fifteen months, gurgled in her mother's arms.
Ernest threw up his hands.
‘All right, all right !
My humble apologies!
Will the mothers — and the young gentlemen — and one baby — kindly take up their positions for a group picture?’
As they were milling about in front of the camera, Rosie said to her husband, ‘Just think — at breakfast-time you were saying when we opened the shop, we probably wouldn't have any customers at all, and here they are, queueing up to have their pictures taken.’
The photographic shop in Silmour Street was looking very festive, with tulips and wallflowers in a vase, paper streamers across the ceiling and a banner in the front window, announcing:Grand Reopening, 14 May, 1921 .
‘Oh, we wouldn't have missed it for anything!’
Gloria was taking good care that she and Matthew would be seen to advantage, making straight for the centre of the group.
‘Push your hair out of your eyes, Matt, so we can see your face.’
Ernest looked through the lens and made some last-minute adjustments, then beckoned Rosie, who was standing to one side, watching.
‘My dear, you must be in the picture as well.
This is for the family album.’
It was certainly a family picture — four ladies seated in a row with their offspring cross-legged on the ground in front of them: from left to right they were Sarah Kleiber and Benjamin, Gloria Judge and Matthew, Ruth O'Dell, with Lilian on her lap and Danny at her feet — and Maudie Judge, with her hand on Trevor's shoulder.
‘Oh, you don't want me in it,’ protested Rosie.
‘I look a sight — and besides, I'm not a mother.’
Trevor remarked knowingly, ‘But you soon will be, won't you?’
Some of the ladies looked scandalised.
Mortified, Maudie tried to silence her son.
‘Trev, don't say things like that.
It's rude.’
But Rosie only laughed.
It was hardly a secret by this time; even her loose maternity dress could not disguise the fact that she was expecting a baby in six weeks' time.
Good-naturedly, she took her place at the end of the line and when Ernest was satisfied with the arrangements, he said: ‘Watch the birdie!’
Disillusioned, Danny turned to Trevor.
‘There isn't any bird really.’
There was a pop!— a flash — and the group broke up, all talking at once.
Under cover of the buzz of conversation, Rosie turned to Ruth.
‘I bet it was your idea, wasn't it, getting them all to come this afternoon?’
‘Well, why not?
I thought it would get things off to a good start.’
Ruth had already decided to bring her own children to be photographed today, and then approached all her friends with young families, suggesting they might like to do the same — so it had turned into a children's party.
In front of the studio back cloth of a painted garden, each mother in turn sat for a portrait with her offspring, and when that was done Ernest offered to take an extra group of them all, as a free gift.
‘It's been marvellous.’
Rosie had never looked so lovely; pregnancy agreed with her and she was glowing with happiness.
‘So much has happened, these past six months.’
She remembered the day the letter arrived from Horner & hardiman , last November.
At first she and Ernest had been completely mystified, for how could some solicitors they had  never met have any news for them which would be ‘to their advantage’?
But obviously they had to find out what it was all about.
The same morning, Ernest went to the Post Office — which had a blue sign outside, saying in white lettering: You May Telephone From Here — and called the office at Stepney, making an appointment for the following day.
The meeting was arranged for ten o'clock; in their anxiety, they arrived twenty minutes early, and Ernest suggested that for politeness' sake they should walk up White Horse Lane and back, to kill time.
But it was a damp, grey morning, and they hadn't gone far before it came on to rain.
Rosie, who was wearing her best dress, hat and coat for the occasion, said, ‘We're not getting soaked to the skin for politeness, are we?
Come on — let's go back indoors, out of the wet.’
When they returned to the office, a stiff-and-starchy female clerk told them they would have to wait.
They sat on hard upright chairs in a draughty passage, and all the excitement they had been feeling drained out of them, seeping through the soles of their shoes and vanishing into the linoleum.
At exactly ten o'clock, the clerk informed them that Mr Hardiman would see them now, and they were ushered into his office.
It was a gloomy room, with one small window that let in hardly any light, as it faced another building only a few feet away.
The walls were lined with bookshelves, each shelf crammed with books, mostly in long sets of leather-bound volumes that looked as if they had not been read, or touched, or even dusted for a very long time.
There were still more books and box-files and stacks of paper piled high on the tables that filled the room, leaving one narrow alleyway leading to the desk where, in a small pool of light from a green-shaded table-lamp, Mr Hardiman sat enthroned.
In such cramped surroundings, the gentleman himself seemed out of scale, for he was a large man, with a large head; a frill of silver hair surrounded a shining bald pate, beneath which was a large pink face, buttressed by several chins.
Upon  his Roman nose, a tiny pair of gold-rimmed spectacles might have seemed insignificant — but he made great play with them.
At first he peered over the top of his spectacles, eyeing his visitors severely.
‘Mr and Mrs Kleiber?
Quite so — pray be seated.’
He indicated two chairs in front of the desk, and they sat down.
Then he peered through his spectacles at a sheaf of papers on his desk, turning the pages one by one, studying the information they contained.
He appeared to be in no hurry, taking his time to consider each word with cautious deliberation, while Rosie and Ernest sat in silence, hardly daring to breathe.
At last Mr Hardiman took off his spectacles, produced a white silk handkerchief, and proceeded to polish the lenses; when that was done, he replaced them upon his nose, and looked over the top of them again.
‘So!’ he said.
‘You have come in reference to my letter?
I'm much obliged to you.’
‘Perhaps, sir, you'd be kind enough to tell us what this is all about?’ said Ernest tentatively.
‘Perhaps I will, Mr Kleiber, perhaps I will.
And possibly — I say possibly, mark you — when I have done so, it may be your turn to feel obliged to me !’
He uttered a short sharp bark, which made Rosie jump; she assumed it was a cough, then realised that it was intended as an expression of amusement.
Mr Hardiman's large pink face convulsed for a moment into something very like a smile.
‘When I tell you why I have asked you to come here, I think you may feel your journey has not been in vain,’ he said, and his shoulders heaved, rising and falling with silent mirth.
‘But I am acting upon the instructions of a client who chooses to remain anonymous, so I am not at liberty to give you as much information as you might wish.
I say you might — because of course I cannot speak with any certainty upon that point — as you might wish to be granted.
Permit me instead to put some questions to you.
I fancy you are by way of being a professional photographer, Mr Kleiber?’
‘Yes, sir, though at present I'm only —‘
‘Do not trouble yourself to elaborate your answers, sir; a  simple yes or no will suffice.
You are a professional photographer, and at one time you pursued your calling at certain two-storey premises in — um — Silmour Street, is that correct?’
‘Yes, but that was —‘
‘Indeed — in Silmour Street, but that was several years ago, as I think you were about to tell me?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Yes, it was.
And you ceased to be the tenant and occupant of the said premises in the summer of 1915, did you not?’
‘Yes, I —‘
‘Yes, you did.
Very well; perhaps it may have come to your notice that those self-same premises are at present vacant, and advertised to be let?’
‘I saw the board a few weeks ago, when I —‘
‘To be let — exactly.
So far we are in accord upon all points.’
Mr Hardiman took off his spectacles again, and waved them in the air as he continued: ‘Now we come to a more problematic matter.
I am instructed to enquire whether you would agree to recommence trading there, as you did six years ago, using the premises as a studio and dark-room, and as a shop for the sale of photographic goods — and occupying the upper floor for domestic purposes.
Would you entertain the possibility of undertaking such a venture again?’
‘I'd like nothing better, sir!’
Ernest glanced at Rosie, his face alight.
‘In fact, I've already tried to raise a bank loan in order to do that very thing — but I had no luck.
And without some capital behind me….’
‘Say no more, Mr Kleiber.
If you are agreeable to the suggestion, the financial arrangements need not be a barrier to you.
My client is prepared to supply the necessary capital, regarding it in the light of a reasonable business investment.’
‘You mean your client would employ me as a manager, to run the shop for him?’
‘My dear sir, you must not tell me what I do or do not mean.
I myself will keep you fully informed of my meaning.’
Mr Hardiman pointed the ear-piece of the golden spectacle frame at Ernest, stabbing the air to underline the points as he made them.
‘You would be the sole owner of the business; my  client would be merely an investor in the scheme, providing sufficient funds for you to purchase your stock-in-trade, and paying the entire rental of the property.
It would be exactly similar to a bank loan, to be undertaken on the same terms, and at the same rates of interest — if you are agreeable?’
‘But that's amazing!
It's just what I've been hoping for!
Of course I'd be agreeable, more than agreeable.’
‘Not so fast, Mr Kleiber.
Kindly allow me to finish what I have to say.
I was about to add:If you are agreeable — and if you are prepared to abide by certain conditions….’
‘I don't understand.
What conditions?’
‘You must give me your solemn assurance on three counts: that you will not seek to discover the identity of my client, that you will not ask for any further assistance if the venture should prove to be unsuccessful and finally that you will not discuss this matter with any other person; this stipulation to include even members of your own family and your circle of personal friends and acquaintances.’
Ernest and Rosie looked at one another again, at a loss for words, as he went on, ‘If you are prepared to give your agreement to such an undertaking, I will give instructions to your bank without delay, and the necessary funds will be put at your disposal.
Well, Mr Kleiber — Mrs Kleiber — what do you say to that?’
They did not ask for time to think it over; there was only one possible answer to such a proposition.
They both said:
After that, things moved with reasonable speed — that is, as speedily as anything can move, when it involves the law, or finance, or the transfer of property — and in due course the money was paid into Ernest's bank account, and he acquired a new lease on the Silmour Street premises.
The shop had been standing empty for some time, and needed a great deal of work.
Ernest and Rosie tried to make a start on the repairs, but by then she had discovered that she was pregnant, and Ernest would not let her do any work that might involve strenuous effort.
He had called in a local firm of builders to carry out the essential brickwork, plastering and re-tiling on the roof; after that, he took a hand in the  redecoration personally, splashing on new paint and putting up wallpaper.
By the end of April 1921, the work was finished and they began to furnish the upstairs flat, mainly with items brought over from the house at Poplar, and to stock the shop with cameras, films and processing equipment.
Today — the Saturday of the Whitsun weekend — the shop had opened its doors to the public for the first time; and they had got off to an encouraging start.
‘Sorry we can't run to champagne,’ said Rosie, passing round sticky buns and pouring fizzy lemonade.
‘But come back again in a year or two, when Ernest's made his fortune, and we'll have a real celebration!’
The children had no complaints about the refreshments, and when it was time to leave, they decided that it had been a pretty good party.
Even Trevor said grudgingly: ‘It wasn't too bad, except they didn't give us balloons.’
‘Trev, don't be so ungrateful!’ said Maudie.
She shook hands with Sarah, whom she had not met until this afternoon, saying, ‘It's been ever so nice talking to you, Mrs Kleiber.
P'raps you'll come over to tea with us one of these days, and bring your Benjamin.
It'll be lovely for Trev to have someone to play with.’
‘Yes, thank you, we shall look forward to that,’ said Sarah politely.
She had not been favourably impressed by Trevor's arrogant display of bad manners, but kept her thoughts to herself.
‘Ruth — will you be walking up Manchester Road?’
So Gloria and Maudie set off one way, towards West Ferry Road, while Ruth and Sarah went in the other direction.
They walked slowly, for Ruth had to negotiate Lilian's pushchair up and down each kerb, and as they walked, they talked.
‘I'm so glad everything has worked out for Ernest and Rosie,’ said Ruth.
‘But I expect you must be missing them, now they've moved.’
‘That's true, but I keep busy looking after my lodgers’ Sarah explained.
‘I don't have much time to feel lonely.’
Ruth wasn't sure this was altogether true.
She suspected that life must be harder than ever for Sarah, left on her own  with a small son to bring up and a houseful of strangers to cater for, and she made a resolution to visit Sarah more often.
‘Anyway,’ Sarah concluded, ‘it's wonderful that Ernest was able to reopen his shop again.’
‘Yes, although I never quite understood how he managed it.
I know Rosie told me, soon after the wedding, that his bank wouldn't give him any help, so how did he finally raise the money?’
‘I believe someone invested in the business,’ replied Sarah vaguely, ‘but he never told me the details, and I didn't like to pry.’
Further along Manchester Road, their paths divided and they said goodbye to one another.
When she reached the Watermen, Ruth wheeled Lilian in through the side door, calling, ‘Con — we're back!’
There was no answering shout, and as they entered the kitchen, Mary O'Dell said: ‘He's out in the backyard with that friend of his — the Welsh fellow.’
She began to unfasten the baby's harness, lifting her out of her chair.
‘Go and tell Con to tidy himself up, because tea will be on the table directly.’
Danny raced out of the back door, yelling, ‘Dad, Gran says tea's nearly ready!
Can Huw have tea with us as well?’
Ruth found the two men in the yard, facing one another in the sunlight; Connor in vest and trousers — Huw Pritchard stripped to the waist, wearing boxing-gloves, shorts and plimsolls.
Danny ran to Huw, jumping up and down with excitement, and begging: ‘You will stay for tea, won't you?
Please?’
Huw laughed.
‘I think that's up to your father.’
Connor gave one of his rare, crooked grins.
‘Since you've already been invited, I can hardly say no!’
When they saw Ruth, both men looked slightly abashed, like a pair of overgrown schoolboys, and Connor explained: ‘This young man wants to learn the rudiments of sparring, so I said I'd give him a few pointers.
Here, let's get those gloves off you.’
‘Thanks.’
Huw held out both hands, and Con unlaced the gloves expertly.
‘Are you taking up boxing as a hobby?’
Ruth asked.
‘Not exactly, though I've always been interested, since I was a kid.’
Ruth noticed that he stammered slightly, and appeared to be embarrassed by her presence.
‘Of course, I never thought I'd have a coach as good as Mr O'Dell, but he kindly suggested I should call in on a Saturday afternoon, while the pub was shut….’
As soon as his hands were free, Huw ducked away, retrieving a shirt and jersey that had been flung down on a pile of beer-crates, saying over his shoulder: ‘Look, I'd better be pushing off.
You don't want me barging in when you're having a meal.’
‘Oh, you mustn't rush away — we'll be glad of your company, won't we?’
Ruth turned to Danny.
‘And now I look at you, my lad, a good wash before tea wouldn't come amiss either.’
‘Can I sit next to Huw at the table, Mum?’
Danny asked eagerly, as they went back indoors.
Since the day of Rosie's wedding reception, Huw had been a regular visitor at the Watermen, though Connor never told Ruth about the attempted assault on the young man by the Brotherhood's Punishment Squad.
Thanks to Connor's intervention, he had escaped comparatively lightly.
For a few days there was a period of uncertainty, as Huw waited to see if the Brotherhood were planning another attack upon him — and the Inner Circle of the Guild waited to see if any steps would be taken by the Dockers' Union, or by the police, in defence of the young man.
When nothing happened, the Brotherhood decided that Huw could not have lodged a formal complaint about their treatment of him, so — with some relief, and a certain amount of grudging respect — they let the matter drop.
When Huw reappeared, having lain low for several days, his scars and bruises were beginning to fade and nothing more was said on either side.
All the same, Connor suggested to him privately that it might not be a bad idea for him to learn something about the art of self-defence, and offered to give him some lessons.
‘It's good of you to give up your time like this.’
Huw's voice  was muffled, then his face reappeared through the neck of his jersey.
‘You know I appreciate it.’
‘My pleasure,’ said Connor.
‘To be honest, I enjoy it.
It reminds me of days long gone!’
‘I still think it was a black day for British boxing when you left the ring,’ said Huw.
‘You'd have been up there with the best of them by now.’
‘Oh, there were good times and bad times,’ said Connor, adding reminiscently, ‘Did I ever tell you of the night I stood up to Jack Johnson?’
‘The World Heavyweight Champion?’
Huw goggled at him — then his face creased into laughter.
‘You're having me on….
That couldn't have happened, could it?’
Connor looked at him for a moment, then joined in the laughter.
‘No, I don't suppose it could…
I must have dreamed it.’
And he led the way into the pub.
Ruth heard him laughing, and her heart leaped up.
It was a long while since she had heard Con laugh like that; lately, he never seemed to find much to laugh at.
For the first year of their marriage, they had both been so happy — enjoying every day to the full and sharing every precious moment; living, and loving — and laughing — together.
Then, gradually, a change had come over him.
Ruth loved him as much as ever, and hoped against hope that he still felt the same way about her, but somehow, something had been lost.
It was as if a light had been extinguished; the colours which were once so bright and clear had grown blurred and faded.
She had tried to talk to him about it.
She forced herself to ask, ‘Con, is everything all right?
What's the matter?
Really?’
But her questions provoked nothing but conventional answers: ‘Everything's all right.
Nothing's the matter.
Really.’
And the one question she wanted to put to him, she dared not ask: ‘Do you still love me?’
That afternoon, when she found him giving Huw Pritchard a boxing-lesson, she caught a glimpse of the old Connor — the man she loved, the man she had married.
All that evening, she watched the clock, counting the hours until closing-time, longing for the moment when he would come upstairs to their bedroom, as happy and as loving as ever.
She put on her prettiest night dress, and took longer than usual to brush her hair; she put a dab of perfume behind her ears — on her neck — between her breasts.
Then she got into bed and lay there, waiting.
She waited a long time; so long, she must have fallen asleep, for the next thing she knew the room was in darkness, and Connor was in bed beside her.
She listened to the rhythm of his breathing, unsure if he were awake or asleep.
Putting out a hand, she touched the firm muscles across his shoulders; he was lying on his side, with his back to her.
‘Con?’ she whispered.
‘Mmm?’
So he wasn't asleep.
‘You were a long time coming to bed.’
‘Was I?
Yes, well, I had things to think about and some work to finish in the office.
I was making up next month's order for the Brewery; it'll save time in the morning.’
‘Oh, yes.’
She stroked his back gently, waiting for him to roll over and face her, but he did not move.
‘Con?’
She tried again.
‘Can I ask you something?’
‘Ask me what?
What d'you mean?’
She tried to think how to phrase the question, then said hesitantly: ‘You would tell me, wouldn't you, if there was something wrong?’
‘Of course there's nothing wrong.
It's just I'm a bit tired tonight, that's all.’
‘I see….
Well, I hope you have a good night's sleep,’ she said.
‘I hope you sleep well, too,’ he said.
‘Good night, Ruth.’
‘Good night, Con.’
Almost six weeks later, something took place which was to have a lasting effect upon the Judge family; and it happened quite unexpectedly, without any warning.
Looking back afterwards, Florrie found it hard to believe that such a tragedy could have arisen from such trivial, everyday circumstances.
It began when she decided she needed new curtains for her front room.
The house in Jubilee Street was looking very drab, and the curtains in the parlour window — Nottingham lace, with a pattern of entwined leaves and flowers — had turned quite yellow with age, despite rigorous washing.
Florrie made up her mind: she must buy some material and make a new set of curtains.
She discussed the idea with her sister-in-law Mabel, and asked her if she would like to come along to help choose some suitable fabric.
‘Go shopping — together?’
Mabel looked astonished; any event in her life, no matter how mundane, always came to her as a great surprise.
‘Oh, do you think we could?
Of course, I'd have to be back by four, on account of making tea for the boys when they get in from school.’
Florrie persuaded her that this would not be a problem.
Fired with enthusiasm, she went on to say that she intended to go to Wickhams, the East End's own department store, in the Mile End Road.
‘They've got a summer sale on till the end of June,’ she explained.
‘And we can get there and back on the bus.’
Still amazed, Mabel considered the possibility, and began to smile.
‘I suppose we could,’ she said.
‘And while I'm there, I could buy some winter vests for the boys as well— and Josh needs a new shirt for best….
Ooh yes, what a good idea!
When shall we go?’
They settled upon the last Friday in June, and began to make their preparations.
They would meet in the morning at Mabel's house, and have a cup of tea and a biscuit before setting out to fortify them for the journey.
It was beginning to take on the aspect of a full-scale expedition, and both women were looking forward to it immensely.
When they got to Wickhams, they were determined to enjoy themselves.
They started in the Fabric Hall, and spent a long time fingering various swathes of cloth.
Florrie had decided she didn't want lace this time — a nice heavy woollen material would last so much better, looped back with crocheted bows on either side, and an under-curtain of plain net, to stop the neighbours prying.
After long deliberation, they settled on a dark bottle-green, and the elderly assistant measured off the required length, pulling yards of cloth from the bale and running it down the length of the counter, measuring it against a fixed brass rule.
Then Mabel took charge, leading the way to the Men and Boys' Outfitting on the first floor, where they took an equally long time comparing styles and prices of under vests, and shirts with detachable collars and cuffs.
But that wasn't the end of it; they had made up their minds to sample every diversion that Wickhams had to offer, and went on to explore the entire store, from Haberdashery, where Mabel bought some knicker-elastic, to Hardware, where Florrie could not resist a patent vegetable slicer which was being demonstrated by a lady in a snowy white apron, who showed them how the little gadget peeled apples, chipped potatoes, sliced onions and generally made itself invaluable to the busy housewife.
After that, Mabel got carried away and bought some china cups — on sale at bargain prices, because they had lost their matching saucers — and Florrie bought a cobweb brush with a special extending cane handle, for getting up into those awkward comers of the ceiling.
Flushed and triumphant after this orgy of extravagance, they left the store at last, keeping an eye on the time because Mabel mustn't be late with the boys' tea whatever happened and then they had a long, annoying wait at the bus-stop.
Mabel began to get anxious; why was the bus taking such a time?
Another woman in the queue said gloomily, ‘It's the Whitechapel market what does it.
Takes over half the road, it does — the traffic gets held up.’
Eventually the open-topped bus appeared in the distance, and they rushed to get on board.
As they were about to go inside — for although it was a pleasant summer day, it was always likely to be windy on top, and their hats might blow away — Florrie exclaimed in sudden panic: ‘Oh, good gracious!
I've left my cobweb brush propped up against the bus-stop.
Whatever shall I do?’
The conductor had just rung the bell, and the driver let in  the clutch.
The bus lurched forward as Mabel called out: ‘Just a minute — my friend's left something behind.
Stop the bus!’
She was nearly ten years younger than Florrie, and rather more agile.
Without a moment's hesitation she jumped down from the platform of the bus, as the driver slammed on the brakes, swearing: ‘Make up yer bleeding mind, for Gawd's sake!’
The bus rocked and skidded to a halt; a horse-drawn delivery van close behind them swerved violently — the horse reared, its front hooves lashing wildly in thin air — someone screamed, the frightened horse whinnied and plunged and Mabel, struck down by flying hooves, lay motionless upon the roadway as one wheel of the van ran over her breast, and her life's blood dribbled away into the gutter.
Her eyes were wide open, and upon her face was an expression of absolute astonishment.
Marcus and Joshua were working at their desks in the Guild Office when Florrie came in, later that afternoon.
The two men put down their pens and stared at her; no woman ever set foot within the dockyard gates.
‘What are you doing here?’ asked Marcus crossly.
‘Who let you in, may I ask?’
Joshua saw that she was trembling violently.
‘What is it, Florrie?
What's the matter?’
Her lips worked, but she could not speak.
Exhausted, mentally and physically, she was on the point of collapse.
Josh sprang up and helped her into a chair.
‘What's wrong?
Are you ill?’
She shook her head.
‘Not me — Mabel.
She….’
Florrie could not go on.
‘Mabel's been taken ill?
Where is she?’
With an enormous effort, she managed to blurt out the words: ‘Accident….
Knocked down — in the street.
Ambulance came — took us to the London Hospital — only just along the road….
But — she was dead when we got there.’
As best she could, she told her story.
By the end, she was  crying so hard they could hardly make out what she said.
With tears running down her face, she blamed herself bitterly.
‘My fault — all my fault.
She only went back because of me…
I'd left it behind, you see, at the bus-stop — my cobweb brush.
And now she's dead, and it's all my fault….’
Marcus knitted his brows.
‘What are you saying?
What's that about a brush?
Do you understand her, Joshua?’
But Joshua wasn't listening.
He was already on his way to the door, muttering, ‘The London Hospital — I must go to her.’
On the threshold he turned, as another thought struck him: ‘The boys — what about the boys?
They'll be coming home by now.’
‘They'll be wanting their tea.’
Florrie dabbed her eyes and wiped her nose.
‘I'll see to that.
I'll look after them…it's the least I can do.’
When Ruth arrived at the Rope Walk on Monday morning, she felt as if she were stepping back in time.
It was a long while since she had visited her old home, and longer still since she had lived there as a girl.
Yet nothing had changed.
The street looked much the same — a cul-de-sac, with a brick wall at the far end, closing the road; and above the wall, towering above the slate-roofed houses, a ship rode at anchor in the Jubilee Dock, its masts and funnels silhouetted against the sky.
Ruth felt small and insecure, as if she were a child again.
The feeling was stronger still when Louisa opened the front door; the smell of steam, of soapsuds and wet sheets was unmistakable.
‘I should have remembered — Monday's wash-day,’ said Ruth, kissing her mother on the cheek.
‘Nothing changes, does it?’
Even as she uttered the words, she realised how false they were.
So much had changed within the Judge family.
Her mother's hair was now completely white, her shoulders bent under the load of time, her face deeply etched by years of trial….
And now — another blow had struck the family.
‘You heard about Mabel, I suppose?’
Louisa asked, leading the way back to the scullery.
Ruth nodded.
‘That's why I came.
Someone was talking  about the accident last night in the saloon — word soon gets round on the Island.
But I still don't know exactly how it happened.’
Her mother told her — not that there was much to tell.
Standing by the old boiler, stirring the seething mass of laundry with a copper-stick, she explained about the accident in the Mile End Road.
‘It's been very hard on Florrie.
You see, it was her shopping Mabel went back for, so she feels responsible.
Nobody's blaming her, of course, but she still feels bad about it.’
‘Poor Florrie.
It must be dreadful for her, but a hundred times worse for Josh.
However will he manage without Mabel?’
‘I don't know.
He doesn't know himself — I don't think he's really taken it in yet.
The funeral's on Wednesday; perhaps when that's over, he'll begin to pull himself together.’
Louisa got out her scrubbing-board.
Her hands kept busy as she glanced across at her daughter and said: ‘I don't suppose you'll be coming to the Chapel, will you?’
Ruth shook her head.
‘I can't.
Besides, you know what Father's like.’
Louisa sighed, her red knuckles pummelling one of Marcus's shirts on the ribbed board, driving the soapy water in, squeezing the grime out.
‘Oh, yes, I know what he's like.
He can be very stubborn about his principles.
Last night, we went round to Josh — I was making supper for the boys, and your father came with me.
Afterwards, when the boys had gone up to bed, he told Josh that Mabel's death was an act of retribution on the part of Almighty God.’
‘That's a terrible thing to say!’
Ruth repeated the word: ‘Retribution — what did he mean by it?’
‘He's never forgiven Josh for Ebbie dying the way he did.
And last night, instead of trying to comfort him for his loss, he told him it was God's vengeance upon him.
‘The Lord will repay’— that's what he said.’
For a minute or two there was no sound in the scullery except the heaving and bubbling in the boiler, and the rhythm of Louisa's knuckles upon the scrubbing-board.
At last Ruth asked: ‘And is that what you believe, too?’
‘No.’
Her mother spoke so quietly, Ruth could hardly hear her.
‘I don't believe Our Lord would do a thing like that.
When we got home, I tried to say as much, but Father wouldn't listen to me.
I'm sure he meant it for the best — I always told you, he means well — but I have to admit, he's not an easy man to talk to.
That's where you're lucky — you and Connor.
You can talk to your husband.’
There was another long silence, and then Ruth said: ‘Shall I put the kettle on?
I think we could do with a cup of tea.’
Later, they sat facing one another across the red chenille tablecloth, the teacups in their hands, and Louisa said with the ghost of a smile, ‘It's good to see you, Ruth.
Thanks for coming round here — it does help.’
‘I wish I could do more.
I'd like to go and see Josh, too — do you think he'd mind?’
‘I'm sure he'd like to see you.
You'll find him at home; he wasn't fit to go to work today.
Father's gone in to mind the office.’
On her way back to the pub, Ruth called at the house, which had all the curtains drawn as a sign of mourning.
Florrie opened the door to her.
‘Ruth, come in.
Did you want to see Josh?
He's in the front parlour.
I've given him the newspaper to read — I thought it might take his mind off things.’
As a rule, nobody ever sat in the parlour; it was kept for show rather than for use, like the clock on the mantelpiece, under its glass dome.
No one had bothered to wind it for a long time; the two hands were clasped together as if in prayer, pointing eternally upwards — either to heaven or to twelve o'clock.
Josh had the newspaper spread out in front of him on the table, but Ruth felt sure that he had not been reading it; she doubted if he even knew it was there.
It took a moment or two before he registered who she was, then he said heavily, ‘Good of you to look in like this, Ruth.
Much appreciated, I'm sure.’
He leaned forward and asked her confidentially: ‘What am I going to do now, old girl — can you tell me that?
What's going to become of me and the boys, eh?’
She tried to sound calm and reassuring, but he turned away  before she had finished speaking, as if her words meant nothing to him.
After a while she gave up, and left him sitting there, staring blindly into an unimaginable future.
She went to find Florrie, who was busy in the kitchen, peeling potatoes and putting some cold meat through a mincer.
‘It's the left-overs from yesterday's joint — I thought I'd make a shepherd's pie for supper.
Josh doesn't have much of an appetite at present, but I expect the boys will be hungry when they get home from school.’
‘Yes.
He seems very anxious about the boys.
I suppose he feels he can't look after them properly on his own.’
‘Of course not.
How could he, once he goes back to work?
But I've told him he needn't worry about that.
I shall come in every day to clean up and cook for them.
Emily and Maudie can mind the shop quite well without me, so I can look after Josh and the boys.
After all, now Tommy's in America and Ebbie's been gathered, I've nobody else to care for.
I was wondering last night if it might be the hand of fate.
I mean, it almost seems as if things were meant to turn out like this what do you think?’
During the days that followed, Ruth often remembered her mother's words: ‘You can talk to your husband ’….
If only she could have done so — but Con seemed to be further away from her than ever.
He was not unkind or thoughtless; he spoke to her gently and pleasantly, but his mind was elsewhere.
One afternoon at the beginning of July, when the pub was closed for a few hours, she suggested they might take little Lil out for an airing.
‘It's a lovely afternoon — the sunshine will do her good.’
‘I don't think I'll bother.
I'm a bit tired, to be honest; I'm going to get my head down for a while.
Why don't you take Mam with you, if you want company?’
So the two women took turns, wheeling the pushchair to Island Gardens.
Ruth's sense of uneasiness was stronger than ever; it was the first time she had ever heard Connor say he felt tired.
She longed to ask Mary if she knew what was wrong  with her son, but there was no point in worrying her unnecessarily and she kept her anxiety to herself.
When they got back, Ruth put Lil into the cot for her afternoon nap and then went into the bedroom, to see how Connor was feeling.
He wasn't asleep.
In shirt and trousers, he lay upon the big brass bedstead, his hands under his head, staring at the ceiling.
When she spoke, he turned his head slowly, gazing at her as if she were a stranger.
‘Hello there!’ he said with an effort.
‘Where have you been?’
‘Down to the Gardens and back.
It's really warm out; you should have come with us — you'd have enjoyed it.
There were lots of people out for a stroll.
I'll tell you who we saw — do you remember Gladys Harker, who used to run the pie-shop?’
Her voice trailed off as she realised he was not listening to her.
She couldn't help remembering the way Josh had looked, that afternoon in the front parlour, so wrapped up in his own misery she couldn't reach him.
With a stab of fear, she recognised the same lack of focus in Connor's eyes, as if he were looking inwards instead of seeing the world about him.
She tried to speak lightly.
‘Penny for them,’ she said.
‘Do what?’
Again, he forced himself out of his reverie.
‘What did you say?’
‘A penny for your thoughts.
What are you pondering so deeply?’
‘Nothing at all.
Just resting.’
‘Oh…
I thought you seemed, I don't know, rather unhappy.’
He smiled gently.
‘What have I got to be unhappy about?’
I wish I knew she thought.
Oh, how I wish I knew ….
As she moved to the door, he called after her: ‘Wait!
There was something I had to tell you — what was it, now?
Oh, to be sure, while you were out Ernest Kleiber telephoned.’
‘About Rosie?’
Ruth turned back quickly; she knew that the Kleibers' baby was overdue.
‘What's happened?
Is she all right?’
‘He says she's fine.
He was calling from the Lying-In Hospital; the baby was born a couple of hours ago.
He thought we'd like to know.’
‘Oh, thank God!’
Ruth was overjoyed.
‘What did she have?
A boy or a girl?’
‘Damned if I remember.
I'm pretty sure he told me a boy, I think.
Yes, I'm almost sure it was a boy.’
‘Con, you can be so aggravating sometimes!
We must go down and tell your mam, or she'll never forgive us.
How long are they going to keep Rosie in?’
‘Ernest didn't say, but he promised he'd look in some time soon, so you can ask him yourself.’
In a sudden rush of happiness, Ruth dropped to her knees beside the bed, hugging her husband.
‘Oh, I'm so glad for them.
Rosie hoped it would be a boy — isn't it wonderful she got what she wanted?’
Connor did not respond to her affectionate embrace.
A shadow she could not interpret crossed his face, as he said, ‘Sometimes people don't know what they want — until they've lost it.’
She searched his face.
‘What's that supposed to mean?’
Suddenly he sat up, shaking his head as if to throw off all troublesome thoughts, and managed a smile.
‘I don't know what I mean.
I'm talking rubbish — take no notice.’
Rosie had to stay in hospital for ten days, but on the first Monday morning after they let her out, she came round to visit the family.
Ruth was scrubbing the linoleum in the saloon when Rosie arrived, carrying a bundle wrapped in a shawl, and she scrambled to her feet, exclaiming: ‘Show me!
Let me see him — what's his name?’
‘Abram.
Ernest says he's going to be a leader of men!’
He did not look much like the leader of anything, for he was fast asleep; very tiny, with a shock of glossy black hair, and a wrinkled red face.
Ruth thought he looked rather like a baby monkey, but she assured Rosie that her son was the most handsome child she had ever seen.
‘We've all been longing to see him.
Con's in the office, sorting out some business, but he won't be long.
Let's go and find Mam, and I'll make some coffee.’
They were about to go through to the back-kitchen when  the door behind the bar opened, and Connor came out with a large, pink-faced gentleman.
‘Oh, I expect you'd both like some coffee too.’
Ruth began the introductions.
‘This is Connor's sister Rosie and her son Abram.
Rosie, this is Con's solicitor.’
‘We've already met,’ said Rosie, smiling.
‘We're old friends, aren't we, Mr Hardiman?’
The solicitor glared at her over the top of his spectacles, unamused.
‘How do you do, Mrs Kleiber?
You must forgive me, Mrs O'Dell, I fear I cannot stay for coffee — I have many other calls upon my time.
I wish you all a very good morning.’
He seemed larger than ever under the low ceiling, and when he strode out through the street door, the saloon bar seemed quite empty without him.
‘Well!
He was in a hurry!’ said Rosie.
‘Fancy him being your solicitor — I'd no idea.
It's a small world and no mistake.’
Then they went into the kitchen, where Patrick and Mary made the acquaintance of their latest grandchild, and spent an enjoyable half-hour drinking coffee, all talking at once.
When it was time for Rosie to leave, Ruth walked with her as far as the corner of the street.
Abram was awake by then, and he stared up at his Aunty Ruth with dark lustrous eyes.
For such a small person, he had a very solemn and penetrating look.
‘You must tell your mum to bring you for another visit very soon,’ Ruth told him.
‘Oh, we'll come again, don't you worry,’ said Rosie.
Then, impulsively, she squeezed Ruth's hand, adding: ‘I know Mr Hardiman made us swear we'd never try to find out where the money came from, but — well, now we've found out by accident, so that doesn't count, does it?
And I just want to say thank you, to you and Con.
Thanks a thousand times — I don't know what we'd have done without your help.’
Ruth was completely at a loss.
‘I haven't the faintest idea what you're thanking us for.’
‘Oh, come on now, you don't have to pretend!
I'm very, very grateful.
I can't wait to tell Ernest that you and Con were our anonymous benefactors all along.’
‘You mean you think we lent you the money to start the business?
But we didn't!
You're making a mistake.’
Rosie laughed.
‘Are you trying to tell me that old Hardiman is Con's solicitor — and that he's also acting for our mystery man?
That it's nothing but a coincidence?
Get away with you!’
That night, when the pub was shut and the last customer had left, Ruth went round with Connor, helping him to lock up.
Alone together, she told him what Rosie had said.
‘…so now she's absolutely convinced that we're the anonymous benefactors — isn't that silly?
I couldn't persuade her we're not.’
Connor had his back to her, stretching up then stooping down to slide the bolts home at the top and bottom of the front door, but he said nothing.
Slowly, a strange thought occurred to Ruth.
She remembered how close Connor and Rosie used to be; he had always been very fond of his half-sister — there was no doubt about that.
‘I suppose it wasn't you, was it?’ she asked.
When he turned to face her, he seemed quite annoyed.
‘Where would I find the money to pour hundreds of pounds into their blessed shop?’ he retorted irritably.
‘You're talking nonsense — of course it wasn't me!’
‘No, of course it wasn't.
That's what I told her,’ said Ruth.
‘But hasn't Mr Hardiman ever mentioned Rosie to you at all?
Hasn't he ever let slip any little hint about who it might have been?’
‘No, he has not,’ said Connor flatly, and his eyes slid away, unable to meet her gaze.
‘Come on, let's go up to bed.’
She followed him slowly up the stairs, and her heart dragged her down like a leaden weight.
She had known Connor O'Dell for nearly ten years now — she knew him better than anyone in the world — and tonight, she knew without any shadow of doubt that he was lying to her.