

THE LABOUR YEARS
MY INTRODUCTION To politics came early in life when I met Ted Heath.
It was a considerable while before I came to know more Tory politicians and acted as an adviser, not to the party, but to a great many Tories.
My early introduction to the world of politics was always marginal in the sense that I never felt able to join any particular political party.
This was perhaps due to obstinacy, but also due to a determined belief that I could never subscribe to the whole of the dogma of any political programme.
Hence when I went to the Lords in 1965 I sat as a cross-bencher, although periodically, according to my attitude at the time, I was supporting one or other of the two parties and rarely took a cross-bench approach.
If I have any political beliefs, they are best and quickest expressed in cliché terms.
I do believe fervently that no man is fit to be any man's master; that an uncontrolled capacity to amass wealth is thoroughly wrong; that the class system, particularly in relation to education, needs urgent change; that it is right and proper and sensible to be an enthusiastic European and that much nonsense is talked about the alleged loss of sovereignty.
In short, I am, I suppose, a single-minded adversary of the normal beliefs of conventional Conservatives and even more unconventional ones such as Margaret Thatcher, a lady for whom it is impossible not to have a considerable respect.
My first entry into the political world was, of course, my association with the Labour Party.
It is normally believed that this arose through my friendship with Harold Wilson.
This is not in fact the case.
It arose because of my meeting George Wigg in the army, whom I had encountered when I was based at Southern Command headquarters and he was at the same headquarters as a Lieutenant-Colonel in charge of army education, where he had already established a reputation for ruthless eccentricity.
He did invite me to become a parliamentary Labour candidate in the  1945 election.
I reflected on it, but declined, principally because of my unwillingness to belong to any party — I have never been a party member —and perhaps even more because the seat I was offered appeared to be an impregnable Tory stronghold.
In fact in the 1945 election it fell to the Labour Party — thus history might have been changed.
George could be the best of friends and terrifyingly the worst of enemies.
His hatreds were almost entirely political.
He hated Tories in general and had little respect for most of the Tory leadership, although some he did respect, primarily Harold Macmillan.
But his hostility to the Conservative prominents was exceeded only by his healthy hatred of many of the leading Labour figures.
He had encountered most of these in the early days of political socialism in this country and considered them to be a thoroughly unreliable lot.
When one heard him giving vent to this view it was difficult to resist the conclusion that justice and truth were on his side.
Nye Bevan I had met in the 1950s — again through George Wigg — and had come to know almost intimately.
Nye was a rich character, with an enormous consciousness of his own powers and ability.
He was not in any sense a vain man, but he had a conceit of himself that came from the knowledge that he dominated every quarter that he occupied.
He had a mind of quicksilver and a gift of repartee that was second nature; his special love of language arose, I think, from the absence of a formal education.
He was a man of profound education, but having acquired it himself he treasured words and used them with unique skill and often with a strange individuality.
Some of the words he used I had never heard of — and I am not unfamiliar with words — but he savoured them, rolled them over his tongue and finally ejected them into his speech with a delight at their novelty, their colour and their music.
He was a generous man with strong abrasive streaks and keen hatreds.
He did not lightly forget an injury, but he did not manufacture trifles into injuries.
He had had a good deal of experience of the deliberate malice of political adversaries, who felt for him a genuine fear that was replaced by contempt only for his lesser colleagues.
If a left-wing politician is genuinely anathematised it is not possible for his opponent to pay him a higher compliment.
Although Harold Wilson did not equate with Bevan in personal terms —in colour or in rhetoric — he too can feel pleased that the condemnation that in many quarters was directed at him demonstrated the genuine respect for his qualities that his adversaries feared.
In the Labour Party in my lifetime only two men of quality — Bevan and Wilson — have aroused hostility of this order, and they are the two most potent and significant characters that have emerged.
I liked Nye enormously and knew of no better way of occupying an evening than by listening to him and occasionally, with some temerity, disagreeing with him.
He was a generous debater.
He never sought to crush you, nor did he ever take refuge in insult or invective.
He delighted to have the point examined, turned over, scrutinised, probed and polished, until it was sharp and gleaming and ready to demolish the whole controversy.
I watched him die.
Jennie's performance during his last months and weeks was a model of quiet, undemonstrative heroism.
She gave him no inkling that she was anxious or worried, remained firm and maintained a total discipline of emotion and action.
He had the medical advice of Sir Daniel Davies, who had been physician to Lloyd George and indeed to a number of misguided dignitaries who were influenced by his great reputation.
Davies brought a strange quality of Methodist Welsh revivalism to medicine which was unacceptable to me but highly acceptable to a fellow countryman.
Friends rallied by the score.
Homes were offered for Nye's wasting frame.
A short sojourn by the seaside, back to their country farm, back to the hospital, and then the end.
The great towering intellect, the gift of humour and reply, remained almost to the last.
I recall my own final visit to the farm where he was allowed down for an hour and where the flame was rekindled for that period sufficiently for us to forget his illness and think only that the old Nye had been restored.
After his death in July 1960 Jennie was desolated and there was great apprehension that her morale would be destroyed.
Nobody doubted her courage, and we were wrong to doubt her common sense.
She made a firm resolution to remain an active and useful member of a society to which Nye had made such a historic contribution.
She was yet to make her contribution, which perhaps under the keen light of social historians may equal her husband's.
I also had the exciting experience of meeting Hugh Gaitskell in the late 1950s.
We became friendly, although the association was more that of a client-lawyer kind.
Gaitskell never adopted me in the sense that Harold Wilson did later, but I became quite close to him and he employed me in quasi-political matters.
I advised the Labour Party over such things as the Vassall inquiry and, together with my friend Dennis Lloyd, I was on a number of committees and investigations to recommend changes in the law — particularly land law (the working party on land nationalisation) and the law of landlord and tenant — which were being prepared by the Labour Party for their future use.
Of all politicians, I think I respected Gaitskell most.
He was, when I met him, probably at the height of his powers.
He had lost the diffidence and uncertainty that characterised his early leadership of the party.
He  was confident, high-spirited and plainly impatient to seize the power that was coming so rapidly within his grasp.
He was unexpectedly a man of great gaiety and to see him at a dance was an absolute delight.
He loved dancing and threw off all the weighty considerations of state and all the pomp associated with political office and became a bright and jolly human being.
Working with him — and my own experience with him was brief —was a joy.
He didn't argue, he didn't dissent: he agreed or disagreed.
I do not believe that it is possible to measure the consequences to our political life that flowed from his early death, following on so rapidly after the death of Aneurin Bevan.
Certainly it had a more significant effect on English politics than any purely political event in my lifetime.
The most intriguing matter supplied by Gaitskell was when he consulted me about the constant leakage of the party's National Executive minutes to the Manchester Guardian .
Week after week, almost within hours of the completion of a meeting, the Guardian had a complete, almost verbatim, account of what had happened.
Gaitskell was anxious to identify the ‘mole’ in this case and asked me what ought to be done.
I advised, my opinion reinforced by Dennis Lloyd, that there was plainly a breach of copyright, since the reports published were to a substantial extent verbatim accounts of the meetings reproduced from the minutes, the copyright of which belonged to the National Executive, and that a judicial remedy should be sought as soon as possible.
We wrote to the Guardian on behalf of the Labour Party enquiring the source of this very precise information and — not surprisingly — our request was refused.
We then issued a writ and proceedings ensued.
The Guardian sought to invoke some sort of privilege, which they could not seriously have believed existed, to protect their publication of the Labour Party's confidential information.
Their claim was based on a privilege that does indeed exist for libel, where the defendant is not required to disclose his sources.
I took the view, shared by counsel, that no similar privilege was justified so far as copyright was concerned.
However, a summons was issued to dismiss our claim on the ground of this supposed privilege, which was refused by the judge at first instance — a refusal confirmed, and emphatically, by the Court of Appeal.
The case trotted on at something slightly better than the conventional pace of litigation in this country and arrived at a point where each side had to ‘discover’ to the other all relevant documents relating to the matter.
I advised Gaitskell that this requirement posed a real difficulty for the defence.
They would have to disclose all memoranda, manuscripts and correspondence relating to the transaction, and it seemed to me almost inconceivable that this disclosure could enable the culprit still to be concealed from exposure.
Gaitskell became excited at the prospect and  instructed me with great firmness that as soon as I had received the ‘discovered’ documents I was to show them to no one but to come straight to him, so that he should be the first person to know who the culprit was or what information was available that would lead to the culprit's identity.
Tragically, or perhaps fortunately, the hunt was aborted by Gaitskell's untimely death in January 1963.
A mystery surrounded his death which was assiduously played up by the media in suggesting every kind of melodramatic possibility, the favourite being that poor Hugh Gaitskell had been stabbed with the sharp ferrule of an umbrella, the end of which had been treated with some poisonous concoction.
I could not have conceived of any circumstances in which it would have been sensible for any particular political group to murder Gaitskell, and the likelihood that it was murder — in such an immensely complicated fashion — seemed to me at first blush fanciful and absurd.
But that was before the murder of the Bulgarian Georgi Markov, in exactly such a fashion, added a great degree of plausibility to the theory.
Whatever the truth, certain it was that Gaitskell was removed from the political scene and, after a sharp internecine struggle within the party, was succeeded by Harold Wilson after a vote in February 1963.
My relationship with George Brown, although not close, was a friendly one.
He sought my advice on one or two matters where complaints were made against him of alleged libels, which I had no real difficulty in seeing off and about which he wrote me appreciative letters.
The major assistance I was able to give him was in connection with the Tribunal, presided over by Lord Radcliffe, established to investigate the Vassall affair in November 1962.
A problem arose because it was believed that Macmillan had secured terms of reference which would entitle the Tribunal to investigate not merely Vassall, but also rumours relating to Vassall that were circulating at the time, rumours about many discreditable matters but mainly his sexual activities.
It was believed that the principal rumour-monger was poor George Brown.
Brown had, very incautiously, said some things at a private dinner party that on a literal construction would have implicated the Labour Party in a rather nasty intrigue.
There was little doubt that Radcliffe proposed to call George Brown, who would have made an uncomfortable witness, and probably a damaging one for the party.
In conference with Gerald Gardiner, subsequently Lord Chancellor, who had somewhat late in the day raised his flag as a member of the Labour Party, it was decided that the best course of action was for the Labour Party to be asked to be represented by Gardiner at the Vassall Tribunal and to inform Radcliffe that it had no additional witness to  come to him.
It was our guess that in the face of this assertion, and while he could still call George Brown, Radcliffe would not want to discount Gardiner's evidence by calling another Labour witness.
This is exactly what happened.
The Labour Party gave its evidence and for practical purposes withdrew from the proceedings.
No reference of any kind was made by anyone to George Brown's ill-advised remarks.
Gardiner was a strange man: an old Harrovian, an immensely skilful and prosperous Silk and a dedicated socialist.
There was a Puritan austerity about him that made one doubt whether he ever enjoyed anything at all.
I never took a meal with him, but I should be surprised to find that he ate with a good appetite.
He would have regarded mastication as a terrible waste of time.
I do not know if he was teetotal, but my guess would be that he was.
He was a Lord Chancellor with a limited range.
His practice was an entirely common-law one: he advised and appeared for parties on libel actions; he advised on contracts and similar matters dealt with in the common-law courts.
On Chancery matters he was not well known, nor indeed on matrimonial matters, although he appeared several times in leading divorce cases.
I was always on agreeable terms with George Brown both in and out of office, although his well-known tendency to get drunk disrupted our relations on one or two occasions.
It is surprising that his fondness for drink did not do more to impair his career, which was a remarkable career, only marred by his reaction to the appointment of Harold Wilson as the leader of the Labour Party.
After that result he disappeared for a short while, but he returned in time to be included in Wilson's government, initially as Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, a post he held between 1964 and 1966.
He was an unusual comrade for Harold Wilson.
Harold was worried by him, and rightly worried.
His anxieties were not unassisted by George Wigg, who became more and more valuable to Wilson, principally as a source of information — largely, alas, misinformation — about the behaviour of anyone in the parliamentary party.
This aroused the resentment of almost the whole front bench, but Wigg's hostility was not evenly spread.
He hated, and was immensely jealous of, those who had received, in his view, excessive recognition on the way up.
George Brown, of course, came into that category almost effortlessly.
On one occasion, when George Brown was to give a seminal broadcast on a new financial plan, Wigg, who had been assigned by the Prime Minister to ensure, or to endeavour to ensure, that Brown arrived at Broadcasting House respectably sober, could think of nothing better to do than to consign him in the early afternoon to the sitting-room in my flat at Ashley Gardens.
There he was provisioned with every known variety of soft drink, and kept virtually  incommunicado until it was time for him to travel to Broadcasting House.
The result was that he left my flat in a fuming temper, very gruff but very sober, and the broadcast was, I was given to understand, of consummate skill and effectiveness.
Then, in 1966, Harold Wilson, whose precise judgement of human beings is, alas, very defective, astonishingly appointed George to be the Foreign Secretary.
If one had been asked, working on first principles, about the least eligible candidate to conduct the country's foreign affairs, many people, including myself, would have plumped for George Brown.
He spoke no foreign languages; had the most superficial knowledge of foreign countries; was a master of tactlessness, and very often drunk in public places.
Against this he had a surprisingly quick mind, a splendid gift of repartee and a skill in creating a warm and friendly relationship on a very slender acquaintance.
What was interesting to note —since I had close links there through my association with the British Council — was the reaction in the Foreign Office.
Some people were delighted with Brown: he was a breath of fresh air, contrasting with the ministers and principals, trained at Eton and Christ Church, to whom they were used.
Others, particularly those trained at the aforesaid establishments, absolutely loathed the sight of him and loved to recount his various gaffes and bêtises from time to time.
But in fact George Brown had a considerable edge over Labour's later candidate, David Owen, who offended the mandarins of King Charles Street with a quiet deliberation that was wholly lacking in George even in his most sober moments.
I retained a friendship for George Brown, although he regarded me with rather dubious approval because of my omission to drink anything at any dinner party.
George's insobriety was disturbing and even wounding to his friends.
On two occasions he joined large dinner parties designed to raise money for particular charities and I witnessed him reduced to slumping over the table on folded arms, where he remained comatose until gently removed at the end of the meal.
He was particularly embarrassing on an occasion when Jennie Lee was sitting alongside him and in his groping fashion he made some amorous overtures.
Jennie was not the right person to whom to do this.
Her denunciation rang through the dinner party and it was sufficiently vigorous to deter even the drunken George from persisting.
But he could be an entertaining man and when sober made good company.
At times he could be brilliant.
I would not have entrusted, to use Jennie Lee's pungent phrase, the conduct of a chip shop to him, least of all the nation's international affairs, but I could not say with any firm conviction that they have necessarily been handled better by his successors  of either party.
The touch of genius that he could evince from moment to moment, if he was exercising self-control, distinguished him from other politicians on both sides of the House.
He was supported by a most devoted wife who looked after him for many years until, late in his life, he rejected and abandoned her for a younger woman.
That inexcusable act probably speaks with greater clarity than anything I could say about his true character.
Oddly enough, the people in the Labour Party whom George Wigg most disliked were those with whom he had the closest associations.
His bête noire was Richard Crossman, but it was a case of eerie fascination being exercised by that unpopular figure.
To my knowledge there was hardly a political problem with which George was confronted where he did not seek the advice and guidance of Crossman, but it was always associated with a healthy denunciation.
Through George Wigg I became reasonably close to Richard Crossman who consulted me on a number of occasions — I have already described the Spectator libel case — but who, I must confess, turned out to be a disappointment to me, since the reputation he had earned for more than occasional unreliability I found to be entirely justified.
However, Dick Crossman was certainly a remarkable man of great intellectual power, with an astonishing capacity for synthesising viewpoints into an effective plan.
It was, I think, this last quality that gave him his reputation for indecision.
He listened and provoked the expression of every opinion —however conflicting — and he then produced a concoction which contained the best of the ingredients from every recipe.
The result was often surprisingly good, with a considerable degree of wit although no humour.
I have always detected that an absence of humour is reflected in a very loud laugh, as if it is necessary to set in motion some violent mechanism before anything funny ultimately tickles the fancy, and Crossman certainly displayed this mannerism.
My relationship with Crossman eventually became in some ways a comic one.
Shortly after his appointment as Minister of Housing in October 1964, he telephoned me on a Sunday morning to say that he was having great trouble with his civil servants because he wished to promote an anti-eviction Bill, which would make it impossible for people to be evicted from their premises without special precautions.
He told me that his civil servants had said that this was impossible, and adumbrated the problem to me.
I thought about it for a while and then telephoned him to say that I could suggest a pretty easy solution, and indicated to him what it was.
He was delighted with this and said that he would send his advisers to see me — on a Sunday afternoon.
However, it was not for me to tell him how to treat his advisers, and half an hour later three civil  servants arrived with their notebooks whereupon I dictated my suggestions to them.
The matter had a rather startling consequence: Crossman's senior civil servant, the Permanent Secretary at the Ministry of Housing, was a lady, Dame Evelyn Sharp.
When she heard that a mere layman had had the effrontery to advise on civil service matters, she went to see the Minister on the following day to tender her resignation.
On hearing of this from Dick Crossman, I said that to have lost such an opportunity was unforgivable!
Nevertheless, he was a man prudent enough to realise that he could not antagonise the entire civil service.
He finally arrived at a compromise with her, which was that he could have three independent, non-civil servant, advisers.
Dennis Lloyd and I were two of them, and the third was Desmond (now Lord) Plummer, who was an estate agent and surveyor and an expert on rent restriction.
This concession having been wrung from Dame Evelyn, we were thereupon authorised to attend all meetings and to advise as though we had the accolade of civil service accorded to us.
My advice extended to a number of important legal technicalities and in particular to the operation of any necessary changes in the prevailing system of rent control — which for many years served to support social stability in this country to an extent rarely recognised.
Perhaps my principal contribution was to have suggested the creation of rent officers and to have advised a formula for ‘fair rents’ which rent officers would be able to use in their day-to-day dealings with landlords and tenants.
A decade later, after Crossman's death in April 1974, my firm acted for the publishers Jonathan Cape over the publication of his Diaries .
As is well known, Dick Crossman, who did not always conform to the rules, had maintained a most complete — if not invariably accurate — account of the Cabinet meetings that he attended and the discussions with his colleagues.
There has been some argument about whether or not they knew what he was doing, but most of them now piously assert that they had no such knowledge and some take the view that it was an outrageous breach of confidence.
Be that as it may, the difficulty was in relation to the government and possible action to prevent publication on a number of grounds, including a prosecution under the Official Secrets Act.
Crossman was a seriously-minded man and his diaries — although occasionally including some innocent gossip — were devoted to the serious topics that held his interest.
These were not the stuff of ‘secrets’.
He was interested passionately in housing, rating, local government, drainage schemes, the selection of building experts and a multitude of other matters of profound importance to our society but unlikely to evoke great curiosity  from lesser minds.
Hence the likelihood that his diaries would have contained material of a secret nature which needed to be suppressed by legal and governmental intervention was from the outset slight.
The problem that was, of course, puzzling and worrying to the government was his faithful recording of who said what about such matters at Cabinet meetings.
Following the submission of the first volume of the Diaries (covering the period 1964–6) to Sir John Hunt, the Secretary of the Cabinet, for official scrutiny, a long correspondence ensued.
Sir John had identified a great number of passages which he regarded as objectionable from the government viewpoint, but I suspect he recognised early on that there was nothing of a very secret nature to conceal and what the government sought to suppress were the comments made by Crossman and others about senior civil servants.
The publication of any immediately contemporary record was, of course, impossible to sanction.
I do not believe in the course of the protracted discussions about this case that anyone seriously proposed that all Cabinet deliberations should be revealed to the world at large within minutes of their taking place.
Nor was this proposition ever propounded, so far as I am aware, by Dick Crossman.
He kept his diaries for a record that would be published subsequent to the meetings.
He did not believe that a long period of purdah was necessary, and the general rule that such a record could not be published until thirty years after the event was indeed ridiculous, since it has been honoured only in the breach.
A desperate effort was made to reach agreement.
Certainly Sir John, a shrewd and amiable man, was anxious to do so, but Michael Foot — one of Crossman's literary executors and thus in the Crossman camp — felt that a compromise would have been a capitulation and contrary to their obligations to his memory.
In the end, the Attorney-General commenced proceedings in June 1975 for an injunction to stop publication.
A complication from the government's point of view was that the Sunday Times had contracted to publish extracts from the diaries and in fact did so before the government sought a gagging injunction.
But it certainly added to the strength of the Crossman case that a great national newspaper had lined up alongside him.
It was significant that the Official Secrets Act — the use of which would have been fatal to the publication — was not resorted to by the government.
The reason, I believe, is that it had in mind the defeat inflicted on the previous Conservative government over the Jonathan Aitken trial to do with Biafra.
And the vagaries of a jury were possibly another consideration: the government fearing the libertarian qualities of juries.
Moreover, the government's attitude would undoubtedly have been coloured by the  intriguing possibility of having one of its most prominent members —namely, Michael Foot — among the defendants at the Old Bailey.
It was no secret that Michael Foot — believing that he had a duty to the late Dick Crossman to procure the publication of the diaries — was courageously prepared to accept this risk and to bare his breast for the dagger.
(I may say that Barbara Castle declined to give evidence on our behalf.
It would be unkind to attribute this decision to her intention to publish her own diaries.)
But whatever the government's motivation, the Official Secrets Act —a steamroller of an Act, as it then stood, which made it an offence to divulge almost anything of any kind ascertained in the course of official duties — was not used.
It may also have been that the government was unwilling to lend further strength to the clamour for the reform of the Official Secrets Act (which has now happened) that had been mounting for some years.
There can be little doubt that a prosecution under that Act at the relevant date, or its use to secure a civil injunction, would have aroused considerable public indignation.
This led the government to intervene with some rather pallid legal weapons.
In the result they sought to rely on a very undefined rule of confidentiality that had recently been confirmed in relation to the suppression of memoirs by the Duke of Argyll about his wife's life, and in one or two other very dissimilar instances.
The government therefore took its stand on the position that the confidentiality rule operated between members of the Cabinet and in the general context of a minister's official duties, and that it could be invoked in a court of law to restrain revelations of Cabinet and other official discussions.
The defendants took the view that the rule ought not so to relate and that such discussions should be free for publication without restraint or inhibition.
The social desirability of either position was not really an issue, although needless to say it was copiously referred to.
The matter the judge had to decide was whether, if there were confidences, there was any legal prohibition preventing their publication.
In the end the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Widgery, found for the publishers on the ground that, although confidentiality could be enforced in suitable cases, this was not a suitable case: the matters revealed in the first volume of the Diaries , being ten years old, were too stale to have any security aspect.
It was an unsatisfactory conclusion in that the issue of principle was left clean open for future argument.
A committee of Privy Counsellors, under the chairmanship of Lord Radcliffe, was set up to‘review the arrangements which should govern the publication of memoirs by former ministers during the period of thirty years that official documents are subject to the provisions of the  Public Records Act’.
In its report, the committee did not recommend any change in the law but that these matters should be left to the good sense and judgement (hopefully) of Cabinet ministers, utilising the Radcliffe guidelines.
It did suggest that the principles of confidentiality should be preserved for a period of fifteen years instead of thirty, but that there should be no new machinery for enforcement since offenders would carry the risk of social and political sanctions, and, of course, if they came within the rubric of any existing legal restraint, such as the Official Secrets Act, they would run the risk of legal proceedings.
The fifteen-year period is merely half as ridiculous as the thirty-year period.
A determined social ‘agnostic’ of Dick Crossman's type is as unlikely to be deterred by minatory finger-wagging as by the pre-report situation.
In short, the law has been left as it is.
The Official Secrets Act remains substantially intact, but it now has to be read with the additional defences available under the new legislation, happily with a pendant attached deriving from the Aitken case that juries will not stand for the use of oppressive legislation in cases of mild divulgence, and confidentiality has been confirmed as being available where secret information is breached without official justification.
Following the judgement, it was clear to anyone concerned to suppress publication of the Diaries , or any part of them, that they would be on an impossibly bad wicket.
This decision was immensely helpful to Jonathan Cape since it had been and remained their intention to publish the next two volumes of the Diaries and a further volume that related to Crossman's earlier back-bench activities.
The decision also made possible the publication of other Cabinet recollections, particularly by Barbara Castle and Tony Benn.
If George Wigg's political hatreds extended to George Brown and Richard Crossman, then they were to surface intensely with regard to the Profumo affair.
Wigg's resentment against Profumo related to some answer that Profumo had given in 1962 to a question about British troops overseas, which to Wigg's unbendable mind was an untruth.
I recollect having urged Wigg on many occasions to limit the ambit of the Profumo affair.
My role in the matter was as an independent voice advising the Labour Party on what to do about Profumo.
My advice was, I believe, impeccable, but unfortunately it was not taken and, where Wigg was concerned, was deliberately misconstrued.
My introduction to the matter came early one morning at about 6 a.m. when — having had a late night — I was awakened by a telephone call from Wigg.
He poured into the telephone a long and unintelligible narrative about Profumo's villainy in relation to the unhappy answer he had given to Wigg about the army.
It did not take Wigg much time to  decide that he had been misled, although a fair-minded examination of the facts from the Hansard of the day proved no such thing.
The salient fact is that Wigg believed, and believed with great intensity, that Profumo had lied to him and for that reason was a suitable object for punishment in fanning the flame of the sexual scandal.
Wigg, in that conversation with me, was seeking my approval to continue his parliamentary quest for information.
I vividly remember, although I was in a thoroughly sleepy condition, telling him that in my view the only proper justification for an enquiry about Mr Profumo's personal life depended on the possibility that some act of his might have compromised security, because he obviously had information which was secret.
Knowing Wigg, I warned him that to pursue the matter for any other reason would be discreditable and in the long run would be sure to be to his detriment.
I gave similar advice when Harold Wilson asked me to advise the Labour Party about their behaviour in the matter.
The Profumo affair was an unhappy demonstration of the lengths to which political hostility can extend.
If there had been no political factor in the equation, it is unlikely that Profumo would have been ruined in the way he was and tortured for years by a newspaper interest which has survived until the present day.
It is rather terrible to think how unforgiving the world can be and how willing to inflict continuous torture on account of a single piece of behaviour that without the political element and the adventitious addition of one or two other elements would have faded into obscurity in no time at all.
It is accepted without great horror, and particularly in the upper-class world in which Profumo mixed, that there is nothing wrong in having an extra-marital relationship.
Profumo unfortunately succumbed to the charms of a Miss Christine Keeler who — casting my mind back —appeared at the time to be an attractive little thing, and whose very appearance could be regarded as a warning to every husband anxious to preserve his marriage.
There were a number of tragic elements — from the point of view of Profumo — that tickled the public fancy and aroused a passionate interest on the part of the press, and not only the tabloid press.
There was the fact that Profumo, who was in the Cabinet as War Minister, had met this young lady at the Cliveden home of the Astor family, encouraged by the head of the family, to whom it was also alleged Miss Keeler had granted her favours.
And the press enjoyed the benefit of Profumo's total inexperience in handling publicity.
Adultery is no guarantee of worldliness.
He provided titillating material — allowing himself to be photographed in the Cliveden swimming-pool with the lady.
The press were delighted to have the scandal fed to them on a silver salver.
But to Profumo's bad luck, other newsworthy circumstances were available to salt the story.
Miss Keeler's love life had provided a sensational scandal in that a ‘coloured friend’, moved to desperate jealousy by her behaviour, had opened fire at the window of her home and been arrested and charged for that offence.
Added to this, three so-called responsible members of Her Majesty's Opposition (Labour) saw fit to impute that Profumo had arranged to ship Miss Keeler abroad so as to render her unavailable to give evidence at the Old Bailey trial of her coloured lover.
After his initial blunder of sleeping with Miss Keeler, it was the sad fate of Profumo to be ruined by political and legal advice.
He had been provoked — and it is well to remember that he was then, and continues to this day to be, happily married to a beautiful and supportive wife — into seeking to continue the deception by a personal statement in the Commons in which he averred that he was innocent of the allegations and a wronged man.
The statement was received enthusiastically by the Tory Party and with obvious scepticism by the Opposition.
The explanation of the statement is that Harold Macmillan, unworldly as he was, became increasingly conscious of the dangers to the government if the matter was not satisfactorily cleared up.
Macmillan instructed his law officers, Sir John Hobson and Sir Peter Rawlinson, to find out from Profumo what the truth was.
One or other of them drafted a statement which was a flat denial that he had misbehaved either sexually or politically.
This statement was approved by the law officers, who very properly insisted that Profumo should also be advised by his own independent solicitor (a partner in the well-known firm of Theodore Goddard) who, having read the statement, also approved it and recommended Profumo to make it to the House.
Additionally, carried away by enthusiasm that ought not to affect the judgement of experienced lawyers, they advised him, or agreed on his urging (I do not know which), that he should issue writs for libel, which he did, with the disastrous effect that he actually accepted some damages from one publication before he was compelled to reveal the falsity of his assertions.
It is a strange reflection on the exceptional unworldliness of these three eminent lawyers.
Every cub reporter in Fleet Street knew that a Sunday newspaper possessed a letter from Profumo to Miss Keeler, probably acquired by simple purchase, which was a sword of Damocles waiting to descend.
In contrast, the government's two senior legal advisers and the senior partner of a leading firm of society lawyers were so ignorant of this fact that it did not even enter their heads that it would be wise to make some enquiries before launching their client into a statement that could be, and indeed was, ruinous.
In any event, on 4 June 1963 Profumo  was obliged by the torrent of publicity and increasing evidence to acknowledge the falsity of his statement to the House and to resign both from office and from the House.
George Wigg's enthusiasm, however, could not restrain him from pursuing a more general, and indeed very vindictive, course in relation to Profumo's statement.
Wigg did not believe in the doctrine that you did not kick a man when he was down.
On the contrary, he considered that an exceptionally valuable opportunity for enabling you to kick him more robustly and with least personal danger.
Once you were Wigg's enemy — and this was a judgement reached by him and not by the other person — there was no pursuit and no hostility that he would abandon; but I remained an affectionate friend because of the other side of his character, which would not even be suspected by those with whom he was in controversy.
Not everyone was wholly approving of Wigg's activities in relation to Profumo — and indeed on many other matters.
The Sunday Citizen explained his enthusiasm for the Profumo affair because of a long-cherished personal grudge against Profumo and of having unearthed a juicy scandal by snooping that would have done credit to a divorce detective.
There was, nevertheless, an element of truth in both these allegations, but Wigg was the wrong man against whom to hurl such invective and he launched a libel action.
The Sunday Citizen withdrew the allegations, apologised and paid Wigg's costs in the matter — the settlement was on my advice to Wigg that he could not know what view a jury would take of his actions in relation to Profumo.
I have developed considerable regard and affection over the years for Jack Profumo, who has worked his passage after having been what is technically described as ‘disgraced’ in circumstances where a great number of people would not have been over-censorious.
I knew no one in their sane senses who believed that Profumo was a spy, and in fact that suggestion was never made.
On occasions when talking about the case, I have been asked what advice I would have given to Profumo.
Some thirty years after the event, it is not easy to recapture the circumstances or to avoid post hoc propter hoc .
But my present belief is that if Profumo had come to me for advice (and my advice, of course, would only have made sense if one postulates that Profumo would have told me the truth), I would have recommended that he should throw in the towel; assert that he had no intention of allowing his private life to be discussed in public ; apologise to the Prime Minister for the embarrassment he had caused both to him and to the party, and withdraw rapidly.
Had he done that — and this is advice every sensible lawyer would have given to him — he might have been able to  return to public life without the long and painful period of atonement to which he was exposed.
We have recent evidence that the Conservative Party at least is willing to forgive, and once it had been accepted there was no question of the betrayal of any secrets, it would have been a simple matter of marital infidelity.
In the result, however, Profumo retired from public life and has worked heroically in public and social service for little reward for a number of years.
The most admirable part of the whole affair was the undeviating loyalty of his wife, Valerie Hobson, with whom I had had some encounters previously, when she was married to Anthony Havelock-Allan.
Over the years, although never establishing a close friendship with the Profumos, I have had an admiring acquaintance with both of them and am happy to see that their marriage was not ruined by this solitary episode and distressed indeed by its revival from time to time by creatures animated solely by greed.
The suggestion at the time that the Labour Party had been behind Profumo's downfall was a little unfair to many members who repeatedly expressed their misgivings about the scandalous imputations, which several of them could not regard as a proper currency for a political difference.
Having advised restraint by the Labour Party, I was angered, and indeed horrified, by the announcement that the government had asked Lord Denning to conduct his now infamous one-man inquiry into the matter, with terms of reference so loose that he regarded himself as charged to examine everyone's activities through a microscope and to denounce anyone where there was a whisper of suspected immorality, let alone convincing proof.
When George Wigg asked my view about this, I recommended that he should urge Harold Wilson to oppose any such investigation and I drafted a letter which Wigg suggested Wilson should write to the Prime Minister.
In fact, I have no reason to think that Wilson wrote this or any other letter protesting against the establishment of a wide-ranging inquiry such as Denning believed he had been instructed to conduct.
Wilson's disinclination to protest against the inquiry probably arose from a reasonable belief that any senior politician who did not want such an inquiry had something discreditable to hide.
While I have no reason to believe that this was the case in respect of Wilson, or indeed any senior member of the Labour Party, I can understand why such a person would be reluctant to try to abort the inquiry.
It is a signal tribute to Denning that he was able to conduct his inquiry in a typical homespun fashion, without any unfair imputation against anyone being made.
But it is also clear that Denning started off with a presumption that everyone involved was innocent and that at some stage  he had personal doubts as to whether this was indeed so.
At that point, he appeared rather hastily to have brought his inquiry to an end.
It was a satisfaction to me many years later, when I was a member of a Royal Commission on Tribunals of Enquiry, established to advise how secrets should be dealt with, that I was able to persuade the chairman of the Commission, Lord Salmon, and through him the whole of the Commission, to recommend that there should never again be an inquiry of the Denning type, where a single individual was authorised to investigate any piece of gossip or scandal relating to any prominent public person.
It is certainly my hope that this is the last time we have heard of a Denning-type investigation.
A small offshoot of the Profumo affair was an exchange between the three Labour members principally concerned with the case (George Wigg, Dick Crossman and Barbara Castle) and the Leader of the House, the late Iain McLeod.
Denning had referred in his report to their speeches in the House on 21 March 1963 and had commented that their remarks clearly imputed that Profumo had been responsible for the disappearance of Christine Keeler.
McLeod went on television and said that, in view of Lord Denning's findings, the three members who had brought to the notice of the House the existence of the rumours about Profumo owed a duty to Profumo to withdraw the charge.
The three asserted that their only observation had been to suggest that because such a rumour was circulating it would be wise for it to be firmly denied or some enquiry made, and that they had not made any allegation against Profumo but only a suggestion for his benefit.
A slightly more critical eye might have felt that the very fact that they were publicly proclaiming the existence of such a rumour could not advantage Profumo in any way and might easily damage him.
There is no doubt that a suggestion that ‘a rumour is circulating’, if made outside the House of Commons, could support an allegation of libel.
However, the whole matter was another aspect of one of the storms in a set of teacups that accompanied the whole unhappy Profumo matter and has continued to do so for the many years since it was first raised.
Another introduction to politics was provided for me in the person of Randolph Churchill.
I cannot claim to have been a close friend, but I had occasional encounters with him and, as with most people, it would be more accurate to describe them as occasional brushes.
He was an unhappy personality, who had obviously grown up in the shadow of his father and had decided that the assumption of a totally aggressive demeanour was the only way of maintaining a personality of his own that would be distinct from that of his famous, indeed most famous — parent.
Randolph was a pretty ruthless character.
I remember one day in the  1940s sitting at a table on the first floor of the Crown in Fleet Street, next to a table where an attractive young woman, then unknown to me, was sitting in front of a plate of smoked salmon and opposite an empty place furnished with another plate of smoked salmon, which must have been ordered in advance.
The other diner was plainly downstairs in the bar and did not appear during the whole of the lunchtime and had still not appeared by the time I had finished and paid my bill.
I now know that the lady concerned was the then Mrs Randolph Churchill, later Mrs Averell Harriman and now the widow of that very great man.
I thought at the time that her absent luncheon companion must have been a boorish character, and even the greatest friends of Randolph Churchill would find difficulty in defending him from this charge.
I had an encounter with Randolph Churchill in the late 1950s which arose in rather unexpected circumstances.
MacGibbon & Kee had published a book by him about the Suez affair.
In it, of course, he was immensely critical of Anthony Eden and the Conservative Party.
He telephoned me one evening to tell me that the Labour Party had decided to use an extract from it in their manifesto.
Not unnaturally, as a Conservative supporter, this gave him no pleasure and he was reasonably apprehensive that it would arouse criticism from other persons of the same political persuasion.
I asked him not to say any more to me, since at that time I represented the Labour Party and felt it quite possible that if he brought any action I would be called upon to act for them.
I left it there.
What I then discovered was a chapter of errors worthy of Feydeau.
Randolph Churchill decided that he would telephone the owner of MacGibbon & Kee — a rather eccentric character called Howard Samuel.
Unfortunately he phoned him in the middle of the night.
Howard Samuel had indulged in, as was not unusual, an enjoyable dinner.
Randolph explained the circumstances to him carefully and received a ‘Yes, Yes’ at regular intervals.
Apparently he asked Howard Samuel whether he would associate himself with an action to procure an injunction to restrain the manifesto, to which Howard Samuel had allegedly replied that he would.
The next morning, as I heard the story from Howard Samuel's wife, Howard had remarked to her, ‘Did someone telephone during the night?’
To which she replied that she had been sound asleep, that she had heard a desultory conversation, but its substance had nothing whatever to do with her.
She did remember that a word sounding like ‘sewers’ was uttered, and it puzzled her to think why anyone should be ringing in the middle of the night to enquire about the state of the sewers.
However, Howard Samuel could remember nothing of it at all.
Shortly afterwards I was telephoned by Morgan Phillips, the general secretary of the Labour  Party, to say that Randolph had issued a writ for breach of copyright and was applying for an injunction that very afternoon, and would I act on behalf of the Labour Party?
I thereupon obtained from him the name of the solicitor instructed by Randolph, telephoned him and said that my own firm would accept service of the writ.
I then telephoned Howard Samuel and said, ‘There is an attack on the Labour Party of which you are supposed to be a loyal member.
Will you do something?’
‘What do you want me to do?’ he asked.
‘There is a complaint that there is a breach of copyright by dint of a short extract from Randolph's book which has been inserted in their manifesto.’
The legal position was not entirely clear: if the extract was short enough, then it was permissible to use it, because an extract from a book used purely for the purpose of comment did not constitute a breach of copyright, but in the present circumstances, when it was used for purely political purposes, I was not so sure.
I thereupon asked Howard Samuel whether he would grant to the Labour Party a licence for the extract, as I had discovered from the contract that the quotation rights were vested in the publisher.
‘Certainly,’ he said.
‘How much should I charge?’
I thought that three guineas would be an appropriate amount, drew up a licence and sent it to him to sign.
At the hearing Randolph's counsel, Mr Fearnley-Whittingstall QC (a well-known right-wing lawyer, who also acted for the defendants in the Spectator libel case), got up and delivered a long and passionate address about the iniquity of what had happened.
Sir David Scott Cairns OC, our counsel, thereupon rose from his seat and mildly brandished the licence to say that it was all permitted.
The plaintiff had no knowledge that a licence had been granted, since there was no time for any kind of discovery.
Notice of the application for the injunction had been given at about 11 a.m. and the hearing took place after lunch.
The application was, of course, dismissed with lightning speed.
Randolph was not a man to forgive lightly.
Howard Samuel never had the courage to tell him that he had no recollection of their night-time conversation because of his post-prandial condition, so Randolph always regarded the fact that the licence had been obtained for the Labour Party as a gross breach of trust.
It was a fuss about nothing, and I greatly doubt whether anyone other than Randolph Churchill would have made a major issue of it.
Looking back, I cannot deny that the grant of the licence was something of which he could legitimately complain, but his capacity for complaints exceeded any normal human being's by a very large measure.
I drafted Howard's final response to the inevitable correspondence that ensured: Randolph was in my view a tragic figure.
He obviously possessed great talents, though he perhaps thought more highly of them than did others; and he also had a unique capacity for arousing antagonisms and hatred.
On the other hand there were many people who loved him dearly.
His life was a brief one and his war service was heroic.
He might have made a significant contribution to the public life of this country had he not been totally overshadowed by his illustrious father and had he not had such a burning desire to shine as bright or even brighter.
But a Churchill of whom I can only speak with deep affection is Randolph's son, Winston.
He too is a man who goes out of his way to twist people's tails in the hope of provoking them when he thinks their inactivity is impermissible.
But he has sterling qualities, particularly courage and a total indifference to public opinion.
I became involved with him some years ago when I was consulted by Lord Rayne who told me that he had a friend — a leading paediatrician in London — whose daughter was in serious trouble.
She had married an Englishman and the two of them had gone off to South Africa where, unhappily, they had engaged in political activities.
Both had been arrested and were charged with serious terrorist offences, of which I was sure they were totally innocent; although I was equally sure that they had engaged in active political propaganda, which in some ways would have been no less objectionable to the South African government.
The girl, many months pregnant and on the verge of delivery, was in solitary confinement in an African prison, separated from and unable to see her husband.
He  was under arrest and confined in even more disagreeable circumstances in a male prison.
The father was distraught; he had appealed to the Prime Minister, had been to see the Foreign Secretary, he had been in fact everywhere, and finally asked Max Rayne whether he could come to see me.
I said that it would be unkind and discourteous to decline a visit, but I could not for the life of me see how I could help him where persons of much greater power were impotent.
In any event he came to see me and we discussed the matter, and I said exactly that to him: that if he had appealed to the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary, it seemed to me a very remote prospect that anything I could do would be of the slightest effect.
Pleadingly, he asked me whether I could think of anything.
I thought for a while and said that the only thing I could think of was that the British government did not —although it would have been slow to admit it — at that moment cut much ice with the South African government, but the United States government cut considerable ice.
‘Do you know any influential American who might be able to intervene?’
I asked.
He sadly admitted that he did not.
It then occurred to me that I might be able to help, and I picked up the telephone and spoke to Winston.
I asked him if he would be prepared to assist.
He said that of course he would, but what could he do?
‘Well, your stepfather is Averell Harriman,’ I said — he had married Randolph's wife after they had divorced.
‘Will you telephone Harriman and ask if he could do anything in the way of intervention?’
‘Certainly,’ he replied, without a moment's hesitation.
I do not know any other politician or statesman who would have acted with such speedy decision without stopping to think of the possible consequences to himself or what people might think about his intervention on behalf of an alleged terrorist.
Winston phoned me back within an hour to say that he had spoken to Harriman, that Harriman had spoken to the State Department, that they had dispatched two telegrams — one to Pretoria and one to Cape Town, the places between which the governmental functions are divided — and that in addition he himself had sent a telegram to the Prime Minister of South Africa, signed by the not unimpressive name of Winston Churchill.
The effect was electric: the girl was released within a few days; the man remained in jail and in fact served a very long sentence.
But that in no way affected my admiration for what Winston had done, and I am pleased to think that on one or two occasions I have been able to render him some modest service in the way of a reward for this particular display of public courage.
I can think of only one other man who would have taken the political risks involved and that was the late Sir Hugh Fraser.
Another occasion which demonstrated Winston's indifference to the dictates of authority or public opinion was when I was approached by a  picaresque character called John Shaheen, an American oil magnate who spent his life getting in and out of the most complicated financial transactions, seemingly always on the verge of ruin but nevertheless contriving to remain sufficiently solvent to undertake his next massive adventure.
On this occasion he had, after the expenditure of many millions, built a refinery in Newfoundland, and he telephoned me to ask whether I could persuade Winston Churchill to come to the grand opening.
I rang Winston and he said he would make an enquiry at the Foreign Office.
The Foreign Office advised him very strongly to take no part in the transaction, but this was in fact an encouragement.
He rang me back and said that he would certainly come.
In typical style Shaheen had commissioned the QE2 to take a large party of people to the opening and offered me a cabin on her, but as I could not spare the time and was not sure that I would be entirely at home with my fellow passengers, I flew over in response to his invitation.
I spent a little while there and enjoyed a helicopter trip for the very first time, although not without considerable trepidation having once or twice seen pictures of them whizzing down to the ground in pieces.
On this occasion, however, shame compelled me to travel in a helicopter since the Lieutenant-Governor of Newfoundland and his wife were also taking this short trip — his wife, if I may say, a most attractive lady.
When she stepped into the helicopter in front of me, I had no alternative but to follow her with my heart in my boots.
However, the flight was extremely enjoyable and we travelled low enough almost to touch the antlers of the wild moose that were in the area and to see the countryside from the most advantageous position.
The actual opening of the refinery in October 1973 was a comic disaster.
The VIPs, among whom I found myself, sat on a huge platform under a vast marquee.
Various people were due to address them at various moments, in particular Winston.
Unhappily a gale of enormous force then blew up which threw the marquee to the ground and we were left clinging to the posts in order to remain upright.
Nevertheless it is a remarkable tribute to the perseverance and courage of the participants that the ceremonial proceedings were concluded, although no one could have heard a single word of what was spoken into the gale and blown back.
My friendly relationship with Shaheen continued until his death in 1984.
He was man who was always on the point of launching some immense enterprise, a few of which indeed came off while others ended disastrously.
Nevertheless he always remained undaunted and could hardly wait for the winding up of his previous effort before starting to plan its successor.
Shaheen was a leading supporter of the Republican Party and a great friend of every Republican president.
Whether they were great friends of his was a matter of conjecture.
During one of my trips to the USA in the 1960s, Shaheen telephoned my hotel one day to say that he had arranged for me to have lunch with Richard Nixon, who at the time had not yet declared that he would run for the presidency in the election of 1968.
He was, therefore, still practising law.
We went and had lunch with him at the India Club on Wall Street.
Mr Nixon hardly spoke a word.
The impression I got of him was that he was the world's most cautious man (which squares ill with his later reckless behaviour); that he was a man who said nothing; who had carefully devised a plan of life which rendered the use of words unnecessary except in an emergency such as fire or accident.
He also struck me as a man who gave the most mature thought before uttering even one of these rare words; and that if you said ‘good morning’ to him, he would reflect for some seconds while a number of questions passed through his mind.
Why — he would ask himself — is this man saying ‘good morning’ to me?
What is his motivation?
And what are the risks involved if I reply?
In the end, no doubt, he normally did answer ‘good morning’.
Anyway, at the luncheon concerned he adopted precisely this cautious attitude and the conversation was as sluggish as it is possible to imagine.
I formed the view of a singularly unattractive character: unattractive in appearance, unattractive in personality, and certainly unattractive conversationally.
The notion that he might make any joke, except an obscene one, I dismissed without a second thought.
The only thing that surprised me after our painful, taciturn lunch was the astonishing enthusiasm and goodwill he displayed on my departure.
He wrung my hand for about five minutes and told me how much pleasure the meeting had given him, though God knows where he had extracted the pleasure from, and expressed the most fervent hope that we would become the firmest friends in the nearest possible future.
It was a hope that I, at least, did not silently echo.
But the politician I was to see most of during the 1960s, the politician in the middle of it all, was, of course, Harold Wilson.
I met him for the first time ever when he took over the leadership of the party from the recently deceased Hugh Gaitskell in February 1963.
He had heard of me from some of his colleagues and asked to see me to discuss the Labour Party's decision in relation to the litigation it had brought, with my guidance, against the Manchester Guardian as a result of the leaks from the National Executive.
He was sitting in his chair, smoking a pipe, and my first reaction was not favourable.
The Prime Minister designate obviously viewed me with suspicion, as being closely associated with his  predecessor.
He asked me what should be done about the action.
I told him it was entirely a matter for him to decide: that the Labour Party was my client and I would proceed on its instructions.
This single episode gave me a very good picture of Harold Wilson's qualities and defects.
He discussed any issue, and particularly this one, with everyone he could think of and he continued to show throughout his political career an indecision that in some directions had dire consequences.
For instance, his intimate associates were very much at odds with each other .
The only common factor was Mrs Marcia Williams (now Lady Falkender), his private and political secretary, of whom I saw very little, but I saw enough of her to realise the immense influence she exercised over Harold Wilson.
As my own position with him became firmer, he aired occasional criticisms of Mrs Williams.
I ventured on one or two occasions to suggest that he might find some way of dispensing with her services.
He never reacted hostilely to any such suggestion, except to say to me that she was difficult enough in a friendly association and matters might be worse (his own words) if he took any action to remove her from his political scene.
I witnessed on several occasions horribly embarrassing disagreements between Harold Wilson and Marcia Williams, but it was clear that his loyalty to her would not be disturbed by any difference of opinion or any show of temper.
The arrival of Harold Wilson heralded the discontinuance of the Guardian action.
Within a few days of seeing me for the first time, he summoned me once again to tell me that the Labour Party did not wish to continue with the action.
I did not ask him why, but I sensed that it was because he knew the culprit.
While suspicion as to the source of the leakage had fallen on a variety of people, I agreed wholeheartedly with the decision that Wilson, and presumably the National Executive, had arrived at.
I was therefore instructed to discontinue the action on the basis that each side paid their own costs, although the Guardian had suffered a continuous reverse in their attempts to maintain the right to press freedom and to maintain secrecy about their informant.
Hence I never knew who the culprit was and was never put into possession of the document or documents which existed and which would certainly have identified that person, since each copy of the minutes had, on my advice, been numbered.
It was a strong probability that the Guardian still retained in their archives a numbered copy of the minutes which would have told us immediately to whom that copy had been issued and therefore the name of the informant.
Before very long, Wilson was constantly consulting me on a number  of matters and even seeking my opinion on political issues — which he wisely always rejected.
He was then, of course, in opposition and particularly asked if I might advise on what would be a sensible housing policy when the Labour Party came to power.
In fact, when the Labour Party did come to power in 1964, the only documentation they possessed on this subject was a single sheet of paper provided by myself, recommending among other things the establishment of rent officers, an idea in which I was subsequently able to interest Dick Crossman.
Apart from housing, rent restriction and the like, Wilson flattered me by consulting me on a number of topics, on which I was never slow to express an opinion and never disappointed when that opinion was totally disregarded or not even mentioned.
I received a special mark of confidence from him, just before the 1964 election, when he was anxious to retrieve some papers from his home in Hampstead Garden Suburb.
He asked me if I could arrange for somebody thoroughly trustworthy to visit the premises, telling me that he had given the key to a neighbour.
I decided that in the circumstances this was not a job that I would entrust anyone else to do, and I motored to Hampstead myself.
I was not surprised, although I was rather gratified, to find the semi-detached house one of incredible modesty.
I noted, also with satisfaction, that there was hardly an article in the house that could have cost more than £5.
There were no Rembrandts, no Chippendale furniture, nothing that indicated that Harold Wilson had achieved any prosperity in his many arduous years in opposition.
This, I thought, reflected great credit on him, though others might take the contrary view and criticise the fact that he had not first thought to amass a substantial fortune.
One thing I can say of him with total confidence is that I have never met a man less interested in money.
That is not to say that he was not interested in spending it.
He was a man of exceptional generosity, in fact I can truthfully say over-generous.
As a prime minister he probably ranked with Ramsay MacDonald in humble origin and modest wealth.
It is appropriate to contrast the modesty of his home with those of more affluent politicians.
Very few politicians of recent years have lived in simpler surroundings and with less show of luxury.
His attitude towards creature comforts was demonstrated by his regimen in Downing Street.
Except when he was entertaining I doubt if he ever sat down to a three-course meal.
Also, unlike others who had been brought up in more cultured surroundings, it was a rarity for him to go to the theatre and even more of a rarity to go to other forms of public entertainments, including the cinema.
In October 1964 the Labour Party won a precarious victory, leaving it with a majority of five in the House of Commons.
Wilson's leadership  was certainly new in style, in that he proclaimed his intention to turn No, 10 into a ‘power house’, where the rhythmic working of bulging brains would generate a new hope, a new vision, a new purpose and a new nation.
The sincerity of his beliefs is unquestionable.
The country had been emancipated from thirteen years of middle-level Conservative rule of reasonable efficiency, modest dynamism but small-power idealism.
The Macmillan era had aroused hopes in leftist hearts that we might achieve a mixed economy that made sense; but the murkiness of political scandal and the absurdities of needless party discord rendered Mr Macmillan's last months unhappy and confused.
He handed over to poor Sir Alec Douglas-Home a party legacy of dwindling popularity, and although that amiable and resolute character fought with vigour and gallantry to maintain his position, the tide had sufficiently turned to abandon him gently on the beach, leaving Harold Wilson afloat in waters so shallow that the most gentle paddle hit the sand.
However, he was in power.
A new government was to be formed.
I had never been a member of the Labour Party, and on the first occasion when I could claim a vote I voted for the Liberal candidate in the Hampstead constituency.
As has dogged the fate of any political candidate I have favoured for any office or position, he was unsuccessful.
However, almost all my political connections were on the Left and my Labour friends, acquired relatively late in life (apart from George Wigg, most of them after I was forty years of age), were a source of delight and novelty to me.
I had eschewed politics in favour of a life practising law and enjoying the amenities of a civilised society in the way of drama, music and literature and, in a more limited and selective fashion, the visual arts.
I had not engaged in speech-making, public address or political activity of any kind at any stage in my life.
As an undergraduate my sympathies were with the Left, with the Republicans in Spain, with the anti-Fascists in Italy and Germany, but always with a nearly corresponding hostility to the extremes of political thought on the other side.
To meet fully matured politicians of the higher quality at a time when I was still young enough to sharpen my wits on their arguments and dialectics was a real — and in my case an undeserved — pleasure.
Against that background, and with those friends, I viewed with satisfaction the election results that gave Harold Wilson his majority of five, or fourteen if you included the Liberals, and upon which he resolutely set out to govern.
On the day that Wilson was elected to office, he telephoned me, tracking me down to a restaurant in London, to enquire what to do about the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra.
It staggered me!
It was characteristic that a small, relatively unimportant detail of that kind — from his point of  view, not mine — should have occupied his time when he had assumed this enormous burden.
He was anxious that the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra should not be dissolved for want of finance.
It was in consequence of that wish that Jennie Lee asked me if I would chair a committee on London Orchestras, which in fact I did, and whose findings I describe later.
Before we delivered our report, however, I had joined the Arts Council, of which I became chairman in May 1965.
A couple of weeks after my appointment to the Arts Council, a letter arrived from Downing Street asking if I wished to accept the honour of a peerage.
Although I had considerable doubts as to whether Lord Goodman would on the whole be a happier and more contented human being than Mr Goodman, or whether in fact it would not be a prefix that would be more of an incubus than a blessing, vanity as always prevailed.
Almost anybody who is offered an honour of some kind indicates that he has had a period of anxious, nay tortured reflection, but somehow inexorably arrives at the conclusion that duty demands — duty to his family, his wife, his children, his bank manager — that he should accept the honour.
I am sorry to say that the same human impulses acted with me, particularly in relation to my bank manager, and I wrote a letter of acceptance.
On 12 June 1965 an Honours List was published containing my name on the list of life peers.
The press remained both loyal and helpful, notwithstanding George Wigg's characteristic intervention describing me, to my acute embarrassment, as a saint-like figure.
Fortunately those of my friends who knew me before were only amused by this foolish description and there was no general resentment of my peerage, which could properly have been attributed to many services that I had given to the government — of both colours.
After the election, I became a frequent visitor to Downing Street.
It is not true, as Lady Falkender has stated, that I became a visitor when George Wigg ceased to visit.
In fact, although George Wigg was close to Wilson, he never enjoyed the same intimate relationship, for the very good reason that he was a politician and did not enjoy Wilson's undivided trust.
I can claim that I did, and that I never breached that trust, assuming that I had any information of a sufficiently intriguing character to make it worthwhile betraying a friend.
Throughout the whole period of Harold Wilson's first premiership, and a substantial portion of his second premiership, I visited at least once a fortnight and sometimes once a week.
I was usually summoned by telephone and invited round to Downing Street at 8 p.m., when Wilson would be alone in the Cabinet room, which he preferred to any office or study, and where, sitting at the long Cabinet table, I often found myself  in the seat normally occupied by the Chancellor of the Exchequer and enjoyed moments of brief delusional glory!
Wilson would talk at great length and it became clear to me that the number of people in whom he could confide safely was very small; in fact it was clear that he had few, if any, complete political friends.
His number two for practical purposes was Roy Jenkins, but they were so totally different in disposition and outlook that the possibility of a friendship would not have existed, even if Wilson had not entertained dark suspicions about Jenkins's ambition to supplant him.
I do not believe Jenkins had any such ambition, and I am quite sure that it was not within his nature to take any active steps to intrigue, but Harold Wilson did believe — and conscientiously so — that such intrigues were taking place.
There was a particularly piquant episode when it had been reported to him that a meeting had allegedly taken place somewhere in the country, where Jenkins was supposed to have organised his cabal.
In fact I happened just to have spent the weekend with a dear friend and was well aware that at some point over the two days she had entertained everyone suspected of being concerned, and not a word of politics was discussed, nor a syllable about supplanting anybody.
But it would have taken more than me to convince Harold Wilson that this was so and that conspiracies were not afoot.
I believe that his suspicions in this regard were more than amply fuelled by the activities of Marcia Williams, who also was a great believer in the conspiracy theory.
As I have said, Harold Wilson usually summoned me to Downing Street for 8 p.m.
On one occasion I screwed up my courage to ask if I could come in at 9 p.m. instead, at which Harold looked puzzled and asked why.
‘Because,’ I said, somewhat impertinently, ‘I would like to dine.’
Such was the austerity of his habits that it never entered his head himself to have any kind of formal dinner in which I could join.
I was greatly relieved when he agreed, since although I regard Downing Street as an admirable place, I have never had any admiration for its cuisine.
Accordingly the time was changed: I went in at 9 p.m. and often stayed until midnight or past.
The author on his seventh birthday showing the assurance for which he was later renowned.
The author's mother with her beloved Pekinese ‘Pucci’.
June 1917.
The author, characteristically unworried by the small matter of the World War then in progress, with his elder brother Theodore.
The author's first degree at his first university — University College, London.
October 1933.
The author (front row, third from right) in charge of the Southern Command cricket team, which he captained by virtue of being the only officer who played cricket.
Brigadier Bacon centre front.
The author, Major Goodman, at Southern Command headquarters, with his oldest friend (then Major) Jim Gower.
The author presiding at his last meeting as chairman of the Arts Council in 1972.
From left to right: Sir Hugh Willatt, the author, Sir John Witt, and Lord Gibson (chairman elect).
The author with Lord Gibson and Lord Drogheda as Lord Gibson's supporters on his introduction to the House of Lords in 1975.
All costumes expensively hired.
c. 1986.
Lucian Freud embarking on a mammoth artistic task which occupied several months of early morning work.
There were four drawings, one of which appears to the left.
The author in  rarefied company (Prince Charles and Lord Harewood) at the English National Opera's Silver Jubilee Gala Concert on 12 September 1977.
The author in regal company at Covent Garden.
The Queen Mother, Sir Claus Moser, Lord Harlech and Lord Drogheda.
The author at a party in 1966 for Shmuel Agnon, a Nobel prize winner for his writing, with Jennie Lee (then Minister for the Arts).
The author with a rather importunate Harold Wilson.
There is no record of whether his request was granted.
These meetings were largely an opportunity for Harold Wilson to use me as the wall of a fives court against which he banged the ball.
I listened patiently.
Sitting in the Cabinet room at Downing Street, with the Prime Minister taking me into his confidence was an exhilarating experience from first to last.
I did not regard Harold Wilson as a wit, nor was his conversation particularly spiced with humour, but it was immensely interesting because he would talk to me about his problems and their supposed solutions, and seemingly consult me on the matter — he was a very polite man — although I was conscious that on most political issues  my own opinion was pretty well valueless and he recognised that.
Periodically Mary Wilson would poke her head round the door to see what progress was being made towards going to bed.
Harold would acknowledge her politely and indicate that it would not be many hours before he was going up.
One meeting I had with him occasioned an episode that has become public.
This was in 1967, when he told me, looking rather pleased with himself, ‘I have done something today that will not please you!’
I replied that it was not the first time, but that I had borne the previous occasions with courage and would do so now.
He said to me, ‘I have appointed Charlie Hill to be the chairman of the BBC.’
I was indeed deeply shocked.
I had nothing against Dr Hill, except that he seemed to me an entirely incongruous appointment that Harold had made for the wrong reasons.
I realised that Harold had appointed him in order to maintain a keener watch on what the BBC was saying about people.
This did not seem to me a reason for appointing a chairman; it might be a reason for appointing some sort of official; though in fact it would not be a sound reason for appointing anyone.
I told Harold that I did not approve of the appointment, but for reasons that he would not greatly appreciate.
‘My objection to Hill is that he is totally irrelevant to most of the things of value that the BBC does.
The achievement of the BBC is a cultural achievement.
It has done more, for example, for the understanding of music by ordinary people of this country than any other organisation, including the Arts Council’— this was a generous admission from the then chairman of the Arts Council —‘and it has done much for education and a great deal for general culture.
All these things, if I may say so, are entirely irrelevant so far as Dr Hill is concerned.’
Events proved this to be true.
He turned out to be an efficient chairman of the BBC but my first impression was amply confirmed since, although I had frequent dealings with him, he seemed to have absolutely no interest in what to me really mattered.
I enjoyed my politico-legal activities and sought to give the best service I could.
My activities had no goal and no aspiration, and I had no competitors, which meant that I rapidly acquired the confidence of the leadership of the Labour Party.
Through my office door there flowed an increasing number of Labour politicians seeking professional and personal advice on a score of topics.
Occasionally the advice sought was within my specialised knowledge as the chairman of the Arts Council.
This was particularly the case when Marcia Williams, having been powerfully lobbied by Arnold Wesker, was determined to persuade Harold Wilson to bestow some extra support on ‘Centre 42’, which was Wesker's notion of an organisation to supervise  the growth of the arts in this country.
His scheme had not found favour in my eyes.
He had spent in promoting the scheme money that could have been used in establishing it, and I was both impatient and critical of his capacity to launch and support a large new artistic organisation, particularly as his ideas of who would give him money were hopelessly unrealistic.
Nevertheless the Prime Minister, at the instigation of Mrs Williams, gave a tea party for Wesker at Downing Street.
Much of my activity was directed to firm advice to the Prime Minister and various other ministers to ignore scurrilous communications that were received with great frequency.
I do not believe that a Conservative government would have aroused hostility at that pitch, but the difference between a Tory government and a Labour government was that the latter threatened, or was thought to threaten, the money and positions of the rich — a threat which moved the rich to unreasoning hostility.
Harold Wilson probably underwent the most disagreeable experience of any Prime Minister in that it was regarded as respectable political tactics to traduce him on any grounds other than political.
To my knowledge there was never the slightest justification for this discreditable course of conduct; nor was it employed by the reputable members of the Opposition.
The matters I was asked to advise on occupied my attention, and a great number of files, for a very considerable length of time.
They were monotonous in the sense that they usually related to allegations that there was some special relationship between the Prime Minister and Marcia Williams, and indeed I advised Mrs Williams in connection with insulting letters that she received.
Right-wing newspapers singled her out for every conceivable hostility, particularly the circumstances of her divorce from her first husband.
Some doubts having been expressed about the validity of her divorce in America, I caused enquiries to be made and received from my American agents copies of the decree of divorce which was issued on 7 April 1961.
I do not believe that at any time, and certainly not at any time when I knew them, was there any emotional relationship between Harold Wilson and Marcia Williams.
I do believe, however, that he proceeded in considerable apprehension in his dealings with the lady; in fact, that he was plainly frightened of her because of her quick temper and also because he had for a number of reasons formed a most favourable view of her judgement.
He told me that one factor which had greatly influenced him was her suggestion that on election day Granada should shift Coronation Street so as not to keep in many of his supporters who would otherwise be thinking of going to the polls.
This was very sensible advice since such was the popularity of Coronation Street that a great many people  would have preferred to view it than to exercise any electoral function.
To this suggestion he attributed the Labour Party's success in the 1964 election and I am sure that no one could have persuaded him otherwise.
Harold Wilson was, for a man so seasoned in the ups and downs of public life, incredibly sensitive.
To the end of his political days he remained unreconciled to what I hope and believe every public person should become reconciled to: the unimportance of most opinions expressed by most people.
However, I am assured by those who know that public persons — premiers in particular— do not become reconciled to criticism, and despite affecting not to be, they remain immensely conscious of what is being said and are troubled if what is said is not to their liking.
Wilson took enormous trouble to capture a favourable press.
His approach to the matter was idiosyncratic.
For instance he read every morning newspaper before midnight on the previous day (in contrast to Harold Macmillan who claimed not to read newspapers) and as a result he went to bed fully — and very ill-advisedly — informed of the disagreeable things that were being said about him, since almost all the papers had Tory proprietors and Tory-inclined editors.
This obsession — and one can, I think, rightly call it that — involved me in probably the most embarrassing event of my professional life.
It arose out of a strike in July 1964 by ACTT television technicians claiming higher wages (and an improvement in working conditions) and it involved all the independent television companies, which included three for whom my firm acted.
The three concerned were TWW, with whom I had the closest ties, Southern Television and Granada.
The strike appeared to have reached a deadlock.
The television companies — using negotiating officers employed by them full-time — had made every effort to settle the strike short of accepting the ACTT's conditions.
I had had no intention of seeking to intervene in the strike and would not have done so but for the ubiquitous activity of George Wigg.
He started off by taking Jack Hylton — an old friend of mine and a leading member of the board of TWW — to meet some of the independent television proprietors, and at that stage he suggested to Hylton that he might use me as an intermediary.
I was not in the least keen, but when it became clear to me that my intervention would be frowned upon only slightly by my television clients, added to the fact that I had established good relations with George Elvin, the ACTT's general secretary, it seemed to me that there might be some sense in intervening.
I had previously been successful in negotiating a settlement between the Boulting brothers and Elvin's union, where I had enjoyed establishing a warm and friendly relationship With both sides.
Consequently I became involved in various meetings between the union and the representatives of the television companies, particularly a very long one at my home in Ashley Gardens, where Harold Wilson was invited to attend and indeed did so.
I had worked out a peace formula that I thought might be acceptable, but when I showed it to Wilson he scoffed at it as being altogether too legalistic and proceeded to provide me with a formula of his own.
Since I am a mild and humane man, I did not tell him that it was utterly hopeless, but as a matter of deference to him I presented his formula to George Elvin, who declined to have anything to do with it.
Thus rebuffed, Wilson was willing to consider that my own formula — inadequate and clumsy as it was — might at least be presented to the union.
It was presented in a further long meeting, going on well into the early hours of the morning, when George Elvin, having conferred with several of his senior colleagues on my telephone, returned to say that they would accept the proposal.
This was, in fact, the end of the strike and the technicians returned to work.
I had done very little imaginative work and would not have regarded this as my greatest negotiating success, but it was certainly so regarded by Harold Wilson who assured me that my name would be kept out of the proceedings, since I had then, and retain, a keen dislike for gratuitous publicity.
The upshot of this little matter was to leave me labelled as ‘Mr X’— a pseudonym invented by Harold Wilson and which has attached itself to me throughout the years, but never offensively.
However, someone in Wilson's office proceeded to leak my name to the press, which used it as an opportunity for jibes at him, particularly as he had contrived an impression that the negotiations had succeeded because of him.
I did not begrudge Wilson this, since I had no wish for my own part to be revealed, but for some reason best known to himself he decided that he would at least claim the credit for having found me.
The Daily Telegraph carried a long story without mentioning my name, since Michael Berry was well disposed to me and had no wish to cause me embarrassment.
But no similar restraint was shown by the others.
The most flattering story was in the Financial Times of 8 July 1964.
I quote this, notwithstanding that it was unduly polite to me, and I disclaim any intention ever to persuade anyone to take cyanide.
After he became Prime Minister, I found myself comforting Harold Wilson on a number of occasions.
His indignation frequently boiled over to a point where he thought and demanded that a libel writ should be issued.
I may say that despite my reputation of being trigger-happy where libel writs are concerned, I restrained him by all sorts of expedients.
When the situation got beyond the normal discouraging advice, I would inform him that it was necessary to take counsel's opinion before we proceeded any further.
The counsel I used was an exceptionally suitable person, Sir Joseph Molony QC, the son of a Northern Ireland judge.
He was an extremely effective and wise lawyer, but he was also a man who had the common sense to understand the nature of the advice I required; it was advice that would discourage Harold Wilson from proceeding any further; so much so that there were only three occasions when we actually started proceedings on his behalf.
The first occasion, in 1967, was the most sensational.
A pop group — happily, as I know, since disappeared — which called itself ‘The Move’ sent a postcard all over the place, including, impertinently, to Downing Street, advertising their new record.
The postcard depicted a crudely drawn picture of Harold Wilson in bed with a particular lady, with Mrs Wilson looking through the door, and various other offensive allusions.
On that occasion we lost no time in speeding over to the courts, finding a judge, and obtaining an injunction almost at once.
An action was instituted — the only libel action where I acted for Harold Wilson which came to court — and I thought it wise to brief a member of the Opposition  to act as counsel on his behalf.
Accordingly for the only time ever I briefed Quintin Hogg (as he then was).
The case was, of course, settled since the pop group had no defence, and Harold Wilson behaved very generously.
The retribution actually extracted had a biblical appropriateness.
They were made to disgorge all the profits made from the record and this sum was, according to my recollection, donated to a charity.
On the day the apology from ‘The Move’ was published, the International Herald Tribune (a Paris-based publication owned by one of the most important newspaper entities in the USA — the Whitney Communications Corporation) published an article headed ‘The Other Woman in the Life of Harold Wilson’, which was grossly libellous of him and Marcia Williams.
Proceedings were instituted and various attempts were made by intermediaries to settle the matter, but ultimately the effective voice was that of Sir Solly (later Lord) Zuckerman, who used his powerful influence in the United States to persuade the newspaper to settle the matter.
It was necessary for me to travel to New York.
This I did in what I thought were circumstances of great secrecy.
I tiptoed on to the plane, hardly breathed while I was on it, and was conveyed with utmost speed to my usual resting place at the Pierre Hotel.
I was about to contact the American lawyer acting for the defendants, Mr William Rogers (later to become famous as Secretary of State under Nixon), when the telephone rang and it was the New York Times enquiring when I was going to meet him.
Since then I have realised that the best way of avoiding publicity is to proclaim everything you are doing as loudly as possible.
This means that if it is of public interest it will appear in all the newspapers and no particular paper will have the incentive to try to procure a scoop.
My negotiations were successful and the matter was peacefully concluded by an apology and a generous payment of damages, destined once again for a charity.
Since in connection with this American libel we did not employ Mr Quintin Hogg, I wrote him a short letter and received a courteous reply: The third occasion when we instituted proceedings was several years later, in 1971, when Harold Wilson was back in opposition, and related to the activities of the BBC, which produced a thoroughly incompetent piece of television called Yesterday's Men .
Apart from the offensive nature of the title, since it related almost entirely to former Cabinet ministers of the Labour Party, the programme had been procured by a series of deceptions.
The individuals concerned, including particularly Harold Wilson and Roy Jenkins, were persuaded to take part in the belief that it was to be a serious piece of film-making.
In fact it was a relatively innocent send-up.
Roy Jenkins, an extremely sensible man who is less vulnerable to criticism than most, regarded the matter with mild amusement.
I first learnt of it when, dining one night in a London restaurant, I received an urgent summons from Harold.
On arrival I found him, Roy Jenkins and one or two others gathered.
Harold was fulminating.
He demanded action be taken at once.
I could sympathise with his feelings, but in fact the principal ridicule was addressed to poor Roy Jenkins, who was shown in the film floating through the air while engaged in a game  of tennis — at which he is quite a competent player.
But Harold was not to be soothed: he demanded retribution, he demanded action, not so much because of the ridicule but because at some stage in the programme it was alleged that he had made advantageous use of privileged or secret material in an improper fashion in relation to a book he was then about to publish.
I thereupon telephoned the director-general of the BBC, Charles Curran, and arranged that he would come to my home that evening.
He arrived with one or two colleagues at 11 p.m.
I indicated that legal action was, in my view, inappropriate in respect of what was a rather feeble attempt at satire, and the importance of the programme would be enhanced to an absurd extent if anyone depicted in it took it seriously, but none of us liked being ridiculed.
The meeting, however, failed to produce a satisfactory outcome (at least so far as Harold Wilson was concerned), and I wrote a letter to the BBC demanding an apology in some ensuing programme.
The negotiations dragged on and in the end I was constrained to issue a writ.
I may say that it was not my intention to allow Harold Wilson to become involved in a full-scale lawsuit in circumstances where not so much odium but ridicule would be poured on him.
As is often the case, the principal odium falls on an innocent party.
There are various former members of the BBC who believe that I was the instigator of the action against them, but unlike politicians I bear this sort of thing with a great deal of tolerance, taking what I think is a sensible view that one cannot make omelettes without breaking eggs.
It is almost impossible to forge any sort of career associated with public life or public men where you do not yourself become the object of hostility in some quarter.
In any event, in due course a suitable solatium in the form of an apology was offered to Harold Wilson — or at lest a solatium which he regarded as suitable since he possesses the invaluable quality of being able to convince himself of the correctness of whatever he does — and the matter ended.
But it remains in the BBC's history even if it does not remain in the history of the Labour Party.
INTERMEDIARY
MY ENTRY INTO the Rhodesian scene in 1968 was purely accidental.
I had been invited to 10 Downing Street for dinner a number of times and on one of those occasions Harold Wilson asked me if I could suggest someone who would go to Salisbury and meet Ian Smith in order to find out whether there was any basis for renewing negotiations.
UDI had been declared in November 1965 and an official meeting had taken place on HMS Tiger in December 1966 which had been a fiasco.
This was the first time that Smith and Wilson had met.
Smith knew that Wilson was a socialist: that he could never admit any discrimination based on racial factors, and all the things that Smith abominated.
So there was a clash of personalities which was a small handicap in these early negotiations.
I suggested to Wilson that there had to be a short cooling-off period, after which Max Aitken would be a suitable person to go to Rhodesia as an unofficial ambassador, since in the war he had flown with Smith in the RAF and they had become good friends.
In consequence of my suggestion, Harold Wilson asked Aitken and myself to dine with him to discuss the matter and to my amazement Max Aitken said that he would go, but only if I accompanied him.
I agreed.
Our trip, in August 1968, was to be in the utmost secrecy and we were to fly to Johannesburg under the names of Mr Aitken and Mr Goodman.
Max, typically, brought a girlfriend.
At the airport he kept looking back as we were walking towards our plane; eventually I looked back too and saw an attractive young woman hurrying along after us.
It had been arranged that I would remain in Johannesburg and Max would proceed ahead to Salisbury to see whether Ian Smith would wish to see me.
Max was a diplomat — a combination of Dr Watson and Inspector Clouseau.
He sent messages en clair which were highly secret and carefully ciphered messages that were of no possible secret value.
Smith agreed to see me and so I flew to Salisbury, arriving on a Wednesday.
Max told me that Smith would meet us on the following Monday, which would have meant waiting around for five days.
This was unacceptable.
I insisted that Smith meet me there and then, for five minutes only, which he agreed to do.
When we met I told him that I did not think he had anything more urgent to attend to, and if he thought he had something more important, then his priorities were wrong.
He decided that we would start the next day, Thursday, at 9 a.m.
And we did not stop for four days, discussing every detail, going over every bit of ground.
The negotiations were in total secrecy — not even his Cabinet were informed.
When we appeared to have finished, I suggested to Smith that it would be very unsatisfactory for two people holding no position in diplomacy to render an oral report.
It appeared to me to be necessary that we should set out our agreed recommendations in some separate document.
This suggestion turned out to be greatly to my own detriment.
Smith agreed that such a report was needed and indicated that, as I had suggested it, I ought to prepare it.
This reluctantly I agreed to do.
I sat up all night on the Sunday and wrote a nineteen-page document.
Smith had lent me his very able stenographer and we worked until dawn, when the memorandum was typed and ready for me to take to Smith first thing in the morning.
Smith was a slow reader and took about an hour to read and ponder the document, after which he approved it and asked me to take it to Harold Wilson.
Max and I were delighted with the result, but when I got back to the hotel I was taken violently ill and had to be put to bed.
It was then that I experienced a side of Max that I had not known before: he was most caring and attentive, almost maternal, getting doctors and nurses, staying with me and looking after me in every way.
It was very touching.
We then came back to London where fortunately no journalists or television crews were lying in wait for us, because the mission had been unofficial.
It was on the basis of that document that the talks on board HMS Fearless were convened in October 1968.
Those talks failed from the very outset.
I am sufficiently egotistical to believe that one of the reasons why they failed was that I was not present.
Wilson's Cabinet — jealous of a non-political and non-party intruder — had decided not to include me in the team.
This was a mistake.
Nothing happened for some while after the collapse of the Fearless talks.
While he was in opposition, Ted Heath had asked me if I would go to Rhodesia on behalf of the Conservative Party if they were returned to power.
I told him that I could not go on behalf of any party, but that I would go on behalf of the government if he came to power, since I knew  the situation and could be of some help.
Duly, when the Conservatives were returned in 1970, Ted Heath asked me to lead a delegation to see whether we could work out an agreement.
Over the years I have developed a profound belief that the Foreign Office has criteria entirely its own.
There is an old saying that there are three kinds of intelligence: human, animal and military.
But a fourth kind of intelligence might be added, which is diplomatic intelligence, which bears not the remotest relationship to any of the other three, nor to any kind of intelligence that can be identified by any human being.
It would be unfair to say that I have formed a low view of the Foreign Office; rather I have formed the view that Foreign Office activities have in some way become totally disconnected from the human race.
The first evidence of this surfaced on the second trip that I made to Rhodesia, in April 1971.
I was told by the FO in London that I would be met at Johannesburg airport — since British aircraft could not land in Rhodesia while UDI existed — and would be conveyed to the British Consulate there where I could have a rest.
I would then be put on a plane to Salisbury.
On arrival in Johannesburg, the first thing I noticed was a young, fresh, smiling face, who turned out to be the Second Secretary at the Consulate.
This amiable young man greeted me enthusiastically and informed me that he would be driving me himself, in his motor car which he had brought from Finland.
Needless to say, being a Finnish car it had a left-hand drive.
South Africa is one of the few countries in the world where people drive on the left, so that most motorcars have a right-hand drive.
However, this young man, besides having the wrong car, was not the most talented of drivers and my first ten minutes were taken up with some anxiety about the likelihood of our arriving at the Consulate intact.
The next three-quarters of an hour were taken up with wondering why it was taking us so long to get from the airport to the Consulate, and what genius had decided to place the Consulate some hundreds of miles away.
The young man admitted in due course, when we had been driving for an hour, that he did not know the way and was totally lost.
We endeavoured to enquire from a black policeman.
The difficulty there was that neither the young man nor the policeman could understand a single word of what the other was saying.
So back we got into the car and ultimately by some good fortune we arrived at the Consulate.
Our arrival was just in time to take off again, so that I had no opportunity for a rest, a meal or anything else.
We made straight back to the airport and I was put on a Rhodesian plane for Salisbury, where negotiations were renewed and eventually I returned to London.
A month later, I made my third trip to Rhodesia.
As the Foreign Office was still trying to maintain the secrecy of my visits, it was determined that on this occasion I would be met at Johannesburg airport and driven by road to the Rhodesian border where I would be picked up and conveyed by the Rhodesian authorities.
I made one stipulation only to the Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, which was that my driver should not be the same amiable young man who had led me such a dance around Johannesburg.
Judge then my feelings when the first face I was to see at Jo'burg airport was the self-same Second Secretary, delighted that he had again been honoured with an important secret mission.
This time, however, we were not going to the Consulate but driving straight to the border.
I got into the car, to be told by him that he had made the most elaborate arrangements for lunch.
‘I'm delighted,’ I said.
‘What hotel are we going to?’
‘We aren't,’ he replied, smiling angelically.
‘I have arranged for a picnic lunch.’
‘A picnic lunch?’
‘Yes!
And you will be pleased to hear that I have even managed to bring a bucket of ice to chill the wine.’
I replied rather coldly that I had not drunk alcohol since 1939, and that it had been my hope that we should stop somewhere where I could wash up generally, relieve myself and have a little rest.
But such was the disappointment on his face that I was compelled to agree that we would enjoy such a picnic, which indeed is a delicious meal in other circumstances — at Henley during summer, or at Glyndebourne on a good afternoon — but in the middle of the South African veld, on our way to Rhodesia, its incongruity would have occurred to anyone except to a British diplomat.
Anyway, we set off and drove for about forty miles.
A nagging doubt began to affect me when I observed a signpost to Cape Town.
‘I do believe that is a signpost to Cape Town,’ I remarked, trying hard to prevent my voice from cracking.
‘Are we proceeding north or south?’
The young man looked rather bewildered.
‘Rhodesia,’ I said, ‘to my understanding is north of Johannesburg and Cape Town is due south.
And this sign says we are going to Cape Town.’
‘Oh!’ he said, stopping the car and looking hurriedly at a map.
‘We are indeed going the wrong way.’
The car was turned round.
That I maintained my usual composure was to me a miracle, and once more we were on our way to the frontier.
A further indication of the skill and care with which the arrangements were made was our accommodation for the night.
We stayed in a frontier hotel about 6,000 feet up, in a night of freezing cold.
The accommodation consisted of semi-converted stables, and it will be known by those acquainted with the residence of horses that the door of a stable is so constructed that there are two gaps, one between the door and the floor and another between the door and the ceiling, and through these gaps  blew drafts of freezing cold.
There was no heating in the room and an inadequacy of blankets, and I finally put on all my clothes again and tried my best to snuggle under the only blanket to snatch an hour of sleep.
In the morning providentially we set off for the frontier, and there to my great delight I saw the familiar face of Mr Derrick Robinson, Rhodesia's Assistant Commissioner of Police, standing beside a BMW motor car which was to convey me to Salisbury.
As we got in and set off he said to me, ‘Have you ever seen Bulawayo?’
I told him I had not.
‘Ah!’ he said.
‘Would you like to go via Bulawayo?’
I said that I would be only too pleased, since we had no commitments until the next morning.
What he did not tell me — and I only learnt during the course of the journey — was that we were adding about a thousand miles to our route.
In normal circumstances this would not have mattered, but at the time Rhodesia was meant to be enduring the most severe and effective economic sanctions, particularly with regard to the supply of oil.
The fact that a man was prepared to drive a completely unnecessary 1,000 miles struck me as indicative that the sanctions were not working.
Indeed, one had only to go to Rhodesia to see the ample supply of consumer goods in the shops from every part of the world to realise that sanctions were nothing but an empty farce, and that the claim that they were going to bring Mr Ian Smith to his knees was a total fraud.
A depressing feature of my visits to Rhodesia arose from my firm instructions to negotiate only with Mr Smith and to avoid receiving protests or demonstrations from any quarter.
The situation is best illustrated by a letter that reached me at this time from Mrs Mugabe: There was no way in which I could reply to the letter except by a futile expression of sympathy.
Fortunately the matter has now corrected itself and, whoever is in jail, Mr Mugabe is at liberty and is the long-standing leader of the nation who has reinforced his position by appropriate leadership legislation.
On the other hand, on one of my visits I was at a meeting when I heard some commotion outside and asked what it was.
It was students demonstrating, as a result of which a number of them were arrested and  I later learnt that a few were sentenced to be flogged.
I was outraged by it and got on to Smith at once, saying that on no account should the students be flogged and that if the sentence was carried out I would leave immediately.
‘You are potty!’ he replied, but there was no flogging.
It was during my fourth visit to Rhodesia that I managed to take some time off.
The talks were going very well and Smith said that he wanted to give us a holiday and take us to Victoria Falls in his plane.
I forbade the entire delegation to travel in his rickety contraption, because if something happened and we all disappeared, our negotiations would have been wasted.
So some of us went to Victoria Falls and I went to Durban where I had some relatives and attended the July Handicap, the only horse race in the world that runs through the streets.
It was then that some international misunderstanding arose, because the President of South Africa was at the race too and a rumour got around that I had engineered the trip to talk with the South Africans, which of course was not true.
The four visits that I paid to Rhodesia in 1971 with my small team of senior officials were regarded as furnishing sufficient firm ground to found serious negotiations towards a settlement.
I had maintained the closest contact with the Foreign Office in the intervals between each trip and was a frequent visitor to the Foreign Secretary's official residence in Carlton Gardens.
It was not difficult to detect that his government was anxious and, if this word could ever be used about the placid Sir Alec Douglas-Home, was passionately anxious to obtain an agreement, just as Harold Wilson previously had had the same anxiety.
An agreement was undoubtedly regarded as an electoral feather in the political cap.
On my fifth and final visit, the operation was led by Alec Douglas-Home himself, although he played no part in the actual discussions except at some crucial moments when decisions had to be made.
The negotiations, in which Rhodesia was represented by Mr Ian Smith, with Mr Lardner-Burke and Mr Howman — both understood by me to be very hard-liners —led to a provisional agreement on proposals for a settlement.
Both sides undertook to take steps to implement these proposals once the British government had established that they would be acceptable to the people of Rhodesia as a whole.
The agreement was based on the famous — some would say infamous-five principles: unimpeded progress to majority rule (already enshrined in the 1961 Constitution) had to be maintained and guaranteed; there would have to be guarantees against retrogressive amendment of the Constitution; there would need to be immediate improvement in the political status of the black population; there would have to be progress towards ending racial discrimination; and the British government would  need to be satisfied that any basis proposed for independence was acceptable to the people of Rhodesia as a whole.
The major proposals for a settlement were, first, the adoption of a draft Constitution, including a declaration of rights providing a reasonable guarantee for personal liberty.
Then came the real crux of the matter, which was the new requirement to qualify for a vote.
In entrenched provisions it was established that a new roll of African voters (the African higher roll) would be created with the same qualifications as those for the European roll, i.e. either an income of 1,800 Rhodesian dollars per annum or ownership of property valued at not less than $3,600, or, an income of $1,200 per annum or ownership of property valued at not less than $2,400 and four years of secondary education.
In addition there was an African lower roll which was a bit of a cheat, designed to suggest a much greater enfranchisement of Africans than in fact would take place.
Another proposal was that an independent commission would be set up to examine the question of racial discrimination.
Further and highly satisfactory was an agreement that, having already released 23 detainees since the end of March 1971, the Rhodesian government would state their intention to release a further 31 detainees out of 93 as soon as the necessary arrangements could be made and that there would be a new special review of the cases of all detainees.
I came back to London before the actual signing of the agreement because I had to attend an Arts Council meeting.
This time the press and the media were there and I declined to make any comment on the negotiations.
But I gave my genuine reason for returning earlier, which was the Arts Council's monthly meeting, in which I was deeply interested and whose chairman I was at the time.
However it was considered by everyone that the real reason was to let Alec Douglas-Home have a triumphal return.
This was an undeserved tribute to my magnanimity.
Needless to say the proposed settlement — widely publicised — drew a good deal of criticism, almost entirely from the Left who were for a variety of reasons extremely hostile to white Rhodesians.
I will not go into the extreme technicality of the proposed constitution since it is now only a matter for constitutional historians.
It suffices to say that under it, once black Rhodesians had acquired a sizeable number of seats, but far less than a majority, they would have been in a powerful position to form a coalition with any breakaway group of whites.
It was, I think, unlikely that the white Rhodesians — who had already shown some signs of division in their opinion — would have remained undivided indefinitely and a breakaway group might well have sought the allegiance of the black population, enabling them to play a large and even decisive role in  government.
This consideration was never advanced or even pondered by the opponents of the agreement.
For me the aftermath of the agreement was unpleasant and caused an estrangement — happily only brief — from some old friends.
The Labour Party opposed the agreement fervently but almost entirely on political grounds.
Some of Harold Wilson's shadow cabinet — notably the shadow Lord Chancellor, Lord Elwyn Jones, Richard Crossman and Barbara Castle — were the most determined adversaries.
After the agreement was reached, indignant voices were raised in many quarters, but I am happy to say that few, if any, regarded my behaviour as treacherous.
The principal complaint about me was that I was politically naive — a complaint again made by Michael Foot when I opposed his Bill to introduce a closed shop into journalism, which I describe later.
Such was my disposition to conciliation, the argument ran, that the temptation to reach agreement on any footing was irresistible to me.
There is some validity in this latter complaint.
I prefer a bad agreement to a prolonged disagreement.
This does not mean that I do not believe there are issues where principle is paramount; but there are great many issues where principle is misguided or even hypocritical, and it is a fair accusation that I tend to suspect this more often than most people.
My own position was perhaps rendered the more difficult by Ian Smith's assertion at one time that I was the only representative from this country that he trusted.
Obviously a testimonial of this kind was not designed to endear me to a number of critics.
Nevertheless, my personal reputation with the Labour Party was such that my association with Smith was viewed with tolerance if not with great approval.
Smith had a reputation for being devious and unreliable, which I found to be far from true.
He bargained hard and was stubborn, but once he was persuaded and agreed, he usually stuck by his word.
He also had the advantage of being untainted by corruption — unlike some white South African politicians and, of course, many black African ones.
In any event, a few particularly strident voices denounced me over the agreement.
Lord Caradon went to town.
He made claims to be an authority on Africa, and I could not help suspecting that subconsciously he felt that an incompetent ignoramus had invaded his territory.
On the whole I bore the strictures with courage in the firm belief that what had been done was the best that could be done.
But the agreement was to fail.
It was subject to a ‘Test of Acceptability’ —the fifth principle — and could only be confirmed and implemented after the British government had satisfied itself that it was acceptable to the people of Rhodesia as a whole.
The whites accepted it wholeheartedly, but the Africans did not want it.
The Test of Acceptability was carried  out by Lord Pearce and a number of other people, including Lord Harlech, and it was turned down flat by the Africans.
The reason was, I think, that the Africans were deeply suspicious of Ian Smith and believed that any agreement which was devised to give them full democratic rights would in fact never be implemented.
They had no faith in Smith and so rejected the agreement he made.
This brings me to perhaps my most serious criticism of the Foreign Office, relating to the Rhodesian negotiations themselves.
We negotiated with immense pain and at great length to achieve an agreement with Mr Smith.
The role of the FO in the discussions was both crucial and disastrous.
They had provided me with a small team of assistants and advisers, and a more agreeable collection of people one could not have found.
They included a very nice young man who was my Rhodesian adviser.
He suffered from the small disadvantage that he had never been to Rhodesia.
This in an ordinary way would not have mattered, but it mattered in this particular case and mattered quite fatally, because at various stages of the discussion, when we seemed to be reaching an agreement, I pressed Mr Smith about whether there was any likelihood, whatever the agreement was, that it would be acceptable to the entire population of Rhodesia, which the British government had laid down as a precondition.
It was clear that the white population would accept an agreement with alacrity.
When I was there they were desperate for one and anxious that the sanctions should be lifted.
People in the street, who knew that I was engaged in negotiations, would come up to me, grab me by my lapels and say, ‘Get an agreement, we beg you.
Get an agreement!’
But I had no such indication regarding the black population.
It was impossible to get any indication since my instructions from the Foreign Office were to negotiate only with Mr Smith and his people and not to have any contact with the black population during the period of my negotiations.
Whether this was wise or not it is impossible to say.
But what, of course, was not known to me, nor to Mr Smith, nor to my Rhodesian adviser who obviously knew nothing about Rhodesia, was the relationship between the tribal chiefs and the tribes: the chiefs do what the tribes tell them, not the other way round.
Whenever we asked for reassurance, Mr Smith assured us that his tribal chiefs were loyal to him and would vote for whatever agreement he advised them to.
However, when the chiefs went into tribal lands to ask their views about the agreement, they received an emphatic direction, in every case except one, that the chiefs should reject the agreement and have nothing to do with it.
In the result, when Lord Pearce went with his committee to determine whether or not the agreement was acceptable to the entire population, needless to say he reported that the vast majority of whites were in favour but that there was almost total rejection by the blacks.
In consequence, months of painful and arduous negotiations had been wasted, largely because of the ignorance or the Bourbon attitude of the Foreign Office who did not bother to find out something on the basis that they already knew every piece of human knowledge that is worth knowing.
Having travelled five times to Rhodesia, having spent hours in laborious, painful, and indeed anguished disputation with Mr Smith and his colleagues, to discover that it was all futile because of arrogance on the part of the Foreign Office is something about which a saint would undoubtedly entertain a certain resentment.
I cannot review the Rhodesian episode without regret, though it was a fascinating adventure with a disappointing, indeed from some points of view tragic, conclusion; but it was the forerunner of the later (Lancaster House) agreement in 1979 and to that extent had some beneficial consequences, and it was, of course, useful as a background to new negotiations.
By the time of the Lancaster House talks, Mrs Thatcher was in power, and I had very few dealings with her, and so I was not invited to participate.
The only person who approached me was poor Ian Smith, who came to London but was not a representative at the talks.
He felt utterly friendless and Max Aitken arranged a luncheon for him which I attended.
I advised Smith very strongly that the best course of action for him was to throw all his weight and support behind the Lancaster House agreement, whatever it turned out to be, which he showed great reluctance to do because in his view Lancaster House was a total capitulation to the black population.
I said that the best thing he could do for the whites was to demonstrate to the blacks that they fully supported the widest possible franchise, and that if he did that he would emerge as a statesman, with a statesman's view of his responsibilities.
And that was the last time I saw him.
Ian Smith was essentially a worthy man, who unfortunately submitted to an ineradicable hostility — not to the blacks but to being governed by the blacks.
In this he was supported by his white Cabinet and nearly all the whites of Rhodesia.
Although I rated Mr Smith quite high in terms of integrity, I did not regard him as having a superior intellect and throughout the negotiations with which I was concerned he remained blinded by a prejudiced belief that the only rule in Rhodesia which was tolerable or possible was white rule.
Nevertheless he maintained a friendly attitude towards me and after my initial difficulty made himself available whenever he was needed.
Needless to say, I found his political philosophy disagreeable and unacceptable, but as my mission was to reach agreement  I avoided becoming involved in basic considerations or in any way assessing the value of white rule as against black.
It was in 1972, after I had trekked to and from Rhodesia on several occasions, and the mission in which I was involved appeared to be a triumphant success, that I received a letter from Ted Heath, who asked whether it would be acceptable to me to receive a CH (Companion of Honour).
The letter was couched in terms which contrived to suggest that if it was not acceptable then he would think of something better.
But, if I may say so, it was totally acceptable, and I could not think of anything better, so I agreed with alacrity.
Normally anyone who receives an award in an Honours List attends on a particular day at the Palace when Her Majesty confers them wholesale.
Knights come first, then come DBEs, then come CBEs and so on and so forth, until you get down to the lowest award, which I think is the British Empire Medal.
I understand that two or three days are required to complete it all.
But a few awards, and the Companion of Honour is one, involve a personal interview with Her Majesty by special appointment.
I was telephoned by the late Lord Plunket, Her Majesty's Equerry, a man of exceptional charm whom I knew well and liked, who arranged the appointment and said diffidently, ‘I hope you do not mind wearing a morning coat.’
As I am a complete traditionalist I agreed to whatever form of costume was required.
On the day in question I attended at Buckingham Palace and was received by Lord Plunket, and to my delight also found Lady Susan Hussey, who was the Lady-in-Waiting and the wife of my old friend Duke Hussey.
The two of them told me that no formalities were required, that I would simply be received in a small private room, and that there would even be the possibility that I would be given a glass of sherry — which presented some difficulty since I am teetotal.
In the event I was shown into a small room with Her Majesty, where we sat together for some twenty minutes chatting amiably about almost anything under the sun.
It was a tremendous privilege, and compared to lining up with hundreds of others in order to receive some trivial award like a knighthood, the conferment of the CH stands out as something of special quality and considerable pleasure.
In general it would be incongruous, having myself been highly honoured, to express any criticism of the honours system, but in my view its main vice has been the determination of unsuccessful candidates to receive an award.
I am fairly constantly approached either by the honour-seeker or his wife to assist him to feature in the list.
In itself there is little harm in this, but I have noticed that it is very easy for the quest to become obsessional.
The lives of both the Duke of Windsor and his spouse were  rendered miserable in their last years by her quest, and his support for that quest, to be entitled to the description of ‘Her Royal Highness’.
In a similar way this is equally true of people in quest of honours, with the corresponding waste of time and effort expended in trying to secure the bauble.
Over the years I have had an interest in medical matters and have been involved from a legal viewpoint on a number of occasions.
I have already described the Croydon Corporation case, which was the result of an epidemic of typhoid, and I have mentioned my long association with the Royal College of Psychiatrists, and the fact that my only medical qualification is as an honorary fellow of that college.
I have not described a tenacious battle to secure compensation for a number of distinguished urologists who contracted hepatitis, believedly at a medical banquet, and for whom at the end of the day a moderate degree of compensation was — against considerable odds — secured.
My major intervention in medical matters came three years after my Rhodesian episode.
I became engaged in a violent battle, first on behalf of the profession and subsequently as a mediator, when Mrs Barbara Castle — then the Secretary of State for Health and Social Security — pursued an honourable, but in my view misguided, determination to eradicate private practice from this country.
It is important to do justice to the situation, which necessarily involves a description of a very remarkable woman for whom I have considerable respect.
Her Diaries (published in 1980), in respect of the years 1974–6 — the years when the battle was raging — deal in immense detail with every aspect of her activities as a Cabinet minister during that period.
They disclose a single-mindedness that is immensely creditable but in its unyielding quality explains a confrontation unequalled in any government's relationship with the medical profession.
Following the inconclusive election in February 1974, Harold Wilson formed a minority government dependent on Liberal support.
This was short-lived.
However, a second election took place in September of that year, which gave him a pathetic working majority of four.
Whereas, in what he called the short Parliament of 1974, no especially controversial measures could be introduced, the majority in the election later that year emboldened the government to take certain steps of a strongly political character, likely to arouse fierce opposition.
A prominent figure in the major controversy that arose was Mrs Castle.
I had known this lady for many years and could claim to have had a friendly relationship with her.
As I have described, she had consulted me many years back over a libel matter which I had discouraged her — unsuccessfully — from pursuing, with calamitous financial results; but I was able to give her a little assistance in another matter which to some small extent repaired the damage arising from the first disaster.
In Mrs Castle's Diaries I am referred to with varying degrees of approval and disapproval.
It seems clear that she found some difficulty in arriving at an assessment of her feelings in relation to me.
The first reference is a friendly one: ‘Lord Goodman had always been very generous with his legal advice to Labour MPs, including me, and Harold Wilson had used him for a number of assignments, including an exploratory visit with Sir Max Aitken to Ian Smith in August 1968 on the possibilities of a settlement.
But Lord Goodman never took the Labour Whip and was ready to use his remarkable abilities under any government for any cause which aroused his interest, notably the arts.’
No one could ask better.
Unhappily to record, this note of approval is not struck uniformly throughout the Diaries which describe, in more detail than I shall seek to emulate, my participation in the famous ‘pay beds’ negotiations.
I have always had a very considerable respect, and indeed admiration, for Mrs Castle.
She is a handsome woman, intelligent, articulate and faithful to inflexible socialist principles, which I must confess I have never shared.
She is a classic instance of a social doctrinaire who believes beyond all argument that socialist doctrine is the  panacea for all human ills.
She follows this belief through to what to her is a logical conclusion at every stage.
The one sensational deviation was her plan for trade-union reform contained in the now famous White Paper In Place of Strife .
Better informed political opinion can seek to explain how this particular proposal squared with her underlying beliefs.
But the pay beds issue was a battle on its own.
When Harold Wilson was re-elected in September 1974, she again became the Secretary of State for Health and Social Security.
She was never a woman for any compromise on a matter of principle.
She believed that private medicine ought not to coexist by the side of the Health Service; or perhaps more fairly, that if it did exist it should not derive any benefits from the Health Service, and that none of the resources of the Service ought properly to be available to private practitioners.
In August 1975 she produced a consultative document which was regarded by the medical profession at large— although socialist supporters in that profession did not share the view — as a declaration of war.
Entitled The Separation of Private Practice from NHS Hospitals , it repeated her commitment to legislate to withdraw pay beds and the private use of outpatient facilities from the NHS.
A pay bed was, of course, a bed which could be purchased within an NHS hospital and normally was to be found in the so-called private  wards of these hospitals.
These wards had a separate nursing staff; separate and usually more lavish facilities in the way of private rooms and different food; and the patient was attended by his own general practitioner and by consultants of his own choice, with a proviso that normally the consultant would need to be attached to the hospital concerned.
The problem of the private beds gave rise to a violence of dispute which seemed to me wholly out of proportion to the magnitude of the issue.
There were, at the time the trouble started, approximately 4,000 private beds in NHS hospitals out of a total of 400,000 hospital beds throughout the country.
To a pragmatist, such as I proudly claim to be, It was difficult to see why this issue should become a hanging matter.
It seemed ridiculous in a country that recognised a mixed economy, respected private wealth and acknowledged that a rich man could live in almost every respect infinitely better than a poor one.
It was, however, an issue that gave rise to an enormous emotional reaction on both sides.
Mrs Castle's argument, and an argument in which she sincerely believed, was that the retention of private medicine meant a reduction in the quality of service available to the National Health patient.
To some extent this was unarguably true, but not in my view to a sufficient extent to cause the furore.
However, it was possible to invoke a strong emotional reaction by drawing attention to the obvious fact that the paying patient could get a better and faster service than his National Health counterpart.
But large numbers of people set a value by this differential service, by no means restricted to those one could regard as rich.
Many people set much store by total privacy when they are ill.
It was this factor, more than any other, that created the controversial behaviour of a number of government ministers who contrived, when in need of treatment, to procure what were called ‘amenity beds’ in single rooms off the wards, but providing identical benefits to those found in the private wards.
For Mrs Castle, however, and for many of her colleagues, the fact that a rich man might save his life, where a poor man could not, was an unacceptable political proposition.
Its unacceptability would be shared by a great number of people, except that it is a levelling process restricted to a single aspect of human life, whereas the advantages of wealth can operate effectively and valuably in so many others.
The middle classes of this country will cling passionately to certain benefits that may necessarily arise from rejecting a socialist political system.
Private medicine turned out to be one of these issues, and private education another.
The doctors' case for the retention of pay beds was a strong one, although not as valid as was represented.
No problem arose so far as NHS general practitioners were concerned, except a very powerful dispute about the level of the compensation of junior doctors; but with the  consultants it was another story.
A few men of high principle refused to take any private patients at all and practised exclusively within the NHS.
Had all consultants done this, the problem would have evaporated, but it was hardly surprising that they did not, since the gilt on the medical gingerbread came from private practice.
There was hardly an important consultant who did not retain a consulting room in Harley Street or its environs, where private fees could be garnered.
To enable them to conduct their private practice economically and sensibly from their viewpoint, pay beds were an imperative.
If they could put their private patients into the private wards of the hospitals where they were already serving as NHS consultants, the organisation of their lives became infinitely easier.
If, in addition, they could hire for private patients the very expensive facilities in the way of X-ray machines, operating theatres and the like, to be found within the National Health Service, this too made their lives very much easier and in many cases made their private practice a possibility.
But Mrs Castle's dogmatism was not limited to the abolition of pay beds.
Her consultative paper provided for withdrawal of the private use of outpatient facilities from NHS hospitals as well.
One proposal by itself was anathema; the two together were poison.
The consultative document had an explosive effect when dropped among the profession.
They rallied their forces to resist it.
Part of that rally — and I am immodest enough to think a not unimportant part — was to enlist the services of my partner John Montgomerie (Monty) and myself to assist in preparing their answer to the consultative document.
We had the experience, sometimes agreeable, often traumatic, of meeting with the doctors constantly over a period, usually at the headquarters of BUPA in Essex Street, adjoining my office in Little Essex Street.
Some of the doctors — alas not many — were essentially reasonable men; but most of them had developed a positively insensate hatred for Mrs Castle.
The very mention of her name aroused fury.
The situation was thoroughly bedevilled by her own total intransigence in the matter, including antagonising the moderate elements in the DHSS.
The government's Chief Medical Officer, Dr Henry Yellowlees, was the son of a distinguished psychiatrist, whom I had on more than one occasion retained as an adviser in private practice.
In her Diaries , Mrs Castle described the mood at her office on the morning after the consultative paper appeared.
In her words: The reaction of these moderate elements unhappily left Mrs Castle cold and, worse still, unchanged in attitude.
My own task was made infinitely more difficult by the unconcealed and indeed — to use Mrs Castle's own word — hysterical reaction of the profession.
It was clear that both parties were set on a collision course, and I could not see the possibility of an out-and-out win for Mrs Castle.
What I could see was a thoroughly unsatisfactory situation whereby large elements of the medical profession remained profoundly hostile to government policy until a change of government should take place.
At very long meetings, punctuated by the arrival of quite excellent sandwiches — for me the most unhealthy of all foodstuffs — I had to listen to the outpourings of the leading fanatics in the medical profession; to the timorous intervention of the moderates; and happily to the constant, wise and soothing interventions of Derek Damerell, the chief executive of BUPA, to whom the country owes a debt that has never received proper recognition.
While Monty presided over drafting sessions designed to present the most cogent arguments against the government's consultative document, and to eradicate the violence of language frequently suggested by some of the medical men, my principal role was to sound the government, and especially Barbara Castle, about the possibilities of a compromise solution.
It was hard going, but as readers of her undoubtedly interesting although immensely tendentious book will discover, some progress was made, although so far as I was concerned with astonishing fluctuations in my popularity.
‘He is,’ she said most woundingly, ‘as slippery as an eel.’
A little later she indicates that I am partially returned to favour when I plan to write to The Times condemning the industrial action that was taken by the consultants: ‘If he really produces this letter to The Times I shall begin to have some faith in him.’
Happily, a footnote in her diary for 19 December 1975 states that, ‘His letter, condemning industrial action by the consultants, duly appeared in The Times on 22 December 1975.’
It read as follows: I had spent many weary hours and weary days of negotiation before arriving at the point where I withdrew from acting as an adviser to the profession because the consultants had embarked on strike action.
My letter to The Times makes my own position clear.
Rightly or wrongly, I could not accept that certain occupations having a particular duty to society could withdraw their essential services for financial considerations.
It was put to me very forcibly by the junior doctors that unless they had the power to withdraw their labour, how else could they ‘get their rights’?
My reply was a relatively feeble but an entirely sincere one: ‘There are some occupations and activities,’ I said to them, ‘where the extent of the benefits you receive depends upon the goodwill of the people you are serving.’
This was a difficult doctrine to establish, particularly since it was pointed out that my own activities were not remunerated in any such way; but nevertheless I found an impossible inconsistency in remaining an adviser to a profession that outraged this important principle.
Thus, for several weeks both Monty and I were relieved of any responsibility in the matter and turned our attention to other and more profitable activities; but I was foolish in the expectation that I should long be left in peace.
At some stage a suggestion arose from both sides — principally Damerell of BUPA so far as the doctors were concerned and, strangely enough, also from Barbara and the DHSS — that the consultancy strike was so damaging that a mediator should be sought.
I cannot resist  the admission that I was profoundly flattered when a telephone call from Harold Wilson at Downing Street invited me to mediate on the basis that, so far as they could see, I was for the moment the only tolerable candidate.
From that, alas, real trouble arose.
I arranged initially to meet the doctors and once again found myself confronting ‘the dreaded Grabham’, as Barbara Castle described Anthony (now Sir Anthony) Grabham, the distinguished surgeon who was the backbone of the doctors' resistance and the most recalcitrant in reaching any compromise of his firm belief that the state had no concern in directing their destiny.
At this first meeting I expressed appreciation at their continuing confidence in me; undertook to mediate (this time unpaid); and also to involve the services of John Montgomerie, whose clear-headed, quiet wisdom had earned him the respect and confidence of everyone he had dealt with.
After an exchange of pleasantries, I then proceeded to outline a plan.
‘The first thing to do,’ I said, ‘is to resume discussions with the Secretary of State.’
The howl of dissent that came from the entire room staggered me.
‘Never,’ they said, ‘will we meet that woman.’
Barbara Castle would find it difficult to believe the vehemence of my protests at this foolishly obdurate attitude, but obdurate it remained.
Finally, I said, ‘Well, if you will not meet Mrs Castle, how are we to make any progress?
Who will you meet?’
Rather grudgingly a voice said, ‘The Prime Minister’, and supporting voices were heard all over the room.
It was clear to me that nothing could be done unless Harold Wilson intervened.
He had, until then, been very unwilling to encroach on the authority of his formidable Secretary of State.
Here I have to review the possibility of a cardinal error, but I will leave my readers to judge.
My instinct, both of mercy and goodwill, was to seek Barbara's approval to a reference to the Prime Minister, but an even stronger instinct told me that it was likely to be met by a flat refusal and that the negotiating process would be stillborn.
I discussed the matter with John Montgomerie and on my own responsibility decided to telephone Harold Wilson to seek his advice.
I telephoned Downing Street in quest of the Prime Minister, but was told that he was in Rome awaiting a call from me since he was anxiously concerned about the consultants and the possibility that their action might indeed have fatal consequences for some patients.
I was told how to contact him in Rome and within a few minutes he was on the line.
‘Harold,’ I said, ‘I have had an initial meeting with the doctors and there is an appalling hurdle in the way of beginning negotiations.
They flatly refuse to meet with Barbara.
I have argued with them until I am blue in the face; have indicated to them that it is near  anarchy when the profession will not meet the Cabinet minister responsible; but I have made no impression at all.
A few, a tiny few, recognise how unreasonable this attitude is, but the overwhelming majority are for the time being standing firm.’
Harold asked the question that I expected; ‘If they won't meet Barbara, who will they meet?’
‘They have indicated to me that they will be pleased to meet with you and any advisers that you may have.
I have no doubt that if you are there, they would attend a meeting with Barbara also present.’
It was clear to me that, although Harold realised the total impropriety of the medical attitude, human nature made it impossible for him not to have a certain mild satisfaction.
‘What do you think?’ he said.
I was unhesitating.
‘I think the crisis is sufficiently important to forget the courtesies.
I think you ought to meet them.’
‘In that case I will.’
I could hear the resolve in his voice.
But a moment later there was the faintest note of trepidation when he said, ‘But who will tell Barbara?
Will you?’
My reply was immediate.
‘I do not get danger money!
You have a great number of secretaries, aides and the like.
One of them must do it.’
‘Very well,’ said Harold.
Here again there was a fundamental mistake.
I should have spoken to Barbara myself and explained to her how strenuously I had endeavoured to talk the doctors out of this unhappy decision.
Their decision made no sense because, at the end of the day, no solution could be evolved with which she did not agree — as indeed turned out to be the case.
I do not know who told her that the doctors had refused to meet her and I heard nothing from her until after a first meeting when what came to be known as the Goodman Plan was presented to the government and the doctors had convened at Downing Street.
The plan in detail is set out under the title ‘The Goodman Proposals’ in Appendix VI on page 760 et seq .
of the Castle Diaries .
It involved the establishment of an independent board to deal with the phasing of the separation of private beds and facilities from the NHS, which was nevertheless associated with an expression of the government's commitment to the maintenance of private medical and dental practice.
It is not my intention to discuss medical politics, but as it turned out this was not an unhappy solution, notwithstanding that it married two firmly conflicting beliefs which have continued to operate, sometimes rather awkwardly, side by side, and may do so for many years.
The immediate ‘bone’ offered to Mrs Castle was the phasing out of 1,000 pay beds, but that thereafter further pay beds would only be phased out on the direction of the newly established board, with a number of criteria required to justify the release of additional beds: the principal one being the establishment of an alternative source of private beds in the locality of change.
The first meeting at Downing Street to discuss these proposals was a dramatic one.
A quiverful of eminent doctors arrived on the scene, including Dr Grabham and his particularly intransigent colleagues; the blessed Damerell, and a number of genuine medical statesmen, such as the famous surgeon Rodney Smith, now Lord Smith, and others.
There also arrived a strong deputation from the DHSS: the Minister of State, now of much greater fame, Dr David Owen; the Permanent Under-Secretary, Sir Patrick Nairne, and Barbara's most trusted right-hand man, a beardless youth, then recently the president of some students' association, named Jack Straw, with whom I had occasion to cross swords later.
The Prime Minister, waiting benignly in his chair, presided.
Alongside were the inevitable Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales, but the meeting could not start because, alas, ‘Hamlet’ was missing.
Mrs Castle was nowhere to be seen.
A decent interval elapsed, during which we looked at each other rather anxiously.
Perhaps, I thought, she will not come.
To do her justice, she would not, I think, have missed the meeting for the wealth of the Andes.
It gave her an absolutely splendid opportunity of indicating her indignation.
I had been quite right in my belief that she would not relish the intervention of the Prime Minister.
I had, however, underrated the extent and sincerity of her indignation, and the more I have thought of it, the more I have thought how justified she was.
It was an intolerable affront, although the situation to be saved probably justified the Prime Minister's decision and my advice.
When she entered the room, she directed an unfriendly look at Harold — so far as I remember making no sound — and, seeing where I was sitting, directed a glance at me that, for anyone of lesser resolution, would undoubtedly have turned me into stone.
However, I smiled amiably and the meeting proceeded.
To her eternal credit, her participation in the matter and her discussion of the Goodman proposals was totally constructive.
For practical purposes — although a wealth of detail needed to be settled — the problem was substantially resolved at that famous meeting on 15 December 1975.
The meeting broke up and I was about to leave when a still, quiet voice said to Harold: ‘Harold, I would much like to talk to you and Arnold by yourselves.’
Harold acceded at once and I trotted dutifully after him to a small anteroom adjoining the Cabinet room.
We sat down and the good lady let fly.
She had never, she said, been so humiliated in  her life.
She did not know whether it would be possible for her to continue in office, such was the damage done to her within her own ministry and her own staff.
I defended myself stoutly by pointing out that the alternative was to break off negotiations, with a dispute that could have gone on for months at great cost to the health of the nation.
It seemed to me an impossibly difficult decision.
I conceded that it might have been wiser, and indeed more seemly, to have consulted her before a decision was reached; but I did not add that I had advised the Prime Minister to agree to a meeting over her head because I was convinced that she would never accept a challenge to her authority.
It was impossible not to feel that she had been badly treated, but the bad treatment came from the intransigent doctors and not from a Prime Minister who, as she must have known, was immensely supportive and would not willingly have been associated with any slight on her.
The same was certainly true of me, although my role was clearly less significant.
I parted with a feeling that it would be a long time before I earned her forgiveness, but I did her an injustice.
Within a very short time she was back again in full and active negotiation, determined to resist to the maximum extent possible any encroachment on the National Health Service for private interests.
Her assessment of me changed from one of total hostility to a slightly puzzled statement that my experience with these doctors, in her own words ‘may prove, after all, not to have been a bad thing for this peculiar chap — half high principle and half unashamed pragmatism — to have been brought into personal dealings with this autocratic profession and to experience at first hand the kind of behaviour that has been driving Ministers of Health to despair for years’.
The sequel to the Downing Street meeting was almost daily meetings in my flat.
Mrs Castle had formed a rather eccentric view about my scale of living.
Her description of my flat is one that I had difficulty in recognising: ‘We were greeted at the door by Arnold's housekeeper, Miss Roberts.
She ushered us (it is the only word) into the sort of room I hadn't expected: rather dark and made darker by heavy period furniture and subdued lighting.
Superb pictures everywhere, deep armchairs and sofa and a large colour TV.
But the whole effect was oppressive.’
However, on half a dozen occasions or more the negotiating teams on both sides gathered, either before or at dinner, to seek to resolve the detailed problems before the Goodman proposals were ultimately embodied in legislation.
It cannot be said that a warm relationship developed between the Minister and the doctors.
The negotiations in my flat were largely conducted on the basis that the doctor delegates met in my dining-room, with Barbara and her colleagues — usually David Owen, Patrick Nairne and young Mr Straw — in my sitting-room, and I would occasionally take one or more from each delegation into my small study for a private talk.
For the first time I had an opportunity of seeing Barbara at work in detailed negotiations, and whatever small credit attached to me for the major idea, the scale and ingenuity that she expended on the detail and in making it possible to arrive at a suitable settlement was beyond praise.
What was significant was the awe in which she was held by her two senior colleagues, but not so by Mr Straw.
Very rarely did David Owen or Patrick Nairne intervene in a discussion.
Mr Straw displayed no such reluctance.
He has since, of course, achieved a political status by which presumably I ought now to judge him, but as a junior voice in a senior assembly I could not resist the conclusion that he was a little too forthcoming, particularly when on one occasion he outraged me by a suggestion that if a common waiting-list was established, consolidating both private and NHS priorities, the NHS patients should have pride of place before private patients came into the reckoning.
It seemed to me an absurdity.
I could see that no NHS patients should be postponed by a private patient except on the basis of priority of application, but that a private patient should be postponed because he was paying, and no one else was, struck my middle-class mentality as an unacceptable anomaly.
At the end of the day I had the satisfaction of presiding in the Lords debate on the Bill and noting the very last words in Barbara Castle's account of the affair: ‘Now, unexpectedly, I have received a letter of ‘appreciation’ from Harold for the ‘hard work and long hours’I have put in over the consultants' ‘package’.
I found it a bit stilted, but Ted thought it warm.
‘You know who has inspired that, don't you?
Arnold,’ he said.’
After what was deemed to be considerable negotiating success with the wretched pay beds, I was left in relative tranquillity from government activity for a short time only.
Having negotiated the final stages of the pay beds, and the legislation with David Ennals (now Lord Ennals), who had succeeded Barbara Castle at the DHSS, it was gratifying to my vanity to be called upon by him very shortly afterwards for a purpose much closer to my heart.
He came to see me with Sir Patrick Nairne.
His request was unusual and, as presented, not a specially attractive one.
‘We are,’ he said, ‘about to introduce a scheme to replace the much discredited ‘trikes’,’by which he meant the three-wheeled conveyances then issued to the disabled.
There were numerous complaints about them in relation to safety, the vast majority of the disabled expressing a wish for specially adapted motor cars.
Mr Ennals was proposing to replace the ‘trikes’ with a new mobility allowance.
Mrs Castle, as it turned out, had opposed this allowance, again on the characteristically doctrinaire grounds that an allowance which made it necessary for the disabled to purchase motor cars would place them at the mercy of the commercial interests of motor manufacturers.
At the time, and indeed until much later, I had no knowledge of Mrs Castle's objections or of the many discussions that had taken place on this subject at government level.
My own approach was fortunately simplified by ignorance.
The Secretary of State asked whether, after the introduction of a mobility allowance, I would undertake the chairmanship of a private trust to raise money to supplement the allowance for those disabled unable to afford to purchase or run a motor car.
The idea of an activity solely related to trying to raise money was at that stage an unpalatable one.
I had spent, and indeed continued to spend, many hours trying to persuade the blind to see, or in other words to convince rich men of the virtue of causes close to my own heart, especially those relating to the arts.
Although I had had a substantial measure of success, it was a back-breaking activity: it involved the pouring of oceans of hypocritical praise on the undeserving; attributing powers of discernment and discrimination to the ignorant and myopic; and only occasionally striking gold in the form of sufficient understanding to make the toil of persuasion unnecessary.
I told David Ennals, for whom I quickly formed some sympathy, that I would like to think about it.
I did think about it and asked to see him again, and once again he visited me with Patrick Nairne.
‘I think,’ I said, ‘that we (I was hopefully referring to others who might be recruited) can do better than merely seeking charitable funds.’
I outlined to him a scheme for an organisation that would provide the disabled with the cars they required in return for an assignment to that organisation of their mobility allowance.
It would work, I explained to him — and it is a demonstration of how something that is essentially simple can on that account have a firmer structure than a more complicated mechanism — by dint of borrowing from the banks a sufficient sum of money for the initial purchase.
The disabled person would then hire-purchase or lease his motor car on terms far more advantageous than he could possibly contrive for himself, since the organisation would have the buying power to obtain cheaper cars and insurance, lower interest rates and a number of other concessions.
I made a guesswork assessment that it would be able to provide a motor car that would cost the disabled person at least 25 per cent less than if he made his own arrangements.
In the event, this was an underestimate, and it has totally falsified the belief that the disabled would become the victims of the manufacturers' rapacity.
Motability, the organisation formed for the purpose, now has a fleet of over 350,000 motor cars on the road.
It is true to say that the cars are largely restricted to three or four models, but my own insistence had been from the outset that no obligation to use the scheme should be imposed on the disabled, nor any obligation to a particular model.
The disabled should not feel that an obligation existed in relation to Motability.
I was sure that were such a scheme to be imposed, it would be vigorously resisted and criticised.
Of all communities, the disabled are, understandably, the most jealous of any suggestion that they are being patronised or treated differently from others.
Before Motability was introduced, I had several conversations with the Secretary of State and with his officials.
To their eternal credit, they took less persuading than I might have expected.
It was, of course, from their point of view a welcome scheme.
The mobility allowance amounted initially to £10 a week and was recognised as anything but adequate.
The fact that a scheme could be contrived that made it a working possibility for the majority of the disabled to acquire a motor car of their choice and to finance the purchase, including insurance and repair, from the allowance, was a staggering revelation to economists and particularly to the socialists of the time who regarded private enterprise as the kiss of death.
Motability has been one of the few established successes of a mixed economy.
The government has provided the resources in the way of the allowance and in the way of an administrative service; voluntary effort has controlled the plan and the policy, including the detailed negotiations with manufacturers, bankers, insurance companies and the like, and all these bodies have made a generous contribution to a humane cause of powerful appeal.
Its establishment depended on one or two fortunate chances.
First it was necessary to enlist financial and administrative talent capable of organising the details.
Happily there presented itself such a person in Jeffrey (now deservedly Lord) Sterling, who threw himself into the task with total dedication.
He conducted detailed negotiations with a consortium of the four clearing banks and, enlisting my assistance at occasional meetings, contrived an arrangement with them that made the economics a possibility, while, I have to confess, retaining some attraction for the banks.
His negotiations with the motor manufacturers — British Leyland, Chrysler, Ford and Vauxhall — were equally successful.
They were enthusiastic, provided voluntary members of the council of Motability and co-operated without reserve.
A signal achievement was Motability's success — largely achieved by Sterling — in enlisting the whole-hearted support and co-operation of the disabled.
With remarkable skill he identified and presented for selection a group of some of the leading statesmen concerned with their welfare.
Over the fifteen years that Motability has been established, there have been powerful disagreements but not a whisper of hostility.
Until recently, the achievement has been largely unpublicised.
It appeared to me that the quest for publicity could do nothing but harm, so long as we were certain, as indeed we made sure, that all the disabled knew of the facility and used it if they so desired.
Our principal exposure to the public arose from the chance that Her Majesty the Queen became interested and used Motability as the centre for her Christmas address in 1981.
Motability has earned one peerage and an OBE or two, but otherwise virtue is its own reward, and so far as I am concerned, it has been the most successful achievement of my career and the most fortunate thought that ever came into my head.
It is right to record, however, that no activity, however benign, can escape malice.
To our profound astonishment — and slight delight — the New Statesman on one occasion produced an article accusing Jeffrey Sterling and myself of lining our pockets from Motability.
The insult was so unjust and so gross that we instituted proceedings for libel and extracted — not without difficulty — a full apology and retraction.
The indignation within the Motability community at this venomous attack was more gratifying than any form of recognition that we might have obtained.
One of my more unlikely activities was to preside from 1973 to 1977 over the Housing Corporation, and alongside it (a body which bore no direct relationship) the National Building Agency.
The Housing Corporation was the overall authority of housing associations, now more than 2,000 in number, established largely by volunteers throughout the country to carry out modest building schemes for estates of houses.
These were to be administered by the association concerned but financed largely by the government, supplemented in many cases from private sources.
My period at the Housing Corporation was immensely instructive.
I had started knowing nothing about houses, nothing about building, precious little about planning, and I ended up — although I say it myself —pretty well informed.
When in 1974 I was flattered by an invitation to make a T V appearance as the Dimbleby lecturer, I accepted without hesitation.
This, on my part, was a massive concession, since over the years I have almost without exception refused to indulge in self-publicising on the box.
I chose housing as my theme for the Dimbleby Lecture, and I enunciated a belief which is as firm today as it was when I delivered it:
We have in this country no less than four million homes which for one  
I was amused, several years after I delivered the lecture, to be approached by the late Lord Rothschild — who had undertaken to discharge the lecture in that year — with an enquiry about the fee I had received.
My recollection was that it was £250 for a great deal of work and endless consultations with courteous BBC representatives who were terrified by my refusal to produce a total text (since I can only give plausibility to anything I say when there is at least an element extemporised) and refused to accept my positive assurances that I was as unlikely to dry up as the Thames.
No one has ever yet accused me of being short of words.
The fee, in all the circumstances, was one of the BBC's greatest bargains, but Lord Rothschild was very concerned lest he might be offered a lower fee.
As it turned out, he had been offered double my fee and I soothed my offended vanity by attributing this to inflation.
Even so, I understand he negotiated a substantial increase: an initiative on which I can only congratulate him.
He came from a world where money mattered.
Shortly before the expiration of my first term at the Housing Corporation in 1976, I was asked to see Tony Crosland, then the Secretary of State for the Environment.
He was a man who tried very hard, by seeking to adopt a deliberately offensive and high-handed attitude, to mask both the generosity of his disposition and the fine quality of his intellect.
The appointment took place on what was, from his point of view, a fraught day.
James Callaghan had at that moment replaced Harold Wilson as Prime Minister and he was occupied in forming his Cabinet.
It was well known that there were two principal contenders for the Foreign Office: both good friends of mine and friends of each other, although, it was believed, long-time rivals — Tony Crosland and Roy Jenkins.
I was sufficiently intimate with Tony for him to unburden himself.
‘I understand,’ he said anxiously, ‘that Roy has already received a summons to Downing Street.
How do you interpret that?
Do you think he will get the job?’
I reflected and pontificated.
‘It is my belief that the man who gets the job is seen last.’
I prayed that I was right.
I turned out to be right.
The telephone rang while I was busy explaining to Tony Crosland that I could not accept a further term of office at the Housing Corporation, since I had been appointed to the Mastership of University College, Oxford, but I had agreed to a request that I should at least stay for another year to see someone else in.
When the telephone rang, Crosland leapt at it with unconcealed anxiety.
It was indeed a summons to Downing Street.
He was off in a flash.
Our conversation, to my great surprise, appeared to take a secondary place in his thoughts.
I did not wait for his return but telephoned him later in the evening.
He was exultant.
All he said was, ‘I've got it!’
I congratulated him, saying that I had no doubt it would be a good day for our foreign affairs but it was a sad day for British housing.
On the whole Callaghan's choice of Crosland was wise: not because he was necessarily better as Foreign Secretary than Roy, but because Roy had an important task to perform at the Home Office where, on the admission of both friend and foe, he was the best Home Secretary of his generation.
Crosland was replaced as Environment Secretary by Peter Shore, a much less exuberant and extrovert character, but a solid, steady man whom I had known over the years and had first met when he was the Secretary of an ad hoc committee formed by the Labour Party — with a few outside ‘experts’ such as Dennis Lloyd and myself — to produce a rental policy.
He had achieved a miracle of secretarial improvisation in a report which blended all the disparate views of the various voices in a fashion that was acceptable to all of them.
From that day onwards I entertained a high regard for his dexterity and skill in public affairs.
He had, I think, been very much underrated.
Peter Shore soon invited me to become a member of the Docklands Committee which was responsible for planning the redevelopment of the Wapping area.
I joined the committee and my principal activity was in the end to assist in procuring its dissolution.
The Wapping area involved four or five local authorities and the plan was to leave each of them with a high degree of autonomy but with some rather unconsidered federal situation over the whole area.
This plan was an impossibility from the outset, and after several months of confused meetings of everyone concerned at County Hall, I went with two or three others to see the Secretary of State to recommend strongly that one single statutory authority should be appointed to deal with the area.
Before this happened, however, there were two minor incidents worthy of comment.
At the first meeting of the committee which I attended the secretary announced that it would be necessary for members to disclose their interests, meaning thereby that they should declare with what companies and organisations they were involved.
I took strong objection to this, pointing out that I had not volunteered for membership, or invited membership, but had been asked to join by the Secretary of State.
‘He should not,’ I said, ‘invite people to join a committee if he has any doubts about their integrity.’
Moreover, the whole business of disclosing interests is a nonsense, since a dishonest man will disclose every interest except the relevant one that he is prone to accept a large bribe.
In the end I heard no more about this requirement.
The second incident was a somewhat comic experience.
The chairman of the committee telephoned me in the late spring of 1976 to say that they were organising a series of public meetings at Wapping when the committee's plans for the area would be disclosed to the local population for the purpose of hearing their comments and enquiries.
Would I preside at one of these meetings?
Since my worst failing is an inclination to say ‘yes, to almost every request, I acceded to this one.
On the day in question I was driven down to Wapping where the meeting was to take place at St Peter's School.
On arrival I found a young man from the GLC equipped with a magic lantern, slides, wall plans and all other relevant data.
The only thing that was missing was any audience.
There were three people only in the school: myself, the young man and my driver.
A telephone enquiry disclosed that there were in fact two St Peter's Schools in Wapping and that while we were in one of them the audience was in the other.
We obtained directions and drove as rapidly as possible to the rival meeting.
There we found an eager audience of some eight people.
To this group we addressed ourselves.
I spoke a few introductory words, the young man displayed his lantern slides, explained the plans and provided Wapping with a firm impression that it was to become the Venice of the East End.
I invited questions.
An elderly lady rose in the front and demanded to know what we were going to do about North Sea Gas since she was quite sure that this was a dangerously explosive substance.
I replied gently that we were there to describe building plans and had no involvement in North Sea Gas.
She subsided but was obviously dissatisfied.
At that moment an elderly man rose to announce that he was the ‘Wapping Poet’.
Without any encouragement from me he proceeded to declaim Wapping poetry at considerable length.
During this declamation the rest of the audience departed except for the North Sea Gas lady who, when the poet finished, resumed her enquiry about her original subject.
I do not know what purpose the meeting served in persuading Wapping of the merits of our plan, but it did enable me for the first and only time to see the terrain on which we were working and reinforced my enthusiasm to kill the committee at the earliest possible moment.
My time at the Housing Corporation was eventful in bringing me for the first, but no means last, time into contact with Mrs Thatcher when, on the fall of the Heath government, she became the shadow Minister of the Environment, in succession to the job she had had as Minister of Education.
In her period as shadow Minister she displayed an efficiency and a command of detail that exceeded that of any  incumbent minister with whom I had to deal.
She has always been kindness itself to me, but I have a feeling in my bones that she would not regard me as a wholly reliable supporter.
Indeed, in this she would be quite right.
I do not believe in the doctrine that every man must stand on his own two feet, especially when he has a wooden leg.
However, I have escorted Mrs Thatcher to the opera on two or three occasions.
These were wholly enjoyable experiences.
She made no pretence of great musical knowledge and I had the satisfaction of describing to her the plot of L'Elisir d'Amore when no one else present in the Covent Garden box could remember it.
On the one occasion when I made a direct appeal to her, in connection with the battle against the closed shop for journalists which I describe later, her response was gratifyingly supportive and it was no fault of hers that she was unable to persuade Lord Hailsham to a course of action that might well have altered journalistic history.
All in all, I would be prepared to give her quite a high mark during her time in government, which I am sure will be a source of great relief to her when she comes to sleep at night.
Despite my closeness over a long period to Harold Wilson, I was certainly not close to his publicised cronies.
My relationship with Marcia Williams was at all times rather chilly.
I think her principal objection to me was that I exercised some influence over him, which was at odds with her own belief that all such influence should be exercised through her.
In any event, I have no recollection of ever having had any differences with her except on one occasion when she telephoned me to make a request with which I was unable to comply.
This provoked an outburst of considerable ferocity.
As I am a mild and gentle man I am always alarmed by such outbursts, particularly if they are of feminine origin.
However, I stood firm and declined to be drawn.
Since then I have come to see that she is a woman of qualities, some of which one detects in Barbara Castle and Margaret Thatcher.
In a way I feel sorry for her.
If in fact she had proceeded along a more orthodox path, she could have become one of the  great political women of our time.
She was passionately interested in politics and most of all in the personnel of politics, and she had cultivated a limited group of Labour politicians who, with her, were rightly described as Harold Wilson's ‘Kitchen Cabinet’.
One of Wilson's associates was a gentleman who was later to attain a high degree of publicity and notoriety, namely Joseph Kagan.
I was frankly astonished when this gentleman was ennobled.
It would not be right for me to say that he was wrongly ennobled, because I know too little about him to be able to detect whatever surprising quality it was that commended itself to Harold Wilson for admission to the House of Lords.
My first encounter with Kagan took place when Wilson telephoned me and asked if I would see him.
My inclination was to decline, but as that would have been discourteous in the extreme to Wilson, for whom I then had enormous respect, I agreed to see him.
Kagan arrived in my office and proceeded to tell me a story, which I can now recount as it is in the public domain.
He was the father of a child by a very attractive lady (who had subsequently married a very close friend of mine).
Kagan was deeply concerned that his access to the child was limited.
To his credit he obviously had strong parental affection and a powerful concern that the child should not be totally alienated from him.
He asked me what rights he had as a father.
I had to advise him that the father of a child born out of wedlock had few, if any, rights.
He could, of course, make the child a ward of court, but I doubted if any wardship would persuade the court to take a child away from a young and devoted mother.
I therefore recommended to him what I regarded as a sensible viewpoint.
‘You are, Mr Kagan, I believe, a wealthy man,’ I said.
‘What is required from you is a spontaneous gesture of generosity.
I suggest that you make an ample settlement on the child and write and tell his new stepfather what you have done, and that you have done it because you are determined that no one else should have any financial responsibility for a child of your blood.
Having done that, I am sure that any decent man would then feel that you have parental rights which should be respected, in view of the gesture you have made.’
Kagan looked at me as though I was demented.
I could see in his eyes that he was wondering why he had been advised to consult such a lunatic.
This recommendation was clearly not what he had in mind at all.
My meeting ended when I asked Kagan who the gentleman was who was now married to the young lady concerned.
He named a man who, as I have said, was a very close friend of mine.
I asked Kagan if he had come to me knowing that I was an intimate friend of the man concerned.
He looked slightly embarrassed and did not deny that he had.
I then indicated that as far as I was concerned the meeting should terminate  there and then, since in no circumstances would I be willing to give advice contrary to the interests of my friend.
In the end there was long and controversial litigation, which nevertheless failed to establish the rights that Kagan sought.
One thing that intrigued me in the course of my meeting with Kagan was his careful enquiries about what duties were involved in membership of the House of Lords.
This I found strange since, to my innocent mind, I did not think that he could possibly have received an indication that a peerage was awaiting him.
He did, however, offer to make me a mackintosh.
This, if I may say so, considering my bulk in those days — now much reduced by the ravages of health and time — was a very considerable offer.
It would have required a quantity of material sufficient to make a small tent.
However, since the principal feature of the raincoat was that it was very easily identifiable as associated with Mr Kagan, I declined the offer with gratitude.
In any event, before the disastrous situation which sent him to jail for a short period, I had one other encounter.
Ian Mikardo approached me to see whether I would assist in raising funds to establish a scholarship at Haifa University in honour of the (then) late Dick Crossman, who had indeed been a man of the most friendly associations.
I agreed to assist.
He wondered whether I would give a dinner, which I said I would, at my home.
I told him, however, that he would have to provide the list of guests since I did not feel that I could exploit my own list any further.
The very sound of my name in quest of some charitable contribution sends many of them in flight to the Outer Hebrides.
He promised to send me a list, but I told him not to bother.
‘Just invite them, I said.
In any event, a short while later Mikardo's list arrived.
To my consternation it included the name of Mr Kagan, with whom I was not anxious to resume an acquaintance, not because of what happened afterwards but because of what had happened in my office.
However, Mr Kagan having been invited, courtesy demanded that he should be received as a guest ought to be received.
He arrived at my home and in the course of the evening he buttonholed me.
He told me that he would donate £5,000 to the fund if I would undertake to invite his little son, then at school in Oxford, to tea on odd occasions, so that I could acquaint him with some of the matters relating to Judaism.
I informed Mr Kagan that I was something of a heretic so far as the minutiae of the Jewish faith were concerned; on the other hand, I said, I had never concealed that I was a loyal member of the faith, and so I would be happy to have the boy to tea and talk to him about Judaism in general terms.
On that basis it was confirmed that he would make the donation.
Some time elapsed and I finally telephoned Lord Weidenfeld, who was charged with the duty of collecting the money, to know what had happened.
‘Alas,’ he said, ‘there was a misunderstanding.
When I phoned Kagan he told me that he had instructed his trustees in Israel to make the payment, but by some terrible misunderstanding they had paid it into the wrong charity.’
‘Is there anything to prevent another payment being made to the right charity this time?’
I enquired.
I was told that the trust had exhausted its funds.
I do not know whether this was associated with the fact that no one ever sought a tea meeting with me and that I was relieved of the obligation of conducting a rather spurious theological discussion on the basis of almost total ignorance.
Another of Harold Wilson's circle was Joe Haines, his Press Officer.
He has, of course, come into recent prominence through a long association with the late Robert Maxwell.
I never established anything like a friendship with him, but our paths did cross from time to time.
Late one evening in 1974, not long after Wilson's second election victory, I was at my home in Portland Place when Haines came through on the telephone with a request for some urgent action.
‘I have heard, and reliably heard,’ he said, ‘that the Daily Express intends to publish the twins story.’
This referred to the fact that Marcia Williams had given birth to illegitimate sons.
Harold Wilson was, when he might have been better engaged in the affairs of the nation, extremely solicitous in seeing that arrangements were made for Marcia Williams, particularly in relation to her progeny.
Haines asked if I would ring up Max Aitken — whom he knew to be a very good friend — to ask him to dissuade his editor from publishing the story, which had until then been kept as a dark secret.
I demurred, pointing out to Haines that as the chairman of the Newspaper Publishers Association I had been very careful to avoid interfering with press stories in any way.
But he urged on me that it was the Prime Minister's particular wish that I should do anything I could to prevent its publication.
I am afraid, rather weakly, I said that I would speak to Max.
I rang the Daily Express and to my great delight was told that Max was in the Bahamas.
I rang Haines to tell him of that fact and there was nothing else I could do as I had no notion of where in the Bahamas Max might be.
Nor, frankly, did I particularly wish to know.
But Max's kindness and good manners defeated my purpose totally.
A few minutes after speaking to Haines, a call came through.
Max had heard from his office that I was seeking to speak to him and his friendly response was to telephone me himself.
I told him what worried the PM.
The story of the twins was well known in Fleet Street and it was really only a matter of hours, or at best days, before a newspaper decided to cash in on it.
However, Max's  reaction was very satisfactory.
‘I do not think we are under any duty to publish malicious gossip,’ he said, ‘which remains gossip however true it may be.’
He indicated that he would telephone the editor and direct him not to publish anything.
I thereupon telephoned Haines to tell him of my success and to urge upon him the necessity for extreme discretion, since what I had done was something of an embarrassment and I did not particularly wish to have my role publicised.
Haines assured me that everything at his end would remain secret, but a few years later I was both surprised and vexed to find that he had retailed the story in his memoirs without any indication of his pledge of confidentiality.
I had further dealings with Haines towards the end of 1975.
Harold Wilson had complained to me about the continuing hostility of the press towards him and wanted to know how to put it right.
He suggested that I might give a dinner to the leading newspaper editors and proprietors, when he could make some statement calculated to neutralise some of the undoubted venom that was then directed at him.
I agreed to give a dinner and it took place in my London home some weeks later.
Harold was pleased that it had been arranged, but he did not arrive unaccompanied since Haines was with him.
The dinner was not an especially peaceful one.
Harold, rather forgetful of his purpose, proceeded to upbraid the guests in a positively violent fashion and then, when he had run out of personal ammunition, he said to Haines, ‘Joe, tell them of any specific complaints that we have.
You have a list.’
Haines thereupon infuriated everyone with an item-by-item recital.
What was no doubt intended to be a moment of triumph fell absolutely flat, particularly as the late editor of the Evening Standard — Charles Wintour — was roused to indignation sufficiently vigorous to make it difficult to continue with the dinner.
The troops withdrew, leaving Harold and Haines with the floor.
‘Well,’ said Harold, ‘don't you think that it was a very successful evening?’
I raised my eyebrows and said nothing.
Later, however, I did tell him that the meeting had been a disaster and that if he thought it had mollified the press in any way he was greatly mistaken.
Harold, however, was nothing if not persistent.
About a month later, he said to me that he was compelled to agree that the first dinner had not been a success (his words), and would I be kind enough to arrange a second?
I expressed doubts as to whether any further breaking of bread between Harold and the press would lead to an outbreak of peace and goodwill.
However, as he was insistent, I invited the original company to return, and return they did, still accompanied by Charles Wintour.
This second dinner went rather better.
There was no sign of Haines, no one had come with a list of grievances, and Harold was able to give some of the assurances that I had urged upon him before the first dinner.
He dissociated himself from Tony Benn's provocative statement that a printer had as much right to regulate the contents of a newspaper as the editor or anyone else.
This went quite a long way towards soothing enraged newspapermen and the dinner terminated quite peacefully, although on its termination my drink stock was reduced by two whole bottles of whisky.
In my view, Harold Wilson never made peace with the press because he was too anxious to do so.
He made the mistake of attributing to the press the importance that they themselves give to newspapers and journalists.
It was strange that a man of considerable intellect could give so much attention and attribute such importance to a press which was wholly influenced at all times by political considerations.
It is fair to say that the Conservatives exercised and still exercise very much more influence on the press than the Labour Party.
Some might regard that influence as excessive.
My standing with Harold Wilson began to go downhill in the 1970s, not on personal grounds but because of what might be described as political differences.
The word political is somewhat unsuitable in the circumstances, since my own political stance has always been a pragmatic one.
I take a political position according to my belief in the particular issue, and it never coincides in respect of more than one issue with that of any particular party.
As a result of my friendship with Harold Wilson I developed considerable affection for him, which I still maintain.
He was in many ways a remarkable Prime Minister, although there were obviously faults — and some grave faults — that history alone will assess in determining whether or not he ranks among the greats.
He certainly had a Herculean task to maintain any consistency of policy among an immensely disparate collection of politicians, constituting, I think, one of the most brilliant Cabinets of our time, short of the Cabinet that served after the Second World War.
Our first difference arose over the Biafran War, which began in July 1967 and in which, by the time it ended some three years later, there had been a civilian death toll alone in Biafra of over two million people.
I was a fervent supporter of the Ibos of Biafra, who were fighting for their independence against the rest of Nigeria.
My principal reason was a very subjective one: I had, as an undergraduate, met with and remained a firm friend of one of the leading Ibos, Sir Louis Mbanefo, who had been knighted by the British government when he became the Chief Justice of  Eastern Nigeria.
Mbanefo was a splendid man of total integrity and his colleagues impressed me in the same way.
For that reason, however inadequate some people may regard it, I was a firmly convinced supporter of Biafra and made various futile efforts during the war to persuade Harold Wilson to a like view.
His attitude in the matter was — as inevitably with many problems — a keen desire that it should go away.
But despite polite utterances to me at private meetings, his public stance was to support the Foreign Office view that the Biafrans should be put down.
In that context, the shuffling attitude of leading Labour politicians is of historic discredit.
Although the decent instinct of many was to support the weaker side in a wholly legitimate quest for independence, their public utterances, alas, were to support the side which in their view was the more important to British interests.
I made several speeches in the Lords propounding my belief that the Biafran side should have had our support, and I still believe we would have been very much better off had that ensued.
But Harold Wilson and the government took a different view.
What inspired that view I am not completely sure.
I do not think that it was entirely the question of the ownership of Nigerian oil; more likely they genuinely believed that the Biafrans had no chance of success.
This in fact became so only because of the policies Wilson adopted in the way of providing arms to the other side, for which there was insufficient compensation from the rather half-hearted support given by the Soviets and by a few other countries to the Biafrans.
What infuriated me was when Wilson visited Nigeria to review the situation.
His visit lasted for a few hours at most— taking into account the time spent asleep — and the only really detailed description he gave was of the accommodation in which he slept in General Gowon's home.
And yet to the world at large he claimed to have conducted a most detailed investigation into the whole matter, sufficient to enable him to arrive at an informed judgement that British policy remained correct.
He also gave the impression, although I do not think he made a specific statement, that he had in fact had discussions with the Biafrans.
I was also infuriated by the continual refusal of the British government, despite my strong representations to Harold Wilson, to meet with the Biafran leaders.
Several of them came to London in order to discuss the possibilities of an armistice and ultimately of peace, but they could only meet junior officials from the Foreign Office and absolutely nothing transpired.
Harold Wilson did consult me from time to time, in the sense of asking me to ascertain from the Biafrans what their attitude would be towards a visit by him and matters of that sort, but my interventions were of a pretty futile nature and achieved no results.
Fortunately the war came to an end, and the one gratifying feature was the fact that it ended without the conventional horrors inflicted upon the defeated faction.
Gowon behaved in a fashion which should attract historic credit in that his amnesty was a genuine amnesty; no retribution, except in a few isolated instances, was inflicted on the Ibos in consequence of the war.
They are now, I think, filly restored to their original position, although Nigeria's economic fortunes have been rather dire.
But the natural resources of the country are so large, and its prominence in Africa is so great (it is the most populous on the continent), that its importance cannot be minimised.
That is an added reason why I think we took such a mistaken view in a situation where it is clear that the Ibos are the brains of the establishment and will always remain in a position of effective leadership when there is no state of war.
The prosecution in 1971 of Jonathan Aitken — now a respected although still controversial Member of Parliament, but then an aspirant journalist — arose out of the Biafran tragedy.
I had found myself, because of my views, in a lobby with a number of unlikely bedfellows.
It was through my convictions that I established a firm friendship with the late Sir Hugh Fraser, and an unexpectedly harmonious relationship with Auberon Waugh and members of his Private Eye banditry: a relationship which, as I have said, strangely has remained unaffected despite my own less than friendly exchanges with that periodical.
Jonathan Aitken's recruitment to the cause of Biafra was motivated originally by his close friendship with Hugh Fraser, but I am convinced that it was not long before, on a close examination of the circumstances, he became honourably convinced that the British government was backing the wrong cause for dishonourable reasons.
It was, in short, backing the ‘big battalions’.
Aitken's prosecution under the Official Secrets Act — alongside Mr Brian Roberts, the much-respected editor of the Sunday Telegraph — was brought about by the publication in that paper in January 1970 of an article quoting extracts from the Scott Report.
This was a report commissioned by the British government as an assessment of the prospects in the Biafran War, which in fact firmly predicted the inevitable victory of the Nigerian government — a victory which was, of course, inevitable because of the support the British government was giving to it.
A General Alexander — a Yorkshire acquaintance of Aitken and an authority on Nigerian affairs who had from time to time provided Aitken, in his journalistic capacity, with snippets of information about the war — had been used by the British government, because of his knowledge of Nigeria and the military position, as an unofficial adviser in these matters.
He had in that capacity been supplied with a copy of Scott's report, which was regarded by the government, and particularly by the Foreign Office, as strictly confidential.
The crucial events around which the case centred occurred at a dinner party given by the General, when Aitken and some others were present.
The conversation turned to the Biafran War and a controversy arose about the Biafrans' prospects of success, which would no doubt have been more favourably presented by Aitken than was believed by the General.
The General, perhaps to make his point, informed Aitken of the authoritative report that the government had received and offered to lend it to him for a short while.
Aitken asserted at the trial, and this view was certainly supported by independent witnesses, that no word about confidentiality was ever uttered, but the document was handed over to him on the footing that it would be returned within a very short time.
Given Aitken's fervent support for the Biafrans, it is not unfair to assume that any suggestion of confidence that was not specifically expressed would have been dampened in his mind, since the publication of the document in his view would lend strong support to critics of the government's policy.
Having borrowed the document, Aitken's account of his later behaviour was clear-cut and uncontroversial except on a money question where the weight of evidence strongly supported his contentions.
His evidence was that he read the report on the night that he received it and was — as others would have been — shocked to find that the parliamentary statements relating to the government's support for the Nigerians were demonstrably false.
Time and again the government had asserted that Britain was only supplying ‘15 per cent in value’ of Nigerian armaments.
In one particular alone, the Scott Report disclosed that 40 million rounds of small arms ammunition had been delivered in fourteen months, which was totally inconsistent with the 15 per cent claim.
Aitken's subsequent contention that this information was a legitimate matter of public interest, which justified its public exposure, would seem to most people to be unanswerable.
Having read the report, the next morning Aitken telephoned Hugh Fraser, then of course a Conservative MP, to tell him about it, to quote extracts from it and to hear his very firm agreement that the report's contents should be disclosed as a matter of public interest.
Aitken did not tell Fraser of any suggestion of confidentiality since, as he later affirmed, he did not believe that any undertaking had been given or asked for.
Later the same morning Aitken went to Yorkshire Television's headquarters in Leeds, where for the two years previously he had had some contacts and where the company was planning a documentary film on Biafra.
Having made several copies of the report, he returned the original to the General.
In the two weeks following, he had numerous conversations with Hugh Fraser — who, of course, made common cause with him over Biafra — and they jointly decided that the document should be provided to the press for publication.
The paper selected was almost inevitably the Sunday Telegraph , which had displayed a greater sympathy for the Biafran cause than most.
The channel of communication to the Sunday Telegraph was Graham Watson, then managing director of Curtis Brown, the well-known literary agents, who acted for Aitken and Hugh Fraser in their respective journalistic activities.
Watson was instructed to negotiate with the Sunday Telegraph .
I he most controversial aspect of the matter relates to those negotiations, but the evidence of Aitken's probity is firmly established, notwithstanding determined efforts to put a cloud around it.
It was unfortunate that Graham Watson regarded the matter as a commercial one in the sense that he negotiated a fee of £500 for the publication rights.
But it was agreed on all sides, and most importantly by Graham Watson himself, that his instructions were that the fee was to go to a charitable organisation flying relief into Biafra.
Graham Watson confirmed this statement to the police and confirmed it again under oath at the trial.
There was an independent witness who deposed that Aitken had a conversation with him shortly after the publication of the report and before any fee was paid, when Aitken asked for the names of Biafran charities to which the money might properly be sent.
The £500 fee was paid by the Sunday Telegraph to Curtis Brown on 11 January 1970, one month after the publication of the report.
All Aitken's evidence — uncontradicted by any other evidence — confirms that well before Curtis Brown received the £500, instructions had been given as to the charitable destination of the money.
Moral purists may well debate Aitken's propriety in selling — even for a charitable cause — something which did not belong to him, namely the copyright in the report, but others may share my own view that, having regard to the intensity of the pro-Biafran feelings of Aitken and Fraser, this particular act would not seriously impede an unobstructed entry into heaven.
The prosecution under the Official Secrets Act was launched on 12 January 1971 (the Conservative Party was then in power and had inherited this state prosecution from its Labour predecessors) and lasted three and a half weeks.
The case was heard by an exceptionally unconventional judge, but one of sound common sense, Mr Justice Caulfield, who more recently found fame in his unorthodox but equally commonsensical summing-up in the Jeffrey Archer action, where his description of Mrs Archer as ‘fragrant’, no doubt causing great embarrassment to the lady, will go down in the history of judicial extravagance.
General Alexander gave his evidence uneasily and was subjected to a brutal cross-examination by the most brilliant criminal counsel of our day, Jeremy Hutchinson QC (now Lord Hutchinson), who appeared for Mr Roberts of the Sunday Telegraph , and by a no less competent counsel, Basil Wigoder QC (now Lord Wigoder), who appeared for Aitken.
The question of whether or not any undertakings as to confidentiality were given would by itself have been irrelevant as a defence under the Official Secrets Act.
The crime is to disclose an official secret, probably even if extracted from the accused at the point of a pistol.
But the major plank of the defence was provided by the remarkable lady journalist Suzanne Cronjé.
By dint of careful and meticulous research she was able to provide the defence with evidence that every significant statement published in the Sunday Telegraph had been published somewhere already in a newspaper, a magazine or a book.
In short, if one had assembled a number of publications and collated them, one would have had everything that the prosecution claimed was a state secret.
In his summing-up, Mr Justice Caulfield could not have evinced a more robust hostility to the Official Secrets Act, sharing a widely held belief that it was long out of date and an intolerable interference with freedom of speech, and that it provided a justification for prosecutions ranging from the serious to the grotesquely ridiculous.
His summing-up left the jury in no doubt about his own views and would have required a jury of quite exceptional perversity to have brought in a guilty verdict.
The verdict of acquittal was easily predictable but was, nevertheless, a great relief.
Hugh Fraser predictably had been most anxious to join his friend and colleague in the dock.
I had considerable difficulty in dissuading him from this course and only did so when I was able to convince him that, far from assisting Aitken, it would damage his cause.
Hugh Fraser's later career was rewarded — no doubt forgiven for his participation in the case, or possibly because it was unknown — by a knighthood, but nothing more.
He was, I believe, thereafter regarded as too maverick a character for political office.
He had, from a political point of view, the sad disadvantage of espousing the causes of whose rightness he was convinced — always a fatal quality in an aspirant politician.
Jonathan Aitken escaped the total destruction of his career, which might well have resulted from a conviction.
But it may well be that his prolonged failure (now happily corrected) to achieve political success was attributable to long memories.
Political success was due to him because of an exceptional intelligence and independence of mind which resolutely refuses to be subservient to the political mandarins of his party.
He has espoused causes which Establishment figures, and particularly the Foreign Office, dislike and opposed causes, conspicuously the Channel Tunnel, which are much approved by his party leaders.
He has a keenly critical mind and is an excellent speaker — one of the best speakers in the House.
It is a sad reflection on his party that for so long he did not enjoy a smell of office.
In 1972 George Wigg's memoirs were published.
At his request, I had written the preface, and that preface had involved me in a most disagreeable situation.
A fortnight or so after I had dictated it in October 1971, I had a telephone call from Harold Wilson to know whether I had read Wigg's memoirs, and was I aware of the very personal attacks on him and Marcia Williams?
I had some difficulty in persuading him that I had not even seen, let alone read, the book, either in manuscript or in print.
In the event, both sides consulted solicitors and the matter was composed by quite serious alterations in references to both Harold and Mrs Williams.
Wigg's hostility to both arose from the same cause.
He had always resented Marcia Williams because of the influence she exercised over Harold Wilson and that resentment grew as his own power diminished.
He was a rejected favourite who did not relish the advance to power of his rival.
But Wilson had been immeasurably kind to him, found a place for a very square peg in his government and, in 1967, when he no longer had room in his government for Wigg, created him a peer and was at pains to find him a suitable job as chairman of the Horserace Betting Levy Board.
Wigg's two passions in life were first a constant and continuing admiration for the British army and second a lifelong interest in racing, about which he had a massive and detailed knowledge.
He was an assiduous and permanent gambler of modest sums, He told me on one occasion that any year in which he did not win £1,000 was by his standards a failure.
My own experience of his judgement was not very encouraging and did not support the view of his racing omniscience.
My practice is to place a modest-sized bet on two races, and not surprisingly my choice is the Grand National and the Derby.
To a layman, that is one who does not bet with any regularity, the Grand National opens up splendid opportunities to a knowing head.
It is possible for the race to be won at very long odds, and on two or three occasions, assisted by Wigg, I had been able to locate the winning horse, or at least a horse in the first three, which, if the odds were long enough, nevertheless produced a satisfactory result.
My most pressing experience of Wigg as a tipster was on one of the rare occasions when I went to the Derby.
My driver was in conversation with Sir Victor Sassoon's driver, who informed him that his employer had considerable confidence in his horse.
Before going to the box I  therefore paid a short visit to the Tote and was in the process of staking the Sassoon mount when Wigg appeared on the horizon.
Needless to say, since the notion that you did not ask anyone over-probing questions would have been regarded by him as an absurdity, he wanted to know what I was going to back.
When I told him, his scoffing could be heard miles away.
‘That horse,’ he said, ‘could never win.
He cannot stay the distance and his breathing is now difficult.’
Wigg went on to list various other imperfections from which the poor animal was suffering.
So vivid was his description that I suggested the only kindness would be to put the nag down before the race.
He then fortunately disappeared and I proceeded to put my bet on the horse, which I am happy to say romped home at forty to one.
When I encountered Wigg later in the afternoon, I made no mention of this situation and characteristically neither did he.
Around the middle of 1969 I had been asked by the Jockey Club whether I would join the board of United Racecourses, for one reason and one reason only: in order to keep the peace between the Jockey Club and Lord Wigg.
George Wigg's encounters with the Jockey Club became quite famous, particularly on one occasion when he had a public slanging-match, using voice-magnifying equipment, with the Duke of Norfolk who, employing similar equipment, exchanged insults with him on a racecourse.
George Wigg was a remarkable man but very difficult to keep in check.
For some reason I had a talent for calming him down.
I possessed a built-in Wigg pacifier that enabled reasonable transactions to be completed where otherwise he would be totally unreasonable.
An instance of Wigg's volatility occurred in December 1969 when he assembled with others at my breakfast table to discuss an issue between himself and the Jockey Club.
The Jockey Club was represented by Sir Randle Feilden (the senior steward), Sir John Astor and one other.
George Wigg was represented by himself.
I was there as the arbitrator, supplying the breakfast.
At the end of the proceedings I had succeeded in pacifying both parties and a concordat had been arrived at.
Thereupon we all agreed solemnly that it was a private matter and that no announcement would be made to the press.
Within ten minutes, George, having got back to his home in Warwick Square, rang me up and said, ‘Arnold, I have a press announcement here.
Would you like to approve it?’
‘George,’ I said, ‘we agreed less than an hour ago that there would not be a press announcement.’
‘Ah!’ he said.
‘I thought it over again and I have decided there must be an announcement, because it would indicate the merits of the matter and make it perfectly clear that I was in the right.’
This seemed to me a poor reason for making the announcement and I told him that I strongly disapproved of his breach of trust.
In any event, if he was going to make an announcement, I said, he should communicate with everyone present and obtain their consent.
Whereupon he blew his top and declared, ‘Well, I will not make the announcement, but I will never talk to you again!’
I took this threat rather lightly and for good reason, because some fifteen minutes later he was on the telephone to me talking about a completely different matter, as though the previous conversation had never taken place.
That was George.
Anyway, shortly after my joining the board of United Racecourses, it became necessary to find a manager.
I thought that Frank Coven would make a good manager and suggested him to George.
He met Frank, liked him and agreed that he should have the job.
Unfortunately, what was not made clear to George was that Frank had an extremely ambitious, though very pleasant, wife who insisted on participating in events to the exclusion of George, who had a very proper concern for himself.
Thus, to George's great indignation, he would arrive at a racecourse to hear that the cup for the 2.30 was about to be presented to the winner by Mrs Frank Coven, when he thought it ought to be presented by Lord Wigg.
In the event, the culmination of the relationship occurred when the telephone rang one day and in a suspiciously silky voice George asked me where I thought the Derby Cup was.
I assured him that I did not have the slightest idea where the Derby Cup was and had not made away with it.
‘I'll tell you where it is,’ he said.
‘Well, why ask me if you know?’
I asked.
This, however, did not dissuade him.
‘The Derby Cup,’ he said, ‘is in the window of Peter Robinson.’
‘What,’ I enquired, ‘is it doing there?’
‘I'll tell you what it is doing there.
Mrs Coven is the ‘outsize’ adviser to Peter Robinson and she has borrowed the Derby Cup in order that it be displayed in their window.
It has no right to be there and if you will take my advice you will tell Frank Coven to take it out of that window and back to the bank as fast as he can.’
I telephoned Frank and adopted exactly the same technique.
‘Tell me, Frank,’ I said, ‘where is the Derby Cup?’
There was a rather guilty silence.
‘Why do you ask?’ he said.
‘Oh!
I'm just interested.’
‘The Derby Cup,’ he said, ‘is in the window of Peter Robinson.’
‘What,’ I asked, ‘is it doing in the window of Peter Robinson?’
‘It is not doing any harm,’ he said, ‘in the window of Peter Robinson.’
‘But suppose it is stolen?’
‘Ah!’ he answered, ready for that one.
‘It is insured.’
‘Tell me,’ I went on gently, ‘if a man has entered a horse for the Derby from, shall we say, Texas or California or Kansas, or anywhere where horses are bred, and having won the Derby arrives to be presented with something, do you think he will be pleased to get a voucher on the Royal Insurance Company instead of the Cup?’
To this Frank had no reply.
‘Frank’ I said, ‘if you will take my advice as a good friend, you will get that Cup back with the  speed of light.’
He needed no telling twice, but alas the episode was fatal to his position at United Racecourses and he thereupon turned to other activities.
If I had to give the best pen picture I could contrive of Harold Wilson, I would describe him as an immensely intelligent man, rather less — by my standards — than half-educated.
One of the most notable omissions in his education and his interests was almost anything to do with the arts.
He was immensely well-read on political history in the nineteenth century and more recent times, and he deployed a memory of fantastic accuracy, but so far as I could judge he had read virtually nothing else.
He cited as his favourite book a long novel about Lancashire and the cotton industry, which he referred to occasionally, but the great wealth of British literature was both unknown to him and something in which he clearly had no interest.
An instance of his ignorance and lack of sophistication was the occasion when one of the commercial television stations put on a Sunday evening entertainment at a London theatre, consisting of relatively brief extracts from a number of famous plays.
Owing to the strength of their position in the world of entertainment, they were able to persuade some of the leading actors and actresses to perform.
There was a piece from Hamlet , another piece from The Merchant of Venice , and extracts from The School for Scandal, The Critic, The Importance of Being Earnest , and a few others.
I was sitting in a row exactly in front of Harold Wilson and his party, and during the last interval I heard him ask his neighbour whether anyone would ‘have seen these plays right through’.
I heard no more of the exchange but this one remark was quite enough to establish his woeful ignorance about the theatre.
But although Harold Wilson was in artistic matters a Philistine, he was better than the later Philistines, since he recognised that the ambit of British culture should not be controlled by his own personal predilections, and he responded with speed and generosity to applications from Jennie Lee for better support for the arts.
He was always very amenable to me when, as chairman of the Arts Council, I too was in need of some special support.
Perhaps his greatest vulnerability was one shared with the great mass of mankind: a vanity which affected many aspects of his life, and which as he grew older increased his claims for credit for almost every activity within human reach.
It would not have surprised me to hear him say that he had advised the Almighty strongly against the Flood and other similar claims, the foolishness of which was self-evident, but not to Him.
A radical shortcoming was his inability to match expenditure to income.
This was due in my view to the fact that he had rather extravagant notions  of the office structure that he should maintain.
He should have realised that the employment of a number of secretaries was both unnecessary and costly, but he continued boldly to maintain a lavish office establishment.
Various friends and supporters rallied to his assistance, largely I think because they liked him, as indeed I did, but it was a waste of time to urge thrift or economy on him since he proceeded happily on the basis that the money would come from somewhere.
This was an unfortunate trait for a prime minister.
It exposed him to some influences that were thoroughly unhelpful, but as a matter of loyalty, and nothing else, he would not discard the people who, he believed, had been of help to him.
Wilson's principal domestic fault was his kindness in bestowing benefits on friends, and indeed on anyone who approached him in the appropriate fashion, and certainly through Marcia Williams.
His attitude towards public honours was a contradictory one.
In public he expressed great contempt for the system, but he made use of it to an immoderate degree, particularly by bestowing honours — undue honours — on the least worthy of his personal friends and particularly if the suggestion was made by anyone close to him.
One day I was sitting in his room in Downing Street having a general discussion, when he suddenly said to me, ‘Can you think of any good name for the next Honours List?’
I thought for a moment and came up with a suggestion that he should give some sort of honour, an OBE or the like, to the cricketer Basil D'Oliveira, who had been shabbily treated by the South African government.
He noted my suggestion and D'Oliveira's name duly appeared in the next Honours List with, I think, an OBE.
And it was a perfectly well-deserved honour which was not open to the same criticism as many of the other honours that Wilson made or unhappily was persuaded to make.
I remember one day prior to the publication of an Honours List in 1974 when Harold Wilson and George Wigg had dinner with me.
Harold Wilson obviously had something on his mind and he told us that if we watched the television news we would hear something that he was sure would be of interest to us.
It turned out to be the announcement of the elevation of Marcia Williams to the House of Lords.
George Wigg almost had a stroke, in view of his undoubted and continuing hostility to her.
For my part, I made no comment of any kind.
The lady has, so far as I know, done no harm in the Lords — no one having seen her except on one occasion when she went there to lunch — and she has yet to make her maiden speech.
I do not think she derived any great benefits from being ennobled, but obviously it was something she liked and sought and Harold Wilson could see little or no reason for not obliging her.
However, when she became Lady Falkender she became much more  open to criticism.
For instance, Denis Hamilton — a totally fair journalist, but an incorrigible Conservative — came to see me one day to warn me that The Times was prepared to break the newspaper silence that had until then, with the exception of Private Eye , been maintained by all news sources about her two illegitimate children.
I asked him why this change of heart and he said that it was because Harold Wilson had seen fit to put her in the Lords.
As such she became a public personage, open to public comment.
I asked him whether, if she had been a man elevated to the peerage, he would have considered it necessary to disclose everything to do with his private life.
He gave me no satisfactory answer, saying only that The Times was set to make this disclosure in an article by a woman journalist the following day.
I did not speak to Harold Wilson or to Lady Falkender about the matter, since I was sure that strenuous efforts would be made to prevent disclosure, but I was equally sure from Denis Hamilton's attitude that this would not succeed and it was therefore better not to try.
But all this palled beside Harold Wilson's unfortunate ‘Resignation’ List in 1976.
By that time my personal relations with him had cooled, so there was no question of my having seen any of the names.
However, shortly before the List's publication, I received a visit from Harold Evans, then the editor of the Sunday Times , who came to breakfast and rather slyly asked if I had seen it; to which I replied that I had not seen it and knew nothing of its contents.
I was not left in ignorance long.
Harold Evans clearly had seen the List and regaled me with some of its more unlikely names.
I was horrified by these disclosures and indeed spent rather a troubled night reflecting on whether I had any duty to express my view.
I decided that as I had worked for Harold Wilson and enjoyed his total confidence for several years, there was some duty to try to deter him from the worst mistakes.
Accordingly I telephoned him quite early the next morning and received a cordial invitation to come and drink a cup of coffee with him in his home in Lord North Street.
He had withdrawn there on the advice of several people (including myself) that Downing Street was an impossible place for anyone whose curiosity extended to seeing every telegram that came in at whatever time of the day or night.
When I arrived at Lord North Street I sailed straight in.
I started by saying to Harold that I had been told about his Honours List — I did not tell him by whom — and I hoped that what I heard was mistaken.
I went on to say to him that I wished to make it clear that my disquiet did not relate to any particular name, but if in fact the names that I had heard turned out to be a correct report, and he published the List, the List would support legitimate criticism.
He would, I said, do himself an  immense disservice which he would indeed regret and from which he would never recover.
Wilson was obviously embarrassed by my statement and sought to identify any particular honorands whom I might have in mind.
This suggestion I declined.
There were several Jewish names on the List and he mentioned one of them as being my most likely choice to be struck off.
I assured him that the man concerned had as good or as bad claims as anyone on the List and that my remarks were not addressed to him.
Thereupon he made the surprising comment that the agitation about his List was inspired by anti-Semitism.
There is one allegation that could never be made against Harold Wilson: that he was an anti-Semite.
He had a great many Jewish friends and I never heard the faintest suggestion of hostility to the Jews coming from him.
He was a self-proclaimed, and indeed unarguably so, friend of the Jews, many of whose qualities he greatly respected.
I replied to him that if he cared to submit the List to any representative group of Jews, he would hear their ‘no’ from Downing Street to Golders Green.
Whereupon he made a further defensive remark that in any event it was now too late to effect any alterations.
Accepting defeat I withdrew, but I was gratified to learn afterwards that although the bulk of unsuitable candidates remained, he had made certain alterations following my visit.
One was to downgrade a proposed new peer to a knighthood; another was to leave out a name completely.
To that extent, my intrusion into the matter achieved something.
The List came in for copious criticism and there were a number of insinuations that the List — which had first appeared on a piece of lavender-coloured notepaper — was largely the work of Lady Falkender.
How far this was true I do not know, but I do know that any suggestion from her to Harold Wilson was likely to receive an affirmative answer.
My intervention, such as it was, became well known and earned me the enmity of two or three people whose awards had been either altered or struck out.
I regarded this as totally unfair since in my comments I had not picked on any particular individual.
This was my last formal association with Harold Wilson.
I had acquired his confidence, which I believe I still retain, but for a number of reasons which were quasi-political we drifted apart towards the end of his second premiership, and although we have remained on friendly terms, the intimacy has long vanished.
I am firmly convinced that it was Harold Wilson's poor judgement in relation to certain advisers that damaged his record as Prime Minister.
If examined objectively and without party bias, that record was nevertheless a distinguished one.