

The farm worker
It is easy to forget that the majority of those who work in agriculture are neither landowners nor farmers but farm workers.
For despite their numerical majority farm workers are the least considered section of the farming population.
Indeed their existence often remains unacknowledged beyond their own circle of friends and workmates.
This is not too difficult to understand for the ‘second agricultural revolution’ has brought about a drastic decline in the number of agricultural workers since the war and has left those who remain more isolated and scattered throughout the countryside as a result.
All too often anyone passing through rural England hardly senses the farm worker's presence, for the fields are deceptively still and during the day-time the villages can also be devoid of any human activity.
Someone must plough the fields or milk the cows, but much of this endeavour takes place hidden from public view and when a tractor is glimpsed across a field it is often assumed that it is a farmer who is in the cab.
The farm worker, in the meantime, receives little attention from those who profess an interest in the changing conditions of rural England.
The social invisibility of the farm worker has enabled his plight to be virtually ignored over the years.
The farm worker has become resigned to this public indifference, although he becomes annoyed by the continuing refusal to recognize the importance of his contribution to food production.
He still finds it difficult to shake off the smock-and-straw image of the unintelligent country yokel and to convince those outside the industry of his skill and versatility.
However, the farm worker rarely achieves what is necessary to bring himself before the attention of the public.
There has been no strike in agriculture since 1923 and the instinct of the farm worker is to shun rather than seek the kind of publicity which would be required to engender public support for his cause.
Hence, despite the brave attempts of many farm workers' leaders since the  days of the Tolpuddle Martyrs, the farm worker has little history beyond poverty, dependence and remorseless labour.
His conditions have gradually improved, but his pay and his status remain (when compared with the rest of the population) relatively poor.
So much has changed in the life of the farm worker, especially the nature of his work; yet so much, as we shall see, has remained resistant to change.
This is the nature of the paradox which often leaves the older farm worker bewildered by the experiences of his lifetime.
The drift from the land
As was noted in the previous chapter, the drive towards increased efficiency has led to the wholesale substitution of capital for labour in agriculture.
There has therefore been a steady and persistent ‘drift from the land’ of agricultural labour, which is either pushed out by continuing mechanization and the adoption of other labour-saving techniques or lured into other industries by the prospect of higher wages and better conditions of employment.
In 1948 there were nearly 57300 regular whole-time workers in England and Wales, but by 1975 the number (not exactly comparable because of changes in the basis of the statistics) had fallen to 184000.
The recent distribution of the labour force is shown in Tables 5 and 6.
The number of workers on the land has been shrinking at the rate of nearly 20000 per year, although this has not occurred in a completely uniform fashion.
The rate of decline has owed a great deal to the overall level of employment in the economy, so that year-to-year fluctuations have varied considerably — it has been calculated, for example, that a 1 per cent decline in the national level of unemployment is sufficient to provoke an increase in the outflow of labour from agriculture eight times as large.
Much also depends upon local employment conditions, for, with a few exceptions, the greatest decline has taken place where there has been the greatest competition for labour, principally in the South East, in the West Midlands and in South Wales.
All types of labour have been affected, but among arable workers, where mechanization has been most extensive, it has been disproportionately rapid.
Finally, the decrease has been greatest among full-time male workers.
In their search for sources of cheap labour farmers have turned more to female, part-time and casual workers and here the decline in numbers has been nothing like so great.
All these   general trends are, however, capable of being reversed at the local level where conditions may occasionally fly in the face of the overall pattern.
The decline in the number of farm workers partly accounts for the peculiar age structure of the industry.
Farm workers are an ageing labour force as the cohort from the days when they were more numerous gradually works its way through to retirement.
The average age is thirty-nine, but in some areas, such as East Anglia, over half of the labour force is over the age of forty-five.
This would offer a considerable threat to the future supply of labour were it not for the fact that agriculture also attracts a disproportionate number of school-leavers — more, in fact, than it could possibly cope with if they were all to stay in the industry.
Employment opportunities for school-leavers in rural areas are usually highly limited and their choice is often further circumscribed by a lack of personal mobility.
A job on the land is therefore regarded as a handy stop-gap until the possession of a driving licence opens up a much wider labour market, both geographically and occupationally.
On average, a sixteen-year-old recruit to farming will have moved on by the age of twenty-three —; usually to the building and construction or road haulage industries.
Increasingly agriculture is regarded as a residual employer, something to turn to when other jobs are unavailable.
In the remoter rural areas, where agriculture has traditionally held a virtual monopoly of employment opportunities, the declining demand for labour in agriculture has historically led to widespread  rural depopulation.
Former farm workers have felt the need to move out to the towns and cities in search not only of employment, but of higher pay, better working conditions, and increased opportunities for personal advancement; and farmers have felt the need to shed labour as an accompaniment to increasing productivity.
This is, of course, no new process: rural depopulation first became identified as a social problem in the middle of the last century.
On occasions rural depopulation has aroused considerable public concern and has even been represented as a draining away of the nation's life-blood, to the detriment of the national character and vigour.
However, an evaluation of rural depopulation needs to take account of a whole variety of factors.
Undoubtedly the people left behind can experience immense dislocation, amounting in extreme cases to complete social and economic dereliction, but with no economic base to support a larger rural population, conditions would have been worse if those who moved to the towns had chosen to remain in the countryside.
Many who moved were glad to do so and the economy as a whole has benefited from the release of agricultural labour to take up employment in the expanding manufacturing and service sectors.
The conventional wisdom has been that those who left the countryside were the energetic and the intelligent, leaving only a residue of the old and the inert, but we also ought to note that the urban view has often been the exact opposite: that the towns have received the rural dregs — the drifters, the shiftless, the work-shy, the unattached flotsam of agricultural change.
There is, in fact, no hard evidence to show that rural depopulation has been socially selective either way.
In England, at least, rural depopulation is now regarded as less of a problem than it was up until the 1940s.
Since 1961 the proportion of the population living in rural areas has actually undergone a small increase and, if anything, a more frequently voiced problem is one of how to preserve the countryside against increasing population pressure.
Nevertheless the social composition of rural areas is now vastly different from that which existed before the drift from the land set in.
Any increase is due to the non-agricultural, ‘adventitious’ rural population, while the number of agricultural workers continues to decline.
Indeed there remains sufficient slack in some sections of the labour force and enough new technological innovations on the horizon for there to be no end in sight to the continuing reduction in the number of workers in the industry.
It may not be too long  before farm workers cease to be a majority of those engaged in farming.
Work on the land
Technological change has not only brought about a drastic decline in the number of farm workers, but has fundamentally altered the nature of the work which they now perform.
Most farm workers over the age of forty have witnessed the disappearance of a predominantly horse-and-hand technology and its replacement by one based upon the internal combustion engine.
Moreover the pace of technological change has increased steadily during the latter half of the twentieth century so that the farm worker in turn has had to become more adaptable to successive new innovations.
Looking back over this period most farm workers view the introduction of the tractor and the combine harvester as representing a decisive break in the hitherto orderly pace of agricultural change — and in many respects this is undoubtedly what has occurred.
However, the nature of the change must not be overstated.
The internal combustion engine did not destroy an unchanging pattern of work stretching back into immemorial antiquity and neither is rapid technological change in agriculture a purely twentieth-century phenomenon.
Not all farm workers have been affected equally by the new technology and certain aspects of working on the land have remained almost untouched by it.
Technological change since the war has undoubtedly altered the pace of work on the farm, but it has barely affected its rhythm.
This is because the length of the production cycle and the rhythm of the work in agriculture continue to be governed by the seasons of the year except in those branches of the industry which have been turned over to factory farming methods.
The traditional rhythm of work remains because most operations in agriculture, especially where the growing of crops is concerned, must take place sequentially rather than concurrently.
In other words, each state in the production process can only be begun once the previous stage has been completed.
The land is ploughed and then the seed is sown, the crop sprayed, the harvest taken, and so on.
It is impossible to perform each stage of production simultaneously.
In replacing horses and men by machines, the practice of carrying out agricultural production in sequential steps is not disturbed, as it is in the changeover from handicraft to  mechanized manufacture in industry.
As a result mechanization in agriculture has wrought a spectacular change in the implements that the workers use to produce the crop and an equally drastic change in the pace at which each step in the productive process is carried out, but in most branches of agriculture the fundamental sequential organization of production remains undisturbed.
From this simple, yet significant, starting-point many of the distinctive features of working on the land follow.
On arable farms, traditionally the most labour-intensive section of the industry and now the most capital-intensive, the changes wrought by technological innovation have not only resulted in a reduction in the number of workers, but a dramatic decrease in the division of labour among those that remain.
Whereas a horseman might manage to plough an acre a day, a tractor driver might now manage up to forty.
A farm employing twenty workers before the war in a complex hierarchy of bailiffs, foremen, charge-hands, horsemen and day-labourers may today make do with less than five.
These five workers have been forced to become adept at tackling the complete range of jobs which may arise on the farm over the year.
Thus, whereas a horseman's work formerly revolved almost entirely around his horses, his modern counterpart must not only be a tractor driver but a ‘general farm worker’— a mechanic, a labourer and perhaps even a part-time stockman, too.
His work has therefore become more varied and, because he is no longer subject to close personal supervision while out in the fields, the farm worker has become more autonomous.
In both cases this is the opposite of the prevailing trend in manufacturing industry.
The only major division of labour which remains in agriculture relates to those who work with livestock and those who do not.
In some respects the stockman has been less affected by mechanization, although this depends upon which type of worker we are considering.
For example, the introduction of mechanized milking parlours has reduced milking to a process akin to assembly-line production; on the other hand the life of a shepherd has been only marginally touched by technological change.
What has changed for the stockman is more often connected with the intensification of livestock production.
There has, in other words, been a quantitative rather than a qualitative change in his work.
The number of stock under the supervision of a single worker has increased considerably and this  has placed an additional burden on the skill of the stockman to face the new challenges which have resulted.
Because intensive livestock production renders the animals more susceptible to disease most stockmen have developed a degree of veterinary skill which can make them a decisive factor in the profitability of any livestock enterprise.
Science has also intervened in such matters as breeding, feed-conversion, and the control of the environment to reduce mortality and disease, forcing the stockman to keep accurate records of the necessary information and plan his husbandry strategy accordingly.
The modern stockman thus approximates more to a ‘farm technician’ than the old image of the ‘farm labourer’.
While many of the older farm workers nostalgically regret the passing of horses, none regrets the way in which mechanization has removed much of the physical effort and routine drudgery that used to be involved in working on a farm.
For the younger workers, in particular, mechanization has become a badge of their modernity which they can show off to otherwise uncomprehending townies in a manner which the latter can understand.
To work with a large and complex piece of machinery demonstrates to the rest of the world that the farm worker is both skilled and in the vanguard of scientific progress.
Farm workers appreciate the status involved in working with the biggest or newest piece of agricultural equipment in their district and take an almost proprietorial interest in the purchases of their employer.
Mechanization has not therefore necessarily involved any decrease in job satisfaction among farm workers.
Variety is endemic to working on the land, variety introduced by changes in the weather, the seasons, soil conditions and, as we have seen, by the increasing versatility demanded of the farm workers themselves.
Farm workers also gain intrinsic satisfaction from working with living and growing plants and animals and they share a sense of achievement when they are finally brought to maturity, the sequential nature of production allowing workers to be involved in all of the stages through to completion.
Compared with most other manual jobs, working on the land offers far more in the way of intrinsic interest, variety, autonomy, challenge, responsibility and control.
Of course, working on a farm like any other job contains its boring, repetitive aspects and any worker can become tired of driving up and down large modern fields for weeks on end during ploughing, but in general job satisfaction is extraordinarily high.
Few farm  workers leave the land because they dislike the job itself; on the contrary many would return were it not for the poor pay and prospects.
For many farm workers the major problem introduced by mechanization has been an increase in the loneliness of the job.
Not only are there fewer workers around on each farm than formerly, but the modern farm worker spends much of his time isolated in the noisy interior of his tractor cab.
Even if he is working in a field with other workers the sense of isolation can remain, for the noise and the increased pace of work hardly lend themselves to easy conversation between workmates.
This is a considerable contrast with the camaraderie of the field which frequently existed before the widespread introduction of tractors.
In the past farm workers worked alongside each other in gangs or small groups far more than is customary today and meal breaks would also be taken together out in the fields.
On return to the farm in the late afternoon there was likely to be a further round of gossip and conversation while grooming the horses and bedding them down for the night.
Today the farm worker often works on his own and drives home for lunch on board his tractor.
He is by no means a total social isolate for there are still occasions when work is carried out in groups of two or three, but contact is more desultory and the closely knit relationships developed out of lengthy periods of working side by side have become somewhat  attenuated .
However, if he is lucky the modern farm worker will find his tractor cab fitted with a radio, to which he can tune in via an earpiece.
Perhaps this has a certain symbolic significance: the farm worker has become more isolated from his fellow workers, but more attuned to the world beyond the farm gate.
Changes in technology and the associated decline in the size of the farm labour force have also had a profound effect on the relationship between the farm worker and his employer.
Although the trend is towards larger farms in terms of both production and acreage, the decline in the labour force is sufficiently outpacing the rate of farm amalgamation to produce a continuing decline in the average number of workers employed on each farm.
In 1974 there were 1.4 regular whole-time workers for every full-time holding; ten years earlier it had been 2.1.
Moreover, the distribution of workers is concentrated among the smaller farms — nearly a quarter of farm workers work on their own and nearly two-thirds work on farms employing four or less workers; only one worker in twelve is on a farm with more than twenty employees.
This means that farms are becoming less bureaucratic — except where amalgamation has created very large units — and the relationship between farmer and farm worker has become a much more personal one.
The economic differences between a farmer and his workers are as wide today as they ever were (probably wider when wealth as well as income is taken into account), but the social distance between them has been considerably reduced.
Although the relationship is by no means an egalitarian one, it has become more harmonious and more easy-going.
This is a considerable contrast with the prevailing tenor of the relationship between ‘master and man’ which existed on the land when labour was more numerous.
In the past the sheer size of the labour force on many farms, particularly the larger farms in the South and East of England, minimized the contact between employer and employee.
This labour force was regimented through a succession of intermediaries — bailiffs on the largest farms, foremen and charge-hands elsewhere — in order to co-ordinate the frenetic periods of often complex and arduous activity, such as seed-time and harvest.
The farmer was a remote and authoritarian figure and personal contact was often limited to no more than the weekly payment of wages.
Control of the workforce was therefore formal and impersonal, often reflecting the tone of class relationships as they existed in the wider rural society.
Mechanization, by reducing the number of workers employed on each farm has brought farmer and farm worker into a more personal, face-to-face and less formal relationship with each other.
As we shall see in the following chapter, mechanization has not been the only process responsible for this, but by enabling the farmer to de-bureaucratize his farm and place greater emphasis on developing the personal loyalty of his workforce rather than relying upon regulations and sanctions, it has been an important contributory factor.
Farm workers have found themselves working more often alongside their employer and the farmer in turn is often more willing to consult his workers on the day-to-day management of the farm.
Indeed the relationship frequently extends beyond the work itself to the farmer's involvement in the domestic life of his employees.
This can create its own peculiar problems, but such personal involvement can also increase the identification of the farm worker with his employer and with the farm.
To some degree the decreasing number of workers on the typical farm makes this close personal contact inevitable.
However, many  farmers believe that they must ‘look after’ their employees beyond the bare minimum specified by their contract of employment as a guarantee of sound and harmonious labour relations.
‘Looking after’ their workers most definitely does not mean paying higher than the prevailing rate of wages, but it does imply a genuine concern for their employees' welfare (including help with personal and domestic problems), the provision of decent housing facilities and frequent individual acts of generosity like small gifts on family birthdays and at Christmas, the allowance of various perquisites and even the provision of occasional ‘treats’like harvest suppers and days out at local agricultural shows.
In other words many farmers like to show their workers that they care .
To the outside observer these activities bear a remarkable similarity to, and may indeed be the modern equivalent of, nineteenth-century paternalism.
They represent the personal touch which takes the edge off what remains for most farm workers the harsh realities of their poor pay and dependent status.
When the farmer is such a personally kind and considerate individual who recognizes his social responsibilities to his workforce, it seems churlish on the part of the farm worker to complain about low wages and poor working conditions.
Thus while most farm workers recognize that they are poorly paid, few blame their own employer for their poverty.
Paternalism therefore deflects the dissatisfaction of the farm worker and can act as an effective guarantor of a ‘family’ atmosphere on the farm.
Technological change in agriculture has increased the importance of obtaining the loyalty of the farm worker rather than relying upon a disciplined and authoritarian regime.
Mechanization has increased the autonomy of the agricultural worker and has rendered close supervision difficult, if not impossible.
On the other hand the farm worker has been placed in control of important and costly pieces of farm investment which may run into many thousands of pounds.
No farmer can therefore afford to carry workers who are disgruntled or who have no identification with the aims of the enterprise.
This partly accounts for the importance which farmers attach to cultivating their workers' loyalty.
However, a paternalist style of management can stand rather oddly in the modern world.
In a scientific, efficient, rationalized business, which agriculture is increasingly moving towards, the trappings of anything which smacks of paternalism can evoke embarrassment among both farmers and farm workers, and  even some annoyance among the latter.
Where very large units have been created by either purchase or amalgamation the ‘personal touch’, to which many farmers ascribe the absence of industrial relations problems in British agriculture, may in any case be inoperable.
Such farms may allow for little or no daily contact with the workforce (other than by two-way radios fitted to tractors), with day-to-day supervision remaining in the hands of managers and foremen.
A more formal and impersonal system of management, of the kind which other farmers disparagingly attribute to manufacturing industry, therefore prevails.
These farms rely almost solely on paying high wages and offering good working conditions in order to attract and retain their labour force.
Indeed the agribusinessmen who typically control such enterprises, are often impatient with any time-consuming involvement in the non-working lives of their employees.
It not only conflicts with their self-conscious professionalism but they regard it as an increasing anachronism in the agriculture of the 1970s.
Most farmers view this trend with gloomy foreboding, however.
They believe that personal ‘gaffer-to-man’ contact has been responsible for removing much of the industrial conflict which they regard as plaguing the remainder of British industry.
Industrial farming, they believe, will bring industrial problems.
It is unlikely that more than a tiny proportion of farms will attain the bureaucratic structure associated with agribusinessmen farmers, but they are regarded suspiciously as possible Trojan horses introducing alien patterns of labour relations into the countryside.
If farmers are frank with themselves they will also recognize that paternalism is cheap.
A kind word here and a Christmas turkey there is a small price to pay for the loyalty of one's employees.
Giving them a wage comparable with other workers is another matter.
Pay and conditions
There are a number of fallacies which are frequently promulgated in order to explain away the low standard of living of the farm worker and which require a brisk dismissal at the outset.
The first is that the poverty of the farm worker is a thing of the past and that his position has improved considerably since the war-In absolute terms this is obviously true: the farm worker has, along with the rest of the population, steadily raised his standard of living as a result of  successive wage increases.
In relative terms, however, it is false.
Compared with other workers the position of the agricultural worker has actually deteriorated since the war.
His wages have increased, but not as fast as everyone else's.
Average hourly earnings in agriculture were nearly three-quarters of those in industry in the late 1940s; today they are down to less than two-thirds.
Secondly, it is often argued that farm workers are compensated for their low wages by a cornucopia of payments in kind.
These, however, constitute only 2 per cent of average earnings.
Even the provision of free or almost free housing leaves the farm worker no better off when comparisons are made with workers elsewhere, for the latter often receive benefits — cheap meals, pension funds, medical facilities, etc. — unavailable to farm workers.
Thirdly, farmers are often heard to complain of a shortage of workers on the land.
However, unemployment in agriculture consistently runs above the national average and while certain specialist workers may be in short supply they form only a small part of the labour force.
Finally, the satisfaction of the job is regarded by sentimental observers as sufficient compensation for the lack of material rewards.
On this the farm worker is most scathing: fresh air does not pay his electricity bill.
The poverty of the farm worker today is obviously very different from that which existed in the countryside in Victorian times, but the majority of farm workers are poor by the standards which we have come to expect in modern Britain.
In 1975 average earnings in agriculture were £45–25 for a working week of 46. 1 hours, compared with £59.58 for 43–6 hours in manufacturing industry.
Earnings in agriculture are the lowest of any industry covered by the Department of Employment's six-monthly earnings surveys.
Moreover, the range of earnings within agriculture is relatively narrow.
Highly skilled and highly trained stockmen on intensive livestock farms can, it is true, earn much more than the average wage (though often for longer and more awkward hours), since such workers are in relatively short supply, but they are the industry's élite and constitute no more than 15 per cent of the labour force.
The average wage in agriculture is so low, not because it contains the odd pocket of particularly low-paid workers among an affluent majority, but because it represents virtually in toto a low-paying sector of the economy.
Farm workers also continue to comprise the majority of the rural poor.
In common with many other low-pay industries the minimum  standards of pay and conditions are laid down by an industrial council, the Agricultural Wages Board.
The AWB consists of equal numbers of employer and employee representatives, together with ‘neutral’ members appointed by the Ministry of Agriculture who almost invariably determine the awards.
Very few workers — less than 5 per cent— receive the statutory minimum wage, however.
The vast majority are paid ‘premium’ payments and in 1972 these were codified by the AWB into a wages structure whereby skilled and supervisory workers receive plus rates laid down by the Board.
Most workers, for example, receive the craftsman's grade, which is 10 per cent above the minimum.
The AWB also controls the length of the working week and the allowances that may be made in the weekly wage for various payments in kind.
The specialization of farms and the mechanization of production have, however, vastly reduced the perquisites which farm workers receive — milk and potatoes are the only significant produce and by no means all farms find it convenient to make these and other small quantities of food available.
Housing remains important though (see below), and the AWB controls the rent of the tied cottage.
In general the AWB's awards have been niggardly — at times extremely so.
It has preferred to follow rather than lead the majority of the industry's employers and seems to have interpreted its own role as that of a safety net to protect the worst-exploited workers.
Centralizing wage negotiations in this way has, however, removed from most farms the resolution of the most sensitive conflict of interest between farmers and farm workers.
There are many farmers, possibly a majority, who recognize that farm workers deserve higher pay, but they resolutely maintain that they cannot afford to grant it.
They acknowledge the low pay of the farm worker but, the argument runs, they cannot be paid more so long as their returns to capital invested continue to fall behind the returns available to industrial employers.
Low pay among farm workers is simply an associated aspect of the low-income problem in agriculture generally, perpetuated by the government's cheap food policy.
Such an explanation has often seemed plausible (though less so since the abandonment of this cheap food policy upon entry into the EEC).
Its major point of weakness, however, is that what determines the incomes of farmers — the prices they receive for their produce — does not determine the income of farm workers, which is derived from the sale of their labour .
The wages of farm workers are thus determined  by the conditions prevailing in the local labour market, rather than that for agricultural products.
Farmers may be able to pass on low prices in the form of low wages but this depends upon the conditions prevailing in the labour market in their area.
Farmers near towns, for example, usually find it necessary to pay higher wages in order to obtain sufficient workers, yet farmers near towns do not receive higher prices for their produce.
Similarly there is little correlation between farming profits and farm workers' wages on a regional basis.
In East Anglia, for example, farmers are among the most prosperous in the country, but their workers are among the most poorly paid.
The reason for this is the lack of competition for labour, not the inability of farmers to pay more.
Farmers are businessmen and since wages constitute a cost of production they will normally pay no more than prevailing conditions dictate.
It may salve the conscience or meet some other purpose of the farmer to pretend otherwise, but if we wish to understand the causes of low pay in the countryside and speculate on the prospects for improvement, we cannot rely upon the charity of farmers.
Experience suggests that they will only pay wages comparable with those in industry when circumstances force them to do so.
One reason why farm workers' wages remain so comparatively low is that the demand for labour within agriculture has been declining as a result of mechanization-Indeed, the prospect of more expensive labour has often been sufficient to stimulate farmers to engage in a further round of mechanization so that both the supply and the demand for labour have chased each other down in an ever-decreasing spiral.
Since the middle of the nineteenth century this has produced a persistent surplus of population in the countryside with a consequent depression of wage levels-Rural depopulation has rarely proceeded on a scale to compensate for the reduced demand for labour in rural areas and neither has the demand for labour in the countryside been adequately stimulated by the provision of sufficient alternative employment opportunities to agriculture.
Even since the war industrial relocation schemes for rural areas have been half-hearted and inadequate.
The whole tenor of planning policy has been to restrict the presence of industry in the countryside and to preserve it as a largely pastoral backwater.
More recently this has received added support from the environmental lobby, which has also looked askance at all but the most picturesque forms of employment being introduced into rural areas.
The quickest way to improve rural wages  would be to locate a small engineering factory in every village — a utopian thought, no doubt.
But as we shall see in Chapter 6 more flexible planning policies are required if the low-wage rural economy is to be alleviated and rural depopulation to be assuaged in those areas where it remains a problem.
A ‘traditional’ English countryside can only be supported by a traditionally poverty-stricken rural labour force.
Maintaining the countryside in a pristine ‘rural’ state merely means consigning a substantial section of its population to a level of material existence which those who propound such policies would not themselves tolerate.
Given the lack of development in many rural areas it is not surprising that the dependency of rural workers on agriculture for employment has remained, nor that so many school-leavers take a job on the land even though they have no intention of remaining there if the choice to leave should present itself.
Urban labour markets have spread more deeply into rural areas thanks to improved communications, but in recent years the increasing cost and decreasing availability and frequency of public transport have cancelled out many of the gains which rural workers might otherwise have enjoyed.
Moreover many farm workers still find it difficult to meet the cost of private transport which might open up the range of alternatives.
The geographical area within which workers look for jobs therefore remains a restricted one.
Youngsters come and go, but the older workers, with their family responsibilities, stay on.
An ageing labour force cannot be expected to be a mobile one.
The declining demand for labour in agriculture even militates against a move to a higher paid job within the industry itself.
Furthermore rural unemployment rates are higher on average than those in towns, so that although it is less visible than urban unemployment, because the absolute numbers involved are so much smaller, rural unemployment has a significant effect in dampening down rural wage increases.
In addition there is one other institution which symbolizes the continuing dependency of agricultural workers upon local farmers — the tied cottage.
Agriculture tied cottages are houses provided by farmers as part of their workers' terms of employment.
A worker may be required to live in tied accommodation as a condition of employment or he may make his own decision to do so.
The farmer may deduct a (nominal) rent from his tenant's wages — an amount regulated by the AWB —— but most farmers waive this.
Until 1 January 1977, if for any reason — including accident, redundancy or retirement — the farm worker's employment ceased, so did his security of tenure.
A farmer could apply to a county court for a possession order and evict his former employee, though the court was empowered to suspend the order for up to six months.
It almost goes without saying that over the years no single topic in agriculture has succeeded in raising passions more.
Agricultural trade unions have described the system as ‘feudal’ and ‘legalized serfdom’, while farmers have defended tied housing as being essential to farming (especially livestock farming) where labour needs to be on immediate call, an aid to labour mobility within the industry and a considerable tax-free perquisite.
Strictly speaking, the tied cottage is not, historically or legally, a feudal institution.
It is a quite recent development of mid-Victorian agriculture, following on from the decline of farm service and the disappearance of itinerant agricultural gangs.
Farmers, concerned about the disappearance of casual labour, built dwellings on their land which would ensure a pool of workers and these houses were known as ‘tied’ houses because they were rented from the employer rather than‘open’houses rented directly from the landowner.
Thus the tied cottage system emerged directly from the desire of farmers to control labour supplies — and it is this concern which remains at the heart of the system today.
During the twentieth century more houses became tied with the decline of the landlord — tenant system in farming and its replacement by owner-occupation, and since the Second World War the chronic shortage of housing in rural areas has increased the importance of tied cottages still further.
By 1976 53 per cent of farm workers lived in tied housing, compared with 34 per cent in 1948.
Since this period was also accompanied by a decline of the labour force in agriculture, it can be concluded that those who left the industry were predominantly not those living in tied accommodation.
Tied housing therefore acted as a brake on occupational mobility.
There is ample evidence that tied cottages have been used oppressively by farmers in the past in order, for example, to strangle incipient trade unionism in the countryside, bit except in a small minority of cases it is no longer used as an oppressive weapon of petty political domination: rather it is the carrot which will tempt the farm worker to accept a low wage.
A farm worker with a desire for marriage and a  family is often grateful, even eager, for the offer of a house with the job.
However, once in the system it is difficult for him to move to higher-paid employment in another industry, for he would also have to find housing elsewhere for himself and his family.
The fears of insecurity which the system once provoked were far from notional — for example, the number of possession orders granted to farmers in England and Wales in 1975 was 1268.
The number of actual evictions was tiny — less than twenty per year — though when they occurred they were given widespread publicity and the fears that they raised went far beyond what their numerical significance might indicate.
Some threatened evictions, it should be added, were arranged by collusion between farmers and workers in order to force the hand of local authorities who otherwise would not admit tied cottage tenants to their housing waiting lists.
The abolition of the tied cottage was for many years the notorious ‘hardy annual’ of TUC and Labour Party conferences but reform of the system was pushed persistently aside.
In 1976, however, the Rent (Agriculture) Act made a number of important changes in the system which were hailed as ‘the abolition of the tied cottage’.
In fact, the Act (which is an extremely complicated piece of legislation) did not succeed in abolishing the tied cottage.
It extended the provisions of the 1965 Rent Act to tied cottage occupants in agriculture, but at the same time provided for a procedure whereby a former worker could be rehoused by the local authority where the farmer could prove that the house was essential to accommodate a replacement worker.
The Act, while improving the security of the farm worker did not, therefore, remove the key element in the tied cottage system which perpetuates his dependency — the fact that his employer is also his landlord.
What the farm worker undoubtedly gained was an important right — the right to a house — but the Act did not disengage the farm worker's conditions of employment from the circumstances in which he is housed.
No farm worker welcomes the prospect of having to uproot his family should he, because he is ill, injured at work, made redundant, has achieved retirement or had a row with his boss, cease to be employed on the farm.
Even though he knows he can no longer be rendered homeless his feelings of dependence will not have been entirely removed.
Certainly the change in legislation is unlikely to provoke a sudden rush of hitherto tied farm workers from the industry.
Despite the many improvements that have been made over the years, the poor pay of the farm worker therefore continues to reflect the very many constraints which surround his choice of occupation and employer in many rural areas.
These constraints continue to contribute to his dependence upon agriculture, and even in some cases upon an individual farmer, for employment.
Many farm workers recognize this as an unavoidable aspect of living away from the main centres of industry, and while they may occasionally recognize the limitations which are imposed upon their freedom to choose both employment and housing, they are not necessarily embittered by it.
For the farm worker may regard his dependence upon his employer as being mitigated by the increasingly close and harmonious relationship which the two sides maintain.
As a result the farm worker is as likely to resent the high wages paid to workers in other industries for what often appears to him to be little skill and less hard work as to harbour a sense of grievance against either farmers in general or his own boss in particular.
Where conditions of poverty and dependency and harmonious and pervasive personal relationships continue to predominate in agriculture then a source of ambiguity is present in the farm worker's perceptions of the world around him.
Puzzlement, as much as anger, therefore sums up his reaction as he sees the wages gap between himself and other workers continuing to widen.
Agricultural trade unionism
The organizations which have set out to improve the pay and conditions of farm workers are the agricultural trade unions.
The most important union for farm workers in England is the National Union of Agricultural and Allied Workers (NUAAW) which has a membership of approximately 90000, three-quarters of whom are employed on the land.
The Transport and General Workers' Union also contains about 11000 farm workers in its agricultural section, but the majority of these are located in Scotland and it is the NUAAW which is generally regarded as the industrial union for farm workers in England and Wales.
Trade unionism among farm workers is not, however, a very strong movement — nor has it ever been.
Only a minority of farm workers have ever been unionized and the history of rural trade unionism has been a chequered one, alternating between brief heady periods of success and long periods of stagnation  and weakness.
Even today trade union membership remains a somewhat atypical activity for the farm worker and the NUAAW itself is not a particularly militant union.
Agricultural trade unions have therefore found it difficult to make such a decisive intervention in the labour market as to substantially increase the rewards of farm workers.
The first widespread trade union movement among farm workers occurred in the 1870s under the leadership of Joseph Arch, the so-called ‘Revolt of the Field’.
By the end of the century, however, trade unionism had been virtually eliminated from agriculture, following the determined resistance of farmers, who in 1874 had instituted a lock-out in East Anglia which effectively broke Arch's union.
The
NUAAW dates from 1906 when, in response to political victimization and tied cottage evictions in Norfolk, the Eastern Counties Agricultural Labourers' and Small Holders' Union was founded in North Walsham.
Its leader was George Edwards, a devout Primitive Methodist lay preacher, who had been active during the earlier period of unionization in the 1870s and in brief revivals during the intervening years.
Edwards, cycling over 6000 miles a year around Norfolk, painstakingly built the membership up to 3000 within two years.
Until 1910 the chief sponsor of the union was the Liberal Party, which saw political capital to be made out of organizing farm workers in the Tory rural strongholds, but in that year a strike in the Norfolk village of St Faith's evoked accusations of a Liberal sell-out and provoked the membership to cut its ties with the Liberal Party.
What amounted to a Socialist take-over ensued.
The membership remained largely moribund until the First World War, although the title of the union had been somewhat pretentiously changed to the National Agricultural Labourers' and Rural Workers' Union (N A L R W U) in 1912.
In 1916, however, the fortunes of the union were boosted by entirely external factors.
German submarines proved (indirectly) to be a bigger stimulus to trade unionism than all the diligent recruitment of the early pioneers.
The effects of the wartime blockade led the government under Lloyd George to take steps to stimulate home food production by offering price guarantees to farmers; and as a quid pro quo to the unions the government also promised to establish a statutory minimum wage, to be negotiated by central and district wages boards.
With wartime labour shortages and guaranteed farm prices prevailing, the union  representatives on the boards found little difficulty in raising wages substantially and union membership increased by leaps and bounds as a result.
Between 1916 and 1920 membership of the NALRWU grew from 4000 to 93000, while at the end of the same period the Workers' Union (the precursor of the TGWU) contained an estimated 120000 farm workers.
Trade unionism in the countryside seemed to be on the crest of a wave and the sense of exhilaration was increased when in 1920 the system of price guarantees and wages boards was extended into peacetime.
In the same year the N A L R W U changed its name to the National Union of Agricultural Workers (NUAW).
Within a year, however, this system was dismantled.
With the resumption of world trade and access to plentiful supplies of overseas food once more, price guarantees began to cost money.
In 1921 they were scrapped along with the wages boards.
Within months farm prices had plummeted and wages were also being driven steadily down.
The NUAW looked on helplessly, but decided in 1923 to make a stand in its strongest area — north and west Norfolk.
Following several occasions on which wages had been cut and the working week extended, the NUAW finally called its members in the area out in what was recognized on both sides as a trial of strength of national importance.
After five bitter weeks the NUAW succeeded in holding the line — but only just.
A return to work was negotiated under the conditions prevailing before the strike had begun so the union had prevented a further round of wage reductions; but this was achieved at such a cost as to convince the leadership of the impossibility of organizing effective strike action in agriculture.
Even in the NUAW's strongest area less than one-quarter of the strike notices had been obeyed and the union had been reduced to penury.
Farmers had demonstrated, as they had to Arch in the 1870s, that once the seed is in the ground they can happily watch it grow and starve their workers, if necessary, into submission in the meantime.
Moreover they could always use family labour or import casual labour to carry out any essential work.
The union found it impossible to enforce the strike — even flying pickets could not police hundreds of separate farms.
The union was also left virtually bankrupt, having paid out in five weeks' strike pay nearly two years' worth of subscriptions.
When victimization followed the settlement — with union members left homeless by tied cottage evictions as well as without a job — the  union had no option other than to take this treatment lying down.
And all this in a conflict fought halfheartedly by many Norfolk farmers who had only an eye for renewed state intervention.
The lesson which the NUAW leadership drew was a simple one: strikes lead only to the demoralization of the membership and the speedy self-destruction of the union.
There has been no strike in agriculture in England since 1923.
Throughout the Depression the NUAW clung on to its existence by retaining the rump of its membership — no more than 25000 — in its East Anglian stronghold.
When in 1939 a repetition of the conditions encountered during the First World War once more led the government to intervene in agriculture then the conditions were also created for a renewed round of trade union growth.
By creating labour shortages on the land wartime conditions again led to an increase in wages and a strengthening of the wages board (a decentralized system had operated since 1924).
The immediate post-war period again provided the optimism that had existed in 1920, and the farm worker appeared to be poised for the first time to achieve equality of pay and status with workers in other industries.
On this occasion, sustained state intervention in agriculture ensured that there was to be no repetition of the inter-war years.
The AWB was retained and the NUAW (it became the NUAAW in 1968) remained firmly wedded to improving the conditions of its membership through such statutory channels.
However, the outcome was a disappointment.
During the 1950s AWB awards failed to keep pace with the cost of living and farm workers found that the gap between their earnings and those of other workers was widening once more.
This provides the NUAAW today with its biggest policy dilemma.
Does it remain committed to the A W B even when it demonstrably fails to deliver the goods?
The insidious growth of the wages gap between agriculture and industry, which the AWB has done little to narrow, leads to the consideration once more of alternative means of raising wages on the land.
Dare the NUAAW break free of its commitment to working within the statutory framework and risk a repetition of the events of 1923?
So far, at least, the official policy of the union has been to support the AWB, though in recent years criticism has been growing.
The problems of creating a strong union, as the union leadership is fully aware, remain enormous — indeed in some respects they have increased.
Uppermost among these is the sheer scale of the problem  involved in recruiting, organizing, servicing and, above all, retaining the membership in the face of a declining labour force whose structure is hardly conducive to unionization.
Agriculture still has more employers than any other industry, but the workers are scattered, mostly in ones and twos, across the countryside and in some of the most isolated and inaccessible areas.
The union is forced to pour resources into simply maintaining the thousands of small branches which trade unionism in agriculture automatically involves.
A less obvious but equally debilitating problem is the propensity of farm workers not to join a trade union even when availed of the opportunity to do so.
Here outright oppression and denial of rights is less troublesome than the benevolence of a personally known and trusted employer; a quiet word with the boss will often be preferable to calling in a more remote and impersonal organization to settle any differences.
In the past the union could be supported by the communal solidarities of the village community; now, with villages no longer consisting of a majority of farm workers and with more workers living in tied cottages isolated on farms, the village no longer fosters the collectivism which supports the union.
As a result much of the energies of the NUAAW are devoted to organizational problems.
There is often little remaining to contemplate any militant activity.
In recent years the NUAAW has striven to overcome some of its organizational difficulties by recruiting more workers in the agricultural ancillary industries, especially in food-processing factories.
It has achieved a good deal of success in this, enabling some compensation to be made for the diminishing pool of potential recruits on the farms.
However, the identity of the union remains closely tied to its agricultural as opposed to its ‘allied’ membership, and all the efforts of its organizers have not been able to arrest the gradual decline in membership that has accompanied the drift from the land.
Compared with many of its urban industrial counterparts the N U A A W therefore remains a weak union — and a poor one.
It has neither the power nor the resources to counter the pressure of the exceedingly well-organized farmers' lobby, nor is the level of unionization in agriculture sufficiently high — it is no more than 40 per cent— to permit the contemplation of widespread militant activity.
An isolated farm worker in a tied house still remains vulnerable to the ubiquitous pressures of dependence and he would be unlikely to heed a strike  call.
Many others would not allow their animals to suffer from lack of feed or, in the case of cows, the cessation of milking.
And how can a farm worker strike against an employer whom he knows to be, more often than not these days, a solicitous and considerate person, even if he pays low wages?
Many farm workers join the union, therefore, not for ideological reasons, but for the friendly society benefits which it offers and as an insurance against ‘problems’ with the tied cottage, ‘just in case’.
None of this suggests that the NUAAW is going to sanction any widespread militant activity other than a little judicious sabre-rattling by its left-wing faction during negotiations on the AWB.
In the last decade there have been strike calls from county conferences in the more militant areas like Norfolk, Essex and Yorkshire, but the union's Executive Committee, which has the sole right to order strike action, has sought to maintain centralized control over any militant activity.
Localized strikes have not, therefore, been permitted.
With the lesson of 1923 in mind, the leadership has continued to support the AWB —; for better or for worse.
At the same time it has moved slowly and hesitantly towards instituting ‘plant bargaining’ on the very largest farms where conditions allow.
For the foreseeable future, however, the inherent weaknesses of unionization in agriculture seem likely to continue to haunt the N U A A W. The falling number of agricultural workers, the urban influences that are spreading across tracts of once ‘truly rural’ countryside and the changing nature of the farm worker's skills may conspire in any case to lead to a reappraisal of the need for a separate farm workers' union.
The TGWU has shown interest in a merger on several occasions, and there has also been a recognition among militants within the N U A A W that successful and speedy strike action could only be brought about with the cooperation of the bulk milk tanker drivers whom the TGWU organizes.
The NUAAW leadership has remained understandably wary of submerging their members' interests in those of a larger union, for there are fears that in supporting urban demands for cheap food the TGWU might not always serve the best interests of farm workers.
On the other hand, with the industrial might of the TGWU behind the farm worker, there might be a more realistic chance of narrowing the gap between industrial and agricultural wages.
To a remarkable degree the problems that face agricultural trade unionism today are the same as those which faced Joseph Arch  more than a hundred years ago.
It is apparent that trade unions in agriculture have never been sufficiently strong to raise wages beyond that level which the labour market has already determined.
Many areas, such as Norfolk, which remain highly unionized continue also to contain some of the lowest-paid agricultural workers in the country.
Those improvements which have been gained by the farm worker have often been by-products of trade union agitation in other industries or have been brought about by such external agencies as government action and technological innovation.
The farm worker has himself contributed, though as often as not by leaving the industry rather than by joining a trade union.
This is not because the farm worker is any more of an individualist per se than his industrial counterparts — whatever the stereotypes — but because the circumstances surrounding the farm worker render individual action, rather than collective mobilization, the only realistic alternative for the majority of those working on the land.
If we are to hold out any hope of a substantial improvement in the pay and conditions of the farm worker, therefore, trade unionism seems to offer a means of achieving these ends on only the largest farming enterprises, where plant bargaining above the AWB rates becomes a possibility.
Trade unions are only as strong as their membership allows them to be and their leadership cannot be expected to perform miracles.
A sudden and decisive upturn in the fortunes of farm workers seems unlikely.
Any improvements, if they occur, are likely to be slow and gradual and as much the result of long-term and somewhat extraneous factors.
‘A place in the sun’?
In order to give a rounded picture of the changes confronting the farm worker today, we must not only consider the transformations in work and technology and the equally manifest, if less discontinuous, factors underlying his level of pay and conditions.
There are other factors, less tangible and less easy to generalize, which are affecting, to use a trite phrase, the outlook of the farm worker.
This relates to both the farm worker's own expectations from life and his subjective interpretations of what he sees around him.
Once his horizons were limited largely to his own parish boundary and the village community which was contained within it.
Most of his social cues and expected behaviour were derived from this relatively enclosed social world.
Nowadays these horizons have expanded to take in much of the world outside by virtue of changes in education, in transport and communications, and, as we shall see in the following chapter, by virtue also of changes in the social composition of village community itself.
The farm worker still remains socially and geographically isolated but he is also becoming less bound by custom and habit.
He is also becoming more impatient with his traditionally inferior status.
Edwin Gooch, the former President of the NUAAW, once demanded that the farm worker be given his ‘place in the sun’, by which he meant not only better pay and conditions but a more deserving recognition by the rest of society and equality of opportunity within it.
The farm worker, in many respects, has yet to achieve his place in the sun, but he is also less willing to accept the low status which the rest of society seems to offer him.
It is at this point that the paradox of change and continuity in the life of the farm worker becomes most clear.
His social and economic situation continues to be regulated by the kind of disciplines that have been familiar to successive generations of workers on the land —; poverty, the lack of alternative employment opportunities, the intense localism, the dependency for jobs and housing on local farmers.
Yet wider cultural influences, many of them associated with the decline of the traditional rural way of life, are working to undermine the customary expectations of the farm worker — particularly when we consider this on an intergenerational basis-For example, a large majority of agricultural workers currently engaged by the industry are themselves the sons of farm workers — probably more than two-thirds.
In many rural areas it has therefore been usual for local farm workers to work on the land ‘man and boy’.
This continuity existed among both employers and employees in many cases so that there are many farmers' sons who also had to ‘serve their time’ alongside the hired labour force before taking over the farm and many elderly farm workers who can remember instructing their current employer in the ways of the farm when he was a small boy.
Such factors often helped to cement the relationship between a farmer and his workers, but this continuity is now being ruptured by the increasing disinclination of farm workers' sons and other young rural workers to consider a job on the land.
Although farm workers may love the job itself, when it comes to advising their sons about employment, they pay more heed to the poor pay and lack of prospects.
Moreover rural  school-leavers themselves are increasingly aware of the stigma attached to working on the land after generations of poverty, exploitation and dependent status.
In this sense farmers today are in danger of reaping the whirlwind sown by their forefathers.
The increasing reluctance of young people to consider a future in farming was illustrated in 1972 by an agricultural ‘Little Neddy’ national survey,The Younger Worker in Agriculture — Projections to 1980 .
This demonstrated the importance of family factors in determining the occupational choice of rural school-leavers — nearly 42 per cent of the respondents stated that they had been influenced by their family in their decision to work on the land.
However, what is also handed down from father to son these days is the importance of seeking a higher-paid and higher-status job elsewhere as soon as possible.
More than a quarter of the young workers interviewed had no intention of remaining in agriculture — they hoped to seek more lucrative employment, mainly in the building industry, as lorry drivers, as garage mechanics or perhaps as engineering workers in local factories.
Consequently there has been a marked fall in recruitment since 1964 — although it is still not enough on its own to create a shortage of labour — and this is contributing to the ageing labour force.
The report concluded that, with a further increase in mechanization, there should still be enough labour to meet the needs of the industry by 1980, but that there was little room to manoeuvre and the longer-term situation was unclear.
At the lime that it was published, the report received a great deal of attention since it coincided with the brief economic boom of 1971 — 2 and workers were leaving agriculture at an alarming rate.
There were calls to strengthen the role of the Agricultural Training Board, which had been founded amid great acrimony and much suspicion among farmers in the late 1960s, and there were also suggestions of a campaign in schools to extol the benefits of working in agriculture and to counteract the industry's image of unskilled drudgery.
But farmers have short memories: within a couple of years economic stagnation had stemmed the labour outflow and even led ex-farm workers in some areas to ask for their former jobs back.
The clamour for action subsided and complacency over the labour situation again set in.
This complacency is self-deceiving.
There is no reason to believe that, should the demand for labour in industry pick up again, the exodus of young workers from agriculture will not be renewed.
Further mechanization will enable farmers to cope with a reduced quantity of labour, but further mechanization will require a finer quality of labour — and it is precisely the highly educated and the highly trained who currently shun working on the land.
This has led many farmers to believe that the skilled, responsible and versatile labour which they require cannot be purchased at any price, and that the future expansion of the industry will be jeopardized by a chronic shortage of the requisite workers.
Tristram Beresford, for example, writes in We Plough the Fields that: The awkward and uncertain hours (especially for livestock workers), the isolation and the lack of amenities are, it is true, drawbacks to recruitment which agriculture must overcome.
However, the job itself, as we have already noted, is rarely the cause of disenchantment with agriculture — indeed, in a decade that has seen a renewed interest in the countryside among young people and a growing desire to escape from the urban rat-race, agriculture could have much to offer.
The skills are there to be bought: the problem is that many farmers have an exaggerated notion of the kind of worker that they can obtain for the money they are willing to offer, as well as an outdated conception of what the farm worker's skills would fetch in industry.
The solution lies firmly in the farmers' own hands
Beresford is undoubtedly correct in one respect, however.
It is not just a question of paying competitive wages.
Farmers still have the problem of overcoming the stigma which all too often young people attach to working on the land.
Teenage farm workers are particularly sensitive to their image at an age when they are dating girls who may or may not hope for a better future than that of a farm worker's wife.
No young farm worker enjoys having his leg pulled by taunts of ‘yokel’ and ‘country bumpkin' in pubs and discothèques and eventually he may even become ashamed of admitting to his occupation.
When the young worker's social world was bounded by his village  such considerations did not matter.
Among friends and neighbours a farm worker's skill was appreciated and he neither knew nor cared about the reputation of farm workers outside.
But young farm workers today are part of the post-war generation of rural inhabitants who have been subjected far more than preceding generations to the cultural influences and judgements of wider society.
The Education Act of 1944, for example, led to the majority of rural school children being educated for the first time outside their own village after the age of eleven.
It also furnished them with a curriculum in both secondary modern and grammar schools that was geared to national cultural demands and criteria of scholastic excellence.
At the same time rural children became more familiar with the accoutrements of a national (indeed, international) youth culture in terms of clothes, music and other aspects of their life-style.
Many, as a result, became more impatient with the social and cultural backwater which, they now realized, their village constituted.
They also became aware of the low regard in which the farm worker is held outside their own rural area.
It is little wonder, then, that they preferred to look elsewhere for employment.
There is little that farmers could, or can, do about these cultural changes which have come to broaden the horizons of so many rural people.
However, at times farmers have been their own worst enemies.
Rather than welcome social and cultural change, they have resisted it.
As a result, the agriculture industry is in the ironic situation of being in the vanguard of scientific and technological progress and subject to rapid and innovatory change, yet with a reputation for being backward and conservative and the very antithesis of modernity when it comes to its labour relations.
It must be added, moreover, that this reputation has often been justified.
Any progress in the situation of the farm worker during the last hundred years has generally been introduced from outside the industry and against the stern resistance of farmers themselves.
Even the spread of increased educational opportunities to rural areas was opposed as late as 1944 on the grounds that farm workers would no longer‘know their place’.
The farming lobby has also pursued a policy of agricultural exceptionalism when it has come to the institution of a wide range of welfare and safety measures.
Farm workers are usually the last to receive the protection of safety legislation, for example, or to receive benefits like sickness pay, pension schemes, paid holidays, a five-day  week or even a written contract of employment and itemized pay packets.
The industry has also taken a neanderthal attitude towards the training and further education of its workers.
Furthermore, the farm worker has generally been among the last to receive citizenship rights granted to the rest of the population — the shadow of the workhouse was not finally removed until 1936, the Rent Act was not extended to agricultural dwellings until 1976 and even today agricultural legislation manages to override certain of the conditions of the Truck Acts.
The farm worker has been allowed to participate in the modern world only sparingly, hesitantly and distrustfully.
Younger workers, observing this, have turned elsewhere in order to be part of a more enlightened and progressive industry.
Because fewer farm workers' sons are willing to work in agriculture the contrasts between the traditional and the modern, between the old dependency and the new independence, are imported into the families of those older workers who have remained on the land.
Many teenage farm workers' sons are soon earning as much as, if not more than, their fathers, and not surprisingly they soon demand the independence from parental authority which their economic independence confers.
The opportunities for domestic conflict are obvious, but at the same time the older generation of farm workers are made more aware of the opportunities that they themselves missed and of their lowly economic position compared with workers in other industries.
Farm workers can also observe the life-styles afforded by ex-workmates and neighbours who have left farming to seek higher-paid employment elsewhere.
This personal acquaintance with higher living standards is a much more potent factor in increasing the restlessness of today's farm workers than the influence of television and the other mass media to which it is often attributed.
What the farm worker observes on his television set are the often distant and somewhat alien mores of the urban, industrial world.
He may regard them as curious examples of another civilization or occasionally view with incredulity the ways of city people and industrial workers, but he will only regard them with envy when television reinforces the evaluations already implanted personally by friends and kin with whom he identifies.
Otherwise television merely reinforces a point of view already strong among farm workers — that there is a wide and unbridgeable gulf between people who live in the countryside and those who live in towns.
There is little reason to suppose that the consequences of these changes will in themselves lead farm workers to become more militant.
While at work he is still aware of the extent to which mechanization has improved his working conditions, and his relationship with his employer generally remains a good one.
It is as a consumer that he is aware of the slowly widening gap between his own standard of living and that of other workers.
So the paradoxes remain and in addition the farm worker continues to observe rapid changes in his work, in his village and in established patterns of authority.
Aspects of life in the countryside which he once took for granted now seem to be increasingly questioned.
For the older farm worker bafflement rather than militancy is therefore the more common response —‘I don't know what the world is coming to.’
Another is a search for more definite realities in the certainties of the ‘good old days’— a nostalgia for the days of horses when each person knew his place, was secure within it, when the old were respected and when the world was slower-moving and more predictable.
Given their continuing powerlessness, however, even the younger workers are unlikely to seek an improvement in their position by resort to militant action.
Their desire to leave farming will simply be increased and they will seize the first opportunity to move.
In such circumstances the abilities of individual farmers to retain the loyalty and affection of their workers will be considerably tested.
They are fortunate that, for the most part, the increasing personal contact at work, the continuing isolation of farm workers from other occupational groups and the increasing proportion of workers living in tied housing out on the farms are providing opportunities for this identification to be retained, should farmers choose to cultivate it.
Certainly if farmers wish to have a suitably skilled and motivated labour force by the late 1980s they will have to do more to recognize the farm worker's quite legitimate aspirations and to help rather than hinder his search for ‘a place in the sun’.
CHANGE IN THE VILLAGE
So far in this book we have considered social change in rural England almost entirely in terms of agriculture.
This reflects the fact that the very far-reaching social changes that have overtaken the English countryside in recent decades have been rooted first and foremost in changes within the agricultural industry — the decline of the landed estates, the technological revolution in farming, the drift from the land of agricultural workers, and so on.
But rural England today consists of much more than agriculture and English rural society is no longer entirely, nor even predominantly, an agrarian society.
Indeed, the single most important social change to have occurred in the countryside in recent years has concerned the changing social and occupational composition of its population.
The outflow of labour from agriculture has denuded many villages of their working populations and replaced them by inhabitants who work in towns and cities and who are not dependent upon farming for their living.
Increasingly, then, when we examine social change in rural England we must not only take account of changes within agriculture but of changes on the interface between the ‘truly rural’(i.e-agricultural) inhabitants and the ‘adventitious’ population of ex-urbanite newcomers who have moved into the countryside in such large numbers since the war.
As we shall see, many of the controversies and conflicts which permeate contemporary rural life either stem from this fundamental change in the social composition of most villages or are exacerbated by it; but it is also important to remember that this transformation has been provoked by preceding changes in the economic and social organization of agriculture.
Social change in the village has therefore accompanied the upheavals in the nature of agricultural work itself.
Any consideration of the changing nature of the English village seems inevitably to raise the question of how far the influx of  newcomers has destroyed the village ‘community’.
The rhetoric of ‘community’, however, often serves to obscure as much as to clarify the changes that have occurred.
The word community itself means so many different things to different people that its use frequently adds to the confusion.
For example, the ‘village community’ can signify nothing more than a type of settlement — a small number of people living together in a rural location usually in a nucleated pattern.
This is simply a geographical expression which tells us nothing about the people who live there.
The ‘village community’ can also mean, however, the pattern of social relationships which exist within this locality.
In this case a ‘community’ might be said to exist when, say, everyone knows everyone else.
This tells us nothing about the degree of harmony in the village — everyone might be at each other 's throats — but it does indicate that within the village there is a reasonably close-knit social pattern, rather than a disparate group of individuals who happen, coincidentally, to live in the same locality.
Finally, the ‘village community’ can mean a disembodied ‘spirit’of community, a sense of belonging, of sharing a social identity in a spirit of friendliness and common emotional experience.
These feelings of community are better termed communion, since they represent a form of community at the level of an individual's subjective experience or consciousness.
Communion therefore relates to a particular quality of human relationship — a kind of meaningful social intimacy — which may have no geographical basis at all, but which, it is believed, occurs more commonly in villages.
The many references by writers on rural affairs to ‘the decline of the English village community’ are usually concerned with the third of these meanings — the decline of communion.
This is often inferred from observations of the changing social composition of the village.
Yet such inferences need to be handled with care.
When the village was almost entirely an agricultural community then a case can be made, as we shall see, that the close-knit and overlapping social ties produced a situation in which everyone more or less knew everyone else, but we should be wary of sanctifying the agricultural village with a misplaced nostalgia.
The village inhabitants formed a community because they had to: they were imprisoned by constraints of various kinds, including poverty, so that reciprocal aid became a necessity.
The village community was, therefore, to use Raymond Williams's term, a ‘mutuality of the oppressed’.
Whether gossip, bickering and family feuds were or were not a more prevalent feature than a wholesome communion of the population could vary from village to village and is ultimately a matter of subjective judgement.
Nevertheless the severe and rapid dislocation of the agricultural village has led to an ideology of communion being conferred upon it, a genuine sense of loss which can be contrasted with an apparently less palatable present.
Since this is, in effect, as much an oblique comment on the present as a literal interpretation of the past, what such accounts tell us about the quality of village life in the past must be handled with considerable scepticism.
Unfortunately there is a flourishing literary genre of what might be called ‘rural retrospective regret’ which is often quite unreliable on the actual history of the English village.
Because assessments of the spirit of community depend so much on highly variable subjective preferences and values, which may fluctuate according to the individual and the village concerned and even to the mood of the individual at a particular time, it is virtually impossible to generalize about whether there has or has not been a perceptible ‘decline of community’ in the English village.
Changes in the social structure of the village community — that is, the second of the meanings outlined above — are, however, more amenable to generalization, although even here there are considerable difficulties.
Part of the ideology of a healthy village community has been the pride which the inhabitants have traditionally shown in their village's unique qualities.
Each village believes itself to be totally different from any other and often marks itself off in a variety of symbolic ways from those which surround it.
Any attempt to generalize about the English village is therefore regarded as an affront: bland uniformity is an attribute of the urban population, but the English village is believed to be resistant to any summary.
Of course, each village does contain its own unique qualities, but to dwell on these only serves to obscure the nature of the changes which have overtaken them, since a concern for the minutiae of each individual village leads us to lose sight of the widespread changes that have affected almost all villages in recent years.
The uniqueness of each village has affected the timing, the pace and the extent of these changes, but virtually no village in England has been immune to them.
Variations obviously occur from village to village and from area to area, so that no claim is made that what follows in this  chapter applies to each and every village in England.
Nevertheless a general pattern is discernible.
If uniqueness is one quality that is attributed to the English village, then timelessness is the other, but again it is easy to confer an entirely spurious antiquity on village life, and even upon the physical structure of villages, which can be misleading.
As both W. G. Hoskins and W. E. Tate have shown, the English village as we know it is in its essentials a product of developments not much less recent than the growth of industrial towns and cities.
In lowland England in particular the characteristic nucleated village settlement is a product of the enclosure movement and the agricultural revolution of the eighteenth century.
Previously scattered farmsteads and agricultural dwellings — a pattern still common in upland farming areas — gravitated towards a definable parish centre around the church or manor house.
Later, particularly during the period of mid-Victorian agricultural prosperity, farmers left the village to live in often newly built farmhouses, which were located on their own holdings of land.
In lowland England, then, only the church, the manor house, and a few cottages pre-date the Industrial Revolution.
The villages which can claim a degree of undisturbed continuity beyond this are not usually agricultural villages at all, but medieval textile ‘towns’ which have reverted to an agricultural status following the transfer of textile production to the industrial North during the nineteenth century.
The continuity of settlement pattern is more apparent in the upland North and West, where villages are less common, but here the colonization of the remoter areas, such as Cumbria, was still proceeding as late as the eighteenth century.
So the English village is neither as immemorial nor as unchanging as it is conventionally believed to be.
Contemporary changes therefore need to be placed in the context of a continuous process of change in English rural society that has affected both the character and the structure of English villages throughout their history.
The occupational community
A convenient, though entirely arbitrary, point to begin an account of recent changes in the English village is the middle of the nineteenth century.
Between 1 846 and 1873 the social and ecological  pattern of what we now regard as the traditional English village became firmly established, particularly in the lowland South and East.
The industrial and commercial development of England had by this time succeeded in ‘ruralizing’ the countryside by reducing the economic viability of much small-scale manufacture and domestic handicraft and transferring it to the new system of factory production in the towns.
Although the countryside did not become completely agricultural because of the continuing importance of extractive industries and the tenacious existence of some manufacture in the agricultural ancillary trades, farming was unquestionably the mainstay of the rural economy.
The population of the majority of rural villages was therefore dependent upon agriculture for a living.
Even if members of the village were not working directly on the land as farm workers they were involved in occupations closely associated with farming such as blacksmiths, wheelwrights, millers and other craftsmen and service workers.
Because of its dependence upon a single industry the rural village formed what might be called an ‘occupational community,.
As with any isolated and largely self-contained community the agricultural village was often the object of a fierce loyalty among its inhabitants.
From its own customs and traditions the villagers could draw upon a strong sense of identity and morality which, looking back, one may easily mourn in a more impersonal, amoral and uncertain modern world.
This sense of certainty was probably the occupational community's greatest source of strength.
Inevitably the boundaries of what was and was not considered permissible in village life were much clearer in the nineteenth century, as they were in Victorian society generally.
This conferred a sense of order on village life, a sense of ‘place’, in both a geographical and a social sense, which could be recognized and accepted as an immutable fact of life.
For those villagers who accepted their ‘place’ this created a sense of psychological certainty and with it a not altogether unwelcome sense of security.
For those who found this social order irksome — the rebellious, the ambitious or simply the single-minded —; the village could become a narrow and restrictive prison, dispiriting and mean-spirited, shackling the individualist by the vicious purveyance of gossip and innuendo.
This double-edged quality of village life is accurately reflected in Flora Thompson's Lark Rise to Candleford.
Here the narrowness of social affairs in Lark Rise provides a  means of accommodation to the otherwise harsh circumstances of rural life:
The hardness of this life stemmed from the chronic poverty and occasionally cruel exploitation to which the nineteenth-century farm worker — or ‘farm labourer’ as he was more customarily referred to —; was subjected.
The conditions of the farm worker, and with them the everyday life of the village community, could vary considerably across the country according to the distribution of landholding, the nature of agricultural production and the pattern of settlement.
As we noted in Chapter 2, James Caird, writing in 1878, drew attention to the differences between the agriculture practised in the predominantly pastoral North and West of England and that in the mainly arable South and East, a division which affected the organization and conditions of village life in the two regions.
The greater use of hired labour on the arable farm created a much greater cleavage between farmers and the farm workers than in the pastoral areas, where little hired labour was employed and where the most significant class division was between landowners and their tenants.
Although this is a somewhat oversimplified distinction, it is nevertheless significant that rural agitation during the late nineteenth century took the form of trade union organization (under Joseph Arch) in the South and East, whereas unionism could make little headway in the North and West.
This was partly because the hiring fairs in the upland areas provided a means of regulating the labour market which appeared to render trade unionism irrelevant, but it was also due to the reduced social distance between farmers and farm workers there.
Class conflict, when it broke out during the final  quarter of the nineteenth century in the North and West, took the form of ‘tenant right’, the demand by tenant farmers for greater security and the guarantee of their other interests against those of their landlords.
Even today trade unionism in agriculture is more prevalent in the South and East, whereas tenants' associations, almost unknown in the arable areas, are more common in the North and West.
Although the recent changes that have occurred in the social structure of rural villages have been national in their character, and therefore have impinged upon both areas, the continuing differences between the two require separate analyses of their impact.
For this reason we shall consider first the changes that have occurred in the lowland village community, while the upland areas will be analysed in the section on the ‘farm-centred community’ later in this chapter.
In eastern and southern England, where the bulk of hired agricultural workers have traditionally been concentrated and where the class division between farmer and worker was correspondingly wide, the structure of the occupational community was a divided one.
The nature of arable farming, which required a large labour force to tend the crop, conferred upon rural society a rigid social hierarchy.
This was often reflected in the pattern of settlement, with most villages consisting of the dwellings of agricultural workers and with the farmers scattered around the parish on their own farms but away from the centre of the village itself.
In a very real sense, therefore, the employers, whether farmers or landlords — in practice it made little difference — were not part of the rural village community as far as the agricultural worker was concerned.
Although there was an ‘official’ village community within which landowners, farmers and clergy were included and which was occasionally celebrated in traditional (and public) rituals and ceremonies, there was another community, a locally based working-class sub-culture, which excluded ‘them’in authority.
This subculture represented the core of the occupational community.
It was basically a neighbourly association of kin and workmates, not dissimilar to that which existed in many urban working-class neighbourhoods, but which the outsider could find virtually impenetrable.
It was sustained by the isolation of the rural village, by the strong kinship links between the village inhabitants and by the need for cooperation in times of family crisis.
Most importantly, it was forged out of the overlap between work-place  and village, the fact that, as an occupational community, relationships established at work spilled over into leisure hours, while the accepted code of behaviour which was followed in the village also applied to the situation at work.
All of this made the rural village an extremely close-knit society.
The circle of friends and acquaintances with which the farm worker surrounded himself consisted predominantly of other farm workers, both at work — where, as we have seen, workers were far more gregarious than they are today — and in the village, where most of their neighbours would also work on the land.
It is little wonder, then, that ostracism and gossip were such powerful ways of enforcing the values and standards of village life, nor that the criteria of status and prestige in the community also tended to be derived from the world of work.
In what Margaret Ashby calls ‘this street-and-smithy parliament’ every contemporary problem was discussed and lessons in human nature could be absorbed.
Above all the farm worker could establish his reputation as a skilled and knowledgeable craftsman among his fellow workers.
They would incessantly ‘talk shop’, for example, especially in that important semi-public arena — the village pub.
As George Ewart Evans documents in his book Where Beards Wag All , it was also common to see groups of workers strolling around the parish on Sunday mornings examining each other 's work, with much chafing and leg-pulling about their respective capabilities en route.
He cites the recollections of James Seeley, an ex-horseman from Norfolk:
This kind of prestige was formalized in ploughing matches for the horsemen, while for stockmen the equivalent public arenas for competition were markets and agricultural shows.
In each case the basis for allocating prestige among the community was very  public.
A botched job, especially for ploughmen, would be visible to all the parish for the next six months — to friends, neighbours, workmates and even the casual passer-by.
The mistake would be recorded in every farm and public house in the area and the resulting loss of face could be especially humiliating.
The pride in the job which has often been regarded as the hallmark of the rural worker was therefore not always derived from sheer altruism.
Each time a worker ploughed a field his status and even his self-respect could be at stake.
The integration of the farm worker into this occupational community meant that it was his prestige among his fellow workers and neighbours that mattered most to him.
Because of this, he was less concerned that he might be considered by society at large as an unskilled ‘yokel’— even if he was aware of the opinion of the world outside.
Within his own locality, however, a farm worker's status could be extremely high and his skill particularly valued.
The identification of the farm worker with his fellow villagers was reinforced by this, and even local farmers, who also had an interest in securing skilled labour and ensuring that the farm ran as smoothly as possible, contributed to the process by seeking out the best workers according to their reputation in the locality.
Nevertheless, relationships with farmers and landowners were clearly different from those between fellow workers.
For relationships with farmers and landowners across most of lowland England were, almost by definition, relationships with authority.
Although the precise configuration of landowners and farmers could vary considerably from village to village, there is little doubt that they formed, from the point of view of the farm worker, a coherent and easily identifiable ruling class against which the farm worker, either individually or collectively, was relatively powerless.
Within the working-class subculture of the occupational community, therefore, the village was defined in terms of two distinct and separate groups: ‘us’, the workers, and ‘them’, the bosses.
The locally powerful were acknowledged rather than accepted; in Flora Thompson's words, they ‘flitted across the scene like kingfishers crossing a flock of hedgerow sparrows’.
They attended the church, patronized the local tradesmen and supervised the affairs of the village.
They felt entitled to, and duly received, the customary genuflections that were accorded to their rank, but they belonged to the local ‘house’ rather than to the village.
Of course, farm workers were never left  in any doubt as to where the power in their village lay, but on the whole class conflict was rarely overt.
Any farm worker could easily anticipate the consequences of ‘going against’ the local farmers, so for the most part they resigned themselves to this situation, bit their tongues rather than spoke out and developed what is by now their notorious taciturnity and ability to ‘keep themselves to themselves’.
In this way the traditionally placid exterior of social relations in the English countryside was allowed to remain undisturbed.
However, beneath what was sometimes only a thin veneer of civility more covert expressions of resistance to the depredations imposed upon the farm worker took place.
The clue to rural class conflict was therefore the existence of a thriving rural underworld which included a whole range of activities such as arson, poaching and the propagation of usually inconsequential subversive talk in the taproom of the local alehouse.
Only occasionally (as in the 1830s and the 1870s) did conflict burst out in an overt and organized expression of discontent.
Otherwise it took more subtle and even secret forms — such as the semi-secret societies among stockmen like ‘the horseman's word’.
But whatever its degree of visibility, class conflict was never far from the surface of day-to-day social relationships when the village was an occupational community.
Landowners and farmers implicitly recognized this division, but they also realized that life both on the farm and in the village would ultimately run more smoothly if the socially divisive effects of potential class conflict could be dissipated or overcome.
Large landowners, in particular, often set about cultivating the loyalty and affection of the local villagers, since this also conformed to the notion of noblesse oblige which was part of the ethic of the country gentleman.
Farm workers, too, could be persuaded to defer to the locally powerful if the latter were prepared to act in what the farm worker believed to be a legitimate manner.
Hence, as has already been outlined in Chapters 2 and 3, the paternalism of the local squire could be exchanged for the deference of local workers.
The institution of charity was particularly important here.
Christian conscience and enlightened self-interest would often combine to enable relief to be given to the poor and the needy and for more ostentatious acts of generosity to be accorded to the village as a whole.
Only the ‘deserving’ would receive charity, of course, for the purpose was to encourage respect and gratitude, not independence.
Gifts were the knots which secured the ties of dependency, and, it was hoped, served as timely reminders of communal identity.
Thus community, as an ideology, was a gloss that was placed upon the very rigid and authoritarian divisions within the village.
It was recognized that there were distinct social orders within the community, but these were widely regarded as ‘natural’ and their relationship was defined as an organic one: each had his or her part to play, be it ever so humble.
The solidarity of ‘community’ at this level was very different to the unavoidable communality of the village poor.
Its existence was almost entirely a symbolic one, in such rituals as ‘beating the bounds’, in village fairs and festivals and in sporting activities as diverse as foxhunting and cricket.
Occasionally this contrivance could overshadow the less congenial reality which lay behind it and could override the more mundane, everyday exploitation of work on the land, but this, given the conditions under which farm workers lived and worked, was only sporadically successful.
As so often when we contemplate English village society much depended upon particular local conditions.
As Margaret Ashby notes in the biography of her father Joseph Ashby of Tysoe.
1859 — 1919 : ‘They [Joseph's contemporaries]tested every man's views by his actions, by his carriage of himself on all sorts of occasions.
They knew the effect of interest and class, and how in some cases these were the whole mould of mind and in others far otherwise.’
It was, however, rarely possible completely to guarantee the affection of the farm worker.
This was particularly the case where the occupational community provided him with a rural counter-culture that enabled class antagonisms to be sustained, albeit in a hidden form.
Here the ‘us and them’ view of the village society could be maintained in the face of an ‘official’credo in which no conflicts of interest were perceived or admitted.
In such cases the most that an employer could hope for was that by his treatment of his workers he could obtain some minimal loyalty.
Some farmers, however, did not even attempt this, but preferred to rely upon the application of economic and social discipline alone.
The precise way in which rural class relationships were acted out could therefore vary considerably from one village to the next according to the predilections of local farmers and landowners.
Of course, a farm worker could acknowledge that the obverse side of squirearchal autocracy could be a benevolent concern for his own  welfare and this could confer a sense of security and harmony on class relationships which could be extremely durable.
Nevertheless, the underlying structure of the vast majority of lowland villages (and, it should be added, some in the upland, pastoral areas, too) consisted of two major social classes.
Whether the farm worker preferred to defer to the authority of his ‘betters’, or fight against it, or merely accept it as a fact of life and accommodate to it as best he could, he recognized that there was a clear, qualitative difference between this relationship and that with his fellow workers.
All members of the village knew their place and, whether they wished to change it or not, this division had to be recognized and tolerated.
Those who could not contain their resentment had little option other than to emigrate.
Locals and newcomers
Today the lowland English village as an occupational community has virtually disappeared, except in a few very remote areas, destroyed by the twin assaults of the drift from the land of agricultural labour and creeping urbanization.
Both have been accelerated since the war by the widespread application of the internal combustion engine.
On the farm the introduction of tractors and combine harvesters has brought about a vast decrease in the number of employment opportunities and an added stimulus to the rural working population to move to the towns in search of jobs.
They have been replaced in many areas by an urban, overwhelmingly middle-class population which has been attracted by a combination of cheap housing (until the late 1960s) and by an idealized view of rural life which their ownership of a car has at last allowed them to indulge.
The arrival of this ‘adventitious’ rural population goes back further than is often assumed, and is by no means a purely post-war phenomenon.
For example, George Bourne was writing about its effects in the villages of Surrey in his Change in the Village as early as 1912, by which time the railways had enabled a commuting population to inhabit the rural parts of the inner Home Counties.
Since then the transformation of rural villages into non-agricultural settlements has taken place in a series of waves out along the lines of transportation from the major urban centres, particularly, in the first instance, London.
During the inter-war years commuting was encouraged by  the railway companies and by speculative builders and it was only after the Second World War that the more widespread use of the car and the continuing electrification of the railways allowed the commuting zone to be extended further.
By the end of the 1960s the motorway network had linked up most of the commuting areas between the major conurbations and the in-filling of commuter villages between such radial transport routes had virtually been completed.
Only a few rural areas, isolated by bad roads and non-existent railways, remained relatively untouched, but even these, by virtue of their isolation, were often gobbled up by the equally voracious demand for holiday homes and weekend cottages.
There are now few villages without their complement of newcomers who work in towns.
These new ‘immigrants’ have brought with them an urban, middle-class life-style which is largely alien to the remaining local agricultural population.
Unlike the agricultural workers in an occupational community, the newcomers do not make the village the focus of all their social activities.
The possession of a car enables them to maintain social contacts with their friends elsewhere, and if necessary, to make use of urban amenities while living in the countryside.
Their entertainment, their socializing, even their shopping, tend to take place outside the village.
This influx of strangers can, therefore, quite rapidly affect the nature of village society: suddenly, so it appears to the locals, everybody does not know everybody else.
The newcomer, moreover, does not enter the village as a lone individual who has to win social recognition among the locals in order to make life tolerable-Instead, particularly during the 1950s and 1960s, the newcomers arrived in such large numbers — perhaps due to the building of a new housing estate by a local speculative builder — that the individual ‘immigrant’ found himself one of many others whose values, behaviour and life-styles were similarly based upon urban, middle-class patterns of sociability.
Although these are noticeably different from those of the local agricultural population, the newcomer does not always feel it is necessary to adapt to the hitherto accepted mores of the village.
This, however, depends on what brought the newcomers to the village in the first place.
If the incentive was a utilitarian one like cheap housing, then the newcomers will have little interest in observing the niceties of village life.
They can, if necessary, establish social contacts among themselves or continue to seek them outside.
On the other  hand, those newcomers who wish to ‘belong’ may try to ingratiate themselves with the local population, sometimes — because of their misconceived expectations of village life — with disappointing results.
In either case, a new social division arises in the village which cuts across the class antagonisms of the former occupational community.
On the one hand there are the close-knit locals, who are the rump of the old occupational community, and on the other the ex-urbanite newcomers whose arrival in such relatively large numbers over a short space of time cannot help but be disruptive.
Some newcomers have been indifferent to the sensibilities of the local population; others, as we shall see, have been oversensitive to what they believe the needs of the village to be-In each case the effect has been the same: members of the former occupational community, faced with an invasion of ‘their’ village by outsiders, have tended to retreat in upon themselves and form a community within a community, cutting themselves off from the separate world of the newcomers.
The occupational community becomes what can be called an ‘encapsulated community’, a village within the village, suspicious of and resistant to any intimate social contact with the commuters and second-home owners who now comprise a substantial proportion of the population.
When farmers and farm workers refer to the ‘loss of community’ in their village it is usually to this kind of change that they are implicitly referring, for there are bound to be changing patterns of sociability developing in the village to which they are unaccustomed or from which they feel excluded.
This new element in the village population also tends to create new dimensions of social conflict to replace the rural class antagonisms of the occupational community.
Farmers and farm workers find that they have common interests as ‘locals’ which can be at loggerheads with those of the newcomers.
From the farm workers' point of view, farmers therefore become ‘one of us’ to be counterposed to ‘them’, the rural immigrant population.
As the recent experience of many English villages shows only too well, there are ample opportunities for conflict to arise between both farmers and farm workers on the one hand and the newcomers on the other.
Since the urban middle-class exodus to the countryside began in earnest in the 1950s there have typically been two issues over which such conflict has been generated: housing and the environment.
Each problem will be considered in more detail later in this book, but here we may note how each issue has contributed to the initial polarization of the village population.
Housing is obviously a crucial resource and one for which, moreover, the whole rural population — farmers and farm workers, locals and newcomers, agricultural and non-agricultural families — are competing.
In general, this does not apply to local employment, because the newcomers either retain their employment in nearby towns and commute to work or they have come to the countryside to retire.
Both they and their children are also more mobile and, typically, more highly-educated, so they compete in an entirely separate —; usually professional and managerial — labour market from the local population.
Housing, however, is another matter.
Here, newcomers do compete with the locals, contributing to a higher demand for rural housing which, together with the restricted supply, has led to extensive changes in the nature of the rural housing market.
Although rural housing, as we shall see later in this chapter, has never been in plentiful supply, the newcomers provide an easy scapegoat for the otherwise ‘hidden hand’ of the housing market.
Resentment among the locals grows at their inability to find housing for their children in their village.
Farm workers find themselves more dependent upon tied cottages and both farm workers and the non-agricultural locals join the queue for council housing.
Yet here they have found that the newcomers are also opposed to the construction of further council housing in the village on the grounds that it is ‘detrimental to the character of the village’ and detracts from the rural environment.
The provision of council housing therefore links up the second basis of local — newcomer conflict, which relates to broadly environmental issues.
The newcomers often possess a set of stereotyped expectations of village life which place a heavy emphasis on the quality of the rural environment.
As was indicated at the beginning of this book, many newcomers hold strong views on the desired social and aesthetic qualities of the English village.
It must conform as closely as possible to the prevailing urban view — picturesque, ancient and unchanging.
The expectation that the countryside should conform to a certain idea of the picturesque and that it should present an unchanging spectacle to the appreciative onlooker has, for example, led many newcomers to be bitterly critical of the changes wrought by modern farming methods.
It is they who are in  the forefront of conservation societies, who complain about uprooted hedgerows in the lowland farming areas and who resent the destruction or diversion of footpaths.
This is because the newcomers regard the countryside in primarily aesthetic and recreational terms.
For the same reason they have been known to treat surrounding farmland as though it were a vast municipal park across which their dogs can roam or their children can ride their ponies without much thought for the consequences.
The problems that this can cause, which are often unintentional and the result of a lack of knowledge about modern agriculture, are sufficient to annoy any farmer already unhappy about what he considers to be unwarranted interference in his legitimate farming operations by busybody environmentalists.
An already wary relationship between the farming population and the newcomers can easily become strained by such encounters, reinforcing the divisions between the two sides.
Individual petty conflicts therefore easily accumulate to add to the differences already apparent between locals and newcomers in terms of background and life-styles.
Because each side is personally unfamiliar with the other there is a tendency for stereotypes to emerge and for behaviour to take place on the basis of these stereotypes, making relationships even more difficult.
Quite quickly the contact between the two sections of the rural population can become limited to the activity of a few ‘go-betweens’, whose employment requires them to relate to both sides.
Shopkeepers and local tradesmen often carry out this role — indeed, surviving rural craftsmen, such as thatchers and blacksmiths, discover a rejuvenated demand for their skills among the newcomers.
Other significant ‘go-betweens’ are the domestic workers hired by the more affluent newcomers —; the ‘little woman’who comes in to ‘do’twice or three times a week, and who is often the wife of a local farm worker grateful for the money.
As scouts sent out by the locals to reconnoitre the otherwise mysterious life-styles of the newcomers such people are terribly influential in defining the image of the newcomers among the locals —; and of the locals among the newcomers-Gossip which is reported back easily becomes magnified in order to contribute further to the stereotypes.
For farm workers in particular the sense of loss which the influx of newcomers has prompted can be quite severe.
Many newcomers share the prevailing urban view of the farm ‘labourer’.
The tend  to be unappreciative of the farm worker's skills, not out of malice, but because they simply lack the detailed knowledge of agriculture on which to base a judgement.
As they drive around the countryside the newcomers cannot distinguish between those fields which have been ploughed with a supreme exhibition of the farm worker's skills and those which have not; nor are they able to appreciate the beauty of a faultlessly drilled seed-bed, healthy stock or clean weed-free fields.
The criterion by which a farm worker could once obtain high status — skill at work — is therefore threatened with being overthrown.
Instead the newcomers tend to evaluate the farm worker and the other villagers on the basis of urban criteria for allocating prestige.
This usually means conspicuous consumption in one or all of its varied forms — the size of the house, the size, age and make of the car, the possession of other consumer durables, the quality of furnishings, and so on.
Even the garden, which can be used for the conspicuous display of flowers and shrubs rather than the more utilitarian purpose of growing food, may become part of this.
Whatever form it takes, however, such conspicuous consumption —; and hence the allocation of status — depends upon income and farm workers, on low wages, simply cannot compete in this league.
The agricultural worker, however, reacts to the possibility of being deprived of his former status in his own village by changing the rules of the competition.
Since non-acceptance on the basis of length of residence is one of the few ways in which local workers can retain any of their old status in the village, they restrict their social contacts to those who share these judgements with them.
For those newcomers who seek the social intimacy of a happy and integrated community life in the village, the reserve (and worse) of the locals can be mystifying and even upsetting.
Many arrive full of goodwill and good intentions, but fail to perceive the often unanticipated consequences of their arrival on the lives of the local inhabitants, and even an oversensitivity of the need to spread goodwill around the village can appear to the locals to be both patronizing and unnecessary.
For example, while the newcomers may fail to understand the skill and local status of the farm worker, they do not wish to treat him as a social outcast — this would run counter to the notion of community with which many newcomers strongly identify.
Moreover the newcomers do like to see farm workers around the village since this serves as a reminder that they do indeed live  in a ‘truly rural’ village, as opposed to a kind of rustic suburbia.
However, the farm worker is allotted his ‘place’ in the grand, and somewhat idealized, design to which the village is expected to conform.
He can be a ‘character’, a source of quaint rustic humour or homespun rural philosophy on such matters as the seasons and the weather, but he is rarely expected to be either forward-thinking or ‘forward’ in his demeanour.
What are demanded are pet farm workers who cause no trouble but who form part of the landscape along with the fields and the trees.
This tendency to treat the local population as an adjunct to the scenery is a problem to which even the rural aficionados among the newcomers can fall prey and by which they can unwittingly cause offence.
For example, the following expression of sympathy, taken from a letter to The Times in January 1977, at first sight appears unexceptional.
The writer, who was troubled that the Lake District was losing its local population, put her case as follows:
The Lake District is one of the most compactly beautiful regions in England and so much of its intrinsic attraction lies in the way of life led by native Cumbrians.
Do people who buy second houses…in the Lake District realise that eventually they will destroy the very appeal of the area which they have always enjoyed?
Do they for a moment consider that most visitors to the like District want to feel surrounded by natives of the fells and not middle-class accents and protocol?
Such comments show not so much an insensitivity to the problems of the locals, but reduces them to cyphers, tourist attractions almost, along with the surrounding scenery.
In this case the native Lake District population becomes what one writer on this theme, R. E.
Pahl, calls ‘props on the rustic stage’, which help to round off the picturesque vision of the countryside.
To the farm worker sentiments such as these, however well-intentioned they may be, seem patronizing and, although in this particular instance the underlying attitudes were made unusually explicit, they are usually present in the assumptions of many newcomers.
In the light of these considerations it is perhaps not surprising that new social divisions and conflicts have arisen in the English village in recent years, nor that the local population has preferred to turn in upon itself in the face of these changes.
This encapsulation of the locals in their own village has also been reinforced in many  cases by a physical separation of the two sections of the community.
Because of the workings of the housing market the local working population tends to congregate on the village council housing estate (where one is available), where the closely knit patterns of neighbourly association which were part of the occupational community are retained.
Where villages contain more than one pub these, too, usually reflect the split between locals and newcomers, or, in the case of villages with only one pub, the bars may be socially divided — the locals to the public bar, the newcomers to the lounge, often ‘modernized’ in rustic mode for this purpose.
The whole village therefore meets socially on only rare occasions, such as the parish meeting or the village fête, but even here socializing is often highly ritualized and rudimentary, as much symbolic as real.
Village fêtes in particular often show up the divisions in the village rather well.
To many newcomers they can seem a celebration of village conviviality, but closer inspection often reveals that who actually speaks to whom depends very much on background and life-style.
Newcomers concentrate on the winemaking and the flower arrangements, while locals head single-mindedly for the beer tent and the equally serious business of the vegetable show, a forum in which husbandry skill is still subject to public competition.
It is doubtful whether such social occasions bring about any lasting reconciliation between the two groups.
It is by no means clear that many newcomers are even aware of the feelings that they arouse from time to time in the local population.
Having come to the village with certain expectations they may only see what they expect to find and, since the local working population has long been used to avoiding overt conflict in the face of those who have the capacity to create trouble for them, the superficial calm of village life may remain.
The civilities of politeness and social etiquette may ensure that the locals' resentment is voiced only in their own social circle.
It therefore becomes easy for the ideal of village life to remain among the newcomers, even though the reality for the locals may be very different.
Nevertheless, in the contemporary English village it is this feeling of having been ‘taken over’ by outsiders that usually prevails among the agricultural population and with it not only a sense of ‘loss of community’, but an inevitable animus against the invasion of ‘furriners’.
This is not to suggest that English villages are currently hotbeds of social unrest, far from it.
But when a  suitable issue presents itself these underlying feelings easily become manifested, often to the surprise and consternation of the new village-dwellers.
The farm-centred community
The ratio of locals to newcomers in the village today depends not only on the accessibility to nearby urban centres, but, now that most of lowland England has been subject to these changes, by the mixture of housing which each village contains.
Since privately rented accommodation is decreasing in rural areas, in common with the national trend, the three most important housing categories are owner-occupied houses, council houses and tied cottages.
Most tied cottages are located on farms rather than in the village itself, so within the village the most important housing mix is usually that between privately owned and local authority housing.
Where there is no council housing then it is possible for the village to be completely overrun by ex-urban newcomers.
This particularly applies to the more beautiful showpiece villages, which by their very reputation attract more newcomers and by their more picturesque appearance prompt a premium to be placed on the price of local homes.
Because of their beauty such villages are also more subject to draconian planning policies which may prevent any new development at all or restrict it to only the limited in-filling of low-density private housing.
Unable to buy and with no council houses available many agricultural workers are forced to seek accommodation in the only local alternative that is available to them — tied cottages.
The increasing proportion of farm workers living in tied housing since the war is therefore partly accounted for by these changes in the rural housing market.
Because most tied cottages are located on farms and because the village in this case has been virtually emptied of its former working population, farm workers become both physically and socially isolated from the village.
The farm becomes their ‘community’ while contact with the village becomes much more perfunctory.
Increasingly it is merely used for its amenities — schools, shops, etc. — rather than as the social centre which it once was.
There is, of course, nothing new in the development of what might be called a farm-centred community, distinct and largely separated from the village, particularly in the pastoral and upland areas of England, where this kind of settlement pattern has traditionally been more common.
In this situation, where the ‘community’ has become the farm itself, the farm worker lives in a somewhat privatized world, for the most part socially invisible to the rest of society.
The sense of isolation which might otherwise ensue is, however, mitigated by the close contact with neighbours and workmates in the other tied houses and by increasing contact with the farmer who is now a neighbour as well as an employer.
There is, indeed, a much less rigid distinction between working and non-working hours, for with easier accessibility between home and workplace the farm worker tends to be involved in the job for as long as it demands, rather than working to any set hours.
Similarly farmers are more prepared to be indulgent about their employees' working hours as long as the necessary tasks are carried out efficiently.
In general relationships between the farmer and his workers become more informal, more personal and — because of their living cheek-by jowl around the farm — more pervasive.
Although there is a risk that life can become too self-contained and claustrophobic, farmers nevertheless find it easier to inspire some degree of personal loyalty among their workers and allow the class animosities of the occupational community to be vastly reduced.
As we have already seen, this reduction in the social distance between farmers and farm workers is also aided by the impact of the newcomers to the village.
Farmers can find common cause with their workers in complaining about the ‘interference’ of outsiders in their own farms' and the village's affairs.
Moreover farmers, at least, continue to appreciate the skills of farm workers, so that the latter obtain much higher esteem from their employers than they can expect from many newcomers.
These trends have reinforced the already closer contact between farmers and their workers brought about by mechanization and the declining size of the labour force which were discussed in the previous chapter.
This does not mean that the objective differences in wealth and income have been in any way reduced, but relationships have become easier and more informal.
An indication of this has been the reduction in the activities of the rural underworld, which was such a thriving feature of village life when it was an occupational community, but which has now virtually disappeared.
Those indulging in poaching activities today are well-organized wide-boys from nearby towns, with the use of large vans  and with good contacts in the meat trade.
The farm worker is as likely as not to be found standing shoulder to shoulder with his employer defending the farm and its game — a literal case of poacher turned gamekeeper.
Because of the ways in which the changes wrought by urbanization have worked their way through the village community the contrast between the more affluent life-styles of the newcomers and the poorer living standards of local farm workers have not therefore resulted in greater conflict between farmers and their employees.
If anything, farm workers now identify more with farmers than they have in the past.
A more likely cause of restlessness and dissatisfaction among farm workers occurs when friends, neighbours and kin among the ‘locals’ cease to work on the land but commute from the village to nearby towns.
In those villages with easy access to local urban centres and industrial estates this has become quite common.
In other words, the continuing fall in the demand for labour on farms has prompted a growing proportion of even the locals to live in the village and work in towns.
This is often much more damaging to the self-esteem of the farm worker than the arrival in the village of alien newcomers with whom he does not identify.
When the farm worker sees ex-workmates supporting a more grandiose life-style he becomes more aware of his own relatively lowly situation.
In a multitude of subtle ways the farm worker may be reminded of his inferiority.
This is the most telling way in which the loss of community may be brought poignantly home to the farm worker.
As far as the newcomers are concerned, they have wished no harm to anyone, so that any animosity which they have evoked has been entirely unintended and unanticipated.
Indeed at times it has seemed difficult to see what the newcomers could do to alleviate the resentments they have occasionally caused.
If they respectfully withdraw from involvement in village affairs they find themselves branded as ‘stand-offish’ or ‘jumped-up’; if they participate fully in the life of the village they are accused of ‘taking over’and of telling the local inhabitants how to run their own community.
The newcomers often act as easily identifiable scapegoats who can be blamed for many of the deprivations which the contemporary rural population suffers —; poor amenities, remoteness from the centres of private and public decision-making, and so on.
This is not to suggest that the basis of local — newcomer conflict in English villages has been entirely illusory  — far from it, as the previous discussion has shown.
However, the social separation of the two groups and the consequent tendency of each to stereotype the other has magnified the conflict involved.
The newcomers feel cold-shouldered by the local population on occasions and become resentful of their almost tribal clannishness.
They complain about having to live in a village for three generations before winning social acceptance or ruefully conclude that ‘the first fifty years are the worst’.
Moreover, the impact of the newcomers has not been an entirely detrimental one, even for the locals.
There is no doubt that the middle-class exodus from the towns to the countryside has vastly improved the physical fabric of the housing in rural areas.
Cottages have been restored and renovated and, whatever the occasional lapses in taste, the appearance of most English villages has been greatly improved.
A comparison between a ‘commuter village’ and one which has suffered the ravages of rural depopulation unhindered by the arrival of newcomers soon shows this.
For example, a trip to the Barringtons, a group of villages in the Cotswolds left to ruin by the local landowner rather than allow the houses to be purchased by or let to ex-urbanites, will show that the ‘loss of community’ in both a Physical and a social sense, has not been caused by newcomers moving in.
The Barringtons vividly demonstrate that the village as an occupational community declined because the underlying economic base could no longer support it.
The disruptions caused by newcomers have been merely a tangible symptom of this change.
The newcomers to the countryside have also been able to apply more pressure upon local and central government for the improvement of local amenities.
Rural education is a prime example of this.
Active and articulate middle-class newcomers have been able to apply considerable pressure to local education authorities in order to improve the standards of rural schools.
They have formed parent — teacher associations and other pressure groups to make their voice heard at County Hall and they have also, by becoming elected as local councillors, been able directly to influence the allocation of resources.
All rural children have benefited from the improvements that have resulted, whether they are the sons and daughters of locals or newcomers.
Indeed the ability of the newcomers to find their way around the local political system has often prompted the improvement of other rural amenities, albeit on a highly selective basis.
For example, newcomers have been in the forefront of the many campaigns to obtain by-passes for those villages which have a main road running through them.
However, the provision of one particular facility never seems to fail to divide the village along local and newcomer lines: street-lighting.
While the newcomers consider the absence of street-lighting to be dangerous, particularly in the winter, the locals, who claim they have always been able to manage without it, regard it as an ugly and unnecessary intrusion.
The changes in the village social structure described in this chapter have, of course, varied in their timing and extent from village to village, yet these developments have been widespread across virtually the entire countryside.
Although they first became noticeable around the major conurbations — for example, in the Home Counties, in Cheshire and in parts of Warwickshire — in lowland England at least the commuting networks have virtually joined up.
The fact that the South East contains a disproportionately high number of professional and managerial inhabitants, that transportation is generally quicker and easier because of the flatter terrain, and that industry and population from London have been relocated to surrounding satellite towns have all conspired to spread the ex-urban population far out into the metropolitan hinterland.
In the North and West of England, however, the presence of fewer middle-class people, poorer communications and more difficult terrain has imposed a more limited distance on commuting.
This is not to say that commuters have not moved into the rural areas of the North and West, for they clearly have, particularly where open countryside is within easy access of large cities, such as the Peak District for Sheffield and Manchester or the Mendips for Bristol and Bath.
However, the radius of commuting tends to be more circumscribed, so that conflict between local residents and incoming urban dwellers has taken other forms.
For example, in areas close to the sea the newcomers have been predominantly retired couples whose impact i n the local housing market has again caused resentment in those regions where they have become concentrated, such as Devon and Cornwall.
Elsewhere, particularly in the remoter upland areas, the issue which has aroused most controversy has been the purchase of second homes as weekend or holiday retreats.
Second home owners have roused the ire of local inhabitants more than either commuters or retired newcomers, partly by the very fact  that their houses are second homes and therefore considered to be needed less than the houses of other ex-urbanites.
In areas where the inflation of housing prices has made it impossible for many local people to obtain their own homes, the sight of outsiders purchasing houses when they already have one elsewhere can be an affront to local dignity.
In North Wales, for example, where the factors already described in this chapter are overlaid by considerations of cultural nationalism, militant action against second home owners has ensued.
In England the reaction of the local inhabitants has been generally less vocal and less publicity-seeking, but nonetheless hostile.
The Lake District, for example, has been particularly affected by the purchase of holiday retreats.
In 1976 a survey carried out from Lancaster University,Rural Housing in the Lake District , revealed that 10 per cent of the houses in the national park area were holiday homes.
The report showed that some villages in the south of the area were in danger of becoming ‘ghost villages’ for months on end —; for example, in the village of High Nibthwaite only two of the fourteen houses were occupied by people earning a local livelihood.
The village contained only two resident children.
In extreme situations like this it is not surprising that the local population becomes angered.
Their children have little prospect of finding any housing in their village when they wish to set up their own homes.
The locals find they must leave, while houses in their village remain locked and empty for months at a time.
But how typical the well-publicized case of the Lake District is cannot easily be judged, for the information on second home ownership is rather skimpy.
In 1972 the number of houses used as second homes in Britain as a whole was estimated at 372000, but it is believed that this number has declined in recent years due to the inflation in house prices since that date.
The few localized investigations of the problem that have been carried out have shown that second home owners do not make an entirely negative contribution to the areas in which they purchase their property.
For example, many of the houses which they buy are in the most remote or inconvenient situations and would otherwise have been abandoned by the local residents.
They are frequently semi-derelict, insanitary and damp and their restoration not only contributes to the renewal of the local housing stock but provides employment for local builders and traders.
Much, however, depends upon the nature of the local housing market, the location  and soundness of the properties and the buoyancy of local demand.
Variations in each of these factors can considerably alter the balance of benefits and costs to the local community in different areas and regions.
Second home owners often provide the easiest of targets for those who deplore the creeping urbanization of the countryside.
Yet, like the impact of newcomers on village society generally, they are more a symptom than a cause of the sense of loss which the local population often feels.
Without the newcomers many more villages would be ghost villages and the social demoralization would be even more acute.
Even where newcomers are demonstrably forcing the local population to seek housing elsewhere through their inflationary effect on the housing market, arguably the answer is to relieve the chronic shortage of rural housing, and to build more houses suitable for local residents.
In the end, however, the antagonism towards newcomers is not a rationally calculated response.
It is a gut reaction to the sense of having been taken over by affluent and alien strangers.
The underlying cause may be the changes in agriculture described in the earlier chapters of this book, but the newcomers represent the most visible and tangible manifestation of a disruption of community life which would have occurred in any case.
The initial instinct to exclude commuters and second home owners from the countryside is not, therefore, altogether helpful.
People living in towns and cities can hardly be denied their quite reasonable and legitimate desire either to reside in or to visit the countryside and without them many villages would now lie abandoned and semi — derelict.
The greatest friction occurs where locals and newcomers are competing — often on unequal terms — for scarce resources.
For reasons outlined earlier in this chapter these do not usually consist of jobs, but rather of space (which will be considered in the following chapter under the heading of land use and access) and housing.
As far as housing is concerned, focusing attention on the disruptive social effects of the newcomers alone diverts attention from the fact that rural housing is not only a matter of (increasing) demand, but of supply and need.
The continuing scarcity of certain types of rural housing is now having as much effect upon shaping the English village community as the influx of newcomers.
Housing and social control
The frequency with which references to rural housing have already been made in this chapter reflects the extent to which the housing market acts as an intermediary between the economic changes in agriculture, described earlier in this book, and the kind of social life which is now to be found in the English countryside.
This, of course, is using the term housing market in the broadest possible sense to mean the allocation and distribution of housing, including those houses which lie outside the market sector itself, such as local authority housing and tied cottages.
How this system of allocation has been operated and controlled has long had a significant effect in moulding the social composition of the rural village, for it has largely influenced who lives where .
Housing has therefore been used, either consciously or unconsciously, as an agency of social control.
Public debate about rural housing policy has, however, preferred not to acknowledge such social control implications and preferred instead to deal in terms of houses rather than their inhabitants.
Discussions about the number of houses in rural areas, their size and density, how many should be publicly or privately owned, owner-occupied or rented, where they should be sited and how they should be designed are often presented as purely technical exercises.
However, these matters are not only the province of economics, architecture or planning.
The decisions that are made also help to determine the kind of people who will eventually live in the houses that are built and therefore the nature of the village community.
During the nineteenth century this link between the type of housing and the social structure of the village was made explicit in the lowland farming areas by the division between ‘open’ and ‘closed’villages.
Closed villages were those in which a resident squire owned most or all of the land in the parish, or those in which a very few large farmers maintained an oligarchy over local landownership.
In cases like these local landowners allowed the construction of only the minimum number of houses needed to accommodate their permanently employed labour force, often in ‘estate villages’.
The building of any further houses was resisted on the grounds that the additional families which they would attract might eventually become a charge on the poor rates during periods of economic depression.
As the major ratepayer in the parish a large landowner  therefore had a strong incentive to limit and even — as early mechanization progressed — diminish his housing stock so that any surplus labour force did not reside locally; hence the closed character of such villages.
At the other extreme were open villages where the land was divided among a large number of freeholders and smallholders.
Many of them were local tradesmen who supplemented their living by acting as petty rural landlords.
They therefore attracted labour without any hindrance, providing jerry-built, damp and insanitary hovels for letting to local farm workers.
Such exploitation was compounded by the fact that their tenants obtained only low wages and insecure employment and could not afford a rent which would provide a sufficiently large return to keep the houses in good repair.
Thus, while the far greater number of ratepayers in the open villages meant that there was no disincentive to build houses, those that were built quickly became decrepit rural slums.
The division between open and closed villages was not always as clear-cut as this may imply — many villages lay somewhere between the two — and it was less extensive in the upland areas where less labour was employed and more workers ‘lived in’ on the farms.
Nevertheless, until the widespread construction of council houses between the two world wars, the ownership of cottages remained, as the historian Geoffrey Best has pointed out, ‘a cardinal point in the grand scheme of subordination’— Those living in the shadow of the local squire found themselves, on the whole, better housed but less independent.
Open villages, on the other hand, were centres of the rural underworld — some of them notoriously so — and displayed their independence of squirearchal authority not only by engaging in petty criminal activity but by becoming centres of pre-political and political activity which opposed ‘official’ values and attitudes.
During the 1820s and 1830s, for example, the open villages were centres of the ‘labourer's revolt’, associated with the mythical figure of Captain Swing, in which arson and machine-breaking were the most common expression of rural protest.
Later in the century the open villages were also centres of nonconformism and trade unionism.
Yet nearby landowners had little option other than to tolerate the threat to law and order which the existence of open villages implied because the closed parishes to some extent relied upon the open ones to provide a pool of reserve labour which could be used during periods of peak demand like harvest, but which would not  at other times become a charge on the poor rate.
Rural tenants — principally farm workers — meanwhile found themselves in a vicious circle of deprivation.
The biggest landowners, who could best afford to erect new dwellings with a reasonable standard of construction and sanitation, had the least incentive to do so — indeed, as the principal local ratepayers they might easily penalize themselves by attracting workers who could later apply for poor relief.
On the other hand the open villages, because they attracted the surplus labour force, contained workers on depressed wages who could ill afford rents which would make housing improvements profitable.
The squalor of rural housing conditions became a mid-century scandal, highlighted by the government Blue Books on living conditions and public health which were published during the 1850s and 1860s.
These investigations uncovered the topsy-turvy pattern of rural housing trends which the link between the structure of landholding, the financing of poor rates and the construction of rural houses had created.
Between 1851 and 1861, for example, in 821 rural parishes covered by the investigation the population had increased from 305567 to 322064, while the number of houses had fallen from 69225 to 66109.
In a sample of 5375 ‘typical cottages’ 8805 bedrooms accommodated 13432 adults plus a further 11338 children.
Behind the honeysuckle and the hollyhocks there was revealed a life of hitherto unimagined degradation.
Calls for housing reform were led by liberal-minded onlookers.
Clergymen, for example, warned about the moral consequences of overcrowding and the incidence of rural incest.
Health inspectors were also concerned about the constant risk of epidemic diseases resulting from poor sanitation.
A few large landowners were stirred by their consciences to build, for reasons of philanthropy rather than economy, new ‘model’ cottages and villages, but these were usually on their own estates where conditions were in any case generally better than elsewhere.
The Union Chargeability Act of 1865 also removed many of the disincentives to build by altering the basis of poor law finance, but the onset of agricultural depression after 1 873 followed so hard upon its heels that attempts to reform rural housing were rendered largely ineffective.
For the same reason the Housing Act of 1890, a permissive Act allowing the newly formed local councils to build housing for rent, provided little relief.
However Much rural housing became a public issue, which it did periodically until 1914, the  depression in agriculture generally ensured that little new building took place and it became more and more apparent that housing conditions in rural areas would receive no dramatic improvement without external intervention.
As in many other areas of rural life, events during and immediately after the First World War were to have a considerable effect upon the structure of rural housing.
The introduction of the wages boards completed the decasualization of agricultural labour begun by the licensing of itinerant agricultural gangs in 1867.
The open village therefore lost much of its rationale as a reservoir of surplus labour.
In the upland areas the introduction of the wages boards also led to the decline of hiring fairs and the gradual discontinuance of the practice of ‘living in’.
In both cases the greater stability and permanency of the labour force encouraged farmers to build more tied cottages in order to ensure a supply of labour — and the significance of tied cottages was further increased by estates being broken up and sold to sitting tenants, a change which also brought about a decline in the number of closed villages.
Tied cottages, indeed, performed much the same function as the closed village in Victorian times, by enabling farmers to ensure that their expenditure on housing was limited as far as possible to guaranteeing their own labour requirements.
These considerations were to bear heavily upon the drive after the war to improve the housing of rural workers by, for the first time, explicitly introducing the criterion of housing need rather than an ability to pay the rent.
Lloyd George's promise of ‘homes fit for heroes’ was implemented in the ‘Addison’Act of 1919, which first stimulated widespread local authority housing construction.
This was followed by further legislation in 1924 (the ‘Wheatley’ Act) and a variety of measures during the 1930s.
The aim of much of this legislation was to increase the sheer quantity of housing available to the rural population, thereby relieving overcrowding and improving the state of repair of the housing stock.
The chosen means of achieving this end was to provide local authorities with central government funds which could be used for housing construction and enable the level of rents to be subsidized out of general Exchequer funds — in other words, the framework of the system of public housing finance with which we are familiar today.
The new housing drive met with a disappointing response in rural areas, however, where local authorities were  reluctant to participate in the government's house-building schemes —; so reluctant, in fact, that specific legislation aimed at alleviating the plight of rural workers had to be introduced after 1935.
In part this was due to the continuance of agricultural depression, which not only left many rural areas bereft of a buoyant rate base but also lowered agricultural wages below the level at which even local authority rents could be afforded.
But the reluctance to take account of the new obligations imposed by government to consider the housing needs of the working classes also derived from more political motives.
Since their inception in 1888 and 1894 rural councils had remained largely in the hands of landowners and farmers.
A rough rule-of-thumb was that landowners controlled the rural county councils and farmers the rural district councils (which were given responsibility for housing).
As the principal ratepayers in the locality — even after the de-rating of agricultural land in 1927 — they pursued a low rateflow expenditure policy and therefore were extremely reluctant to commit local authority expenditure to the building of houses which could become a burden on the rates.
They were particularly reluctant to subsidize council house rents out of the general rate in order to allow farm workers access to local authority housing.
Not until 1935, when the government offered rural councils no less than 80 per cent of the cost of construction of houses for agricultural workers, was legislation successful in moving recalcitrant rural authorities.
Although the provision of public housing had been established as a principle in rural areas by 1939 — by itself no mean achievement when one looks back over the history of rural housing — the results of twenty years of legislation were a disappointment.
Less than 10 per cent of the housing stock in rural England and Wales consisted of council houses, despite all the attempts at pump-priming which had been carried out from Whitehall.
As many wartime evacuees found to their alarm, rural housing remained at a lower standard than that to be found in most urban areas, with only slow progress having been made in the provision of piped water, sewerage and electricity.
In 1942 the Scott Report concluded that: ‘Thousands of cottages have no piped water supply, no gas or electric light, no third bedroom and often only one living room with no separate cooking and scullery accommodation.
For the great majority of rural workers a bathroom is a rare luxury.’
Such deficiencies in the number and quality of  rural houses were particularly serious when viewed in the context of the inter-war legislation.
This had been directed primarily at improving rural housing as an adjunct to public health policy, yet not only were the standards of rural amenities still markedly inferior (for example, 5000 rural parishes possessed no sewerage system), but the sheer volume of housing available for rural workers remained inadequate — rural district councils built only 164083 dwellings between 1919 and 1943, compared with which the number of private houses was 706527.
Why did this chronic shortage of rural council housing persist?
The cost of housing construction, and particularly the cost of the associated public utilities, was usually higher in rural areas, although this did not deter private developers whose houses usually needed the same facilities.
Low rateable values in some of the remoter rural areas also played a part.
However, it seems unlikely that the political will existed among many rural authorities to embark upon a rapid and expensive programme of housing construction.
Many of the principles which underlay the provision of rural housing in the nineteenth century reasserted themselves in a new institutional framework.
Farmers and landowners continued to dominate rural areas, both as employers and as local councillors, and therefore as effective landlords of the housing stock within the range of farm workers: council housing, privately rented houses and tied cottages.
Their desire to keep rates down made them reluctant to build council houses.
Farm workers could instead be housed in tied cottages which had other advantages in addition to providing suitable accommodation, not least of which were the convenience of having workers on call, the greater stability tied housing conferred on the labour force, and the reinforcement of ties of dependency.
Tied cottages also depressed farm wages, making farm workers unable to afford council house rents-Thus, the rents could not be lowered without raising the rates, while farmers were not going voluntarily to raise wages just so that their workers could afford to live in council houses.
Whether as ratepayers or as employers the farmers who ran the majority of rural councils found it more advantageous to provide tied housing for farm workers and build the minimum number of local authority homes.
These trends have continued since 1945.
Rural housing within reach of farm workers has come to be in even shorter supply.
By  1974, on the eve of local government reorganization, rural district councils provided 20 per cent of the rural housing stock, compared with the 31 per cent supplied by local authorities elsewhere.
Farm workers were thus becoming increasingly dependent upon tied cottages, while other rural workers were faced by a declining pool of privately rented housing which was apparent in rural areas, as elsewhere, after successive Rent Acts had improved the security of tenants.
In addition competition for privately-rented accommodation had, as we have already noted, increased from commuters and second home owners.
In view of the history of rural housing it was therefore somewhat ironic to find in 1976 that changes to the tied cottage legislation were opposed by the farmers' lobby on the grounds that there were insufficient safeguards against local authorities refusing to meet their housing responsibilities!
The crux of the tied cottage problem, it was argued, was the shortage of rural housing.
The cynicism of this argument is breathtaking, for the
N F U and C LA could surely not have been oblivious of the fact that this shortage was one which farmers and landowners, in their role as councillors, had been responsible for creating.
For many years farm workers, and other rural inhabitants who did not have access to home ownership, had been quietly and routinely disadvantaged by the housing policies of many rural local authorities.
Since the Second World War, however, the political control of rural councils has not been the only factor influencing the rate of rural house-building.
A salient feature of the rural housing situation over this period has also been the incorporation of a specifically rural housing problem into the general problem of the nation's housing, coupled with increasing central government intervention in, and control of, rural housing provision.
Rural councils have found themselves hamstrung by the centralized control of local authority expenditure (particularly during the periods of economic stagnation and crisis) and, in the case of housing, by the imposition of cost yardsticks which rarely take account of the peculiar difficulties which many rural councils face from the heavier costs incurred in housing provision in remote areas.
The subsuming of rural housing under a general ‘housing problem’ has also been accompanied by a change in emphasis in housing policy.
Between the wars the aim of housing legislation was simply to stimulate the construction of as many houses as possible in rural areas; since 1945 the aim has been to  control the number of houses in rural areas as part of overall planning policies designed to contain the growth of urban sprawl, prevent the loss of good agricultural land and protect the visual quality of the countryside.
Far from encouraging local authorities and private developers to build more rural houses as in the 1930s, there has been an active discouragement, involving the imposition of strict planning controls, particularly over housing in the open countryside and in other sensitive areas such as Green Belts and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
The increasing affluence of the rural population wrought by the urban middle-class exodus has tended to mask the continuing and severe pockets of poverty which exist in the countryside and has led the ‘problem’ of rural housing to be regarded less as a problem of social welfare and more as an issue concerning land use planning and countryside preservation.
This takes us into an area of discussion — what has broadly come to be known as ‘the environment’— which will be dealt with in the following chapter.
However, a few indications can be given here of how environmental issues have impinged upon housing policy.
Since the Town and Country Planning Act of 1947 the granting of planning permission for rural housing has arguably been concerned with the visual quality of the countryside rather than with alleviating problems of housing need.
By placing strict controls upon rural development these policies have also brought about a planned scarcity of housing which, in the face of increasing demand, has made a rural house a desirable good with a premium price.
Until the early 1960s the effects of rural depopulation, the dilapidation of much rural property and the cost of travel to urban centres all contributed to the lower price of rural housing compared with urban areas.
But as the surplus rural housing was gradually soaked up by commuters and second home owners, and as housing which had once been a damning indictment of years of neglect and deprivation was restored and renovated, so relative scarcity began to increase prices above those prevailing for comparable suburban and even urban housing.
The pressure on rural development has thus become more intense.
Between 1961 and 1971 the population census recorded an increase of 1700000 in the rural population, and although some of this was accounted for by contiguous urban development spilling over the boundaries of surrounding Rural Districts, there is little doubt that  the population pressures on most of rural England are now those of increasing demand rather than those resulting from rural depopulation.
The solution to this has been not to build even more houses to relieve the upward pressure on rents and prices but to impose even more stringent controls — conservation areas, village ‘envelopes’ and so on.
As prices inexorably rise, so the population which actually achieves its goal of a house in the country becomes more socially selective.
Planning controls on rural housing have therefore become — in effect, if not in intent — instruments of social exclusivity, although this often depends as much upon implementation as on the principles enshrined in the legislation.
For example, the insistence of planning authorities upon the use of certain building materials, the standards of design and external finish and the density of housing development reflect their traditional concern with how a house or a village looks rather than who will actually live in it.
As a general rule, the lower the densities and the higher the standards of design, the higher the social class of those who will eventually occupy the houses that are built.
As the environmental lobby has gained increasing influence over rural planning policies, so the dilemma between the requirement of maintaining an attractive village landscape and the provision of housing for those in need has become more acute.
Nationally imposed cost yardsticks ensure that many rural councils can only afford to build houses to a standard design in relatively large estates, yet on both grounds they are often out of sympathy with the visual quality of many English villages.
Local amenity societies and conservation groups therefore frequently oppose their construction —; and all too often the houses remain unbuilt.
Although the prime responsibility for rural housing provision has rested with the rural district councils (district councils since 1974), they must work within a strategic planning framework laid down by county council planning authorities.
Thus while the district councils are responsible for development control, they must act within guidelines for zoning and land use established by the county.
Traditionally, county councils have been more preservationist-minded than many of their local district councils, often because their membership showed a higher proportion of large landowners who had a keen interest in preserving the countryside, even before concern for the environment became a fashionable issue.
On  occasions this could lead to conflict between district and county councils over housing provision — for example, over the desire of farmers to build tied cottages in open countryside.
However, the most direct influence of county councils over housing and the social composition of villages occurs in their policies for restricting the growth of some settlements in favour of‘key villages’.
For reasons principally of economy, most county councils have preferred to concentrate development on a few villages which can then conveniently be provided with the full range of public amenities — schools, shops, libraries, sewerage facilities and so on-This saves on the enormous cost of duplicating amenities in every village and helps to direct and contain population growth to a few well-chosen sites.
In areas of declining population the designation of key villages has become an emotionally charged issue with allegations of villages being ‘left to die’ by cold-hearted and remote planners.
Yet the full cost of providing just piped water, electricity and sewerage, let alone the range of other amenities expected by the modern rural population can be staggering.
In areas of population pressure a further rationale has been to ‘write off’ certain selected villages from a preservationist point of view and sacrifice them to expansion so that surrounding villages may remain ‘unspoilt’.
This policy of concentration has resulted in housing being provided in the form of large estates, built to uniform design by large building firms, tacked on somewhat incongruously to the older village core.
Derived from policies which seek to preserve the landscape qualities of the English countryside, such estates have more often contributed to its deterioration.
In recent years there has been some awareness on the part of planners of the role of rural planning policies in exaggerating the scarcity of rural housing and achieving comparatively little for those in greatest housing need.
However, the growth of environmentalism as an issue of live public concern during the 1970s has pushed planning policy more in the direction of increased control than of increased flexibility.
Housing policies thus continue to be concerned more with bricks and mortar than the needs of the people who inhabit rural areas, let alone with considering how these policies redistribute the life-chances of the rural population.
As Marilyn Rawson and Alan Rogers conclude in their review of recent policies Rural Housing and Structure Plans :
The general restriction of planning methods for rural housing to development control and a concern with the fabric of the built countryside pervades the whole attitude of structure planning to rural housing, not just policies.
Only rarely do plans consider more than the simple spatial attributes of the housing stock.
Housing quality is examined usually by area rather than by social group and there is little information on different income groups in the countryside and their needs and demands for housing.
This is surprising when one remembers the importance frequently given to local housing need which can only be satisfactorily defined in relation to an understanding of social groups and information on incomes.
It follows that policies for rural housing do not consider the social implications which might result from their implementation.
There is, for example, little or no discussion on the possible distributional effects on different social groups of conservation policies regarding rural housing nor of the economic and social implications for rural housing of key settlement strategies.
The danger is that current rural housing policies will produce a polarization of the rural population.
While the demands of the rich and the affluent can be met within the framework of current housing policies, the needs of the poor increasingly cannot.
During the 1970s the provision of rural housing for those who cannot partake in the market sector has been pitiful.
Between 1967 and 1973 (the last year in which rural districts were a distinct administrative category), the number of council houses built annually in rural areas was almost cut in half, from 35000 to 18000, while private-sector housing held steady at just over 70000.
This enormous decline in public housing was largely due to a government-induced squeeze on local authority expenditure.
However, since 1973 matters have hardly improved.
The Labour government elected in 1974 decided to concentrate its housing resources on the needs of the inner city areas and coupled this with changes in the basis of the rate support grant which disadvantaged rural local authorities.
While not for one moment can the appalling state of housing in many of the major English cities be denied, there is no reason to believe that the problems of poor housing and underprivilege are any less acute among the rural as opposed to the urban poor: they are merely less obvious and less concentrated in numbers.
The result is that once those who are unable to purchase have negotiated their way through the labyrinthine and highly variable eligibility rules to achieve a place on a council housing waiting list, they join a queue which is growing at a  faster rate than addition to the council housing stock and which in some cases even exceeds the total number of families housed by the district council.
One largely unforeseen consequence of rural housing policies has therefore been to increase the relative deprivation of low-paid rural workers (and their newly married offspring).
They are frequently denied the choice of living in the village in which they were born and brought up or in the village close to their employment.
This has been a cause of intense resentment in some rural areas which has rebounded on those newcomers who have been able to afford to purchase their homes at prices beyond the reach of the locals.
The distortions introduced into the housing market by planning controls have therefore exaggerated the divisions already existing between locals and newcomers that are derived from differences in backgrounds, cultural assumptions and life-styles.
In their effects these policies have been socially regressive.
They have ensured that competition for rural housing has been carried out on increasingly unequal terms and that the population of many villages has become more socially exclusive.
Although this his been the opposite of what was generally intended, there seems to be little sign of any reappraisal of rural planning controls which might result in a reversal of current trends.
A ‘loss of community’?
The developments that have taken place in the rural housing market illustrate vividly the paradoxical nature of contemporary changes in village life.
The rural population today is better housed, better educated and generally in receipt of a higher standard of living than at any time in the past.
Yet alongside these improvements there have existed continuing problems of relative deprivation for particular groups within rural society who are often powerless — sometimes increasingly so — to help themselves.
This paradox underlies much of the contentious discussion over whether the English village has or has not suffered a ‘loss of community’ through recent changes in its social composition.
Clearly the relatively sudden and far-reaching nature of these changes has disrupted the established pattern of social relationships to be found within most villages.
However, had a substantial number of urban dwellers not chosen to live in the countryside the consequences may have been even more severe: the  complete destruction of both the social and the physical fabric of the English village.
Consequently there is a good deal of uncertainty about whether the newcomers to the countryside have wrought a deterioration or a revitalization of the village community.
Should we take account of only the material standards of village life or should we include such an apparently ephemeral notion as what is colloquially referred to as ‘community spirit’, the sense of identity and belonging, which the inhabitants feel?
And from whose perspective should any assessment of gains and losses be taken?
As we noted at the beginning of this chapter, because there is no consensus either among or between the different sectors of the village population over the answers to these questions, any overall conclusion about ‘loss of community’ is impossible.
Nevertheless it is possible to make a number of guarded conclusions on how the social changes that have been described in this chapter have altered the structure of relationships within the rural population.
As we have already indicated, what has been ‘lost’ from the countryside has been the village as an occupational community, which has disappeared not so much because of the impact of the newcomers but because of the underlying changes in the economics of agriculture.
In some villages the occupational community has been reconstituted in an attenuated form on the council housing estate or among the tied cottages of the ‘farm-centred’ community, but in either case a new dichotomy has emerged between those who have chosen to live in the countryside and those who remain there because of their employment or some other force of circumstances.
There seems little doubt that farm workers, along with other low-paid members of the rural population, have experienced these changes with a sense of loss.
When the village was an occupational community they identified closely with the other inhabitants, deriving both standards of behaviour and a sense of self-esteem from their neighbours.
As rapid economic and social change has worked its way through the countryside, however, the farm worker has found himself increasingly separated from the local village community both socially and — for those living out on the farms — geographically.
Farm workers are apt to complain that they now feel like strangers in their own village.
The burden of this increasing sense of isolation has fallen particularly heavily upon those members of the rural population who  lack the means of personal mobility to maintain a more dispersed network of social contacts.
As in the case of housing, the contradictory nature of rural development is here serving to increase the deprivation of the already disadvantaged.
Both the rising expectations of the rural working population and the changing character of the village have made access to some form of transport an essential element of contemporary rural life.
However, because the village newcomers possess their own cars, the reversal in the decline in rural population has not been accompanied by a revival of public transport.
On the contrary, as the pool of demand has declined, so rural public transport provision has been decimated.
Many rural branch railway lines disappeared in the early 1960s, while the bus services that have replaced them have in many cases been abandoned or severely curtailed.
Yet the need for public transport among the poor, the elderly and the disabled remains.
Indeed it may have increased as a result of the general tendency to centralize health, educational and welfare services and even shops in key villages or other local centres.
At the same time rural transport has been caught in a vicious circle of declining demand and rising fares which not even the provision of subsidies has been able to break.
It is therefore difficult to convince a farm worker's wife, who may have to walk two miles down a muddy lane in the pouring rain to catch the Mondays and Thursdays only (except Bank Holidays) under-threat-of-closure bus to do her weekly shopping, that she has benefited from any improvement in the provision of rural amenities, when her access to them is increasingly denied.
Despite experiments with postal bus services and privately operated minibuses, the future for public transport in rural areas remains bleak.
As in the case of housing, local councils find it more difficult to operate a service according to need rather than demand.
Once rural bus services are subsidized they become vulnerable to withdrawal by councils dominated by car-owners wishing to limit increases in the rates, while those who need the service are often without a voice at County Hall.
As a result those sections of the rural population who are unable to run a car now tend to find themselves more isolated from the outside world than at any time in their lives.
Of course, isolation is something to which the rural working population, particularly in the upland areas, has long been accustomed.
However, in the past this isolation was experienced more  often as a community, rather than individually.
The isolation of the village from the outside world was mitigated by the existence of a close-knit village community with which the farm worker could identify and which provided him with the range of institutions and amenities which he then required in order to live the year round.
Today the farm worker is more isolated as an individual.
Even the closer links with local farmers cannot compensate for this, since few farmers and farm workers share their leisure activities or meet socially off the farm.
The changing character of the village also diminishes its relevance as a social centre for the farm worker.
For example, once the village pub changes its tone in order to cater for its new clientele, the farm worker is easily alienated — and may even be made to feel unwelcome among the gin-and-tonics and prawn cocktails.
The village may even decline as a service centre as the pattern of local shops and other services becomes transformed.
Mobile newcomers have less need to buy their food and other necessities in the village because they can travel into nearby towns to take advantage of cheaper prices in supermarkets.
The village shopkeeper, faced with a dwindling trade, must either raise his prices or switch to providing a more specialized service for the commuters and second home owners.
In the South East, for example, it has been common to find former village shops and post offices converted into bookshops, antique shops and delicatessens.
Faced with changes like these, the farm worker experiences not only a sense of alienation from the village, but often a real material deprivation.
Many farmers and landowners share the sense of detachment from the village community which farm workers now increasingly tend to feel.
However, as we noted earlier, farmers and landowners were detached from much of the daily life of the village even when it was an occupational community.
Their social circle was more geographically widespread and they looked beyond the local village for their friends and kin.
This pattern has not been altered by recent changes in village life.
Being more affluent and therefore more mobile than their employees, farmers are still able to overcome many of the constraints imposed upon their socializing by remoteness and distance.
The disruption which farmers and landowners have faced has been of a somewhat different kind: they have suffered a loss of their traditional authority over the village population which they once took virtually for granted.
Since the newcomers are dependent upon them for neither  employment nor housing, they are not inhibited by a web of economic and social ties from expressing their opposition to the opinions and activities of farmers or landowners hitherto considered locally omnipotent, Middle-class and well-educated, they even compete with farmers and landowners for positions of authority and local responsibility, disrupting or threatening to disrupt the customary hierarchy of dominance and status in the village.
This does not affect all farmers equally, however.
In terms of the typology presented in Chapter 3, it is the gentlemen farmers — the traditional village squires — who have probably been most affected and who have watched the newcomers add to the general decline of squirearchal power and influence.
Similarly, the family farmers, who have typically been very involved in and identified with the running of local village activities, have found themselves elbowed aside.
However, those farmers who are more exclusively business-oriented — the agribusinessmen and active managerials — and are less concerned about village affairs, may have been somewhat relieved to find that the village population no longer expects them to engage in time-consuming and tedious parochial administration.
For some farmers and landowners the major impact of the newcomers has therefore been political rather than social, for their arrival in the village has ensured that landownership is no longer the automatic passport to the political domination of the countryside that it was once considered to be.
In so doing the newcomers have contributed to the sense of urban encroachment on rural political affairs among farmers and landowners which goes back over a much longer period, and which has been associated with changes in the institutions of political control in the countryside: the gradual decline in the personalized and autocratic power of the locally resident squirearchy and the transfer of public administration to a more formal and impersonal framework of local government since local politics were first placed on a democratic footing in 1888.
In some areas, of course, the changes may have been more apparent than real and the necessity of being eligible for election may not have changed the actual personnel who continued to dominate rural politics.
Indeed research carried out for the Maud Committee on local government reform in 1967 showed that 35 per cent of rural district council members were farmers, far and away the most numerous section and more than twice as many as the next largest  group.
Nevertheless there has been a slow but perceptible change in the basis of such control, which is no longer in the hands of particular landowning families and individuals as such, but part of the duties of the office to which they have been elected.
Moreover, much of the day-to-day administration has been placed in the hands of salaried officials with the specialized knowledge required to understand the complexities of modern local government administration.
This separation of the responsibilities of public office from the personal qualities of the incumbent has in the long term had a number of important consequences on decision-making in rural areas.
Local government has become more professionalized but it has also become more bureaucratic.
Successive reforms of local government administration, which have sought to make it more efficient, have produced a more rationalized but also a more centralized system, which has brought about a necessary decline in local autonomy.
Many of the important decisions affecting village life are now no longer taken locally, but by inaccessible and apparently impenetrable bureaucracies which, however well-intentioned, cannot be sensitive to local problems and idiosyncrasies.
The locus of power over village decision-making has therefore receded from the Big House to County Hall and on, in many cases, to Whitehall.
For these reasons many farmers and landowners sense a decline of the village community because ‘the village’— that is, locally powerful farmers and landowners — no longer has control over its own affairs.
The climax of this trend was seen to be the local government reorganization which was implemented in 1974.
By merging rural district councils with nearby urban districts and county councils with county boroughs, it was widely believed that not only was administration bound to become even more remote, but that the control of rural affairs would be handed over to urban interests with no understanding of agriculture and the ways of the countryside.
Certainly these reforms have been very unpopular in rural areas, particularly among the farmers and landowners who have seen their personal dominance finally slipping away in the merger with urban areas.
The newcomers, of course, have not been responsible for this loss of rural autonomy — indeed, they have been equally affected by the growing remoteness of decision-making.
However, as in many other aspects of rural social change, they have symbolized and personified the final encroachment of urbanism into English village  life with which these reforms are associated.
As we shall see in the following chapter, this does not necessarily mean that the interests of farmers and landowners are no longer dominant in rural society, but it does mean that this dominance has increasingly to be carried out by reaching an accommodation with these new conditions.
When the agricultural population complains of a loss of community in the English village it is usually to this loss of an enclosed, socially self-sufficient occupational community that they refer.
This, however, does not represent a loss to the incoming population, to whom is left open the chance of reconstructing a sense of ‘community’ once the village has been transformed into a more homogeneously residential, as opposed to agricultural, settlement.
It is arguable that the friction between locals and newcomers which has been a common feature of village life in recent years is only a temporary problem brought about by the dislocation of established social patterns which have been hard for the social life of the village to digest, and that once the newly arrived population has either taken over entirely or ‘settled down’ to a rural existence many of the initial problems will be reconciled.
For example, a study of the Sussex village of Ringmer by Peter Ambrose,The Quiet Revolution , has suggested this pattern, but as yet his findings remain unconfirmed elsewhere.
Much depends here on how stable and similar are the life-styles of the village newcomers.
As we have seen in this chapter, however, the newcomers, no matter how monolithic and undifferentiated they may seem to the locals, are composed of a number of identifiably separate urban middle-class groups — commuters, weekend cottagers, holiday-home dwellers, retired couples — among whom the village may vary considerably as a centre of their social activities.
This diversity accounts for the mutually contradictory complaints that are frequently voiced by village locals: that the newcomers come in and try to run everything or that they take no part in village life and are not ‘involved’.
Some of the newcomers — weekend cottagers, holiday-home dwellers — are highly transitory and may take little interest in village social activities.
The commuting population also contains its proportion of ‘spiralists’— upwardly and outwardly mobile young professional and managerial people — who alight on the village's new private housing estate as a relatively brief transit camp in the progress of their careers.
Because they arrive  with an expectation of moving on within a few years they refrain —; if only for reasons of emotional self-defence — from putting down ‘roots’ and involving themselves too closely in village affairs.
It is important to remember, however, that the village has declined in significance as a social centre for even the ‘locals’ among the population, thanks to the growth of largely privatized forms of leisure, such as television.
Moreover, former farm workers and other locals who have ceased to work in the village but who remain resident there and commute to nearby towns, may also involve themselves in leisure activities over a much wider geographical area than hitherto.
In particular, the younger inhabitants of the village increasingly look to urban centres for their entertainment.
This, however, need not so much reflect a decline of the village as a social centre (its past vitality has often been greatly exaggerated) as the extension of a wider range of choice to those sections of the rural population whose ownership of a car or a motorcycle has granted them easier access to urban amenities.
They, along with the newcomers, may hope to take advantage of the best of both rural and urban worlds.
There are, however, many newcomers who intend to stay permanently in the village and who are attracted, at least in part, by the very prospect of living in a ‘real community’.
Rather than remain uninvolved in village activities and risking the accusation of being ‘stand-offish’, many of them enthusiastically throw themselves into the life of the community, provoking the opposite complaint from the local population of ‘wanting to take the place over’.
Where the indicators of a thriving community life are ostensibly absent, they may even try to create the ‘community’ which their preconceptions of rural life have led them to expect.
The major problem here is that their image of what this community consists of tends to be markedly different from that of the local population.
In particular it tends to be associational rather than communal — that is, they regard as a key indicator of a flourishing village the number of clubs, societies and other associations which it supports.
A common characteristic of social life in the modern village is thus the attempt by newcomers to create an ersatz sense of community by founding and running local organizations — branches of the WEA, amateur dramatics societies, art clubs, etc. — and even building a new ‘community centre’ in which to house them.
Given the diversity of employment among the newcomers this formal method of association  is usually necessary to bring the population together.
To the locals, however, it appears to lack the spontaneity of what they consider to be a ‘real community’, which they regard as arising ‘naturally’ out of living and working together over succeeding generations.
It is worth speculating on whether, from the locals' point of view, the proliferation of village organizations reflects not so much a flourishing of community life as a symbol of its downfall.
Certainly the tendency of a number of planning studies to equate the vitality of a village with the number of organizations it contains reveals a decidedly middle-class bias and fails to give sufficient weight to the overwhelmingly informal basis of rural working-class association.
To a farm worker, for example, a community centre represents the antithesis of what he understands by ‘community’.
We therefore come back to different meanings which the term ‘community’ expresses to different people.
The word itself is so value-loaded that no judgement on whether contemporary trends in rural society have or have not brought about a ‘loss of community’ in the English village is realistically possible.
What is clearer is that the arrival of a non-agricultural population in the village has created new cleavages and social divisions which have proved difficult to reconcile.
Moreover, as we have seen, not all the effects of these changes relate to something so intangible as a sense of community, for material resources have also been redistributed in a way which has disadvantaged certain sections, principally the poorer sections, of the local population.
As the example of housing palpably shows, conflict arises in the most acute form where these resources are in short supply and where all social groups are competing in pursuit of the same objective.
Unfortunately, one of these resources is the very countryside itself, which is subject to increasing pressure from the competing demands of the rural population.
Friction between locals and newcomers has been as much a function of this as of any other factor, a conflict between the aesthetic appreciation of the qualities of the English countryside and a utilitarian assessment of its productive capacity.
This is a conflict of interest which cannot easily be overcome and hardly augurs well for the future reconciliation of the differences between the agricultural and non-agricultural rural population.
Indeed the concerns of land use and access have become the most pressing public issue relating to rural areas in the 1970s.
Environmentalism and the countryside
During the last decade or so a wide range of what were once considered to be mundane or esoteric problems concerning the English countryside have been thrust to the forefront of public attention by the apparently sudden and widespread increase in anxiety about ‘the environment’.
Thus what began as a specific and separate set of issues involving such matters as landscape change, pesticide use, urban and industrial development, resource depletion, recreational demand and the preservation of rare flora and fauna have been linked together in a much more comprehensive debate about environmental matters.
As a result, what is often loosely referred to as the ‘environmental movement’ or ‘the environmental lobby’now encompasses an enormous range of groups from anarchic ‘eco-freaks’to establishment institutions like the Countryside Commission and from small, parochial amenity societies to multi-national pressure groups like Friends of the Earth.
During the last years of the 1960s environmentalism also became fashionable, transforming the esteem granted to those individuals and organizations seen to be upholding ‘environmental’ values.
Ecology, for example, had hitherto been granted a rather lowly status by professional scientists on account of its association with the kind of amateur botanical pursuits beloved of Victorian country vicars.
Now ecologists found themselves the veritable gurus of our age.
Similarly bodies such as the Council for the Protection of Rural England, often depicted as the last refuge of ex-Etonian Guards officers and assorted upper-class cranks, was able to speak with a new confidence and a new authority, attract a new breed of membership and turn itself into a highly professional custodian of the English countryside.
It was little wonder, then, that one leading ecologist, Max Nicholson, was able to speak, with pardonable hyperbole, of an ‘environmental revolution’.
As our awareness of ‘the environment’ has gown, so has the  meaning given to the term expanded until it has come to signify the whole of the non-cultural world.
We are now faced with a situation, therefore, in which the debate about ‘the environment’ has become so wide-ranging that it has impinged upon almost every aspect of contemporary industrial society.
Consequently it is neither possible nor appropriate in a book of this kind to analyse all of the issues which currently preoccupy environmentalists-It will be necessary instead to limit our discussion to only those aspects of environmentalism which are immediately relevant to current social changes in rural England.
This excludes such important matters as the threatened global environmental crisis, personified by the ‘doom-watch’ school of thought, and a whole range of peculiarly urban problems relating to redevelopment, transport and industrial pollution.
Within these limitations, however, an amorphous and diverse spread of topics remains to be explored, particularly since a persistent theme of this chapter will be to emphasize that environmentalism in rural England is not simply a technological or ecological affair, but a social, political and even philosophical question, too.
For example, it is arguable that the qualitative change which engendered an environmental movement in the early 1960s involved not so much the presence of environmental destruction as the fact that the new forms of pollution and disruption became much more difficult, if not impossible, to avoid.
A simple piece of historical reflection will show that industrialization rendered many localities virtually uninhabitable as long as two hundred years ago.
However, it was always possible for the rich and the powerful to isolate themselves from the consequences of industrial growth by moving away from the factory areas to the more tranquil and less squalid atmosphere of the countryside.
This demonstrates that the combination of ‘amenities’ which constitutes the rural environment is what Fred Hirsch, in his book The Social Limits to Growth , calls a ‘positional good’— that is, something which is fixed in supply and whose consumption is dependent upon one's position in society.
Positional goods, therefore, come into the hands of the early rich.
As in the case of all positional goods, however, those features of the rural environment that are so widely admired can only be retained if access to them by other social groups can somehow be restricted.
In other words, a positional good cannot be shared without losing some of its value; consequently as the countryside became more  accessible during the 1960s, thanks mainly to increasing car ownership, so the value of the rural environment began to fall to those already in possession — and they quickly mobilized to defend their interests.
Stanley Johnson puts this point most forcefully in his book The Politics of the Environment :
The title of the movement launched in this country is not without significance.
It was called ‘The Countryside in 1970’ because the mood of the time was predominantly one of unease and anxiety about what was happening to the countryside.
The fact that the patron of the movement was the Duke of Edinburgh is also not without significance.
Whatever evolutions took place in later years, a good deal of impetus in those early days came from the middle and upper-middle classes.
These people, owners of homes and second homes in rural England, sensed the threat or alien hordes, closed ranks, and, as is customary, looked to royalty to sanctify their cause.
As far as decent environments were concerned, they were the ‘haves’ and they wanted to keep it that way.
They themselves might ‘motor’ down to their country retreat at the weekends but they looked with signal disfavour on the idea that the vast mass of the populace might enjoy a similar mobility and have access to pleasures which for the moment were peculiarly their own.
Of course, we should not be surprised that pressure groups pursue self-interested aims — that is usually why they are created.
Neither does the fact that private and publicly espoused interests occasionally coincide render those interests illegitimate on that account alone.
However, it is perhaps significant that environmentalism received little attention as long as it was only the poor and the powerless who suffered from the detritus of industrial society.
By the 1960s, on the other hand, it was becoming increasingly difficult for those further up the social scale to avoid the consequences of industrialization any longer— even by indulging in rural retreatism.
So perhaps more instrumental in influencing the spread of environmentalism in England than the writings of apocalyptic ‘doom-watchers’ were such factors as the widespread construction of motorways — which, because they were routed around rather than through cities, shattered the peace of so many middle-class localities — and the changes in agricultural technology which altered the ecology and the landscape of extensive areas of rural England.
In the intervening years the environmental lobby has probably gathered a broader basis of support, although, as we shall see later  in this chapter, the values which are upheld are often more sectional than many environmentalists might suppose.
Those who wish to preserve the traditional features of the English countryside have, however, been extremely successful in alerting public and political opinion and have gained an increasing adherence — at least in principle — to conservationist values.
Nevertheless, the peculiar quality of the rural environment as a ‘positional good’ ensures that environmental conflict remains part of the ‘politics of affluence’.
The long-standing resistance to urban and industrial encroachment continues, but increasingly in recent years the defenders of the rural environment have found themselves fighting on two fronts.
Not only have they continued vigilantly to oppose the many external threats to the countryside, but they have developed an awareness that the rural environment is also being subverted from within — by farmers and landowners, and the demands of modern agricultural practice.
By 1973 one of the leading figures of the environmental lobby, Sir Colin Buchanan, felt it necessary to accuse farmers, in a speech to the CPRE, of being ‘the most ruthless section of the business community’.
As he put it: ‘The planners and the road engineers have had a good bashing, but they have learnt their lesson.
The real danger to the countryside now lies in the agricultural community.’
Agriculture and ecology
We can date the beginning of the disillusionment with agriculture as a force for rural conservation fairly precisely: the publication of Rachel Carson's Silent Spring in 1962.
With relentless detail she documented the effects that the petrochemical ‘elixirs of death’—; the pesticides which farmers still regard as an integral part of modern agriculture — were wreaking on the wildlife of the countryside.
Although not unaware of the benefits in increased production which the new agrochemicals had allowed, she drew attention, in a passionate book, to the long-term dangers: With words like these Rachel Carson placed farming practice at the centre of what was to be an often rancorous controversy about the compatibility of efficient, profitable and cheap food production with the ecological balance of the countryside.
As we have already seen in the previous chapter, this conflict has also been reinforced by the social changes which have occurred in rural areas, so that disputes concerning environmental preservation often coincide with local — newcomer, rural — urban, and agricultural — industrial divisions in the rural population.
There is a good deal of evidence to show that the reinforcing nature of these divisions has helped to perpetuate the conflict between farmers and environmentalists.
Agriculture, by definition, involves a disturbance of the natural ecology.
Indeed, most forms of agriculture do not so much disturb the natural environment as destroy it and replace it by a manmade artefact.
Rachel Carson realized this: her argument was based not upon idyllic sentiment, but upon the fear that the artefact which modern agriculture was creating was neither safe nor to our own long-term advantage.
Her attack was not therefore directed towards the use of pesticides in general, but towards their indiscriminate use — particularly of organo-chloride insecticides.
These were entirely novel synthetic substances and no species (including man) had acquired any previous experience of them.
When they were first introduced they were an enormous boon to the farmer and the initial response was almost euphoric.
The most common, the insecticide DDT, was very stable, had a very low toxicity to humans and was cheap to manufacture.
It was used extensively during the Second World War, and is still used in parts of the Third World to help eradicate malaria and typhus.
DDT was followed by other organo-chlorides, including aldrin, isodrin, entrin, and dieldrin, which was widely used in Britain as a sheep-dip and as a seed dressing.
When they were introduced the mechanisms by which these insecticides worked was not known, but their low acute toxicity and, above all, their stability appeared to make them safe to use.
Yet it was this very stability which made them so potentially harmful, for their effects upon a whole ecosystem, as opposed to an individual species, were not considered before they were adopted and so, as farmers enthusiastically seized the opportunities which these new insecticides offered, little thought was given to any possible chain reaction which might follow.
It was left to Rachel Carson to bring to the attention of a wider public just what the unintended consequences might be.
The most widely publicized of these consequences involved the accumulation of DDT and other organo-chlorides in the food chain.
So stable were these chemical compounds that they were passed on from prey to predator by their accumulation in fatty tissue, involving a metabolic process which led to higher concentrations as the insecticide was passed along the chain.
The very stability which so commended itself to farmers — any transient compound is less useful in agriculture unless it can be applied directly to the pest — was the factor which so alarmed ecologists.
In Britain Rachel Carson's vision of a ‘silent spring’ provided a potent symbol of the dangers.
While many hitherto disinterested onlookers could, perhaps, stomach the loss of several insect species (even dragonflies and butterflies), there were few who were not moved by the prospect of extermination for a number of species of birds.
Those under threat also included some of the most majestic of all birds — the golden eagle, the peregrine falcon — because, as birds of prey, they were at the head of the food chain.
The danger was not so much from direct poisoning, but from the effect of sublethal doses of organo-chlorides on eggshell thinning.
This produced a spectacular decline in the number of birds successfully reared and eventually in the total population of adult birds.
For example, in those areas where golden eagles fed extensively on carrion sheep which had been dipped in dieldrin, the proportion of pairs successfully rearing young fell from 72 per cent to 29 per cent during the late 1950s.
Similarly, the number of peregrine falcons was more than halved between 1939 and 1963.
Much of this decline again occurred in the late 1950s, when aldrin and dieldrin were introduced as seed dressings, and was almost certainly due to peregrines eating pigeons which had fed on the seed.
by no means all species of raptors suffered in this way, but sufficient alarm was engendered to lead to demands that organo-chlorides be prohibited.
Restrictions were placed on the use of aldrin and dieldrin as seed dressings in 1962 and the use of dieldrin as a sheep dip was restricted in 1966.
When DDT was found to have carcinogenic properties it, too, was restricted.
However, the persistence of organo-chlorides  in the environment has ensured that the rate of recovery of affected species has been slow.
Fortunately continuing research by agrochemical manufacturers has to a large extent enabled the persistent organo-chlorides to be suspended.
Modern pesticides are often more selective and less persistent in their effects and thus less environmentally hazardous.
Nevertheless the indirect ecological effects cannot always be foreseen.
Some pesticides, for example, have encouraged the development of mutant strains of pests, like the famed ‘super-rats’ resistant to Warfarin or DDT-resistant mosquitoes.
Others have had a boomerang effect by wiping out natural predators or by obligingly clearing the habitat for another, though equally troublesome, pest-Herbicides which killed poppies in wheatfields cleared the way for wild oats, so that until the (very expensive) sprays had been developed to cope with them, a trip through the eastern counties in midsummer could create the strong impression that oats had made a spectacular comeback as a cereals crop.
Pests therefore continue to flourish despite the widespread application of pesticides, although ironically this occurs within the context of a general impoverishment of the wildlife of the countryside.
Indeed recent research has suggested that the outbreak of infestations by cereals aphids is inversely correlated with species diversity, so that the trend towards monoculture and the reduction of natural predators may have increased the risk of sudden epidemics.
Ecologists with a morbid sense of déjà vu have even warned of the possibility of modern equivalents of the Irish potato famine, while those with more fertile imaginations have invoked science fiction fantasies of plagues of mutant insects devastating the countryside.
The more lurid and alarmist versions may perhaps be discounted, but they have fed the popular distrust of the use of artificial chemicals in agriculture and this, however much farmers may deplore the fact, has become an important factor in the politics of environmentalism.
The use of chemicals in agriculture is not limited to pesticides.
Paradoxically the ecological problems deriving from the application of artificial fertilizers are often equally complex and extensive.
Fertilizer encourages weeds as well as crops to grow, so the increasing use of fertilizer promotes the increasing use of selective herbicides.
If this seems an abstruse form of cultivation it is not one that is limited to modern agriculture, but can be found in many  suburban gardens where, acre for acre, the concentrations of both fertilizer and pesticide are higher than on the average arable farm.
Nevertheless, the sheer quantity of nitrate fertilizer that is applied to much farmland — and it has increased five times since the 1930s —; creates problems from the surface run-off of rainwater which finds its way into drainage channels and ditches and eventually into streams and rivers.
Here the nitrate contributes to ‘entrophication’—; the excessive growth of vegetation and algae in the water.
Over-abundant growth may selectively promote a few aquatic plants to the detriment of others, clog the water-course and reduce the number of fish and other aquatic creatures (and hence their predators).
This has created particular problems in parts of the Norfolk Broads, for example.
A more sinister development is the seepage of nitrate into aquifers which are used as sources of the domestic water supply.
During the drought of 1976 this resulted in an unusually high concentration of nitrate in the aquifers under parts of East Anglia and warnings were issued in some areas that babies should be given only bottled water to drink.
Since it may take decades for water to percolate into these aquifers the problem is a long-term one, and bearing in mind the increasing use of artificial fertilizer since the war, one which may return.
Controversy has also surrounded the long-term effects of artificial fertilizer on the soil structure.
This is an issue surrounded by farming lore and even prejudice, which is often at odds with scientific investigation, and this, together with the extreme variability of soil conditions in England, makes any generalized assessment virtually impossible.
In some cases cultivation maintains a good soil structure, while in others it may break it down, and what constitutes a ‘good’ soil structure may depend upon its mineral composition and upon the use to which it is put.
Much of the recent discussion about soil structure has centred on the decline of its organic matter content, particularly in the arable areas, following the decline of outdoor grazing and mixed farming patterns, the replacement of animal manure by artificial fertilizer and the use of heavy machinery to apply it.
The fear that is often expressed is that these new forms of cultivation will result in soil conditions analogous to the Oklahoma ‘Dust Bowl’ of the 1930s.
Occasional springtime dust storms in the Fens are even invoked as an ominous example, although these are caused by the drying out of the peat soils and have occurred since  the Fens were drained in the seventeenth century.
(Nor, incidentally, are ‘Fenland Blows’ caused by the absence of hedgerows — another common belief; conventional hedges are simply not tall enough to be effective, only shelter belts of poplars or other tall trees.)
However, an inquiry by the Agricultural Advisory Council in 1973 revealed that the use of artificial fertilizer and the deficiency of organic matter in light sandy soils increased the risk of wind erosion in parts of the Midlands and East Anglia.
Although this has led some farmers to renounce the more extreme forms of continuous cropping, the new minimum cultivation methods (described in Chapter 3) may allow a return to monoculture on suitable light soils.
By eliminating ploughing, soil disturbance is kept to a minimum and wind erosion is reduced by the fact that the soil is never without either a crop cover or a binding layer of roots.
The number of occasions on which heavy machinery must be driven across the land is also reduced, although compaction and ‘panning’ are more of a problem on heavy clay soils which are not prone to wind erosion.
Nevertheless, minimum cultivation methods are much more dependent upon agrochemicals, especially herbicides, so there are few benefits for wildlife.
Modern farmers are often accused of ‘soil-mining’ rather than farming — of not replacing the fertility which they extract from the soil by a balanced rotation of crop and animal husbandry.
Be that as it may, there is certainly one sense in which modern agriculture literally, albeit indirectly, mines the earth: by its increasing dependence on fossil-based fuels.
Although in principle agriculture ought to be a net producer of energy, converting the sun's energy into the calorific value of food, modern agriculture is actually a net consumer.
We are consequently eating up our energy resources.
Apart from the fuel used directly to power farm equipment and to transport food, processed or unprocessed, to the consumer, the fertilizers and pesticides which are an integral part of modern cultivation methods are overwhelmingly derivatives of oil.
The increasing specialization of modern agriculture means that while arable farmers use over one million tons of artificial fertilizer each year, intensive livestock producers experience considerable difficulties in disposing of their animal waste.
Our energy resources would go literally down the drain if many water authorities, worried by the pollution problem, did not force farmers to find other methods of disposal.
Nevertheless modern  agriculture's contribution to the energy crisis is that each of us eats the equivalent of approximately 100 gallons of petrol each year.
The amount is comparatively small — in a crisis it could be met simply by placing a ban on Sunday motoring — and with the proximity of North Sea oil it does not present an immediate problem.
But it hardly offers a long-term solution to the problem of resource depletion.
As oil resources become more scarce by the end of the century, can agriculture continue in its present form?
And at what cost to the consumer?
Such thoughts do not immediately exercise the minds of farmers, but they are becoming concerned by the rises in the price of fertilizer and other oil-based inputs and by their own powerlessness in the face of ‘agribusiness’ corporations, which was referred to in Chapter 3.
So the dependence on agrochemicals and the effect which this has on the ecology of the countryside are not simply the moral responsibility of the individual farmer.
It involves the whole political economy of modern agriculture — and that includes consumers and politicians as well as producers.
This point can be more clearly illustrated by considering the prolonged controversy surrounding the effects of modern farming methods on the rural landscape-This has created as much, if not more, acrimony between farming and environmental interests in recent years, with the destruction of traditional landscape features replacing the extermination of birds of prey as a rallying point for public attention.
This shift in emphasis has taken place partly because the restrictions on the use of organo-chloride pesticides introduced in the 1960s have enabled some of the more extreme threats to wildlife preservation to recede and partly because pesticide manufacturers countered nature conservationist claims that they were responsible for the reduction in bird population by arguing that hedgerow and woodland removal could be the prime culprits.
The relevant pressure groups maintain their vigilance, but during the 1970s the changes in the rural landscape, especially in the lowlands, have become much more visible and have certainly received much more publicity.
These changes have been touched upon several times in this book already and the reasons for them were considered in Chapter 3.
They relate basically to the widespread changes which have occurred in agricultural technology and husbandry techniques during the ‘second agricultural revolution’ of the last thirty years.
Where these changes have been most extensive, the landscape has  reflected them.
Therefore it is not surprising that the lowlands landscape has changed most, especially in arable areas, for farming in the lowlands has been subject to the most thoroughgoing technological changes.
The factors which lie behind the removal of trees and hedgerows, the erection of new and imposing farm buildings and the ploughing up of downland and heath were listed in Chapter 3: increasing mechanization, increasing labour costs, the introduction of more intensive livestock systems and the drive towards maximizing crop production on an expensively priced capital asset.
The upland areas have suffered fewer changes, but this is not to say that the upland landscape has remained unaltered.
Fell and moorland have been cleared of bracken and heather in order to provide extra grassland and, most notoriously, the ‘serried ranks’ of conifers have marched across the hillsides.
In all areas the sustained prosperity of British agriculture since the war has encouraged farmers to expand their output by taking marginal areas of land into cultivation.
Yet, as we remarked in Chapter 1, it is the agriculturally marginal which is often, by prevailing urban aesthetic standards, the most picturesque.
The nature of the rural landscape is, of course, inextricably linked to the variety of wildlife species which it supports and the removal of traditional landscape features — hedgerows, trees, ponds, marshes, even permanent pasture — necessarily involves the destruction of wildlife habitats.
The urban daytripper and the village newcomer have therefore found common cause with the ecologist to greet these landscape changes with bitter resentment.
Farmers have in turn responded to this hostility with a mixture of anger, contempt and disdain.
The anger has arisen because most farmers believe that the allegations that they are ‘ruining’ the countryside are exaggerated and too indiscriminate.
This indignation is also accompanied by a contempt for the ‘ignorant’ protectionist who, many farmers allege, has no knowledge or understanding of modern agriculture, and especially of the economics of food production.
Farmers are quick to point out that the desire to retain hedgerows and other familiar landscape features emanates from exactly that social group — the ‘urban mass’— whose demands for cheap food have indirectly brought about those changes which they so deplore.
The farmer therefore accuses the preservationist of hypocrisy.
However, the charge is often returned by environmentalists who note how much  farmers pride themselves on being ‘stewards’ of the English countryside for the benefit of future generations and for the nation at large, but then deny the right of anyone else to have a say in how it should be maintained for them.
Drawing upon the historical legacy of an independent yeomanry the farmer will then reply that no one is going to tell him how to run his farm or meddle in his affairs and that environmentalist ‘busybodies’ should go and mind their own business.
Needless to say, once the battle lines have been drawn in this way, there tends to be a deterioration in relationships all round.
Those organizations, most notably the Countryside Commission, which have earnestly attempted to reconcile the viewpoints of farmers and environmentalists have had a hard time.
Once the stereotypes have been established there has been a tendency towards self-fulfilling prophecy in the behaviour of each side towards the other.
Farmers, their pride stung, can easily become aggressively unhelpful to even the most politely worded and well-reasoned appeal to curb some of the unnecessarily destructive aspects of their farming practices.
Equally it must be understood that there are many farmers who perpetrate these changes with genuine personal regret, but who feel compelled to do so by economic circumstances.
Many experience a sense of guilt at taking out a hedge or destroying a copse of trees for purely economic reasons and farmers, no less than anyone else, do not like to be reminded of something which, in the abstract, they might find difficult to justify.
Touched on a raw nerve, they can react accordingly.
The hostility which farmers have recently provoked from many environmentalists also helps to confirm them in their characteristic persecution complex, associated with being a small, closely knit minority in an urban industrial society.
Any attempts to persuade farmers of the necessity of environmental conservation must take all these factors into account.
However, it would be quite mistaken to regard the conflict over farming and the environment as stemming from a ‘breakdown of communications’, to use the fashionable cliché, because a direct conflict of interest is also involved.
It is arguable that if each side could communicate its opinions more clearly to the other, the resulting conflict would be even more embittered.
Farmers regard the landscape as a factor of production and a source of profit; supporters of the environmental movement, on the other hand, look upon the countryside as a source of visual pleasure and as a habitat for wildlife — as something to be ‘consumed’.
As long as this aesthetic appreciation does not coincide with profitable necessity then this conflict will remain.
If this perspective is adopted, environmentalists ought perhaps to be grateful for the fact that the vast majority of farmers are not more economically rational when they come to organize the husbandry of their farms and that the inertia introduced by the historical pattern of landownership and farm structure in this country has acted as a brake on landscape change.
A landscape determined solely by what is most profitable under current conditions would look very different from that which exists today, despite the rapid changes which have recently taken place.
There is, for example, virtually no economic justification for retaining any hedgerows at all on the majority of farms in the southern and eastern counties of England.
Indeed it has been estimated that the presence of hedgerows reduces the output of cereals farms by up to 15 per cent.
As we have already seen, they are no protection against wind erosion, which can in any case be overcome by other means, and even if there are stock grazing on the fields a movable fence is more efficient, convenient and requires less maintenance.
Hedges also obstruct farm machinery, rob crops of food and water and shade the crop, producing uneven growth and preventing it from drying out at harvest.
Moreover, the roots from trees and hedges clog drains and hinder the plough.
It is little wonder, then, that until quite recently the Ministry of Agriculture, mindful of its responsibility to increase the production of as much cheap food as possible, gave grants to farmers for hedgerow removal.
But what is more remarkable is that so many farmers were sentimental (and some impecunious) enough to keep their hedgerows in for so long.
As Nan Fairbrother points out in New Lives, New Landscapes :
It is useless trying to justify [hedgerows and]trees in terms of farming, for such unreal arguments are no protection against ten-ton bulldozers, and our wartime farmer had no illusions about the trees on his farm.
Every one of them, he said, lost him money every year; he kept them because he liked them, and because he had no children and could afford to indulge his old age.
Possibly the only use for hedgerows today is that they help to keep people and litter out of fields, rather than animals in, but if hedges and trees were uneconomic during the war, how much more so are they today?
The logical arable landscape is therefore the prairie and, no matter how much this type of landscape may be deplored, the economics of modern food production are compelling more and more farmers to create it.
From a relatively small base among the most profit-conscious farmers of Lincolnshire and East Anglia, a prairie landscape has spread to other farms and to other areas.
As more animals have been brought inside by the introduction of intensive feeding systems, so more land has been given up to arable production.
During the 1960s the barley acreage doubled and an increase was recorded in every county in England.
The arable/pastoral boundary also began to creep northwards and westwards as a result of more land being brought into arable cultivation so that counties like Nottinghamshire, Northamptonshire, Berkshire, Wiltshire and Hampshire recorded some of the highest increases.
What is happening is that the English rural landscape is slowly becoming divided into three major types in the lowlands.
These are listed by Nan Fairbrother as follows:
One is intensive arable as in the Fens, New Holland in Lincolnshire, and on much of the chalk; there are few or no hedges or trees, but open country with no sense of enclosure or division.
Simply the land surface with level crops emphasising the smoothness of the worked earth.
The second type of rural landscape is the traditional mixed farm…but mechanised and often enlarged.
This is common in the Midlands…; the smaller fields have been run together and evened-off, but the old pattern is still recognisable in its new mechanised version.
There are hedges still, but low now and neatly clipped, many of the small woods and copses have gone, and most of the trees in the hedges are the ageing survivors of enclosure planting.
It is only a matter or time before they die…and there are few new sapling in these machine-cut hedges to replace them, even if farmers wanted them.
The third type or landscape is the predominantly Bass farm with animals on permanent pasture, and this is still common in a belt running north-south from Lancashire to Dorset and into the south-west.
Here the fields are small…and the hedges often tall and deep, leafy with trees of all ages as hedgerow saplings grow up to replace the dying giants….
It is the least mechanised of our farming scenery, the least efficient and the most resistant to change because of the multiple ownership and the often rented holdings.
The distinctions are not, of course, quite as clearcut as this, since considerable local variations remain, particularly around urban  centres and on the very poor soils of little agricultural significance.
However, this represents the shape of things to come, with the first type increasingly in the ascendancy aided and abetted by the demand for cheap food and the agricultural policies of successive governments aimed at ensuring the expansion of home production.
In the lowlands it is the prosperity of agriculture which is contributing to landscape change by allowing increasing investment in new capital-intensive forms of production.
In the uplands, on the other hand, the greatest threats to the traditional landscape arise out of poverty, neglect and decay.
As we have seen in Chapter 3 marginal farmers engaged in sheep and beef cattle rearing dominate the upland areas, and many of them are on a ‘deferred death sentence’.
The resulting poverty is occasionally picturesque — as in the case of antiquated farm buildings — but broken walls, derelict farmsteads and scrub-covered hillsides often present grotesque eyesores.
Within the context of current agricultural policies there are sound economic and social reasons for abandoning farming altogether over large areas of the uplands and using the land for other purposes which would both be profitable and create employment.
It has been estimated that up to one-third of hill land could grow timber and the aim is to increase the forestry acreage by 60 per cent by the end of the century.
But just as the removal of trees from the lowlands has created considerable opposition from environmentalists so has the policy of planting them across the hillsides.
Much of the Forestry Commission's early planting was certainly crude and insensitive, but in recent years it has become more attentive to its landscaping responsibilities (not least because the Forestry Commission has found that there is money to be made out of tourism if it does so) and now employs landscape consultants to advise on its planting policies.
As long as trees are more profitable than sheep and beef cattle and as long as softwoods are more profitable than hardwoods, the trend towards conifer-covered hills will continue.
Sheep-mown hills can only be retained where sheep farming prospers; otherwise the hillsides will revert to equally disfiguring scrub as farms are eventually abandoned.
The upland areas have already suffered extensive depopulation because the local agricultural economy will no longer support the standard of living which their inhabitants quite reasonably demand.
It is both unfair and unrealistic to expect those who remain to make further sacrifices in order to  service the sensibilities of visitors.
As in the lowlands, the traditional landscape has to some extent been preserved by the economic irrationality of farmers — although in the uplands it consists of their ability to hold on against all the odds rather than disavow the pursuit of maximum profits.
To anyone committed to the preservation of the traditional landscape of rural England, much of this must make gloomy reading.
Certainly the landscape will continue to change in response to new technological factors and the evolving structure of the agricultural industry.
The idea of a static and unchanging countryside is a misreading of history and, as far as the future is concerned, a totally unrealistic expectation-As long as we, as consumers, demand cheap food and as long as this demand is implemented by state-directed agricultural policies, the end product will be the disappearance of the traditional rural landscape and associated farm buildings.
However, the conflict between modern farming practice and environmental conservation is by no means an irreconcilable one and, although entrenched positions have been taken up on both sides, there are now a few signs of a more sophisticated awareness of the Problems involved and a more constructive desire on the part of both farming organizations and the environmental lobby to overcome them.
It is, for example, quite mistaken to believe that all farmers are hostile towards environmentalism.
The gentleman farmer has long sought to preserve the aesthetic qualities of the English countryside and has provided the backbone of the CPRE.
There are, moreover, many small farmers who prefer to follow a traditional ‘way of life’ and abjure the profit maximization that often provides landscape change.
The most aggressively anti-environmentalist farmers are probably the agribusinessmen who allow little to stand in the way of enhanced profit margins and who are largely indifferent to aesthetic considerations.
Nevertheless, the majority of farmers engage in landscape change as a result of the economic constraints imposed upon their farming practice rather than as a result of any personal whim.
Only those who can afford to ignore these constraints feel capable of exercising a choice to retain a more traditional agricultural landscape.
This suggests that the attitudes of farmers towards environmental conservation are considerably more complicated than the stereotypes adopted by the more extreme members of the environmental lobby would suggest.
by no means all farmers are as  antipathetic to the conservationist case as is sometimes assumed, but eventually they must all make a living.
Taking these factors into account, there have recently been put forward several imaginative proposals aimed at encouraging farmers and landowners to create a more aesthetically pleasing landscape.
The Countryside Commission, for example, has funded an extensive research programme in both the lowlands and the uplands in order to assess the extent of existing landscape change and to demonstrate how profitable farming and an attractive countryside may be combined.
The lowlands study New Agricultural Landscapes by Richard Westmacott and Tom Worthington was published in 1974.
Based on a series of case studies in seven counties, it confirms that the most significant change in the arable landscape has been the loss of hedgerows and trees, but the authors argue that the present landscape is not always inferior to that of the past.
A careful rearrangement of field patterns may actually enhance the natural contours of the landscape and, although the indigenous wildlife may be seriously affected, the ‘new agricultural landscapes’ may be both functional and aesthetically pleasing.
Westmacott and Worthington argue that an essentially voluntary scheme of advice and persuasion within the present system of agricultural advisory services can enable such a landscape to be fashioned.
Moreover, the Countryside Commission's own favoured policy is to promote landscape agreements and tree-planting schemes in cooperation with sympathetic farmers and landowners.
The major problem with essentially voluntary schemes like these, however, is that they appeal to only those farmers who arc already convinced environmentalists.
They are unlikely to influence those farmers — such as agribusinessmen — who react most readily, and most exclusively, to financial incentives; and these are usually precisely those farmers who wreak the greatest landscape change.
Agribusinessmen, for example, are unlikely to be moved by permissive policies: for them the creation of a desired landscape must either be profitable or unavoidable.
And as the economic constraints push more and more farmers towards the rationalization of their enterprises the proportion of farmers (and of the countryside) to whom this applies is likely to increase.
This suggests that some system of control must be introduced if farmers are to be persuaded to retain the wildlife habitats or landscape features which they would otherwise destroy.
The problem is  that there is little agreement over how this control should operate and what form it should take.
The Countryside Act of 1968 allowed local authorities to take a more positive role in environmental conservation and gave the Countryside Commission general responsibility for safeguarding the rural landscape.
Despite some notable local successes, the results have, however, been disappointing: certainly little impact appears to have been made upon the laissez-faire attitude of the farmer towards his own property.
By the mid-1970s the general policy of winning the confidence of the farming organizations and working on the basis of persuasion and advice was being increasingly questioned.
But there has remained considerable disagreement over the most viable alternative — financial incentive or state compulsion.
Some forms of incentive are feasible — for example, the attachment of landscape conditions to agricultural grants — but would be difficult to operate in practice without a comprehensive (and expensive) advisory service to back them up.
Any such proposal would almost certainly provoke resistance from the NFU and CLA who have hitherto ensured that their members remain largely outside the scope of town and country planning legislation and who would be suspicious of ‘bureaucratic interference’.
The outcry would undoubtedly be even greater if some form of compulsion were involved, such as placing the rural landscape under the same kind of protective legislation as already exists for ‘listed’ buildings so that farmers would have to notify the local planning authority of any intention to remove a protected landscape feature, such as a hedgerow or a section of heath.
It is by no means clear how farmers would react to any system which threatened to control their freedom to do as they please with their own land.
There is also little evidence to show that farmers welcome an opportunity to become glorified park wardens or landscape gardeners — nor, indeed, have they the necessary skills to do so.
Although there have been a number of successful experiments in providing advice to farmers at the ‘grass roots’— most notably the Upland Management Scheme in the Lake District — farmers still remain suspicious of environmentalists however sympathetic they may be to environmentalism.
This suspicion runs very deep.
It is not simply xenophobia, but a reluctance to admit any other ‘proprietary interest’, including that of the environmental lobby, into the control of private property.
Any infringement of the owner's exclusive rights will be resisted, and for this reason, if no other, attempts to provide a planned resolution of the conflict between farming and the environment will prove difficult.
Fortunately many nature reserves and other wildlife refuges are situated on land of little agricultural value; and many farmers can still be persuaded to retain important and irretrievable landscape features if only they are informed of their unique significance.
But in the future a diverse ecology will only be able to coexist with an efficient agriculture within the context of a planned land-use strategy, and such an attempt to resolve the various and conflicting demands on the countryside cannot be successful without farmers surrendering at least some of their freedom of action to do as they wish with their own land.
It is not, therefore, simply bloody-mindedness which will lead some farmers to resist planning controls over the rural landscape; it will be a defence, however tenuous, of the interest of private property — and that, needless to say, is an interest which is fundamental to the fabric of contemporary English society.
The essentially political nature of this issue is rarely addressed publicly and explicitly, but sooner or later a decision will have to be made over whether or not those in possession of the rural landscape should be forced to cede some of their control.
In the meantime, the rationalization of agriculture continues.
The resolution of the many conflicts between farmers and environmentalists remains a hit-and-miss affair.
A tactful environmental lobby, a sympathetic farmer and a smattering of goodwill on both sides may continue to produce encouraging results.
But for how long?
In the final analysis a farmer must make a profit and all the economic pressures on farmers will eventually lead them to place agriculture before environmental conservation.
So a conflict of interest remains.
Already, for example, birds of prey which are saved from accidental poisoning by pesticides are being deliberately shot, trapped or poisoned as their numbers increase once more .
Voluntary landscape agreements have not saved acres of hedgerows, heath or woodland and even those trees that remain in lowland England are an ageing population because insufficient planting has taken place over the past thirty years.
Therefore the fundamental problem of property rights cannot be evaded indefinitely.
Although most farmland is privately owned the landscape is publicly consumed.
As a result we all feel we should have a say in its appearance, but as yet we have no right to be heard.
This is a much older problem and one which  precedes the rise of environmentalism, because in addition to the environmental lobby the exclusive rights of the farmer have long been under threat from another source — the massed ranks of the urban population, intent on using the countryside as a source of recreation and determined to gain access to what they consider to be semi-public territory.
Recreation and access
The vast majority of farmers and landowners take an inordinate pride in the countryside and will show off their land to the occasional interested and respectful visitor.
But when visitors to the countryside are considered en masse rather than on an individual basis, then the farmer's traditional nervousness towards the urban population begins to take over.
In moments of mature reflection the farmer may pity the ‘townie’— a pity based upon what the farmer regards as the dehumanized and alienating quality of life in the larger cities — but that genuine twinge of concern is easily swept aside by the nightmare of being ‘invaded’, ‘swamped’ or ‘overrun’by a ‘mass’of ‘ignorant’daytrippers and holidaymakers.
Some of these fears have been forged out of bitter experience.
Many of the problems associated with the uncontrolled access to farmland are long-standing and have been enshrined in the Country Code, the list of ‘do's and don'ts’ concerning open gates, litter, dogs which worry livestock, fire risks and so on.
However, recent trends in farming practice have made agriculture even more incompatible with uncontrolled recreation.
Intensive livestock methods increase the susceptibility of animals to diseases easily spread by humans, and visitors threaten good farm hygiene; and the danger can easily be reversed — some farming operations, particularly spraying, threaten visitors.
So farmers increasingly object to visitors ‘roaming all over’ their land and will point out with some vehemence that they would not be allowed, nor even expect to be allowed, the same licence to wander around urban factories.
For the exasperated livestock farmer, with fears for the future of his pig unit or broiler house, for the fruit-grower alarmed by the possibility of a poisonous spray inadvertently finding its way into the metabolism of a casual passerby, and for the cereals farmer who does not take kindly to his best malting barley being trampled down in order to create an impromptu picnic site, the simplest  solution is to go in for siege tactics.
Up go the ‘Trespassers Will Be Prosecuted’ and ‘Keep Out’signs, the extra barbed wire is ordered and the shotgun is cleaned and prepared.
Those who dare to venture off public rights of way find themselves harassed and evicted.
As a further disincentive footpaths may suddenly disappear under the plough or new fences are erected across them, signposts mysteriously vanish and perhaps an unsociable bull is (illegally) posted in a field transversed by a path.
Once again the battle lines are drawn.
The ensuing conflict has been sharpened by the phenomenal growth of outdoor recreation during the last two decades.
Increasing leisure time, thanks to the near-universal introduction of a five-day working week and paid holidays, has combined with increasing affluence to produce a rapid increase in daytrips to the country and, more recently, in the number of long-weekend and off-season holidays.
The Countryside Commission's Digest of Countryside Recreation Statistics charts many of these changes and offers a glimpse of the increasing demands being made on the countryside.
For example, the number of visitors to the Department of the Environment's Ancient Monuments rose from 6.8 million in 1960 to 15.4 million in 1972; visitors to National Trust properties also increased in number from 1.02 million to 3.9 million over the same period.
By the early 1970s it was estimated that there were already over five million campers and caravanners and three million anglers.
Not only are more and more people willing and able to go and look at the countryside, but the trend is towards more active recreational pursuits, involving the more extensive use of space and paralleled by an extension of the time spent there.
Nothing more aptly illustrates the quality of the English countryside as a ‘positional good’.
Millions of us now look to the countryside to ‘get away from it all’, only to find many favoured spots overcrowded by people and traffic as a result.
The place for a quiet picnic on a Bank Holiday is now in the centre of the City of London — few people, little or no traffic and an ample supply of peace and quiet.
Since the countryside is a ‘positional good’, it is hardly surprising to find that the demand for rural leisure activities is socially skewed.
The Digest suggests that managerial, professional and other non-manual workers (social classes AB and CI) are overrepresented by a factor of between two and three, whereas semi- and unskilled manual workers (social class D E) are underrepresented by a factor of three or more.
This is  obviously accounted for in part by the affluence of the higher social classes, but it also reflects their different pattern of recreational preference.
Primarily, though by no means exclusively, it is the English middle class which, somewhat self-consciously, ‘appreciates’ the countryside — and which is determined that others will not ‘spoil’it for them.
In so far as this involves finding more and more ingenious ways of keeping as many people as possible away from unspoilt parts of rural England, there is common ground between some visitors to the countryside and many of those who live and work there.
This goes to show that alliances formed in the conflict over recreation and access to the countryside are by no means the same as those which coalesce over issues of wildlife preservation and landscape change.
Indeed there are even differences of opinion among environmentalists over how this increasing demand upon the countryside is to be accommodated.
Some environmentalists prefer preservation-by-exclusion, so that visitors are rationed because some areas are made deliberately inaccessible (particularly ‘wilderness’ areas) or a toll or entrance fee is imposed, or even, as a last resort (as in the case of most nature reserves), access is made dependent upon the membership of an amenity society and/or the possession of a permit.
A more subtle form of restriction is to proceed by a philosophy akin to that of apartheid .
Environmental bantustans are set aside where virtually unrestricted leisure activity is allowed and even encouraged, so that the surrounding area can be strictly controlled and rationed for those interested in a more solitary appreciation of the countryside.
Thus Bowness-on-Windermere is sacrificed for the greater good of the Lake District or Matlock Bath in the cause of the Peak District.
A third alternative is to keep one step ahead of demand by increasing the provision of rural leisure facilities and expanding the range of choice.
Although arguably the most constructive approach, this is usually the one which creates the greatest controversy.
In the marginal farming areas of the uplands, where revenues from tourism are an important part of the farming economy, farmers may welcome further recreational development, but conservationists are usually more hostile.
In the lowlands both farmers and environmentalists may combine to oppose development, but are often at loggerheads over the issue of access to farmland.
The debate over recreation and access in the countryside therefore easily fragments into a  plethora of parochial disputes, with constantly shifting allegiances and alliances, and one which oscillates between each of these three alternative solutions.
As yet, no coherent policy has emerged, only a confusion of purpose over whether to impose greater restrictions or offer more choice.
Of course, each of these solutions will be valid in particular circumstances.
For example, there may be good grounds for the total exclusion of the public from some nature reserves.
On the other hand, the onus is on those who advocate the view that the countryside offers spiritual uplift to the modern urban dweller to make it more, rather than less, accessible to those who live in towns.
Recent public policy, as exemplified by the Countryside Act of 1968, accurately reflects the dilemma between the belief that ‘the countryside is Good for You’, so that people should be encouraged to visit it, and the necessity of reassuring agricultural and environmental interests.
The Act enabled local authorities to create and administer country parks and picnic sites, thereby expanding choice but directing it towards specially planned recreational reservations.
Their provision has, in any case, varied considerably between different parts of the country, and, because of the precise way in which it has been implemented, the Act has done little to increase the opportunities for rural recreation among the more deprived sections of the urban population.
Consequently most visitors to the countryside continue to come from a fairly circumscribed group of affluent suburban car-owning families while those arguably in greater need are scarcely catered for.
But again there is ambivalence over whether they should be encouraged into the countryside: to the farmer and conservationist alike a vision is conjured up of marauding inner-city teenagers and other undesirable aliens, wreaking havoc in an environment best kept well away from‘those kinds of people’.
In the true manner of a ‘positional good’, the appreciation of the countryside thus continues to depend upon limitations placed upon its accessibility.
Various groups act as social as well as literal gatekeepers to the rewards which rural England has to offer, and visitors are allowed through only on a selective basis.
Isabel Emmett has referred to the formal and informal mechanisms of selection as the ‘social filter in the leisure field’, allowing different groups access to different facilities, more or less easily.
As she points out: Remarkably little research has been carried out on the question of how these filters operate, and by whom they are operated, yet any policies aimed at harmonizing the interests of agriculture, conservation and recreation in the countryside must be based upon an understanding of this problem.
The more sociological aspects of leisure and rural amenity have been overlooked in favour of the purely physical aspects of recreational planning or a mere headcount of who goes where, when and for how long.
Although attempts are being made to remedy this lack of knowledge, there are still many assumptions about recreation and the countryside which are taken as facts.
The biggest myth of all, of course, concerns that of a static and unchanging countryside fighting a rearguard action against urban encroachment, with the corollary that the natural must, by that very fact alone, be superior to the manmade.
When this is combined with a series of élitist and mostly facile generalizations about the ‘swinish multitude’ of unappreciative urbanites prejudice easily hardens to become common ‘knowledge’.
It may be — although we cannot be sure because our knowledge is so uneven — that many of the frequently expressed fears of the effects of expanding leisure opportunities on the countryside are  exaggerated, that well-publicized cases of overcrowding and ecological damage in the Lake District, in parts of the Derbyshire Peak District or on the Downs in Kent and Sussex are localized and atypical rather than the shape of things to come elsewhere.
It is possible, for example, to recall the fears expressed by conservationists in Devon and Somerset during the construction of the M5 beyond Bristol at the prospect of hundreds of thousands of the denizens of Birmingham and the Black Country descending upon Dartmoor and Exmoor.
In the event the vast majority continued to make for the seaside resorts in the area, leaving the conservationists to fend off the more predatory designs of farmers and water authorities.
The unspoken assumption here, as so often elsewhere, was that crowds would impair enjoyment — a typically individualistic assumption which it is taken for granted applies to the entire population.
In fact, it is a value which exists predominantly among only the middle-aged and the middle-class.
Common observation suggests that other social groups enjoy the conviviality and sociability of being part of a crowd and find open spaces ‘with nothing to do’ dead and unappealing.
Moreover, statistics collected by the Countryside Commission suggest that the overwhelming majority of visitors to the countryside venture no more than a couple of hundred yards from their car.
Most of them demand little more than a ‘view with a loo’— a place to park, a cup of tea and adequate toilet facilities.
Nevertheless a peculiar social blindness easily affects environmental judgements: we hear much more about the ‘detrimental character’ of refreshment kiosks than of boathouses and about the erosion of footpaths than the more severe ecological impact of persistent horse-riding or ski-ing.
This may not be unconnected with the social composition of their respective devotees.
It would be foolish, however, to argue that the problems created by the increasing urban demand for recreation in the countryside are entirely illusory or simply a matter of arbitrary taste: they clearly are not.
Nowhere is this more apparent than where access to farmland is most easily accomplished and is least organized — in those rural areas which abut directly on to the main centres of the population: the so-called ‘urban fringe’.
Here the problem of trespass from neighbouring urban areas can be almost a way of life for some harassed farmers with continual problems of damaged or stolen crops, dumped rubbish, damage to fences, gates and farm buildings  and machinery and the worrying of livestock.
Some of this is due to malicious vandalism, but much more interference is probably caused by ignorance or thoughtlessness.
But whatever the cause, there are no benefits for the farmer, only an increasing sense of frustration and anger.
Consequently urban-fringe farmers find themselves taking unusually thorough measures to defend their land against intrusion — extra barbed-wire fencing along boundaries and footpaths, an unsightly rash of warning notices and even electronic detection devices are all employed.
Farmers may even switch their pattern of production in order to minimize the risks — from arable to intensive livestock farming, for example.
Most of the conflicts concerning agriculture and amenity also occur in a particularly acute form on the urban fringe.
Thus urban neighbours may attempt to curb farming operations because of problems of noise or smell.
Farmers growing trees for profit can find a Tree Preservation Order placed on them because they enhance the view from a nearby housing estate.
Spraying crops and burning stubble also provoke outcries from nearby residents.
There are, of course, compensating advantages for urban-fringe farmers — proximity to markets and consumers, the possibility of grafting on lucrative recreational facilities for horse-riding, fishing, shooting, and so on , and not least the prospect of being able to sell out at development value.
However, the experience of farming on the urban fringe illustrates the scale of the problems encountered when urban recreation and agriculture are indiscriminately mixed without any attempt to manage their inevitable incompatibilities.
Without this no one seems satisfied: the farmer cannot farm efficiently; the environmentalist is despondent about the blighted landscape; and the nearby urban population is not allowed the freedom it would wish in order to relax in the countryside.
Many observers have argued that some form of planning is therefore essential if the optimum outcome for all concerned is to be achieved, but carefully administered recreational facilities in the countryside will not be sufficient on their own.
Too many urban dwellers regard ‘a day in the country’ as an escape from the regimentation that planned leisure sometimes implies.
The licence to ‘roam all over’ farmland is precisely what many of them require.
So changes in attitudes are also needed and given that real interests are often involved — the profitability of agriculture, the rights of private  property, the defence of national scenic assets — these changes will be difficult to engineer.
Alongside the need to engage in a more explicit discussion of the values which underlie rural planning (which, as we shall see in the following section, is rarely a purely technocratic exercise) there is the need to ensure that the relevant knowledge about today's countryside is more widely disseminated.
Little information about contemporary agriculture is conveyed in schools or by the mass media (The Archers and Emmerdale Farm notwithstanding).
Yet, given the opportunity and some imaginative presentation, the urban population has shown that it is capable of responding, judging by the numbers who take an interest at county shows or who turn up at the pitifully few farms which organize public open days.
Farmers, too, need to understand more about the social impulses which prompt an increasing number of urbanites to look to the countryside for relaxation and enjoyment.
The self-contained social circle of most farmers, commented upon in Chapter 3, does not particularly lend itself to such empathy, but farmers will ignore the aspirations of the other 97 per cent of the population at their peril — and so, for that matter, will conservationists.
This will mean conceding the impossibility, whatever the strict legal interpretation, of farm land ever being treated by the urban population in the same way as a factory or even their own back gardens.
Equally, however, the farmer is entitled to demand that the countryside be viewed neither as a more extensive version of an urban recreation ground, nor as an arcadian idyll set aside for the pursuit of an indulgent atavism.
Otherwise mutual incomprehension and avoidable conflict will continue.