

THE FIRST PERSON
THE FAT CONTROLLER
If one had to worry about one's actions in respect of other people's ideas, one might as well be buried alive in an ant heap or married to an ambitious violinist.
Whether that man is the prime minister, modifying his opinions to catch votes, or a bourgeois in terror lest some harmless act should be misunderstood and outrage some petty convention, that man is an inferior man and I do not want to have anything to do with him, any more than I want to eat canned salmon.
Aleister Crowley,Autohagiography 
In the next week or so until I met up with him again I was suffused with wild imaginings.
I braced myself for my apprenticeship to Mr Broadhurst.
I anticipated the calling up of daemons, conversations with the dead, Anubis and Osiris joining the two of us for a ride on the ghost train at the palace pier.
But Mr Broadhurst's instruction in the magical arts was not at all what I had expected.
Instead, having conducted a further searching examination, he set me to the cataloguing of the little rituals, those magical forms of thought that I myself had developed in order to cope with the stress of eidesis.
Mr Broadhurst was very particular about this and he took it extremely seriously.
He met me after school and accompanied me to the newly opened branch of Smith's in Churchill Square.
Here we purchased a large-format cash book, the kind with ruled columns.
Back at Cliff Top over tea in his caravan, he set out the column headings for me thus:
Practice
Content
Frequency
Intent
and then explained what they meant.
‘Now see here, boy.’
He tapped the page.
‘This first heading refers to the nature of what you do.
Some rituals — the majority, indeed — are concerned with bodily functions.
For example, the way you urinate.
Do you aim at the commode, or at the water contained therein?
How do you roll back your foreskin?
What formulae do you recite to yourself when at stool?
In what order do you cut your toenails?
And so on, and so forth , there is no need for me to elaborate further, you understand me well enough…’
Mr Broadhurst paused for a moment and then resumed.
‘Incidentally, do you masturbate yet, boy?’
I blushed.
‘You do.
Good, good.
Had you not I would have lent you some instructional literature — onanism is, you see, terribly important, a most efficacious ritual.
‘Naturally there are other kinds of practices that perforce can be described as ritualised.
There are those concerned with the way we eat, the way we sleep and the way we open the door.
There is even a ritual component to the way we walk down a street.
Furthermore, there are rituals concertinaed within ourselves.
I refer, of course, to manners of thought that have become formalised, certain convolutions, the consistent combination of apprehensions with little twistles of kinaesthetic intimation, d'ye follow me?’
No, I didn't follow him at all.
Not only was the vocabulary well beyond me, but I couldn't even tell what my instructor was driving at.
‘What I'm driving at, boy, is that, even when you become reacquainted with a part of your body, that meeting has its characteristic mental agenda.
You think: My thighs, and attendant on that very ‘thighy’ feeling is the acknowledgement: They are too plump and suck at surfaces sweatily — d'ye see?’
This time I did see because he had uncannily identified one of my private sources of shame and voiced my own concomitant mantra.
Nevertheless I was confused.
I still couldn't grasp that he understood the particular use I made of such ‘consistent convolutions’.
‘But, Mr Broadhurst, sir, all these things that I do and think, they're just habits, aren't they?
I mean everyone does these things, don't they?’
He exploded.
‘Don't be a booby, boy!
I cannot abide a booby, not under any circs' 'soever.
Of course these are habits, of course everyone does these things, that is not the point!’
His anger was unlike any other that I had known.
It carried with it, implicitly, the threat of extreme retribution.
Lines scoured on flesh in the penal settlement, or detention beyond the Styx.
Ever afterwards when Mr Broadhurst barked — I jumped.
The point was — as he explained to me throughout that autumn and the winter that followed — to understand that habit was ritual, and ritual was habit.
‘I am the Magus of the Quotidian!’ bellowed Mr Broadhurst.
We were promenading past the Metropole Hotel on the front at Brighton.
I was amazed that nobody stared at us, or even shouted back.
‘I am powerful precisely because I understand how habit  trammels the mind's energy, d'ye see?
All these people —’ he gestured wildly with a carpet roll of arm —‘they imagine that they perceive what is really there but they don't.
Instead their minds are constricted by a million million common little assumptions, assumptions choking them like bindweed — and these they take for granted!
‘But there is a way to break this down, to dissolve it — oh yes indeed — to unlock the Motive Force.
Every time you indulge in an habitual act you bind yourself in with the others.
These habitual acts are the rituals of sanity.
More than that, they are sanity, d'ye see?
And sanity is nothing but an emasculation, a dread deadening; and I won't have it!
Oh no I won't!’
So it was that I set out laboriously to catalogue the very schema of my own sanity, to list exhaustively the full range of my personal habits.
I did it, in fact, habitually, for forty-five minutes each day after I had done my homework.
A typical listing would read as follows:
Practice
Bodily: nose-picking with semi-dried snot
Content
Prise the hardened flakes away from the wall of the nostril
Frequency
Variable, when bored every five minutes
Intent
To avoid nasal blockage
This was the kind of prosaic patterning of self-absorption that I knew would entrance Mr Broadhurst.
But there were also other kinds of listing that had a more obviously magical significance, thus:
Practice
Mental: thinking that it will rain tomorrow
Content
Carefully visualising the rainfall and imagining the drumming noise it makes on the bungalow roof
Frequency
Most evenings
Intent
To try and prevent it raining
After about three months I had managed to fill the entire cash book with this sort of mundane rubbish.
I say that now but at the time I took my task extremely seriously and I swelled with pride when Mr Broadhurst took me back to Churchill Square to buy my second book.
It was whilst working my way through this, often writing in the column headings for several pages in advance to give myself the illusion that I had completed more than I actually had, that two important suspicions that had lain dormant for some time rose up and took on the aspect of horribly credible hypotheses.
I cannot say whether or not they impinged as much then as they seem to with retrospect.
No matter how disturbingly accurate my visual memory may be, all-seeing is nowise all-hearing but suffice to say they were further indicators that the bridge over which I had crossed the abyss had been mined behind me.
Firstly there was the maternal complicity I have already spoken of.
Mr Broadhurst was by now in the habit of picking me up from Varndean Grammar on Wednesday afternoons, accompanying me to Pool Valley, and then on home by bus.
This was his midweek check-up, anticipating the full review of my homework on Sunday afternoons.
(The Big Match to Songs of Praise slot had become institutionalised.)
This routine became the focus for a certain amount of gossip.
Gossip retailed by those selfsame people, the scions of higher platforms on the social scaffolding, who came for drinks at Cliff Top.
Without mentioning it to me Mother effectively torpedoed this submarine of rumour by putting it about that Mr Broadhurst was my guardian.
The first I knew of this was when, seeing his bollard shape through the wrought-iron railings, my old humiliator Holland turned to me and said, placing predictably his malicious emphasis, ‘There's your ‘guardian’, Wharton, come to take you off for some wanky-wanky, as usual.’
A ‘guardian’ was a distinctly posh kind of relationship for me to have with anyone.
Possibly my mother viewed the subterfuge as merely part and parcel of her continuing social climb.
Could it be that, or was it more likely that she and Mr Broadhurst had agreed it between them?
If so, what was in it for her?
My second hypothesis concerned Mr Broadhurst himself.
I couldn't be certain, not having observed him closely before, but either Mr Broadhurst was not like other old people, or else he wasn't really old at all.
In my new proximity to him I was able to see that his hands were neither wrinkled, nor dotted with liverish spots.
When we walked together up the steep streets of Brighton Mr Broadhurst never wheezed.
And, on looking into the lambency of his hooded eyes, I could detect no whiting-out, no glaucoma or cataract.
He still granted himself the licences of old age — even if he wasn't entitled.
He had given up his voluntary work at St Dunstan's in November claiming that it was ‘too fatiguin'’ for him to carry on with.
But be that as it may, he no longer moved with the calculated languor that I remembered.
Instead he fairly hustled his big body along, as if it were a laggardly prisoner he was escorting down death row.
He was growing feistier and spryer by the month — I wondered where it would all end.
Wondered as one Sunday in February at our appointed hour, I bearded him in his caravan.
My ritual cataloguing had come to a halt.
So feeble had my efforts become that my last entry was concerned with nothing less than my manner of dribbling.
‘Good, good, very good!’ exclaimed Mr Broadhurst — he was flicking through the second book.
‘This is excellent, lad, and I do believe that this exercise is having a beneficial side-effect, namely an improvement in both your grammar and the general ordering of your still-immature intellect.
This is all as it should be.’
‘But I'm finding it harder and harder.’
‘Harder?
Harder to what?’
‘To think up habits — I mean rituals.’
I hung my head, glad to have a pretext to hide it from my mentor.
For recently the random eruptions and scattered pustules that had decked my chin and brows for the past year had begun to mass, forming formidably ugly scarps and weeping lesions.
‘Well, that's as may be, lad, although you haven't tackled masturbation yet, not properly at any rate.’
I blushed hard, Mr Broadhurst ignored me.
I thought of my mother, she would probably be baking scones, her apron dusted  with flour.
Women in ugly hats would soon be Hosanna-ing on the telly.
‘Erm…
Mr Broadhurst…
P'raps I should be —’
‘Nonsense, lad.
I can see that you're sensitive about this.
Don't be.
Masturbation is critical to our enterprise, for it connects the most repetitive and mindless of actions to the inducement of ecstasy.
Now, I observe that you are shamed and discomfited by your acne — am I right?’
I nodded.
‘Of course I am.
Now, you are too young to be aware of this but in the past there was held to be a linkage between so-called ‘self-abuse’ and the sebaceous rigours of your time of life.
I propose an advance on your future status that will assist you at this point and hold you fast to our mutual course.
If I tell you that I can rid you of the damned spots will ye do what I say?’
I tried to think what I might be prepared to do to achieve this and concluded almost anything.
I wasn't a brave boy, not physically, that is, but then it was unlikely Mr Broadhurst had anything physical in mind.
‘OK, Mr Broadhurst, what should I do?’
‘Excellent.
You are amply fulfilling the weight of expectation I have placed on you.
Now then, when you masturbate do you ejaculate semen?’
‘Y-yes.
I s'pose so.’
‘Capital!
I had feared that you might not be sufficiently developed.
Pay attention.
When you next indulge in self-stimulation, instead of summoning up the prone and panting form of some nymph of your fervid fancy, at the moment of climax I want you to contemplate your own dappled visage.
Form a tight eidetic image of it, d'ye see?
Then freeze it for as long as it takes.
Can you do that?
Of course, I know that you can.
Collect your emission in a handy receptacle and then bring it here to me, yes?
Got the photo?
Capital!
Capital!’
I returned to his caravan the following afternoon after school bearing my load, which was by then little more than a dusty stain on the inside of a beaker.
Blushing, I handed it over.
‘Is this all?’ said Mr Broadhurst.
‘Not much there but as long as you followed my instructions it will do.’
The big man arose from the bed and took a turn around the caravan, humming to himself.
Then he opened one of the  doors of the fitted cupboards.
This was wholly unexpected.
The interior of Mr Broadhurst's caravan had remained unchanged during the four years it had been sited at Cliff Top.
The cut and blown glass ornaments were still set on their mirrored shelves in exactly the same positions as when he had unwrapped them.
The miniature stainless-steel kitchenette looked as if it had never been cooked in.
Mr Broadhurst's caravan was as unlived-in as an imaginary room constructed to display furniture in a department store.
Although I knew I probably shouldn't, I couldn't help looking as he rummaged through the marvellous things in the cupboard.
Dusty robes hung from hooks.
They were made out of silk and embroidered with dragons, butterflies, monkeys, each one an entire chinoiserie.
On the various shelves were set items of laboratory equipment: retorts, beakers, distilling tubes and burners.
These were jumbled together with what looked like pieces of electrical — or electronic — equipment, circuit boards, plasticised grips, LCD read-outs.
There was also a stuffed fox and a human skull.
Much more stuff was in there but Mr Broadhurst's buttocks, each the size of a chronic beer drinker's gut, obscured the rest.
When he turned to face me he held in his hand a small spherical flask with a tube coming out of it at an angle.
He unscrewed the glass stopper to this receptacle, and, having filled my beaker with water, poured the solution into it.
He approached me across the marbled swirl of shag carpet, looking like a prelate pumped up with helium, and solemnly intoned, ‘Now, lad, cup your hands, here comes the anti-chocolate.’
I cupped my hands and Mr Broadhurst poured the fluid into my finger bowl.
‘Repeat after me,’ said the Magus of the Quotidian, ‘I washed half my face —’
‘I washed half my face —’
‘In new semen soap —’
‘In new semen soap —’
‘For half a week —’
‘For half a week —’
‘The effects were shattering!’
‘The effects were shattering!’
‘Do it — wash your face!’
I did as I was told.
The watery fluid plashed against my cheeks; as it did so I felt a novel sensation, a sloughing, pulling and slipping of the skin.
‘That's it, that's it,’ he chided me.
‘Rub it in well.
Now…stop!’
I left off having but didn't dare look at my hands.
‘Look at your hands!’ commanded Mr Broadhurst.
I looked at them, they were smeared with blood and worse.
I felt faint.
He pulled a small mirror from his pocket and held it up to me.
At first I simply couldn't comprehend what had happened, for all my spots were gone, dissolved, had vanished.
Not only that but my face was unscarred, unpitted.
It was as if the acne had never been.
Mr Broadhurst gave me to understand that this was merely another advance, another introductory offer, and that I shouldn't take it, or myself, too seriously.
Nevertheless the ridding of my skin complaint by necromancy coincided with a shift in emphasis as far as my instruction was concerned.
It was as if , having seen the contents of Mr Broadhurst's fitted cupboard, he were now prepared to allow me some knowledge of the rituals connected with this apparatus.
Henceforth my studies diversified into tarot reading, numerology, Feng-shiu, alchemy, astrology and kabbalah, or at any rate into Mr Broadhurst's somewhat modified versions of these arts.
‘It's all nonsense, you understand — utter bollocks.
A pathetic attempt to use proto-scientific methods to ascertain and then apprehend the transcendent.
What the Jung-lette called ‘a massive projection’.’
So said Mr Broadhurst.
‘No matter, it will serve as a useful antidote to what they will try and inculcate you with at school, that's its chief virtue.
And added to that, in the future — should you progress in your apprenticeship — it will provide you with a repertory of useful explanations.
To use an analogy garnered from the world of espionage, it will give you ‘cover’.’
He had a set of photocopied notes, which implied that I wasn't his first apprentice.
These he would produce with a flourish during our Wednesday- and Sunday-evening sessions.
There had always been something of the fairground barker about Mr Broadhurst and during this period he enhanced it.
He  waved his arms about a lot, wore suits that my mother's old friend Little jimmy wouldn't have been ashamed to be seen in — barring the size problem — and generally did his best to appear flamboyant.
Each set of notes came with an attached exercise and at his behest I set to, to analyse squares of numbers, using keys to turn them into the letters that described either thaumaturgical entities, or else even the tetragrammaton itself.
This had a beneficial side-effect, namely an improvement in my arithmetic.
The tarot reading and astrology were presented by my mage at a fairly down-market level.
To me, the disciplines involved in relating these random sequences of fixed symbols to potential destinies and character traits were an amusing game.
The skill, once learnt, helped make me a little more popular and outgoing at school, where there was a craze on for such things.
As for kabbalah, I found it utterly incomprehensible.
I might not have known exactly what rationalism was but it was nevertheless deeply engrained in my picture of the world.
Mr Broadhurst browbeat me over it: ‘I will have you know the ancient Hebrew art, its derivation and derogation, its eventual suppuration into the Rosicrucian, even if I have to badger you unmercifully — eurgh!
Yuck! ping!’
This last noise occasioned by a solid pellet of his spittle hitting a brass spittoon.)
For nowadays Mr Broadhurst toyed with either ‘chawin’(his own term) tobacco, or ‘takin’ snuff.
I didn't know which was worse — his snot or his flob.
I was forced to pay more attention to lessons in science and history at Varndean, purely so that I might better understand my other, shadowier tutelage.
As for Feng-shiu, although Mr Broadhurst declared it to be the most ridiculous of all these esoteric studies, it did help my geography.
After all, how else can alignments of physical objects be calculated so as to lie along propitious meridians, save by reference to more fixed and less mutable properties of the earth?
Mr Broadhurst himself was something of an alchemist.
‘Just an enthusiastic amateur, you understand, boy.’
Some of what I had glimpsed on the afternoon when he excised my acne  was his own miniature collection of alchemical equipment.
He responded to my curiosity concerning the transmutation of metals by allowing me to assist him as he experimented with his alembic and his aludel.
Many were the afternoons when I found myself priming the athenor with a set of little bellows, while Mr Broadhurst waved a caduceus about.
It was one of his own devising, constructed from an old-fashioned television aerial wreathed with flexes.
We looked on together as the various hypostatical principles were distillated and redistillated.
We were equally disappointed when cohabitation was not effected.
But although he toyed with it, Mr Broadhurst had no patience with the search for the sophic hydrolith.
‘I would wager, boy, that these types never managed to transmute anything, save for their stupidity, into vanity.
And anyway, any form of currency is a mutable thing, capable of being magically imbued by the thoughts of those who utilise it.
Although, that being said, I do myself possess one of Paykhull's medals.’
He showed this to me and told me to note especially the inscription on the coin's obverse side: ‘O.A. Paykhull cast this gold by chemical art at Stockholm, 1706.’
‘You know, boy,’ he mused as I hefted the heavy thing, ‘these coins are excessively rare.
I have no idea how I might have come by it.
No doubt it will transpire that I must have known this Paykhull.’
It was from little hints such as this, undoubtedly consciously dropped, that I began to build a fuller appreciation of what Mr Broadhurst really was.
This was the way I passed through the remainder of my childhood.
The zoetrope span smoothly, time's Chief Designer narrowed the legs of trousers and decreed that the cars should be more aerodynamic.
If there were changes in the political leadership of the country, they made little impact on me.
I was more preoccupied by my O levels.
I gained seven and then, with Mr Broadhurst's none too gentle prodding, I opted for economics, maths and business studies as A level courses.
At school I remained a solitary.
What little human warmth I required I garnered from the aunts and cousins, who still came to Cliff Top for their annual holiday.
They still came but there was a new uneasiness in this  department of my life as well.
My mother's business success had continued and the bungalow was in the throes of an ongoing transformation that would only end some five years later, when the Cliff Top Country House Hotel opened its register for bookings.
In the meantime, the aunts and cousins were put up in their usual caravans.
My mother and I moved between the enterprise zone of the bungalow and the camp where the caravans squatted, adopting a different manner and diction as we did so.
We were veritable chameleons of class mobility.
As for girlfriends, it was here that my eidetiking came in particularly useful.
Trammelled by my exhaustive cataloguing of habit, which I had continued to practise at Mr Broadhurst's insistence, my visual escapades had become fully manageable.
I didn't think I had an option — I was no teenage Lothario — but anyway I knew instinctively, without even having to ask him, that Mr Broadhurst would view the loss of my virginity as incompatible with my apprenticeship.
So instead, I refined my masturbation in combination with my hawk-eyed recollection to produce a variety of sexual experience which —(I now realise)— more than compensated for the absence of the real thing.
My fellow schoolboys vied with one another for admission to the cinema, so that they could witness X-rated films.
They went to see what they were unable to experience.
I went to the cinema not for entertainment, but for cinematography.
For it was only by studying the precise rake of extra-long pans, the trajectory of tracking shots and the jejune emotional appeal of the jump-cut, that I could add to the repertoire of my own internal shoots.
One day in the early autumn of my lower-sixth-form year, when the damp leaves were already furring the grassy median strips that cleaved the dual carriageways surrounding Varndean Grammar, I saw a familiar figure from where I sat reading in the school library.
Mr Broadhurst had returned from his summer break.
I rammed my books and my binders into my briefcase.
I took the steps in big bounds and pelted across the asphalt to the school gates.
I knew better than to attempt to hug Mr Broadhurst, although that was what I felt like doing, for not only did  everything in his manner discourage physical relations, he had also given me a strict injunction.
Soon after he had taken me under his ample wing he had remarked, ‘Think of me as the Brahmin of the Banal!
Only the dull earth can purify me, contact with all else is a defilement so far as I am concerned.
Therefore, boy, never attempt to touch me, save for when I specifically enjoin it.’
During the six months since I had last seen him, Mr Broadhurst had undergone a further metamorphosis and this time the change was more radical, more entire, than ever before.
To start with there was his costume.
As I have said, after the abandonment of his undertaking uniform he had gone through a dodgy bookie/snake-oil purveyor period.
Now he was dressed very well indeed, even elegantly.
He had on a three-quarter-length crombie with a velvet collar, a dark-blue suit with the faintest of pin-stripes and a snowy linen shirt.
The knot of his foulard tie was held in place by a pearl stick pin.
Up top, a bowler hat as firmly rounded as a Wehrmacht helmet served to emphasise the suitability of his head for Mount Rushmore, or any other monumentalism.
In one of his hands chamois gloves were loosely bouqueted with the silver head of a cane; in the other a thick slab-sided cheroot, topped by an inch and a half of whitened ash, protruded from his knuckles.
As I ran towards him, Mr Broadhurst smiled.
His smooth face was slashed open by his predatory mouth, as if an invisible hatchet were biting into fruit.
The bony protuberances that he had in lieu of brows arched until they were Gothic; and he laughed — bellowed laughter and smoke.
‘Ah, there you are!’ he ejaculated, the implication being that he had looked everywhere.
‘Come now, boy, we have much to talk of and little time.’
I was now both tall enough and bulky enough to link arms comfortably with Mr Broadhurst.
To my great surprise this was exactly what he did.
And that is how we set off, arm-in-arm, down Sunningdale Drive past Sussex Gardens where the bowls players were dying slowly in well-pressed whites, towards the London Road.
Mr Broadhurst held forth magniloquently.
‘Consider the similarities between Brighton and Rome,’ he  declared.
‘Both are built on seven hills, both have been the pleasure centres of mighty empires.
Observe the hilltops, lad what d'ye see?’
I pondered.
‘Well, I can just about see the cemetery up there.’
‘Quite so — and over there?’
He gestured vaguely behind us.
‘The racecourse?’
‘Good lad, good.
In fact, capital!
The racecourse.
The games of life and the games of death.
Mortality for once defined by geography.
What a relief!’
He laughed again, carried away by his pun.
I had never seen Mr Broadhurst in such a good mood before.
He positively bowled down the pavement, puffing furiously on his stogie, for all the world like some bipedal locomotive.
‘You're wondering something, boy, cough it up, spit it out, expel it, vomit it forth.
In short, tell me.’
‘Well…
I don't…
I don't know how to put it, but you seem somehow changed —’
‘And you are wondering what has happened to cause this — am I correct?
Of course I am, there is no need for you to elaborate.
Well, sir, it's true, I have changed.
I have eaten myself up and through some unprecedented act of gastromancy farted out my new incarnation — thus.
‘You are also wondering something else — aren't you?
You are curious as to whether there is some connection between this metamorphosis and my summer sojourn.
Where do I go?
That is the question.
In due course I will answer it for you, that and many other things that I know have quizzed you these past years.’
So, as the two of us progressed, ascending, cresting and then descending three of the seven hills, Mr Broadhurst talked.
And what talk it was!
Rich and protean, his word-seam seemed to me to be the very fount of knowledge itself, a mulchy conceptual bed which might be sown merely by the fact of being listened to, thus engendering all ideas for all time.
‘Reality,’ said Mr Broadhurst, ‘love it, hate it, you cannot do without it.
Wouldn't you agree?
Of course you.
would, for you cannot but do otherwise.
And yet you, lad, are a perfect candidate for the role of skipper, suborner, seducer and traducer  of that reality.
Reality is a virgin whose virtue we all want to believe in, and, at one and the same time, an old whore who we've all had and had and had again, until our eyes and ears are like genitals that have been rubbed raw.
We observe its regularities, its comings and goings through and in ourselves, yet we are unable to stand apart.
At any rate you cannot stand apart, I cannot but do otherwise and that is why we belong together, d'ye see?
Of course you don't, I will perforce have to demonstrate.’
As he declaimed we were weaving our way through the late-afternoon shoppers who thronged the centre of the town.
Or rather, so magisterial was our progress that these less-solid citizens were being forced to weave in order to avoid our combined bulk.
Suddenly Mr Broadhurst pulled up short, causing me to wheel around so that we were both facing the window of a toy shop.
The display in the shop window was an extravagant scenario designed to showcase a monster train set.
A papier mâché scarp formed the backdrop and in the foreground engines pulling carriages and engines pulling trucks passed over hummocks, through tiny tunnels, and clattered into and out of plastic stations, never stopping, electronically hooting.
I stared at it, conscious of the big man's arm encircling mine with the coiled hunger of an anaconda about to ingest.
Of all the eidetic images that remain from my childhood, frozen with crude representational accuracy, this is the most vivid.
The trains moving with fluid inertia; the tiny plastic trees and buildings —their implausible neatness all too accurately complementing that trompe-l'oeil reality of which he had spoken; beyond the papier mâché horizon, the workings of a pocket deity were clearly visible in the brushstrokes of the painted sky.
As I stared at the display, the reflections of myself and Mr Broadhurst in the plate-glass window came into focus as well, imposed over the vista.
Eidesis came upon me trapping both layers into a third internal one.
Then Mr Broadhurst seemed to start towards me and I could no longer be sure where he was, in my head, on the shop window or the pavement?
In all three locations at once?
He spoke inside of me.
‘Where am I, boy?
Is that what you  want to know?
Why, I am in all three places at once, that is the point, the whole of the point.
Now look, look at the counterpane world, project yourself into it, look beside that bijou signal box.
What can you see?’
Trying to ignore this assault on my fundamental antinomies I peered at the train set.
A tiny, rotund figure was stamping up and down on the daubed green of the false ground, like a drunken redneck at a hoedown, or an aboriginal at a corroboree.
It was Mr Broadhurst — and he was Hornby-size.
‘I am The Fat Controller,’ said the Mr Broadhurst in my eidetic vision.
‘I control all the automata on the island of Britain, all those machines that bask in the dream that they have a soul.
I am also the Great White Spirit that resides in the fifth dimension, everything is connected to my fingertips — by wires.’
We were walking once more.
We crossed the traffic that divided around the Clock Tower and entered the Lanes.
Soon we were alone, moving through a narrow defile between two teetering antique shops.
Here, Mr Broadhurst broke step again, this time wheeling me around to face him.
‘What is my name, lad?’
I was nonplussed, I stared at my teacher, never before had his swollen face seemed so replete with indifference, stone ataraxy.
‘Ah…erm…
Mr Broadhurst, sir?’
‘Wrong!’
An open palm, as big and fattily solid as a Bradenham ham, smote the side of my head with horrific force.
I fell to my knees, immediately aware of the sticky saltiness of blood in my saliva.
‘Come on, Ian — don't disappoint me — answer the question.’
‘Y-you…you are…you are The Fat Controller?’
I whimpered.
I was certain, although I could not have said why, that if I did not answer correctly this might well be the end.
‘Good, good.
Well done…
Capital!’
The Fat Controller was helping me to my feet.
‘I'm glad we cleared up that little problem.
Some might say, ‘What's in a name?’ but then I doubt an arsehole would smell so sweet.
Now, lad, you were curious earlier as to my movements and my changed countenance.
The fact of it is that my five years are now up and hence my  retirement is over.
Before Christ's mass I will be gone, back into the world.
‘And how have I been spending this summer?
Why, in refamiliarising myself with what-goes-on.
These past five years my pernicious enfeeblement has meant that six months of the year I have had to hibernate, to entomb myself in the disused redoubt beneath Cliff Top, but at last I am free.
Free to smell again the sweat on the brow of the bourse; free to bask in the slipstream of wide-bodied jets; free to sit in on the counsels of the alleged good and the alleged great.
‘I have cantered among the hyenas of the Serengeti as they brought down  wildebeest  ; I have danced the Wellington Boot Dance with the Zulu in the township hostels; I have tiptoed through the Bibliothèque Nationale, listening to the gummy gumming of mundane scholars; I have shelled prawns with slant-eyed androgynes in the polyglot souks of the uttermost East; I have reached the nadir of a nonsensical number of psycho-sexual trances, both in the Amazonian hinterland and the plastic cultures of the Pacific rim; I have subsumed myself to the circuitry of artificial cerebella in the silicone wadis; I have crawled down the barrels of guns on all five continents, only to spring forth again — triumphant; I have tittered in the stalls and tottered by the walls festooned with epicene opera-lovers; I have sallied forth into the salons of the old world and the new; I have hefted steins in the beerhalls and pinched flutes in the Shires; I have raced laggardly protons around the cyclotron, revelling in the sempiternal sciamachy; and — let us not forget — I have also hidden under couches whilst the moneyed pulers petted their kittenish neuroses, imagining themselves trusted, secluded.
‘To cut these many stories short, to tie a knot of reminder in this multifarious narrative: I have reacquainted myself with my domain.
And now — let's eat.’
We ate at Al Forno, an Italian restaurant at the bottom of the Lanes.
I was subdued after the preprandial violence.
Subdued and also cowed by The Fat Controller's manner of consummate self-assurance.
This was no longer a slightly eccentric seaside retiree with a portfolio of amusing tricks.
He had become something other, or worse still, perhaps he had always been.
As soon as we entered the restaurant the proprietor came out to us from the kitchen, rubbing his hands oilier on a tea towel.
‘Ah!
Meester Northcliffe,’ he trilled — and it was a measure of my disorientation that I took this further name-change in my faltering stride.
‘We no see you for an age.
Why you no come to Al Forno?
Youse find someone who makes a better pizza?’
‘Tommaso, how could that be so?’
The Fat Controller was emollient, masterful.
‘You make the finest pizzas on the Sussex coast — haven't I always said that?
No, no, I have been away on business for these past few months.’
‘And who is this, your son?’
Tommaso gave me three-quarters of an ingratiating smile and The Fat Controller's good humour increased by a factor of nine.
His trunk swelled up to resemble that of a baobab tree, matching for bulk the whitewashed curvature of the charcoal oven that dominated the restaurant.
His voice boomed, ‘Haha, ahahaha, no, no, more like a grandson, I should say, but it's good of you to be so shamelessly flattering —to him.’
Then his good mood evaporated so entirely that it might never have been.
‘Jump to it, boy!
Bring us two litres of that vile Chianti and four of your large specials — we'll be upstairs.’
We climbed up a twisting staircase past two floors of tables and then took our place in the bay window on the top floor.
In due course Tommaso himself brought the wine.
The Fat Controller poured me a glass.
‘Stick that in your laugh-hole,’ he said.
‘You're past the age when you can be forgiven for not holding your liquor.
So pour it down your neck.’
I did as I was told.
The ‘special’ turned out to be a cartwheel-sized pizza like a slice of the earth's crust, its five feet of rim volcanically erupting.
On top of it there were all the fruits of the forest, the animals of the plain, and a few of the beasts of the sea for good measure.
Everything was enmired in thick globs of mozzarella cheese.
The Fat Controller ate three of these and I did my best to tackle the fourth.
I was stunned by this prodigious feat of consumption.
I remembered Mr Broadhurst-that-was mopping up the Sally Lunns but that was a mere warm-up exercise compared to this.
When as a child I had alluded to Mr Broadhurst's corpulence, my mother had snapped at me.
‘It's a disability, Ian, like any  other.
Mr Broadhurst has glandular problems, that's why he's overweight.
He doesn't eat any more than ordinary people.’
As she spoke I had eidetiked the glands in question, embedded in the back of Mr Broadhurst's neck like obese sweetmeats.
‘You're thinking about my glands, aren't you, boy?’
The Fat Controller's voice sluiced me out of my wine haze.
He was dissecting a gland-like mushroom as he spoke, clearly in order to illustrate his telepathy.
‘The only reason people are fat,’ he went on, ‘is because they eat too much.
After all,’ he continued, deftly manipulating half a loaf of garlic bread to sop up the tomato juice on his last platter, ‘you never saw anybody fat come out of Auschwitz.’
It was two beats before I realised that this was meant to be a very funny joke and then I struggled to match his guffaws, adding my own rather reedy piping to his basso mirth.
He went on to discourse at length on the nature of fat.
He reviewed a gallery of the great fatties of all time, from Nero through Falstaff to Arbuckle.
He dwelt especially on the insulating and prophylactic properties of excessive flesh, remarking at one point, ‘Without the upholstery of embonpoint the body is a mere skeletal spring, ready to uncoil its very mortality.’
He brushed up my biochemistry, informing me that the long chain fences of fat molecules are antipodean in scale set beside the dry stone walls of mere proteins, and that he himself had it as an ambition to contrive that his entire body should be sheathed in one enormous fat molecule.
He concluded by reviewing the sexual properties of portliness, noting that, if you are fat enough, you can develop love-handles specially adapted for oral sex, as well as coitus.
During our meal the restaurant had begun to fill up with the pre-theatre crowd, Brighton burghers and their wives.
I saw them through The Fat Controller's eyes — they were gauche and dowdy, crammed into suitings so ill-fitting that they looked like bolsters stuffed into pillow cases.
They spoke quietly, deliberated over the menu and drank their wine in sips, like dipping birds.
One of these types now rose from her chair and came over to where we were sitting.
Our coffee had just arrived.
‘Excuse me,’ she said hesitantly.
‘No,’ snapped The Fat Controller.
He didn't even look up, he was doing something with the cafetière.
I gawped at the woman.
The rebuttal had done her no good whatsoever, her face was going blotchy, but she mustered all the sang-froid she could and continued, ‘Since you refuse to be civil I shall not moderate my criticism.
I didn't want to embarrass you in front of your grandson —’
‘He's not my grandson, he's the son of the woman I lodge with —,
‘Be that as it may, perhaps he would like to know that you have completely disrupted our meal.
Your voice is as loud as it is insistent and, as if that weren't bad enough, what you speak of is as boring as it is unseemly.
You are without exception the rudest man it has ever been my misfortune to share a restaurant with; and I think I can speak for all the others present when I say that.’
Without waiting for The Fat Controller's reaction to all this, she turned and went back to her own table, where she was greeted with little ‘Well done's and furtive shoulder pats from her fellow diners.
The Fat Controller sat stock still while this woman had her say, like someone engaged in a sporting activity that has been temporarily frozen, prior to a replay on behalf of inattentive home viewers.
I observed him warily, waiting for the outburst I felt certain was infusing along with the coffee, but he remained impassive and finished the meal by stoically downing a litre or so of the espresso blend, a large tin box of Amaretti di Saronno and eight grappa.
He added the bill with a single saccade of his pulsing eyes.
It was the first display of his own eidetic abilities I had ever witnessed; before that all his efforts in this respect had been directed at infiltrating my internal visual world.
Foolishly, I took it as a good sign.
We walked out into the doldrums of early evening.
The Chianti had gone to my head a little but I was a big lad and had done my share of experimenting with alcohol before, so the intoxication wasn't too hard for me to handle.
His gargantuan  repast seemed to have put The Fat Controller in a better mood and avuncularity seeped back into his tones the further we got away from the pizzeria.
‘There are two reasons why I wanted to be sure that I met up with you after school today.’
He paused to light the green-brown dirigible of a partagas perfecto with a flickering windproof lighter.
‘You will have guessed the first,’ he resumed, masticating the thick coils of smoke, ‘namely that I wished to inculcate you a little further in the understanding of my true nature, a little further but not too far — keep 'em guessing is my motto.
My other reason was that I wanted to have an opportunity for a more leisurely chat with you about your future.’
‘My future?’
‘Quite so.
In the absence of your having a father who is disposed to take any interest in you — if indeed he is still alive — I find that I am, as it were, in locus pater .
Not a prospect that I relish.
My values, my methods, indeed my very understanding of the world, is not, as you know, conventional.
Nevertheless, I have as much of a need to hand my legacy on to someone as any biological parent.
Your unusual ability for mental imaging marks you out in this context.
I have decided — at least pro tem— to enhance your relationship with respect to me, from the purely formal one of ‘apprentice’, to the potentially more intimate designation ‘licentiate’.
Do you know what that means?’
‘No.’
‘So much the better, be sure to look it up when you get home.’
We entered the public gardens that surround the Royal pavilion.
In the autumn twilight the great building appeared simultaneously shoddy and grandiose.
The Fat Controller looked more at home in this context than I could ever imagine him to have been at Cliff Top, or anywhere else for that matter.
There was something of the Regency dandy in the way he trailed his cane and rotated his globular head, as if looking out for fellow beaux to salute.
Moreover the fluted columns, caryatid gateways and golden domes of the pavilion suggested to my adolescent self a world of ambiguous pleasures  involving him, which I had to suppress my tipsy mind from visualising.
Why ‘The Fat Controller’?
I thought to myself.
Why not ‘the Fat Controller’?
‘It's important that you capitalise the definite article — even in thought — you understand me?’
‘Y'y'yes,’ I spluttered, amazed once again by the accuracy of his telepathic probing.
We banked to the left, following the precisely plotted curve of a bed of flowers, which had been arranged to form a living mosaic of the municipal crest.
‘Fancy a trip to the theatre?’
The question was close to being a statement.
‘I'd — I'd love to,’ I said.
And then, quite suddenly, I recognised the people who were walking in front of us through the gardens.
It was the complaining woman from Al Forno together with her party.
I started talking hurriedly, hoping to distract my companion.
I was desperate to prevent the angry outburst that I had expected in the restaurant happening here, in this even more public place.
I said, ‘I want to go to university,’ although, in truth, up until that moment the desire had been incubating, only half-formed in my mind.
‘I'm interested in…
Well, I'm interested in sorts of things —’
‘Sorts of things?
What d'ye mean, boy?’
‘Well, like products.
All the different kinds of products.
How you persuade people to buy this sort of thing rather than that sort of thing.’
This much was true, that I often found myself in my mother's kitchen staring at the array of condiments, spices, herbs and tinned foods, wondering why she should have bought this particular kind of split peas, rather than another.
It was all incomprehensible to me; and since I had begun to study economics the Marginal Theory of Preference only served to deepen my confusion.
for, in a world of such demonstrable irrationality, how could there be a predictable quantification of choice?
Since the resumption of my mother's upwardbound course in social orienteering, her purchasing patterns had undergone a profound change.
She now cooked with garlic, took an interest in wine and spoke of fricassees rather than fry-ups.
Things had always attracted me, far more so than people.
As a small child I had known all the words of Masefield's poem, ‘Quinquireme of Nineveh from distant Ophir/Rowing home to haven in sunny Palestine…’
Then the cargo was described in loving detail, the sandalwoods and spices, the ivory, the oil, the wine.
I was entranced.
‘Haha.
Ahahaha…indeed, that is very interesting.
Entirely  germane .
Well, you shall go to the university if you wish it.’
The Fat Controller sounded uncharacteristically mummyish.
‘My plans for you are more in the manner of an agency.
I do not intend to intrude on your life, or impinge in any direct manner.
It is merely my desire that you complete your studies and take up a form of employ that may be useful for my purposes at some time in the future.
Other than that I wish to make no claims upon you.’
He paused, the butt of his cigar held against his brow, so that a cataract of white spume dribbled down into his eye socket.
The eye behind it remained unblinking.
‘And come to think of it, this isn't so dissimilar to the kind of influence your genetic father might wish to have on you, were it not for the fact that he is such a contemptible Essene, a cloistral nonentity capable of only the meanest interaction with his fellow men.
You know, of course, how he spends his time?’
‘No, not really.
I haven't seen him for three years or so.
Mum told me that he travels up and down the coast by bus, reading in public libraries.’
‘Quite so.
And how does that make you feel?’
‘Oh, I don't know —,
‘Correction: you do know.
It makes you feel ashamed and embarrassed.
It is as much due to his neglect as my intervention that you find yourself thus, cut off from normal society.
Were I inclined to a sense of responsibility, this factor alone would go no small way towards vitiating it.
Still, no mind, here we are at the theatre.
And there, if I am not mistaken, is the ignoramus who was so  aggressively rude to us at Al Forno.’
‘I'm, I'm not quite sure, is it?’
I was hoping that my indecision might somehow communicate itself to The Fat Controller.
No such luck.
‘Oh yes, it is,’ he said with heavy emphasis.
‘I should imagine  that you are worried — worried that I might cause some sort of scene, humiliate you in front of this jetsam.’
He gestured, encompassing with his shovel-sized hand the precincts of the Theatre Royal which bustled with people, and the roadway where backing and filling vehicles jockeyed for temporary respite.
‘That's not my style, Ian — you should realise that I set great store by not creating ‘scenes’; by not making those that I esteem suffer any unnecessary discomfort, whether it be social, physical, or otherwise.’
With that we swept past the woman and her friends and entered the theatre.
The Fat Controller had reserved good seats at the front of the stalls.
I refused the offer of an ice-cream but he bought an extra-large cone for himself and then, once we were seated, inserted the whole thing, wafer and all, into his mouth.
‘Nyum-nyum,’ he said.
‘I love the cold ache, the frozen hammering on the…nyum-nyum…insides of my temples.
Little Peter Quince thought this a symptom of facial neuralgia, or worse, a precursor of the hydrocephalus that carried off his sister…nyum-nyum…
Puling neurasthenic, used it to justify his laudanum binges.
Still, I warrant I must be hydrocephalic anyway, or at any rate inoculated against swollen-headedness, eh?’
I nodded, although I had absolutely no idea what he was talking about.
We sat in silence while the rest of the audience trickled in.
His ice-cream finished, The Fat Controller began to shift around uncomfortably in his seat, puffing and blowing.
Eventually he said, ‘This is no good.
I can't get comfortable.
We shall have to try and swap seats with someone so that I can put my feet in the aisle.’
The couple at the end of the row happily switched with us and we settled down once more.
However, as soon as we reached our new vantage I understood the real reason why he had wanted to move.
The seats we now occupied were directly behind those of the complaining woman and her companions.
‘Serendipitous, eh?’ he said, and leered at me through the artificial gloom, his rubber lips curling up.
‘We shall have an opportunity now to balance things up a little— would you like that?’
‘I'm not sure,’ I dissimulated.
‘Come, lad, now is the time for you to make up your mind.
I have spent a deal of time these past few years on cultivating you, submitting you to a species of metaphysical topiary, clipping, pruning, stunting.
I have made no secret of the fact that I consider you to be a boy with potential, a boy I might introduce to some of the wonderful things of this world.
Be that as it may, I shall be philosophic if you prove unworthy of this not inconsiderable investment — I can always write it off as a little deficit financing — but if you wish to continue with our relationship you must be prepared to place some real trust in me.
Without it I cannot proceed.’
As he was talking I noticed something peculiar.
Although his tones were conversational — and in his case this naturally meant loud — none of the people in the adjacent seats seemed to be able to hear him.
Once again he was addressing my consciousness directly, speaking straight into my inner ear without any sound escaping into the atmosphere.
‘people are not all alike — would you grant me that?’
His tone was now pedagogic.
‘S'pose so.’
‘S'pose so is not quite good enough.
The point is, my young friend, that we have certain duties, not in respect of others, but ourselves.
We cannot permit the foisting of indignities upon our person without some form of retribution.’
He held the tip of his cane an inch away from the complaining woman's head.
‘This woman here is not a moral agent in the same sense that I am, or that you will become.
Her moral responsibilities are not ours and therefore nor are her rights commensurate.
I, on the other hand, am in possession of powers which to the man in the street would appear awesome, inhuman, perhaps even godlike.
Naturally along with these powers comes an enhanced moral capability.’
While he spoke the auditorium fell silent.
At first a few individuals left off talking, then this engendered a positive feedback, more people heard the gathering soundlessness and responded to it so that whole tiers shut up.
Eventually there was complete quiet.
The house lights went down and the small posse of hack musicians who slouched in the orchestra pit began to saw indifferently at their instruments.
The curtain rose disclosing a set which for strident artificiality compared favourably with the train display in the toy shop.
The layering of the paint on the backdrop was clearly visible; the rambling roses were plastic and immobile; the front of the stage was spread with a swathe of fruiterer's mock grass.
There was a hiss over the PA, followed by the chirruping of recorded birdsong.
I consulted the programme and discovered that what I was regarding was the rose garden of an English country house,circa 1922.
A woman entered stage left.
She was young and wore a dress that flared out around her calves.
Her head was shrunken under a tight-fitting felt hat.
She commenced to promenade up and down the stage, punctuating her remarks with hammy gestures of her lorgnette and preposterously long cigarette holder.
The play was a farce.
Not that this mattered a great deal to me.
I was aware that the threshold of the audience's suspension of disbelief lay far below mine; and that the aching gap between the supposed humour of the script and their exaggerated response was minuscule when set beside that which already separated my reality from theirs.
I could also appreciate that the bulk of this supposed humour was meant to derive from the anachronism of the play's sexual mores.
But these were only peripheral apprehensions, for the bulk of my attention was occupied by The Fat Controller's mesmerising amoral discourse.
‘When I wish to kill — I kill.’
The voice was lubricious, polite but insistent.
‘And nothing that people say or do can detract from this.
Fortunately I am not driven to this expedient that often, because I have many other stratagems that I have devised for attaining the same object.
But every so often, such as now, killing does seem the best possible option.
Observe the ferrule of my cane.’
I felt something prod my leg and looked down.
He was manipulating a kind of toggle or switch on the head of his cane.
The woman in front — the woman who was to die —guffawed loudly at an on-stage incident, distracting me.
When I looked down once more I saw, gleaming in the darkness, a long pin or needle that projected from the cane's tip.
As suddenly as it was there it was gone again, retracted back into the body of the stick.
What happened next was hazy.
There was a scene in a panelled drawing room.
The pin-headed young woman was being surprised by her husband in the throes of simulated adultery.
A Jeeves type, a servile machiavel, providentially hit the lights and the whole auditorium was plunged into darkness.
I couldn't be certain but in the hubbub that followed (shrieked squeaks and ‘hahas’ from the audience) I thought I heard a definite mechanical ‘click’, but when the stage lights came up again, nothing had happened.
The Fat Controller was sitting Ciceronian amongst the mob, and his intended victim was squeaking with the rest.
Squeaking and even gasping with the great good humour of it all.
Immediately afterwards there was an interval.
Instead of joining the press of bodies that jammed up the aisle towards the crush bar, he took my arm once again and drew me in the opposite direction.
We exited into a back alley via the fire door.
It was dark outside and The Fat Controller pulled up the velvet collar of his overcoat.
‘Did you enjoy the piece?’ he asked, and before I could answer he went on, ‘I myself did not.
I found the script tedious and the performances inconsequential.
How risible it is that art cannot provide a better imitation of life, when we know that life itself is so illusory.
Would you not agree?
Furthermore,’ he went on, drawing me in the direction of pool Valley, ‘one is insistently aware that all of these actors are the meanest of impostors.
That that woman who would be a flapper is in fact a naturally be jeaned fag hag, who will soon be uttering even worse inanities in some adjacent lounge bar.
Is this not so?’
I responded to his rhetoric with a question, anticipating rebuttal.
‘The woman who insulted you, the woman sitting in front of us —’
‘The one who I said I was going to kill?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, I have done so.’
He fell silent as if this was of little or no account.
‘But…but, I didn't see anything.
How did you do it?’
‘Curare.
No magic to it at all, except insofar as it was a direct  transferral of intention to effect with very little attenuation of the causal chain.
You observed the hypodermic needle in the ferrule of my cane?’
He tapped the pavement with the stick for emphasis.
‘A method of poisoning which I learnt of during a sojourn in Bulgaria.
It struck me at the time that there was something rather apt about such a pedestrian people developing such a pedestrian means of covert assassination —’ He broke off to laugh at his own pun.
‘The curare will paralyse the woman.
Rude bitch.
I injected her above the hairline.
I cannot conceive that the pathologist will trouble to look there for a puncture mark and indeed, prior to that eventuality, it doesn't seem likely that the emergency team of paramedics they'll send out from Brighton General will be well enough acquainted with the action of this drug to hit upon the right antidote in time to prevent her from expiring.’
Perhaps I was in shock but instead of simply feeling horrified by this intelligence I was curious.
‘But when they do the whatsit…’
‘The post-mortem?’
‘Yeah, when they do the post-mortem, what will they decide was the cause of death?’
‘Suffocation, I should imagine.
I admit they will find that something of a puzzle, but given the low critical standards of provincial audiences, they might hit upon the felicitous conclusion that she choked while in the midst of an exaggeratedly hilarious response to that pathetic farce.
And now’— The Fat Controller consulted his watch; an endomorphic gold Rolex had replaced the full hunter —‘it's getting on for nine-thirty.
I warrant that your mama may be wondering where we have got to, we had better enbus for Saltdean.
Forward to the terminus.’
That night, as I sat on the edge of my bed, contemplating the tatter of pop posters sellotaped to the flower-patterned wallpaper of my bedroom, I found myself shaking.
It couldn't be true, could it?
The Fat Controller hadn't really killed the woman, had he?
There was no denying that his penetration of my mind, using my eidetic memory to distort the relation between representation and that which was represented, was strident, aggressive even.
But there was still a world of difference  between this and the vicious and arbitrary manner in which he had committed femicide.
And he had done it to a woman who had done nothing to him, simply been a little rude and overbearing, not unlike The Fat Controller himself.
My head span.
I felt the nausea of awakening to a brand new day of suffering, a dawn of utter exclusion from my fellow mortals.
What had I got myself into?
I imagined my mentor, beached on his snow-white counterpane, consciouslessly watching Night Thoughts and perhaps improvising his own televisual homily.
I wanted to confess everything to somebody, but who?
Now my intimations of the complicity between The Fat Controller and my mother grew into the utter certainty that it extended even into these murky areas.
I realised that the ‘trust’ which he sought was silence.
A comprehensive silence covering all those aspects of our relationship that might appear to an outsider to be improper, or even bizarre.
I hated to imagine what the consequences of breaching this trust might be.
If a woman who was rude got killed, I would surely be strung up, tortured, cut down and my heart excised.
My cursed eidetic memory summoned up a vision of the medieval rood screen in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, the one depicting the martyrdom of St Anthony.
St Anthony being boiled in oil with a companionable gaggle of fellow martyrs; St Anthony pierced by crossbow bolts fired by The Fat Controller in chain mail; and in the central, triumphant panel — his white body as flexibly two-dimensional as bacon rind — St Anthony being sawn in half, lengthwise.
Instead of the almond eyes of the soon-to-be-beatified, the gaping mouth of welcomed suffering superimposed on the Saint's visage was my own.
My own dead-straight mousy fringe and dimpled chin framed my face as it distorted in agony.
Without noticing its onset I found that I was crying and I went on crying until I slept.
The following day was a Saturday.
Walking down to the newsagent's in the village I ran through the events of the preceding evening again.
I conjured up a vivid representation of the plushy murk in the Theatre Royal, I saw the shiny tip of the hypodermic gleaming against the dark fabric of The Fat  Controller's trouser leg.
I still wanted to believe that he had been fooling me, or testing my credulousness in a more than averagely cruel manner.
The day was high and bright, the salt tang seasoning the after-pulse of summer heat which still hung in the air, but nothing could shift my sense of despondency, nagging depression.
I couldn't even be bothered to look where I was going.
I ran straight into the hard bulk of The Fat Controller and was winded by the impact.
I had always suspected him of being rather more solid than the average person and this collision provided complete confirmation.
He was as rigid and unyielding as the rugby-tackling machine at school.
‘Well, if it isn't my little companion, my theatre-going pal.
Where are we off to this morning then, so sunk in our own fantasies and imaginings that we cannot be troubled to look out for vulnerable senior citizens, eh?’
As ever he answered his own question.
‘To the paper shop, I'll be bound, but there's no need to trouble yourself for I have the early edition right here.’
He pulled the local daily paper from under his arm and brandished it in the blue air as if it were a short sword.
‘We made the front page!’ he exulted, holding the rag up so that I could see the headline: ‘WOMAN DIES AT THEATRE ROYAL.
I began to tremble violently and would have fainted, had he not grabbed me by the elbow and guided me to a low wall, where I slumped down.
‘I can see that you're a trifle overcome,’ he said after a few moments.
‘Let me read you the copy: ‘A woman died last night during the interval at the Theatre Royal.’
What appalling style, even twenty years ago one could expect a better standard of English.
Anyway, no matter, it's a digression, where was I…yes: ‘The woman, who has yet to be named, was among a party of four attending Tea at Five for Six .
Her companions alerted theatre staff when it became clear that she was having difficulty breathing.
An ambulance was called but efforts made to revive her proved unsuccessful.
She was pronounced dead on arrival at Brighton General.’
‘Well, there you have it.
Not a pretty death, but as peaceful as she could have hoped for, given the circumstances.
Let me see, let me see, what's this: ‘A spokesman for the police said that, although certain aspects of the woman's death were unusual, they did not suspect foul play.’
Oh yes, oh yes indeed!
Ahaha, ha ha.
Of course not!
Why should they?
It was fair play, wasn't it, my lad, absolutely fair play.
Wouldn't ye agree, lad, wouldn't ye?’
MY UNIVERSITIES
Frigidity has only been better exemplified to me by the first psychotic woman I ever saw, who complained that her vagina contained a block of ice.
Anthony Storr
He was as good as his word.
For the five years after the murder of the woman at the Theatre Royal his interventions in my life remained purely educative.
He did not, as I had feared, ask me to perform covert assassinations on his behalf and nor did he insist on my using my eidetic capabilities to project myself into the noumenal world that he inhabited with such terrifying ease.
Naturally he couldn't forbear from upsetting me, nor ruining what slim remaining chance I had of being like anyone — let alone everyone — else.
He messed around with me emotionally, through dropping those bombshells of feeling — concerning my father, amongst other things — that I have alluded to before.
Nevertheless this was small beer for him.
In due course I left Varndean and went to do business studies at Sussex University.
For the first year I had a room on campus but I wasn't happy there so I returned to Cliff Top, where my mother put one of the caravans at my disposal.
By now there were only a few of them left, grouped like maintenance vehicles around The Fat Controller's wide-bodied jet of a home.
The bungalow had been more or less cancelled out by mother's renovations.
And arisen, phoenix-like, from its dusty and corrugated remains, was the tastefully false façade of Cliff Top, the hotel.
My time at university was, for a while at least, a happy one.
I enjoyed my course of study and felt that the practicalities of business were a perfect antidote to the magic that had dominated my adolescence.
Although we were sneered at by the arts and humanities students, those of us who were doing business studies felt, quite reasonably, that we were closer to the spirit of the age than the old hippies of the faculty.
People had begun to feel less ashamed about being greedy and of wanting more than their share of fairness.
I wasn't partisan politically but I did think that choice was important, whether it was which brand you chose or which person you decided to deride.
Here at least my disparate educations converged.
That first term I was very shy and awkward.
I found it almost impossible to mix with my fellow students.
I barely understood any of the cultural references that they took for granted.
Also I couldn't shake off the imprint of The Fat Controller's locutions.
His tendency towards pleonasm had infected me.
Often when attempting to explain some aspect of my studies to fellow students who were having difficulties, I would look up from the textbook we were sharing to see an expression of sheer disbelief pass across their faces.
I knew why, they had the queer sensation that they were being addressed by someone from a bygone age.
I was the repository for arcana of an exacting kind.
The Fat Controller forced upon me the conclusion that things were not at all as they seemed.
As yet my understanding of this was inchoate, but I never for a moment doubted that, while I might work hard and comprehend these studies quite thoroughly, the true meaning of my life lay somewhere else.
The laggardly limb of this awareness was tied firmly to the dominant emotion in my life, fear.
Together, with fear yanking the way forward, speculation and sentiment ran the three-legged race into the future.
It may surprise the reader (who after all is charged with the task of making an important decision), that I should talk of my time at university as a happy one and yet still speak of my dominant emotion as fear, but then the worst is yet to come.
The self-styled Brahmin of the Banal kept my fear-levels up to scratch by manifesting himself unexpectedly.
As I have said, even as a teenager I knew without having to ask that sexual intercourse would sap whatever magical powers I might have.
Yet I craved physical affection — the raw stuff of touch — Perhaps even more than emotional.
I felt preternaturally over-sexed, and despite being removed from The Fat Controller's proximate influence I still stuck to this rule.
I lubricated my eidetic  memory, priming it to summon up still more lurid fantasies, carnal changelings compensating for the real thing.
It got so bad I wasn't able to concentrate on my studies.
I couldn't open a book, attend a seminar, lecture or tutorial, even go to the library, without getting an erection.
I would have to slip away to toilets, down basement stairs, off into the closed stacks of the library and there strike the flint.
The friction burnt me, my imagination incandesced in the limelight of this magic lantern show.
At least these skits had grown in sophistication since my adolescence.
I became catholic in my lusts.
No longer did I desire conventions of little nymphets, each one wearing playboy's plastic name badge.
Instead I screwed around the crowd, all kinds of people, fat and thin, young and old, male and female.
I performed cunnilingus, sodomy, intercrural sex and even safe sex — long before it became fashionable.
I had become so eidetically adept that I could make these phantom partners mutate in mid-thrust, so that while I might penetrate a swivel-hipped virgin, clean and childishly scented, I would come in the flabby, dentureless, food-flecked mouth of an octogenarian.
This addiction to self-abuse began to tell on me.
I was crazed with wanking.
It was the lack of touch that really did me in.
Without the feeling of another touching me, I was starting to lose the sense of my own body.
I was becoming numb all over.
If only real hands could shape my contours, then at least I would know that they were still there.
In my second year matters came to a head.
Since moving back to Cliff Top my mother had boosted my grant.
I was able to buy a small car in which to make the fifteen-minute drive to the campus each day.
I would get up in the morning, step out of my caravan, face the ocean and do my exercises, followed by my ritual routine.
I had grown to be a large, lumpy sort of man.
My resemblance to my father — which had always been remarked upon when I was a child — was now startling.
I knew I wasn't attractive and I didn't help myself by dressing like a young fogey in tweed sportsjackets, flannel trousers and open-necked check shirts.
I was stuck in a time warp in every sense, one that encompassed my part of Cliff Top as well.
My mother's hotel may have elevated her from the raw stuff of commerce — so much so that she now subscribed to Country Living and other unspecialist periodicals — but the caravan enclosure was decaying anew.
They were flaking paint and hadn't been refurbished since I was fourteen.
The brake-pad bindweed had returned and everything was seized up in the early-seventies.
The Sussex campus was stuck in the past as well.
Built during a period of architectural optimism, when it was assumed that technology would triumph, it had been laid out in a series of oblong paved courtyards, surrounded by long, low, concrete-faced buildings, remarkable solely for their brutalism.
It always struck me as ironic that these buildings, which had been designed to make that present appear futuristic, now served so well to make this present look exactly like the recent past.
The funding was running down, clumps of weed had pushed up between the paving slabs, and whole layers of rendering were falling off the façades of the buildings, giving them a seedy, leprous aspect.
To cap it all most of the student body dressed to complement the period when the university was built.
They weren't following fashion — they were trailing far behind it.
Back at Cliff Top The Fat Controller was no longer in permanent residence.
The winter after the incident at the Theatre Royal he had started to absent himself.
Initially for a few days at a time, then for weeks, and eventually whole months.
It was like a rerun of the reel in which my father was edited out.
His explanation was ‘business interests’ and indeed, I did start to see discrete references to him, under his working name ‘Samuel Northcliffe’, in the financial and economic sections of the newspaper.
It appeared that his alter ego was an international financier of some kind.
The name Northcliffe was linked with raising equity on all five continents but not in such a conspicuous way that he himself garnered personal publicity.
I never saw a photograph of him published.
You might have thought these further disclosures would have had a powerful effect on me but, of course, I was inured to  surprise where this man was concerned.
I also knew better than to seek him out.
On the contrary, given the  formidable powers he had shown to me, I rather suspected that even during his absence he was keeping me under observation.
I was right.
The autumn of my second university year then.
Another autumn and another life-change.
Everything of importance has always happened to me in the autumn, every new departure has always presented itself within a dying context.
I saw a girl who I really fancied, I mean really.
Well, this was nothing new.
I knew what to do, incorporate her into the mass grave of my fantasy world; there her real charms would soon decay and get jumbled up with my rather more rotten visions.
Once she had been tarnished by my imagination, she would cease to have any power over me.
But I was slow to get started on this project and before I could something unforeseen happened.
She took a liking to me.
We were taking the same course module, ‘marketing and statistics’.
She was another young conservative, I guessed from a rather sheltered background.
Her sensible shoes, neat skirts and pressed blouses spoke of home-baked shortbread and Sunday school but she wasn't as naive as I imagined.
She was fine-boned and delicate, with auburn hair tied back in a leather clasp.
Her neck was perhaps a trifle long and her head rather small but her features were symmetrical and her brown eyes large.
Her name was June Richards.
She sat at the front during seminars and posed questions to our tutor that were more like statements.
She would raise her hand to gain his attention and then use a biro to punctuate what she said with a series of invisible bullet points.
The other students were all Cro-Magnons, Heavy Metal fans who scrawled graffiti on their course binders.
She was different, well informed and, still more attractive, she had a real enthusiasm for the idea of marketing.
She could illustrate her arguments with clever examples drawn from the real world of commerce.
After only three such seminars I was smitten.
June must have noticed me staring at her.
It was true, I couldn't keep my eyes from sprinting up her slim ankles, and fell-walking the contour lines of her sharp shoulders and her  breasts, breasts that were improbably close to her scenic collar bone.
But when she came up to me after that third seminar I was so shocked and embarrassed that I could barely speak.
I started shaking and my shoes squeaked with apprehension as I shuffled on the lino.
‘You're Ian, aren't you?’
There was something clipped and ex-colonial in her accent.
‘Y'yes.’
‘My name's June.
I'm doing the marketing module as well.’
‘I-I know.’
‘I'm sorry to bother you.
It's just that Mr Hargreaves says you keep excellent notes and I missed the tutorials last year for the econometrics module.
He thought you might be able to help out.’
‘Why weren't you here last year?’
I regretted the question immediately but there was no pulling back.
It sounded so intrusive, like the beginning of an interrogation, but she didn't seem to mind.
‘Well, my parents live in Kenya and I was going to study in Nairobi, but Moi has suspended the classes at the university for this year, so I applied to come here.’
‘Oh, I see.’
Kenya, Nairobi, Moi.
How exotic, how improbable.
‘These notes then?’
‘Yes, yes, of course.
I'm afraid I don't have them on me, but I can bring them tomorrow.’
The next day we companionably photocopied the notes together.
I had got up early that morning and done my best to make myself look presentable.
I still had no thought — for obvious reasons — of making any move on her but I felt it would be enough if she wasn't repelled by me.
She wasn't.
Perhaps the toner fluid intoxicated her — there were over a hundred sheets to copy — or maybe it was the lack of air in the photocopying room, but after we had done and she had commented favourably on the comprehensive and detailed nature of the notes, she asked me to go out with her.
Like a fool I accepted.
We went to some art-house cinema in Brighton.
I couldn't  concentrate on the film at all, I was so aware of her presence beside me in the flickering darkness.
I had to repeat whole sections of my ‘ritual register’, to stop myself from eidetiking, to stop myself from spoiling her image.
I sat tight in my seat, my big knees grating against the row in front, trying to ignore the agonising cramps that tore up my thighs.
Afterwards we went for a pizza at — of all places — Al Forno.
I hadn't set foot inside the place since my visit with The Fat Controller.
Despite this I was recognised.
Tommaso appeared as we came in from the street, hamming it up just the way I remembered.
‘Ah!
Meester Northcliffe's friend, you no come to see us for an age.
Whassamatter, you no like our pizza?’
‘Oh no, no, Tommaso…’
I slipped into character as well.
‘And with heem a pretty lady.
Welcome, welcome.
You shall have the best table.
Meester Northcliffe's special table.’
I could tell June was impressed.
Tommaso made me look like a mature man, an important man.
I wasn't taken in.
There was more complicity in his winks than was warranted.
As I had grown some six inches since he had last seen me, I didn't for a moment believe that his recognition was unprompted.
Over food and wine I drifted into intimacy with June.
Initially we talked of our course and our fellow students, but soon the conversation veered off into more personal matters.
June alluded to an unhappy affair with a boy back in Kenya, plainly giving me a message.
I found myself acting the part of a wooer only too well.
No matter that I had no experience, I had rehearsed this role for years, blocking everything out —right down to the way I would sit, ministering to the words of the desired object — yet never believing that I might actually perform.
‘He was a shit really.
I think he just wanted to use me.’
Her fingers drummed the table top.
She wore red nail varnish.
‘So I told him it was over.
I guess that was just another reason why I wanted to get away.’
Her cuticles were frayed, perhaps the nails were false?
I resisted the urge to take an eidetic peek by recollecting the pincered click of my own manicuring habits.
‘My aunt lives in Hastings, so my bloody overprotective parents  thought it would be OK for me to come to Sussex.
I live with Auntie, she keeps an eye on me.’
‘Oh I see.’
‘You're a local, aren't you, Ian?’
‘Yeah, I live near Saltdean, always have.’
I told her some Cliff Top stuff, about my sort of overprotective mother and my absent father.
I knew I shouldn't but I couldn't help it.
It seemed so right, the low burr of two voices in the pool of candlelight.
The waiter brought coffee and some amaretti.
June unwrapped the flimsy tissue paper from one of the almond biscuits and rolled it carefully into a tube.
She was tanned and her hair was fairer at the roots.
I could make out the tracery of blonde down on the edge of her cheek.
‘Look, see this?’
She took the paper tube and lit one end with the candle.
Then she set it in the middle of a saucer.
‘Now watch, this is magic.’
The tube burnt blue and orange transforming the paper into a black filigree.
But before it was consumed entirely, it lifted off and shot up towards the painstyled plaster of the ceiling.
It fell back towards us and I caught the filmy ash on another plate.
I felt elegant, masterful, catching that ash.
She looked at me with a smile that implied fusion.
I insisted on paying the bill and on opening the door for her as if I were an ordinary gallant.
We were walking along the front towards the Palace Pier when she took my arm.
Outside the Metropole she turned to face me and we kissed.
That kiss, my first, sang my mouth into existence.
Her conduit arms around my shoulders — as I had suspected —threw the switch for a sensation of total embodiment, which surged up to encompass me.
I felt vivified by that kiss.
Before I had been lifeless jumble of miscellaneous body parts but now I was Frankenstein's monster, shocked by lust into coherence and action.
‘Do you really live in a caravan?’
Her breath was on my neck.
‘Yeah, but it's not a gypsy caravan.
The caravanning life isn't  all it's painted up to be.
This one's a grotty little fibreglass thing, there's nothing romantic about it.’
‘Still, I'd like to see it.
Can we go there?’
‘Yeah, all right.
It's on our way back to Hastings.’
I fully intended to show her the caravan and then take her home.
I felt safe — she seemed like a demure young woman.
Even if I tried it on I thought she would stop me.
But back at Cliff Top in the crisp violet night, we stood watching the lights of the ships in the Channel and we kissed again.
Although I couldn't see her face properly, her tongue was painting my image by numbers.
Her cool hands slid up under my jacket, plucking at my shirt, pulling it out at the waist.
And my hands, my heavy hands, they glided over her with careful diffidence, not so much touching or feeling but defining her anatomy.
They located her shoulder blades, her spine, the small of her back, and then slid between our compressing bodies and travelled up to the tiny soft immensities of her bosom.
For the first time since my balls had dropped I felt wholly in the moment, unafflicted by my meddlesome internal projectionist.
All my wank footage lay in dusty spirals on the cutting-room floor.
I was free.
Then, somehow, we were in my caravan.
The fold-away bed was let down.
Without shyness, without hiding ourselves from each other, we undressed.
She pulled the leather clasp from her hair and shook it free in a whirl of golden brown.
She unbuttoned her blouse.
I dropped my trousers.
As I stood on one foot to remove them, the little cabin shifted on its suspension but there was no embarrassment, not even in the disparity between the utility of our underwear and the transcendence of our desire.
We were alone together in some prelapsarian grotto.
Her body was ochre against the light-blue side of the caravan.
I held her to me as we fell across the bed, feeling her lithe life-force twitching against me as beautiful as a rainbow trout, leaping from a mill race into my outstretched arms.
She touched me with confidence.
I couldn't believe it.
Both her hands around my penis, cosseting it, restraining it, I licked her neck, the backs of my fingers prinked her pink nipples.
We sighed.
The heel of my hand was firm on her mons, my  fingertips strummed gently at her lips, parted them.
We rippled on the yellow sheet, the counterpane — and us — long gone.
She led me on, instructing me, indicating her desires with soft tweaks and softer pats.
In due course, it was time.
She moved back against the pillow and drew me on top of her.
Her legs fell open and oh!
The kid softness of her thighs, the honey of her breath, the sweet intensity of it.
My urge to enter her, to be inside her, was stronger than anything I had ever felt.
‘Yes!’ she sighed.
‘Now!’ she gasped.
I felt the beginnings of a slithering enfoldment.
I looked out of the tiny window over her shoulder, willing myself to make it slow, to make it last.
A hard square of orange light sprang on in the darkness.
Someone — I realised with a start — was in The Fat Controller's caravan.
Beneath me June's body froze, becoming utterly immobile, lifeless.
Sex time stood still.
The little door of my caravan squealed open.
He stood there in full evening dress, the shiny black rim of his topper slicing across the bulge of his massive brow.
His Partagas perfecto was champed between his inner tube lips, a diamond as big as a buttercup sparkled on the starched front of his dress shirt, a long white silk scarf was casually looped around his lack of a neck.
‘Good evening,’ he said, as I scuttled like a giant shaved rodent into the furthest corner of the caravan.
‘Trying to have a little fuck-for-real, are we?’
I looked back at the bed, at June rigid in ecstasis , her eyes blank and upturned.
‘No need to worry about her.’
The Fat Controller entered the caravan casually, his eyes darting about taking in my few effects, our scattered clothes, the pile of economics books on the little table.
‘Got an ashtray?
No?
No matter.’
He flicked two inches of ash on the floor and sat down on the edge of the bed I had just vacated.
June's body rocked longitudinally on its curved spine, then fell sideways.
It was as stiff and brittle as a lifesize plaster maquette.
‘Cat got yer' tongue?’
I was gibbering quietly, I felt the head of my penis stickily retreat back inside its hood of skin.
‘You needn't worry about her,’ he repeated, gesturing at the naked girl.
‘She'll get her climax — which is more than you  could have managed.
I'll engineer it myself after we've had a little chat.
You shan't be shamed for she'll think you a great lover, a real Lothario, a dandy Don Juan.
And the very fact that the experience will never ever be repeated will make the remembrance burn for her a hundred times as bright.
‘D'ye see that?
When she's married ten years hence, she'll compare her husband's performance with yours and he'll come off worse — every time.
Memories are cruel to the present in that way and, as far as sexual intercourse is concerned, it is axiomatic that familiarity breeds contempt.’
Predictably, he chortled at his own execrable pun.
I was still gibbering.
Muffled bleats and strangled gurgles leaked from my lips.
‘Oh do can it!
Come here, put a pair of trousers on or something.
We need to talk and I'm tired.
I've just been driven back from Covent Garden and I want to get to bed.
You are a very lucky young man indeed.
If Tommaso hadn't troubled to have me paged at the opera, you would certainly have performed coitus with this young woman and d'ye know what would have happened then?’
‘N-no.’
Somehow I had managed to squirm back into my trousers.
I crouched on the tiny oblong floor, clutching the only breasts that were left for me to clutch — my own.
‘Your penis would have broken right off inside her and I mean that quite literally.
I thought you understood about coitus, I thought you appreciated what being my licentiate entailed?’
‘Y-yes, but —’
‘My dear boy.’
He was conciliatory.
‘I know this must be difficult for you, perhaps even a little traumatic, but don't take it to heart.
All in good time you will have a bed partner and let me tell you, you will care for her far more than you ever could for this one.
It's a function of your relationship to me, d'ye see?
I have, how shall I put it, organised an elective affinity for you already.
Everything in that department is in train, so don't spoil it.’
He was resting his huge hand on June's angled knee as casually as if it were the arm of a chair.
He twisted his Redwood trunk on the bed and looked down at her from under his lashless lids.
He scrutinised the rictus of her pleasure, which was rendered  grotesque by its immobility.
We both stared at her vagina.
Its slick lips ‘o'ed back at us.
The Fat Controller blew a plume of cigar smoke at it from out of the corner of his mouth; the blue strands interleaved with her browner ones.
‘Right, that's all, I'm off to bed now.
I'm absolutely fagged out, grand opera is too, too fatiguin'.
I had to sit next to a monstrously fat man.
It was bloody hot in the stalls and his sweat stank.
It was as if he were shitting out of every pore.’
He spoke casually and with no sense of irony.
Then he stood and gathered his hat, cigar and white gloves together in one hand.
Pausing at the door he turned once more and extended the middle finger of his right hand towards the bed.
I noticed for the first time that it was dreadfully long.
The very tip of the finger began to oscillate.
It seemed to be locked on to some invisible beam that was projecting from out of June's vagina.
The colour rushed back into her face, her back arched still further, she whimpered and thrashed, her outstretched hands clutching at the edge of the mattress.
The Fat Controller addressed me over the sounds of her orgasm, paying no attention to them at all.
We might have been in a shopping concourse and her cries some strange species of muzak:
‘Ah!
Ahh!
Ahhhherrr!
O — O…’
‘…
I have business at the university tomorrow, so I'll come and find you afterwards.
It occurs to me,
‘H-h-a hnh…ha, ha, Ha!…’
‘…that I have been neglecting your education.
I can be of more service vis-à-vis your ambitions than I have heretofore.
Consider it,
‘Yes, oh yes, oh-yesss…’
She was subsiding.
‘…something by way of a compensation for this.’
He indicated the young woman he was dehumanising on the bed.
‘Now, pop your trews off and give her a cuddle; and make sure she's out of here soon, I don't want her mooning about in the morning.’
He turned to leave but then swivelled back once more.
‘Remember, put your pecker in her or any other doxy and’— he held up his stogie braced between three fingers —‘this is what will happen.’
He snapped it in two — gave me a leer — and was gone, as suddenly as he had arrived.
I did as I was told.
While I cuddled June I cried, wept hot tears.
She was terribly moved.
She cleaved to me, slipping her legs between mine.
I explained, as gently as possible, that my mother was very old-fashioned and always checked up on me in the morning.
About 3 a.m.
I managed to get her into the car and drove her back to her aunt's in Hastings.
Powering the skateboard of a car back along the coast road, home to Cliff Top, I felt its wheels skittering on the damp surface and my arms yearned to yank the steering wheel hard round, ending this nightmare.
Only The Fat Controller's talk of ‘elective affinity’ prevented me.
Now, of course, I wish I had.
The following day June sought me out, after a seminar on management technique.
We stood on the concrete set of the main concourse while extras thronged about.
‘How about tonight?’ she said and the pathos in her ignorant unknowing enquiry almost made me gag.
My mind flew back to the sight of The Fat Controller's cigar.
I had trodden on its shattered corpse that morning on my way out of the caravan.
‘I — I can't, really, not tonight.
Sorry.’
‘What's up?
Have you got to go visiting with Mummy?
I thought we might do some studying together.
You know I don't want ‘us’ to get in the way of work.’
‘Haha.
No, I'd love to.
It's just there's something else I must do.
I can't really talk about it now.
I'll tell you tomorrow.’
I couldn't bear her look of hurt expectancy any more, so I tore myself away from her face and walked off.
I realised that, if I was going to have to break with her, the process of rejection might as well get started right away.
As I reached the end of the student union building I looked back and gave a little finger-wiggle.
Even from fifty yards away I could see her pained expression.
Turning the sharp corner of toughened glass with its graph-paper patterning of buried wire, I ran into someone — or some thing.
Although I was walking at a normal pace the impact stunned me.
My head rang with that particular vibration of accidental pain, a tintinnabulating effect that always feels as if it should have preceded its cause — by way of a warning.
‘You're rather good at walking into me, aren't you?’
He was in a Prince of Wales check this morning.
The sight of such an expanse of tiny squares, flowing up and around his massive elevation, produced more of an architectural than a sartorial impression.
‘I trust your inattention is a function of scholarly absorption, rather than adolescent spooning.’
‘What difference can it possibly make?’
It was a measure of my despair that I dared to be so disdainful.
‘Don't get chippy, boy, I cannot abide it.’
But although he was terse, he didn't rage at me the way I expected him to.
I suppose I half-hoped that he would zap me with extinction the way he had zapped June with orgasm the night before but his horrible middle finger was folded around a reeking cheroot and showed no sign of flexing.
He put my felonious body in the stocks of his arm and led me off in the direction of what passed for a garden at Sussex, a series of brick-edged parallelograms that couldn't have looked more artificial if they had been planted with cathode-ray tubes, instead of hardy perennials.
To anyone who was watching we must have looked the very picture of youthful preoccupation and parental concern.
‘What have you been studying this morning then, eh?’
‘Management techniques.’
‘Oh yes, and what are they?’
‘Well’— I hated myself for responding to his interest —‘we were looking at different kinds of organisational hierarchy and how to construct optimal decision-making procedures in corporate contexts.’
‘I see.
Can you really give any credence to this ordure?’
‘I'm sorry?’
‘This crap.’
‘Well, it's essential, isn't it?
I mean somebody has to have an idea of what's to be done and how it should be communicated to the employees.’
I was earnest, like any aspiring young person trying to draw out approval.
He seemed to ignore the substance of what I had said.
‘What Is To Be Done?’ he mused.
‘That's what I said to Vladimir Ilyich.
Naturally he cribbed it for the title of a  pamphlet, when what I actually meant by it was some advice.
I urged him to have a few of the young daughters of the gentlefolk before he established the provisional government at the Smolny Institute.
He was headstrong enough, although not as cold and passionless as they later made out.’
We went on walking for a while, in silence.
Eventually The Fat Controller pulled me up in front of a viciously scalped hedge of box.
He took the cheroot from his mouth and peered at its slobbered-on green end, as if it were a reptilian rump about to grow a new tail.
‘I thought you were interested in products,’ he said, a wheedling tone entering his voice.
‘I can help you in that area.’
‘We've done merchandising, purchasing, sourcing and inventory auditing.’
‘That's not what I'm talking about.
What I can help you with is an understanding of the nature of a product that goes far beyond these crudities; these academic categories masquerading as truths.’
‘I'm interested in the marketing side of things.
How to evolve a strategy to actually sell a product.
You know, advertising, sales promotion, that sort of thing.’
‘Of course, chip off the old block, aren't you?’
‘Yeah, I know ‘contemptible Essene, cloistral nonentity’, that's what you said to me.’
‘You have a fair recollection, boy, I'll grant you that.
Tell me, how much of that recollection is visual and how much verbal?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, do you first need to form a picture of the two of us sitting in that café discussing your father — an eidetic image — before the words come to you, or not?’
‘I suppose I do need to —’
‘…
So you were being disingenuous.
You know exactly what I mean.’
His thumb and forefinger pinched the sides of my neck, one big pad pressing into my carotid artery.
My head roared with neon pins and needles, at once visual and sensual.
He went on with the conversation, in my mind, ‘Do you remember your underpants then?’
I was slumped against  him, almost fainting, conscious only that he had led me behind a red-brick loggia, obviously so that we would be out of sight of the people in the main concourse while he dispatched me.
‘Well, do you?’
‘W-what about my underpants?’
I stuttered, coughed.
Why wouldn't he get it over with?
‘I want you to recall the label of said underpants, summon it up as fully as you possibly can.
I want to know whether the legend thereon was printed, or machine-embroidered; whether the label itself was stitched into the pants, or appliquéd in some fashion; whether the label indicates an element of design, or whether the information it retails relates purely to the material constitution of the aforementioned pants.
Can you do that?’
He knew I could, he was toying with me.
‘Now when you have the image, let me see it.’
‘W-whaddya mean?’
‘You know what I mean.’
He relaxed his death-hold on me and made me sit down with him on a convenient bench.
I idly noted that a brass plate declared that this bit of garden furniture was sacred to someone's memory.
I wished it was mine.
I did as he said.
The label was sewn on to the crinkled, elasticated hem of the pants, which were boxer shorts, blue-and-white-striped like mattress ticking.
The legend on the label read ‘Barries’ Menswear, 212 King's Road, London, 100% Egyptian Cotton.’
It was easy for me to summon up this everyday vision, because whenever I sat on the toilet the hem was stretched between my calves, and if I leant forward it was always the salient object in my view.
‘Good.
Now, what I am about to teach you is an extension of your eidetic capability which you will find of great use in your intended career.
There is no word, at least in current usage, that does justice to this advanced technique, so I have had to coin a term of my own.
I call it ‘retroscendence’.
He paused and looked at me, as if trying to gauge what kind of impression this hokum was making.
‘Before we retroscend allow me a few prefatory remarks on your pants.
Firstly, let us refer to them simply as ‘shorts’.
You are too callow to be aware of this but the term ‘boxer shorts’ is merely a marketing  neologism, coined in order to revamp a demand for what in England was perceived as an outmoded type of underwear.
In America where the loose, cotton, mid-thigh-length male undergarment has consistently maintained its market share, there has never been any need to call these things anything but shorts.
‘A second point, you are not conspicuously dandyish, indeed, I would say that you have grown to adult size with but little appreciation of the value of effective turn-out.
Be that as it may, I perceive in your decision to purchase these shorts — you did purchase these shorts, didn't you?’
‘Yes.’
‘An attempt, albeit muted, to get to grips with a world beyond Saltdean.
I picture you on a trip up to London, perhaps for a day's work experience at the offices of some conglomerate.
Am I right?’
‘You're right.’
‘In your lunch hour you head down the King's Road from Sloane Square.
You walk and walk, staring at the chic emporia.
Here's one that sells just belt buckles, here's another exclusively devoted to pointed boots, or country and westernalia, or whatever.
It hardly matters.
You do not intend to enter.
You would feel yourself embarrassed, shy, in front of the shop assistant, who would be so much more metropolitan, more sophisticated, than you.
Instead you peer inside and try to calculate the merchandising policy: what value of stock is required, per metre of shelf space, to meet overheads and instil profit?
Am I right?’
‘Yes.’
His voice was hypnotic, dreamy.
‘Of course I am.
Nonetheless, you do still have some vanity, don't you?
You still have the shame of the short-trousered recent past.
You still — God knows why — wish to imagine that someone will inadvertently examine your underwear after the car crash of sexual congress.
So after toddling about for a while you go into Barries’ and point out the shorts where they lie in the window, interleaved with their fellows.
But I'm getting ahead of myself, when all I really want to teach you is the full history of such a product.
That's the title of this lecture: ‘The History of the Product’, and like all good modern lectures — intended simply to garnish knowledge rather than impart it —this one uses visual aids.’
The big hand was on my neck again, twisting it like the focus grip of some humanoid camera.
The autumnal trees, spindly, moulting, were cast into darkness as if the wan sun had been eclipsed.
I felt myself being pulled backwards, upwards, so that my visual field did indeed resemble that of a camera, a camera in some computer-graphics title sequence.
The Sussex campus was shrinking below me into a collection of children's play houses, then models, then crumbs, then fly droppings.
Until the cars moving along the university's peripheral roads were silverfish and the whole scene was dappled with low-lying cloud.
Then we were higher still and the earth curved away from us, showing a nimbus of atmosphere at its edge.
The Fat Controller spoke inside of me again.
‘Look up above you, look at the bare-faced cheek of the infinite.’
I did as he bade me.
Up there, set among the unblinking stars like some branding of the cosmos, was that selfsame label, the label in my boxer shorts.
‘You see,’ he said, ‘retroscendence enables us to take any element in our visual field and, as it were, unpack its history.
We have chosen your shorts, I now propose to instruct you in their origin and past life.
Please do not be confused by the apparent dissolution of the integrity of your visual field.
Remember that the purest of solipsism is indeed realism.
For, if I am the world’— we were heading down again, his nails digging into my flesh, I could make out the Eastern Mediterranean —‘then the world must be real.
Isn't that so?’
In the flat land of the Delta the babies cry themselves to sleep in the airless shade, while everyone else labours in the scintillating sun.
When the dun evening comes the kids go down to the irrigation channels for some bilharzia bathing.
They have little to look forward to, save for fat legs, flopping in the silt of some riverine beach.
My shorts were distributed over a half-acre of plants in the sharp silvery light of this place, in the form of white balls, fibrous globs.
So fluffy to see but so hard to the touch.
‘Regard those buds,’ said The Fat Controller, ‘for throughout the long day of pluck and twist they turn into barbs and after years of this constant abrading, a deadened rind is added to the pluckers’hands.
This is the cotton workers' equivalent of Repetitive Stress Syndrome.
In due course we will witness similar, half a world away on the Mile End Road.’
I next found myself lying at the bottom of a crude hopper of duck boards which was set on top of an irrigation dyke.
The fruit of these people's labour (‘Their name is El Azain,’ he said, and his voracious lips seemed to suck on my lobes, his sharp tongue to probe my synapses) fell about my face.
Then we were off, emptied along with the cotton into the truck that transported the El Azains' harvest, together with that of the five other families that made up this producers' co-operative, to the local town to meet the buyer.
The town was an organic place.
A compost heap of soft walls that gently crumbled, flowing down to join the mud at their feet.
Eventually the earth would be dug out, remoulded and cast once more in the form of bricks, which would take their place in fresh walls that in due course would crumble again.
Our dyad looked on as Mohammed Sherif, the co-operative head, aged and bloated by dietary tedium, went through the formalities with the buyer.
They drank thé à menthe from dirty glasses, while a charcoal lump fizzed in the clay bowl of the hookah.
From time to time Sherif's woolly old head, loosely wrapped in a dirty headdress, would fall back against the fly-speckled surface of the remaining quarter of a red sign.
This dolorous thing proclaimed ‘oca-Cola’ in Arabic.
As this went on, the point of view without extension that was myself and The Fat Controller accompanied the product-of-the future as it was unloaded from the truck and heaped in a stall of warped boards.
A man with one nostril pulled a stiff tarpaulin over us.
‘There is no other buyer, d'ye see?’ said The Fat Controller.
‘The bargaining isn't even a formality, it's just an empty ritual.
Sherif must accept the price he is offered if the five families are to have any hope of paying off their lengthening tab at the provisioner's and if — haha, a'haha — they want their thin  children to live to grow thinner!
Look here’— we peeked out —‘he's thinking to himself: This may be my last harvest.
No such luck, I'm afraid.’
The Fat Controller and I next became the cotton entirely.
We were jolted from the Delta to the coast, where we disappeared into a giant galvanised iron shed.
Here we were subjected to a process of pounding and separating, carding and spinning.
Until at last I saw him shooting off ahead of me in the form of a long lumpy thread, vibrating with moisture, which stretched ectoplasmically into the maw of the shuttling frame.
He cried out, ‘Here we go!’ and I followed on.
The machinery clanked up and over and up and over again, gulping down first him, then the shorts-to-be, then me.
‘Bloody lucky’— he spoke like a harp out of the strings of half-constructed fabric —‘that this old Schliemann-Hoffer has already caught its finger quota for today.
D'ye see, little hands have to struggle to free the trapped weft before the frame drops?
If they aren't quick enough — ouch!
Blood as good as yours or mine creatin' a sort of moiré effect and condemning your shorts to the wastage pile.’
Before we set off again, on along the coast and then across the sea, The Fat Controller saw fit to bifurcate our strange awarenesses.
So that, while one part of me remained intimate with the cotton, another separate centre of cartoon existence accompanied those tokens which served, through their concatenation and order, to mirror parallel developments in the world of objects.
So it was that I lay in honeycombs of tiny compartments, stacked into loose piles and sheaves with onion-skin leaves of paper.
I waited to be clipped and pinned, stamped and spiked.
Latterly I was digitalised and pulsed my way across the dark convexities of visual-display units.
I thought to myself, even as it happened, that this winking of my very self-consciousness was a nice expression of the value I represented.
Meanwhile my cotton body was wound on to great bolts, each one five metres long.
Although the bolts were thick, I still bent in the middle when I was lifted and carried, a man at either of my ends.
I was wadded along with my fellows into a  container and then — darkness.
A long, long, unutterably tedious wait in the lint-filled darkness, until at last I felt the tension of the crane and realised that I was being lowered into the hold.
A juggernaut roaring, an ultrasonic shuddering, the smell of air-borne hydrocarbons, the sensation of pores opening to admit grit.
‘All right?’ asked The Fat Controller.
‘Not a lot to see in the hold of that ratty freighter, was there?’
‘No.’
‘That's why I've brought you here.’
Here was the Old Kent Road.
We were looking across it at a slice-shaped building, calcined with pollution.
It stood like a slice of stale chocolate cake, marooned in a tar ox-bow, that had become a cul-de-sac when the main  thoroughfare ploughed another course.
Over the portico, cut into the rendering, were the words ‘Success House’.
‘Good that, isn't it?’
His voice was muffled by something —could it be that he was smoking a cigar even whilst disembodied?
‘A nice irony.
The façade proclaims success, but behind it the building dwindles to nothing.
Consider those stately columns, regard the coils of plaster vine that trail from the windowsills, meditate on the dados in the shape of fasces that stud its pitted hide.’
‘Ye-es.’
‘Does not the whole ensemble speak to you of imperial confidence, a global network of industry?’
‘S'pose so.’
‘And yet all there is inside is one old Jew.
Zekel is his name.’
‘I know that.
What I mean is, when I was a number on one of those screens, I saw his name alongside me.’
‘Quite so, for it is he who is responsible for importing the schmutter that will be made into your shorts.
He is a cotton factor; and look over there.’
I found myself looking.
‘Here, if I am not much mistaken, comes his customer.’
A youngish Greek man was sidling a blue Porsche into the alleyway alongside Success House.
The car was so low it  looked as if a giant had tried to stub it out and it was clear that getting out of the bucket seat gave the Greek momentary altitude sickness.
He looked around warily as he locked up.
‘See him glance round like that?
He's worried that if Zekel knows he has a Porsche, the Jew will drive a harder bargain and the haggling between them — which is already prolonged — will become interminable.
‘The Greek's name is Vassily Antinou and let me tell you, he's an even deeper mine of stupid contradiction than you are.
His father  quarrelled with the Colonels over some detail of graft.
Naturally the adolescent Antinou, stranded in plump London, elevated the exile into something political.
It s so typically English that this rebel should end up with his own sweat shop in Clapton — you'll see it for yourself in due course.
All his socialist rhetoric has faded into spurious concerns over the man-management of twenty women-in-nylon.
Poor Cypriots who have no option but to look on, while their boss — who is suited by Anzio, shod by Hoage's, and shirted by Barries’— rants up and down the linoleum batting at the flexes of their sewing machines, and talking of productivity deals and workers' share options.
Pathetic, eh?’
We were inside Success House looking out.
Those selfsame stately columns framed a view of the immense rumpled surface of South London.
The factor sat behind a roll-top desk; he was so bent and atrophied by arthritis that he looked like a crustacean clad in a suit.
‘Whaddya want, Vassily?’
He clearly thought the Greek who leant against the  doorjamb was a hoot.
He picked a newly constructed swatch of samples up from the desk in front of him and chucked it at Antinou, who caught the flopping thing one-handed and proceeded to fondle it familiarly.
‘This one,’ said Antinou, pulling out a sample and rubbing it between his finger and thumb.
‘That's called ‘getting the silk’, ' said The Fat Controller,sotto voce , ‘now watch, he'll yank it hard to check the tensility.’
He was right.
‘Egyptian cotton,’ sighed Zekel.
‘I bought it myself at auction — it's still bonded.’
Antinou went on fondling the  piece of cloth that was once a fluffy ball on the flat delta.
‘How much?’ he said at length.
The Factor named a price, Antinou countered and so it went on for quite a while.
The Fat Controller and I were back inside the bolt when it arrived from the bonded warehouse at Felixstowe.
The van doors swung open and as Antinou's lads eased us out we were treated to a 6 a.m. view of Clapton.
It looked profoundly underexposed, like a photograph rejected by Quality Control.
‘See him,’ said The Fat Controller.
A languid black man was floating around, elegantly suited.
‘That's Crispin.
He's the originator of the Barries’ look, he's the man behind your shorts.’
‘Hold up, lads!’
The black man let his hand fall on the bolt of cotton.
He pulled a fold of cloth loose and, with tender movements, as if he were sensually unwrapping some erogenous zone, he felt the cloth.
He bunched it and pulled at it, finally he pleated it between his knuckles, before letting it fall back.
He went off in the direction of some green doors that bore the legend ‘Narcissus Clothing’, muttering, ‘That'll do, that'll do.’
‘You see,’ said The Fat Controller once Crispin had disappeared, ‘your shorts already had shape and form — in his mind.
Now he's found their substance.
Shall we go on?’
We were on the King's Road.
The frontage of Barries' Menswear was pseudo-cottagey, a waist-high tracery of white plaster and black beams surmounted by plate-glass windows.
‘There he is, that's Barry — Barry Mercer.’
A plump man, piscine, his tail end fading to little leather pumps, came out of the shop gesticulating, clutching his sweating ginger head.
Crispin followed behind.
‘Of course his real name is Morgenstern.
His father was a bespoke tailor on the Mile End Road.
You know I was talking of cotton and Repetitive Stress Syndrome?
Well, Mercer's father had exactly the same rinds of dead flesh on his hands that we saw in the Delta.
‘Barry couldn't change his name until his father died — and he certainly wouldn't have brought Crispin home.
His father would have said, ‘We sell to schwartzers, we don't do business  with them.’
But Barry's mother is too polite for that, whenever Crispin goes round he gets schneken and the photo album like anyone else.
Shall we listen in?’
‘Accessorise, that's what you do if you want to establish a designer concept,’ said Crispin.
His nostrils were cavernous and so finely edged that they seemed made of paper.
‘But what can we accessorise?’
Mercer whined.
‘I had to go up to Clapton yesterday and haggle with Antinou for hours over that bloody Egyptian cotton.
Whaddya want it for?
We don't have a range of clothes, a collection, that requires accessories.’
‘No matter.’
Crispin was imperturbable, ‘We'll just do the accessories.
Antinou can turn out boxer shorts for less than 50p a unit.
We can do shirts and socks as well—’
His words were abruptly cut off.
We were back at the university, sitting on the bench as if nothing had happened.
The empty ornamental pond was choked with rotten leaves, starlings blew about the place like avian litter.
The Fat Controller had a large gunmetal cigar case open in one hand.
He was studying it reverently, as if it were some breviary of tobacco.
He said, ‘You have to remember that selecting the right cigar is an act of intuition rather than analysis.
It's no good looking at the cigars available and attempting to choose one on the basis of certain criteria.
Rather, you must wait for the cigar that is — so to speak — ordained, to speak to you.
To say ‘smoke me’.
This one' — he picked one up gingerly, near to the tip —‘says it is the reincarnation of Cleopatra's asp.
I'll buy that.’
He lit it with his Zippo.
‘I thought connoisseurs never lit their cigars with petrol lighters.’
‘Whassat?
Oh well, yes, I suppose strictly speaking that is true but it's a mistake to view a sensual pleasure as being a single datum.
Rather, every such experience is manifold.
If your palate is sufficiently developed you can distinguish the tobacco from the petrol.
I myself have rather a taste for petrol.
Picked it up during a little sojourn among the Australian aboriginals…but anyway, we digress.
What did you think of my little lesson: ‘The History of the Product’?’
‘It was very interesting.
Was it an hallucination?’
‘Don't be so bloody stupid!
What's the point in my spending time on you, cultivating you, being perfectly decent towards you, if you're going to manifest such infantile credulousness, eh?’
‘I don't call depriving me of my girlfriend being perfectly decent.’
‘Still hung up on that, are you?
Come now, you cannot possibly imagine that anything could have come of your relation with that chit.
In your heart of hearts you know yourself to be incapable of such mutuality, such abandonment of self —’
‘But what about my ‘elective affinity’?’
‘That's altogether different.’
‘Because that's what you want?’
‘Quite so.
Now, as to‘The History of the product,’ an ability to retroscend in this fashion will be of inestimable value to you, it will mean that when you are engaged in assessing the demand for a particular product you can look at similar and instantly unpack the portfolio of its genesis.
There is of course another aspect to this, the cultural superstructure that corresponds to this historical basis.
I refer, of course, to the discreet advertisements in the quality press, people mouthing fatuously ‘Oh Barries’, when they see what shirt you're wearing, the flyers Mercer manages to insinuate on to the information desks in some of the major London hotels, and so on and so forth .
‘Naturally your shorts are a very simple example of this.
When it comes to products that are in more diffuse circulation the retroscendent experience can be considerably more disorientating.
Although a skilled retroscender may learn how to pilot himself through all the historical imagery available I fear that lies some way off for you.
In the meantime — until you have made your bones, that is — you will needs have to confine yourself to asking my assistance when you wish to retroscend, got that?
Good.
Now’— he brought himself face to face with his Rolex —‘tempus fucks it.
I have a plane to catch.
I will see you anon.’
He could never say goodbye or hello, he just came — and went.
I was left on the memorial bench, more isolated than ever.
Naturally June couldn't understand why it was that I went on cutting her.
And cut her I did.
I even had to resort to missing seminars and tutorials, so as to avoid having to speak to her.
Initially she was simply bewildered by this but soon she was plain angry.
She left a series of notes in my pigeonhole that started off plaintively: ‘I'm very confused by what happened between us the other night.
I thought you were a caring sort of person, I can't understand why you won't speak to me now.
Is it something to do with the sex?’(how right she was) but ended up abusively: ‘Ian Wharton, you are the fucking male chauvinist pig to end all fucking male chauvinist pigs.
You take a woman out and then dump her.
Don't you care at all how people feel?’
If only she could have known how much I cared.
If only she could have seen me skulking around at Cliff Top, the very picture of melancholy.
Sitting drooped over walls, utterly dejected.
I felt the full force of her criticism.
Somewhere in my abdomen was a sac of warm caring, a bladder of emotional nutrition, distended with the urge to burst and engender another's heart.
But I was constrained, fearfully constrained.
Cut off more than ever from the society of my peers, I fell back on my mother.
Since I had been at the university we had seen far less of each other.
It was an extension — or so I thought — of the tact she had always shown to me as a child that she didn't impose.
However, when I took to hanging about in the new house, when I watched her while she chatted to her staff and guests, or entertained the local burghers, or  genteelly remonstrated with her suppliers and various tradesmen over the phone, I began to see this seeming tact as an extension of that complicity I had long been aware of.
Mother, I sensed, didn't just know a little about Mr Broadhurst, she knew all about him.
That's why she was the first to know he was moving out.
I was in my caravan, trying to study on a Sunday afternoon in mid-winter.
I was reading some gimcrack book about economics, full of those pictograms that fall half-way between diagrams and drawings, when I heard the thudding of a diesel  engine running under the roar of the gale coming in off the sea and over the whirr of the fan heater that was marinading my feet.
The rounded rectangle of my little window on the world gave me a television picture of the site.
Outside in the howling, flobs of rain were twisting and twining around the few remaining hutches.
I felt a sense of profound foreboding and then I saw them, the gyppos.
Naturally I recalled who they were at once —the hawkish profiles, the jet tangles of hair were doubly outlined as the window of their truck slid by mine.
I was outside in an instant.
Their brakes must have locked as they were coming down the slope, for there was a twenty-yard slice of chocolate loam where their wheels had scoured the turf.
‘What are you up to!’
I shouted over the gale.
‘Look what you've done.
This is private property, you know.’
Even as I shouted I sensed the utter absurdity of my words and the ludicrous figure I presented, a slovenly, plump young man, so obviously clumsy and ineffectual, rabbit's ears of shirt-tail escaping from my waistband.
They leapt from the cab in just the way I remembered, lithe and dangerous.
‘Gerrart-of-it!’ said the larger of the two, moving purposively towards me.
‘Come fer thass.’
He indicated the shiny fuselage of Mr Broadhurst's caravan.
‘But where is Mr Broadhurst?’
‘I dunno, laddie.
S'not a problem.
Gor'all pepperworks 'ere.’
He thrust the edge of a clipboard at me like a weapon.
The other gyppo had come up by his shoulder.
He was flexing and twisting his simian arms, as if limbering up for violence.
‘D'jew wanna argue, muvverfuckah,’ he spat.
I broke from them, and ran back up the slope to my mother's house.
I ran the length of the new hallway, with its Wilton carpeting,faux hunting prints and brocaded wallpaper.
I found her in the back kitchen, standing over the chef who was rolling out pastry.
‘Those gyppos are here,’ I panted.
‘They say they're going to take Mr Broadhurst's caravan.’
She looked at me critically, lifting her new gold-rimmed bifocals on to the bridge of her nose.
‘Try not to track mud into the house, Ian, and don't you think you should drop the  term ‘gyppos’ from your vocabulary — it's awfully common.’
Thora Hird was dispensing homilies on the television; she was sitting in front of a Grecian urn.
‘But, Mum.
He's never said anything to me about moving away from Cliff Top —’
‘Ah yes, Ian, but he has to me, he has to me.’
There it was, out in the open.
She had no need to give it further emphasis, it could not have been clearer.
She knew all about him, she knew all about ‘us’; and she either didn't care, or she approved altogether.
My mother was at that time becoming suspiciously youthful in appearance.
Her breasts were stranded back in the fifties.
Enfolded in the crisp embrace of new money, they were pointed and hard, like the nose cones of rockets about to blast off for planetary exploration, the nurturing of new worlds.
And her hair — that hair — still curling wilfully, as if every strand were an ungovernable sexual impulse.
How could I ever have trusted her?
The new stripped-pine floor vibrated; through the sash window I could see the black truck pulling up the drive towards the main road, the silver caravan coming behind like a drogue that was preventing the gypsies from submerging, escaping into the very centre of the earth.
With them went went whatever chance I ever had of regaining my childhood.
REHABILITATION
Illness is the beginning of all psychology.
What?
Could psychology be — a vice?
Nietzsche,Twilight of the Idols 
Here's how it happened.
I went on attending the university, doing my course modules, and avoiding intimacy in whatever way it proffered itself to me.
At the same time I practised assiduously my calculus of personal ritual to ward off any kind of eidesis.
I was determined to live as far as possible in the now.
If ever I was tempted by the seductive stasis of an eidetic image, I punctured its reflecting skin with a dart and tore it away to reveal the structure of habit below.
I squinted and transformed the galaxy into the dust of my dead skin; I always read ‘YAW EVIG’ from the glistening macadam and avoided giving way.
I came to be capable-as he had said I would — of the most beautifully consistent combinations of apprehensions with little twistles of kinaesthetic intimation.
I became — in my own small way — a Cassandra of Ca-ca.
The most piddling aspects of my embodiment furnished me with prophecy: hanging on whether the flap of gum skin comes away, then…the leaf will fall or not fall, I will die or be immortal, the sun will rise or not.
Indeed, it was at this time that, ironically, I turned myself into a genuine adept of the Magus of the Quotidian.
So much so that for weeks at a time I could live without eidetiking at all.
Ironically, because having shown me what he termed ‘retroscendence’, The Fat Controller was content to let me stew in my own juice for a while.
I actually thought that his technique for unpacking the hidden history of products was despicable.
I wanted my understanding of business to be entirely different, based firmly on analysis and deduction rather than any kind of weird visual intuition.
I dimly understood that by holding out to me this realm of material essences, available by an act of will alone, The Fat  Controller was condemning me to a cosmos of brand names, a metaphysic of motifs, a logic of logos, and an epistemology based on EPOS (The Electronic Point of Sale method of inventory-keeping, which was just coming into use at this time among major retailers).
Mine was to be a psyche available for product placement — that was his intention.
The interior of my mind was to be shaped according to his merchandising plan, with circular display racks of concepts standing in aisles of cogitation, flanked by long shelves groaning with brightly coloured little ideas.
I could see that if I were to give way to retroscendence the average supermarket gondola, stuck with myriad products like a hedgehog with spines, would become a mystic test-bed able through its thousand portals to suck me into individual sagas so complex, so durable, that I would perhaps never reemerge.
The very ecosystem I inhabited was also to be one of products, striving against built-in obsolescence to individuate themselves, using whatever human means were at their disposal to advance their branded species.
I was conscious that underlying it all there must be some Law of Unnatural Selection, which could prove that the fittest product with the most colourful packaging was the most likely to be  pollinated by purchase.
But against all my expectations, the longer he kept away, the more I found I could hack it.
I relapsed into a seeming normality.
I freed myself from the antiquated strait jacket of his verbose speech patterns.
I even smartened myself up, becoming something of a dandy.
The boxer shorts from Barries' were followed by shirts and socks, then by jackets and trousers from Di Stato (Anzio's high-street chain), and eventually some Hoage's shoes.
I had no vices and I couldn't take anyone out, so I had nothing to spend my student grant on save for clothes.
In my mind at least I was already the smartly turned-out, bright and efficient young executive that I aspired to be.
I was determined to render myself generic by the time I left university.
A few months of living like this behind me, I almost managed to convince myself that my whole involvement with the man I called ‘The fat Controller’ had been an elaborate fantasy.
After all, what evidence did I really have?
There's  nothing wrong with a man living under an assumed name and besides that, I couldn't prove that Mr Broadhurst and Samuel Northcliffe were one and the same, any more than I could prove that it was The Fat Controller who had killed the woman at the Theatre Royal with a spring-loaded hypodermic full of curare, rather than anyone else.
As for my eidetic happenings, I found them suspect as well; they were so clearly a product of my own fervid visual imagination.
When I came to think about it, it struck me that almost all the aspects of my eidesis that The Fat Controller played upon had preceded his intervention, rather than followed from it.
I began to wonder whether or not I had been the victim of an extended delusion, which was perhaps the function of an overheated adolescence leading to some kind of psycho-hormonal explosion.
I knew little of psychology but enough to be aware of the impact on the unformed ego of an absent father.
Could my investiture of Mr Broadhurst with such sinister and wide-ranging powers have been my way of dealing with the chronic lack of a proper role model?
Under the influence of this late surge of rational speculation I tried to view myself in a different light.
Perhaps I wasn't the plaything of a mage, who was determined to drag me into a frightening and chaotic world of naked will, only a seriously neurotic person in need of help.
But what kind of help?
I didn't know who or where to turn to.
So for the meanwhile I continued with my ritualised observances, obsessively counting the number of steps it took me to walk to any given location, carefully avoiding the cracks in the pavement for fear that the bears of the id might get me, and attending to my bodily functions with the pure metrical devotion of a sadhu.
I also played with the idea that what afflicted me was some kind of strabismus of the psyche.
If I strained I could see the world as others did, stereoscopically, but if I relaxed binocular vision would ensue, and while one ‘eye’ would remain focused, the other would slide away into the clouded periphery where The Fat Controller and his machinations held sway.
What was required to hold him at bay was constant vigilance.
Constant vigilance and isolation are a wearing combination, wearing and depressing.
I might struggle to hold fast to my course, to become just another off-the-peg person dangling on the idiomatic hook (line and sinker), my voting habits purely a function of minute alterations in fiscal policy, but a moment's relaxation could have a jolting impact.
The Fat Controller — whatever he might be — had ceased to manifest himself.
And the human frame on to which I had grafted this delusion had definitely left Cliff Top, but despite this, from time to time I would come across what seemed like obscure messages, quirkily encoded, that threatened to upset my peace of mind.
One day I was browsing in the university library, when for no reason that I could pick upon I drew a biography of Newton from one of the shelves.
Flicking through it, I came across a passage that described his psychotic breakdown.
Apparently, during the autumn (Ha!) of 1693, Newton — always eccentric and blockaded from the world — became increasingly deluded.
He wrote a series of letters to Pepys, Locke and other friends, accusing them of being atheists and Catholics.
He even intimated that they had tried to corrupt him by sending female temptresses to seduce him in his Cambridge rooms.
The biographer speculated that it may have been failure in his alchemical experiments that led to this breakdown.
It was broad daylight when I read this passage and the sunlight that radiated through the high plate-glass windows illuminated a scene of modernity and order.
It didn't matter — as soon as I read the word alchemy, alarm bells began ringing in the fire station of my mind.
The engines of ritual, which stood ever ready to staunch any eruption of the magical were speedily limbered up.
It was too late, I couldn't prevent myself from eidetiking Mr Broadhurst's unusual caduceus, the one he had made out of an old TV aerial garnished with flex, and I couldn't prevent myself from reading on:
Newton wrote to Locke saying that he had ‘received a visit from a certain Divine of monstrous and Toad-like appearance.
This man, or beast, claimed cognisance of divers operations in the Science of Alchemie of which I  have had no acquaintance.
He insisted on examining my alchemical equipment and pronounced that my method of Fixation was inexact.
He also drew my Attention to what he claimed were certain impurities in the material of my Cupel.
Furthermore he Intimated to me that there was a pure distillate of the very Stone itself buried in precincts of Glastonbury Abbey, to which he alone had access.
I cannot do justice to the disagreeable impression that this man, one Broadhurst, had upon me…
I shut the book with a bang.
I clenched out the light and stuck my fingers in my ears.
I rotated the nails so that a cheese paring of wax was scoured from the surface of the drum.
I rolled the two pellets of wax between the forefingers and thumbs of each hand and then replaced them in the opposite ears, the whole time humming and appreciating the bitable texture of the linoleum beneath my soles.
On opening my eyes I didn't dare to imagine that this would have worked.
I expected him to be with me, his stentorian ubiety transmogrifying the spacious library into somewhere shabby and small.
But there was no one.
There were other such incidents.
Attracted by the cover with its depiction of a colourful Chinese dragon, I leafed through a copy of De Quincey's Confessions of an English Opium Eater .
This time I chanced upon a passage where the writer was awakened from his narcotic slumbers by a knocking at his cottage door:
The servant girl came into my chamber and told me that there was a ‘sort of demon’ downstairs, jabbering in a strange tongue.
I made myself presentable and sallied forth.
In the kitchen I found my servant and a stray village child, both dumbstruck by this apparition.
I soon established that the ‘jabbering’ they spoke of was none other than classical Greek, of which this portly figure had an exact command.
‘You are the Opium Eater?’ said the man.
‘I am,’ I replied quaveringly.
‘Then, dear fellow, make with the stuff, bring forth a get-up, lay on the gear, give us a decent hit for the love  of Mike, for by Zeus I am surely clucking fit to bust.’
Strange as it may seem, I was struck more by this man's preoccupation with opium than by his appearance or choice of language.
I gave him a piece, which to my horror he popped straight into his mouth, for it was surely large enough to kill some half-dozen dragoons together with their horses.
Then, without more ado, he turned on his heel and left, slamming the door behind him.
It was only later when I came to reflect on this incident, that I recalled the man's appearance.
He was excessively fat and had a sinister and  aggressive expression.
Altho' his physiognomy was European, he was clad in the turban and loose trousers of a Malay.
I cannot say whether this manifestation was a product of opium or not but ever after the most excruciating of my opium torments have regularly visited me with his likeness and the haunted corridors of my mind have resounded with his peculiar bombast.
Perhaps his aspect was a function of those involutes of memory of which I have spoken; and his combination of these attributes, the brutish apparel of the Malay, the features of a bibulous beadle and his predilection for opium were no mere chance but a deep expression of my own pain?
I no more believed in ‘mere chance’ than De Quincey.
The juxtaposition of erudition and slang, the gargantuan habits, the ‘sinister and  aggressive expression’.
Surely this was another clue, another coded reference; either that or my capacity for fantasy, temporarily dislodged from my visual imagination, had taken up residence in another realm, polluting my very ability to comprehend.
In a way, The Fat Controller's new method of checking up on me was even more disturbing than his old.
I went into a steep decline.
I started to show up for my seminars and tutorials shabbily clad, or not at all.
One week I failed to turn in an essay on the trade deficit.
This was out of character.
At the next seminar Mr Hargreaves — the same tutor who had referred poor June to me — asked me to stay behind.
‘Wharton,’ he began nervously, ‘it might not be my place but I have to say that I'm a little worried about you.’
I shuffled uneasily.
‘Well, err…you know, I've been getting rather anxious about my finals.’
‘Come off it, you do consistently well in all your modules — I've had a word with your course tutor — and as you've been continually assessed, you couldn't flunk now even if you wanted to.
What's the problem, lad?
Apparently you never have anything to do with your peers, you're a solitary.
Perhaps I shouldn't interfere but I hate to see a young man throwing his life away.’
I looked into his face.
Hargreaves was a bit like a large rodent, a capybara or coypu.
He had a questing snout and thin limbs held bent up against his adipose body.
It almost goes without saying that he also had fine, Beatle-cropped brown hair and affected a close-clipped beard with the dense consistency of fur.
It ran right up and over his cheekbones, leading one to suspect that it was important for him to shave his eye sockets and forehead daily, if he wanted to avoid becoming altogether bestial.
‘Yeah,’ I muttered at last.
‘I haven't been feeling that great.’
Then the words started to hiss out of me, stale, rubberised air escaping from a subsiding Li-lo.
‘It's just…it's just…that I don't have many friends and I do feel sort of isolated, I s'pose —’ I pulled up short, I was trespassing on forbidden ground, getting close to revealing more than I should.
How could I talk of my other world amid the absolute certainties of textured louvres, plastic chair-and-desk combinations and colour-coded felt-tips?
‘If you are feeling depressed’— Hargreaves was entirely solicitous —‘it might be an idea for you to see the Student Counsellor.
He's there to help you with any problems you have, did you know that?’
I muttered something affirmative.
‘Look, here's what I'm going to do.’
He brightened up, getting the glow of a man who feels himself on the verge of discharging a disagreeable responsibility.
‘I'm going to make an appointment for you to see Dr Gyggle — he's not just a counsellor, he's also a qualified psychiatrist.
I'm absolutely sure that a chat with him would help you.
You needn't worry’— he was getting happy now, preening his face with his tiny hands —‘this conversation  we've had will remain just as confidential as anything you may say to him.
The next day there was a note from Hargreaves in my pigeon-hole — I was to see Dr Gyggle that afternoon.
There seemed no going back on it without having to retail some further lie and anyway I was sick at heart — without The Fat Controller's gyroscopic girth to encompass it my world was spinning out of control.
The following afternoon as I walked across the campus, I didn't know it but I was about to commence my full rehabilitation.
But I did know that Gyggle was the shrink for me the minute I saw him.
It was the beard, I suppose, a beard that was the exact opposite of Hargreaves's beard.
Whereas his beard was so clearly a compensation, a making up for unachieved virility, Gyggle's beard was positively rampant, priapic.
It was only a beard — true enough — but it had been connected to a man's face for many many years.
Clearly it was a transitional object, purpose-built to drag me back into the world of men and affairs.
When I was shown into his little office in the administration block Gyggle was sitting reading something.
His forearms were lying on the desk and his skinny torso was framed by a proscenium arch of ring binders, set on shelves that marched up and over his head.
The Gyggle forearms were covered all over with a regular pattern of tight ginger curlicues of hair.
In fact, it would be true to say that my first impression was of a man entirely dominated by a regular pattern of tight ginger curlicues of hair.
His sleeves were rolled up — which was what led me to make such an assumption — but really it was his hair that set the tone.
The curlicues massed at his collar and from here a series of well-defined ginger ridges ascended to his nude pate.
Waves of this same hair swept around the back of Gyggle's head, from coast to coast of his oval face.
They formed galleries, which seemed so regular they might have been the honeycombed nestings of some breed of super-lice that had reached an advanced accommodation with their host.
But however striking, the hair had to be viewed as merely a trailer to the main feature of Gyggle's appearance, the beard.
The beard was a kind of super beard, a beard to end all beards, a great reprise on some of the world's finest and most significant beards.
Obviously the way it tumbled — nay, cascaded — down on to the Gyggle chest had close associations with those prophetic beards that lingered in my memory from many hours of tilted observation in cathedrals and museums, yet something about the beard's rigidity, its apparent inflexibility, said Assyria, Sumeria.
Whispered epics in the bouncing back of war chariots, chanted louder as the warriors attack — entirely in profile, of course.
When he looked up and turned to greet me Gyggle's real profile showed the beard off to even greater effect and teased me with its diversity.
Here was the suggestion of the spreading fan of an eminent Victorian, a beard clotted with high-flown phrases and guilty secretions, a beard of mad power that then faded at the edges into the ineffectualness of a declining constitutional monarchy.
What a beard, I thought.
‘You must be Ian Wharton.’
He looked up from his reading and the beard parted in such a way as to suggest that there might be an affable grimace lying some way behind it.
‘Yeah.’
‘Tim Hargreaves said that you'd like to have a chat with me about some things.
He said you'd been out of sorts recently.’
‘Not so recently.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I mean I've always been out of sorts, I've always felt like this — oh, you know — almost as long as I can remember.’
(As long as the heaving green adumbrates the land, as long as time has refused to be some time but always now, as long as the humungus titles have zipped up from the seam between sea and sky, as long…)
‘Oh yes.’
His voice was soft, honey soft.
It was like a net of sound falling over my mind ready to trawl the truth.
‘And what is ‘feeling like this’ like?’
Everything was happening so fast — he couldn't be aware of the crisis he was dragging me towards.
The room was a pressurised cabin suddenly ruptured.
I sensed the warmth screaming out of the atmosphere to be replaced with the absolute zero of his clinical persona but I couldn't stop myself.
‘I — I, I'm an eid-eid …
(I've got an eidetic memory.’
I stuttered and then blurted.
Gyggle steepled his freckled fingers and tucked them under a tier of the beard.
He looked at me with yellow feral eyes.
‘You don't say.
How fascinating.
I've done a little work on eidesis myself.
What kind of eidetic memory have you got?’
I was flummoxed.
‘I — I didn't know there were different kinds.’
‘Oh yes, there's eidesis that concentrates on form and proportion; eidesis that acts mnemonically, producing near-instant recall through combinations of letters or numerals; there s a kind of mathematical eidesis whereby equations and aspects of calculus are viewed spatially and of course there's common-or-garden eidesis, which people call ‘photographic memory’—’
‘That's me!’
I was embarrassed by my exclamation; it sounded like a yelp of boyish enthusiasm.
‘I see.’
Gyggle was unperturbed.
‘While it's true that an awful lot of eidetikers have problems with communication and some are even autistic, those that aren't don't tend to be overly neurotic or unhappy.
On the contrary they usually put their gifts into some satisfying but resolutely unimaginative task.
They acquire multiple degrees, purposelessly log facts, or do photoreal drawing after photoreal drawing — each one notable only for its lack of — how can I put it, emotional bite?’
The ragged hole appeared in the beard again; it occurred to me that the shrink was baiting me in some way, teasing me.
‘Actually,’ he went on, ‘these eidetikers are usually terribly ordinary people, unimaginative in the extreme, hmmm?’
‘My problem is quite the reverse,’ I said emphatically.
‘I think I may be suffering from an excess of imagination, either that or…or…’
And there it was, it struck me that I had nothing to lose, I was damned either way.
If I betrayed the pact between myself and The Fat Controller he would undoubtedly destroy me, fillet me, excarnate me in the screaming void.
But if I said nothing, turned tail and ran from Gyggle, what hope was there for an ordinary life for Ian Wharton?
What hope was there of love?
‘Or what?
Do you think you are going mad?’
I nodded.
Gyggle got up from behind his desk and came round to to front of it.
He  was very tall, perhaps six foot five, all elbow and forearm, like an enormous ginger praying mantis.
He propped his absence o arse against the rim of his desk and contemplated me.
‘Look Ian, I'm here to help you, I'm not here to grind my own axe.
I'm not a very orthodox kind of counsellor or psychiatrist but if there's anything within my power that I can do to help you, then I'll do it.
Now tell me what it is about your eidetic ability that is causing you so much distress.’
I told Gyggle.
I told him everything.
I told him in great detail.
I omitted nothing, nothing, that is, save for The Fat Controller.
I explained how it was that as a child I had been told I was  an eidetiker but that it had meant nothing to me.
And how it was that I had rediscovered the gift in pubescence, as if prompted by my burgeoning sexuality.
I told him how I could freeze my eidetic images, then project my phantom body into them, to discover things that I could not possibly have known.
I told him that this bizarre gift had frightened me, made me feel vulnerable; and that I had felt compelled to develop a magical system of my own to prevent my hyperactive visual memory from destroying me altogether.
The whole time I spoke Gyggle maintained his desk-propping position, fingers steepled to beard, impartial eyes cast down into my own.
When I had finished he had only two things to say.
‘It's very interesting that in all of this you don't say anything about your relationships.
Most of the students who come to me with problems are absolutely preoccupied by their parents, their friends, their sexual partners —’ I grunted noncommittally.
‘And the other thing is that if what you say is true then you have a form of extra-sensory perception.
You know, there are certain tests — scientific tests — that can determine whether or not this is the case.’
‘No, I didn't know that.’
‘Well, there are and what I would like to propose to you is this, that you allow me to do these tests on you.
There are the facilities here, in the experimental psychology faculty.
I don't want you to imagine for a moment that I don't believe every word of what you tell me.
It's just that whatever the reality of your condition verifying it will constitute a kind of catharsis — do you know what  that means?’
I tried to give him a withering look.
‘Of course you do; Tim Hargreaves told me that you are an exceptional student.
Now, if you'll excuse me I believe our hour is up.
Could you make an appointment with the secretary for next week?
We'll meet here and then go over to the lab together, OK?’
I rasped my chair backwards and got up, I muttered goodbye.
As I was pulling the institutional door of his office shut behind me he looked up from the reading matter he had taken up again and said, ‘And Ian —’
‘Y-yes?’
‘Try not to worry, lad, I'm here to look after you.’
In the mathematical corridor with its shown brickworking and angled spotlights, a young woman was waiting to go in.
She regarded me warily from under a fringe of split ends.
One small hand, the nails surrounded by gnawed raw flesh, clutched a wad of tissue paper against her seeping eye.
For some cruel reason I took heart from the very ordinariness of her misery.
I now entered the empirical and experimental phase of my life.
Every Thursday afternoon I would join Gyggle in his office and together we would cross the campus to the squat blockhouse that housed the experimental psychology faculty.
We would descend to the basement and make our way through a maze of waist-high partitioning.
Under the hum of stroboscopic strip lighting, fidgeting, rodentine psychology students scampered this way and that, clutching streamers of computer printout, clipboards and calculators.
So pre-programmed did their behaviours seem, that they themselves might have been the subjects of some meta-experiment and the pallor of their laboratory coats a function of their caged confinement.
First of all Gyggle tried me on the same sort of rudimentary exercises that I remembered performing as a child.
He would make me look at pictures and then reproduce them with coloured pencils, or else ask me to rotate a figure mentally a certain number of degrees around a given perpendicular before attempting to redraw it.
But soon we progressed to more state, of-the-art experimentation.
Sequences of words would be flashed up on a VDU, so quickly that — in theory — they could only be perceived  subliminally.
These tests established exactly what they had done before; namely that I did indeed have an exceptionally accurate visual memory.
I was able to recall perfectly quite long sequences of words even when I was exposed to each for little more than twenty milliseconds.
Throughout the testing Gyggle was solicitous and gentle.
He said nothing to me about my fears for my sanity and behaved as if what we were doing were a common exercise, undertaken for purely scientific purposes.
It was this manner of his, more than anything else, that seemed to have a therapeutic benefit.
For, as the testing progressed, so my life outside of the sessions began to acquire the lineaments of a normalcy I had never felt before.
I took to spending more time with my mother again, rather than shutting myself up in my caravan.
Our talk was unemotional, inconsequential.
With her new-found gentility Mother had bought the ability to make endless small talk.
Coming from her tight mouth, the county trilling on local lawlessness and moral decline made these cankers seem wholly benign.
She was transformed from the young trollop I remembered to the middle-aged reader of Trollope she had always wanted to be.
There was a slackening of the tension in the psychic umbilicus, and more importantly, there was no reference to Mr Broadhurst.
At the university I came out from my shell.
I actually talked to my fellow students and built up some relations with people, which, if not quite friendships, at least satisfied the definition of acquaintance.
One day, coming across June in the corridor alone, instead of hurrying past, my face to the wall, I stopped and spoke to her.
I knew she now had a boyfriend.
I had seen them together, arm-in-arm, taking their mutual attraction for a walk.
Perhaps it was this, the fact that she now had someone else to love her, that made it possible for me to make a proper apology, to stutter out confusedly, red-faced, that I was sorry about what had happened.
I told her that I had had a sort of a breakdown, and that I was appalled by what I had done.
I wish I could have said that she was sweetly understanding, but she looked at me as if I were an incubus that had raped her and scraped along the brickwork, desperate to get past.
After a couple of months like this Gyggle changed the nature of our experiments.
‘Well, Ian,’ he said, stroking the beard as if it were a favourite pet that had curled up on his chin, ‘I think we have established incontrovertibly that you are an eidetiker of sorts.
Now let's test the veracity of your rather more extravagant claims.’
Gyggle had obtained a series of computer-visualisation models from an extra-sensory perception researcher in Texas.
These involved the experimental subject in observing three-dimensional figures on a VDU, and then answering questions about aspects of the figures that were knowable — but hardly at an intuitive level.
For example, if the figure was a line diagram of a room with four windows set at different heights, the programme would ask me whether a line of sight from the far corner of the room would enable me to see a particular point outside the window nearest to me, a point that shifted on the screen at speed.
When Gyggle first explained this experiment to me I almost laughed at how facile it was.
For me — who had consciously to struggle against the imagaic maelstrom implicit in the idea of retroscendence — to have to deploy my powers in this pedestrian manner seemed nothing less than absurd.
I said as much.
‘I think you've missed the point about my eidetiking, Dr Gyggle.’
‘Oh yes, and why's that?’
‘Well, you see — I thought I explained this to you — if I were to eidetik now I would go into a kind of a trance.
No time would pass for you but during that trance I could unpack whatever reserves of information this particular visual scene contains.’
‘Give me an example.’
‘Well, I could, for instance, discover what shape your chin is under that beard.’
It was meant to be a jocular observation but even as I said it I knew that I had transgressed some important Gyggle taboo.
It's like that with beards, particularly medical beards and even more so psychiatric ones.
Although their wearers adopt them  as naturally woven badges of individuality, the second they are challenged, taken out of context, they rise up to form chin-borne hackles.
‘I don't see that my beard has anything to do with it,’ his honey voice huffled.
‘But if you think you can — do.’
I went into a full-blown eidetic trance.
I encapsulated the whole scene, the dingy cubicle with its plywood partitions; the warped lino, as undulant as the earthen floor of a barn; Gyggle's hideous cheesecloth shirt, the buttons pulled apart to the sternum, revealing still more tight ginger curlicues.
I took in both the general: lunar dust motes caught in the sidereal glare of neon light, and the particular: the smear of cobweb on an inch of mushroom flex that protruded from the ceiling above.
When the eidetic image of the room was fully and accurately frozen inside of me, I made my move, or tried to make my move, because nothing happened.
I was somehow reversing that pivotal moment in my eidetic career eight years before, when Mr Broadhurst had bade me look in his waistcoat pocket and then made his move.
Now it was I who couldn't move; more than that I wasn't even able to form an idea of what it would be like to move.
formerly my eidetic body, the tool with which I worked upon my visions, had felt as defined as if three-dimensional crop marks had been described in the air.
My wilful grasp upon it had been entirely unproblematic, as sure as neat fingers picking up pins, or knitting, and then casting off the atomic stitches of the material world.
I couldn't even imagine what this sensation might be like any more, so utterly had it evaporated.
I conceptually fumbled, struggled to get some purchase on the sempiternal sheen of the visual image; but there was nothing, no movement, no astral agility, it remained frozen.
Or at least almost entirely frozen.
Just before I snapped out of it, aborted the failed trance, I thought I saw — although I couldn't be certain — the ragged hole in the beard through which Gyggle addressed the world unravel a little at its edge, exposing a slug side of what might have been Gyggle's lip.
‘Well then,’ said the old fox, ‘have you eidetically-removed the hairs from my chinny-chin-chin?’
‘I-I, I can't seem to.
What I mean is — I'm trying.’
‘Trying,’ pronounced the psychiatrist sententiously, ‘is lying.
‘I can't understand it.’
I was shaking and sweating.
If I could no longer eidetik effectively, had my status as apprentice and licentiate of the Brahmin of the Banal been removed at one fell stroke?
‘I'm not surprised,’ said my therapist, ‘for nor can I.’
‘Whaddya’ mean?’
‘Well, put it this way, you claim to be able to derive information from internal visual images which you believe to directly correspond to the phenomenal world.’
‘Whaddya’ mean, ‘phenomenal’?’
It was the sort of jargon I expected from you-know-who.
‘I mean the commonsensical world of material objects and appearances.
You claim that you can discover things that are unknowable in an orthodox fashion by moving about the representation of this world inside your own head.
Is that right?’
‘Yeah.’
‘So if I were to screen a feature film for you, and in it there was a scene that took place with two characters talking on a sofa, you would be able to tell me whether there was an object lying behind it?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Supposing it was an animated film — would you be able to enter into that world as well?’
‘I s'pose so, but I've never really done it.’
‘But in the case of such an animated film, there wouldn't be anything behind the cartoon sofa; not only that, the sofa couldn't be said to have a behind at all.
Do you see what I mean?’
‘We-ell —’
‘No.
Not ‘we-ell’.
The point is that you are suffering from a complex delusion.
There is nothing behind the cartoon sofa and if you find anything it's because you yourself have put it there.
There can be no picture of the world in your head that exists independently of your assertions and beliefs about it.
To know something is to participate in a communicable truth.
Your whole belief in your eidetic power rests on a misconception of the nature of consciousness itself.’
He was standing over me as he said this, in his characteristic lecturing pose, the edge of a desk slotted firmly into his lack of backside.
This posture always made me suspect him of having a horizontal cleft slicing through his buttocks, betokening a random — but adaptive — mutation, taking humans closer to being office furniture.
He was chewing gum and the nyum-nyumming of his long jaw sent the tail of the beard wagging across his shirt-front.
‘Come on now,’ he went on.
‘Let's do the rest of the experiments and see if you can prove me wrong.’
I couldn't.
I couldn't even manage the simplest of manipulations involving extra-sensory perception.
Gyggle started off with the most sophisticated of these, the symbol and colour cards, but was soon reduced to getting me to try and guess —and a guess is all I could make — which of three paper cups had a ping-pong ball under it.
At my best I did no better than average.
Then, when we went back to rotating mentally the computer simulation of the room and attempting to ‘see’ possible lines of sight, I had a further shock.
I found that my grasp on the image itself was now hazy, the very mechanisms of my mind seemed to have been injected with lobal anaesthetic, blown up into a fuzzy ineptitude.
The Kodak laboratories of my eidesis were being dismantled; soon all that would be left was an out-of-order passport-photo-booth, mouldering on an empty station platform.
To give Gyggle his due, he didn't crow.
On the contrary, when that afternoon's session ended and we were walking back across the campus, he put one of his Anglepoise arms across my shoulders and attempted some avuncularity.
‘Ian,’ he schmoozed, ‘you know, you are a prodigy, just not the sort of prodigy you thought you were.
May I speak frankly?’
as if you've ever done anything else, I thought to myself but didn't say.
‘You see, I think that you are what's called a borderline personality, with pronounced schizoid tendencies.
That sounds a lot heavier than it really is, because what our testing has proved is that you are not psychotic in any orthodox way.
When your private reality is challenged, it yields to the truth.
Can you see that?’
‘S'pose so.’
‘S'pose so’, that's what stayed with me after we had parted, that ‘S'pose so’, with all the sullen acquiescence it implied.
But whatever I thought of him, Gyggle's therapy had been one hundred per cent successful.
By forcing me to take part in rituals that were scientifically formulated the psychiatrist had logically inverted the magical process whereby my original eidetic memory had ripped the meniscus, thrusting me into the noumenal world.
That day was a turning point for me and afterwards my life improved immeasurably.
The very next morning I arose and, without any premeditation, any thought at all, for the first time in adulthood I went though my morning toilet not noting the precise conformity of my actions to the schema of habit.
It was the same in all the other areas of my life; removed from the need to protect myself against the horrors of enhanced eidesis, I began to live as others did, blithely and unconsciously.
I didn't even have to bother with understanding that incomprehension is bliss.
I swam through events now, rather than surveyed them.
I felt the corporeal elephant on whose back my world was supported amble effortlessly along, rather that it being necessary for me to lean out from the howdah of my head and goad him.
What a relief.
Can you imagine it, to have grown up insane and then in one fell swoop to achieve sanity?
I doubt it, because it is inconceivable, just as you cannot imagine what it would be like to be blind from birth and then gifted with sight (but of course I can).
I had broken the cycle of eight thousand lifetimes and defiled the banal brahmin inside me, polluted him by contact with the testable, the material proofs of induction.
I kicked pebbles ahead of me on the path up from my caravan to my mother's hotel and, with each ‘thwok’, my terrible adolescent idealism was refuted.
This all happened just before Easter, at the end of my penultimate term at Sussex.
It meant that that summer, despite the pressure of finals, I was able to enjoy human company and gain succour from it, in a way that had previously been denied to me.
I found myself revising with the small colloquia that lay  around the grassy precincts of the university.
The young are more forgiving than adults, and despite the haughty isolation I had practised, I was far more accepted than I could have hoped for.
I got on first-name terms with the other managers-in-the-making.
They invited me to punk parties as noisy as tractor factories, where I swigged flat cans of beer, already shaken with a twist of cigarette butt.
In turn I took some of them back with me to Cliff Top.
There we descended to the pebbled beach and filtered ourselves, giggling, into the porous sea.
My mother instructed her deferential staff to serve us tea on the croquet lawn.
We sat stuffing ourselves with smoked-salmon sandwiches, slurping Earl Grey, while she charmed and intimidated them with her stolen airs and purloined graces.
They all thought me secure, even if they didn't find Cliff Top exactly homey.
The aunts and cousins arrived for their annual break just after I had finished my finals.
By now some of the cousins had children of their own — the pullulating Hepplewhite swarm had leapt to another branch.
The new kids were indistinguishable from the old and the new parents were just the same, for the female cousins had all married, or shacked up with, wispy, indefinite, ineffectual men; and the male cousins had simply married their mothers.
My mother kept them away from her country house hotel.
They were confined to the ratty quarter-acre of ground, screened off by the landscapers, where the few remaining caravans crouched in shabby senescence.
But they didn't seem to mind, or feel remotely affronted.
Here they lay as of old, like a colony of seals, eating scallops and rubbery whelks, swigging glasses of light ale, blowing raspberries on kidflesh sticky with vanilla ice-cream and frosted with sand.
‘Ian's going to London,’ announced my mother to one and all.
‘He's done awfully well at the university and now he's got a job, an important job as well.
Tell your aunts and cousins about your new position, Ian.’
‘Aye, tell us,’ they chorused, an antistrophe of flower-patterned dresses.
‘It's nothing really,’ I said.
‘It's not even in London proper, I'll be staying at a place called Erith Marsh.
I'm going to be a marketing assistant for a company there —’
‘Oh aye,’ said one of the aunts, who was scrutinising a dicky-looking mussel, as if it were a suspicious traveller and she an immigration officer.
‘What's t'cumpany do then, lad?’
‘Um, well, they make valves.’
‘Valves?’
‘Yeah, valves for the oil industry.
They make the shut-off valves that get put in the drill bit to prevent blow-outs.’
The aunt gestured to the far end of the sun porch where one of her sons sat.
Of necessity, like all Hepplewhite men, he was shadowy, emasculated.
‘I think our Harry has wun of them,’ said the aunt.
‘Over a year married an’ our Tracey still isn't knocked up — he must be blowin' out all over t'place!’
The whole gang subsided into coarse guffaws, thigh-slapping, knee-pounding.
It was all the same as it ever was.
Except for mother, that is.
She stood off to one side, her lips twisted into a grimace of disgust at their vulgarity.
When the autumn came, and I finally packed up my car and made ready to leave Cliff Top, she came over unexpectedly emotional.
‘You'll take care of yourself, now won't you, my darling?’
After a couple of weeks with her sisters, I heard the false note not just in her accent, but in her voice as well.
How had my mother transformed herself into this dower-house chatelaine?
This scion of the squirearchy?
My curiosity was  overridden , though, by a more powerful inclination, to get the hell out.
So I merely downplayed my reply.
‘Of course I will, Mother, I'm only going up the road, I'll come back at weekends.’
‘Oh you say that but I know better.
You'll be sucked up and seduced by the beau monde, I know you will.’
Pearly tears seeded themselves in the corners of her eyes.
‘I'd hardly call Erith Marsh the beau monde, Mother.’
‘I don't like to talk about it, Ian, because it's far too painful for me.
You know I still miss your father.
The way he went away hurts me to this day.
You'll not be like him, will you?’
She went up on her toes and kissed me.
I felt the shock of the old, of the Mummy smell, the atomised odour of atavism.
It welled up, reclaiming its rightful position in the hit parade of the senses: No.
I with a bullet.
The corner of her mouth pressed against mine and in concert with her sharp hand, which clutched at my ample buttock, her sharper tongue slid ever so slightly between my lips.
‘Contemptible Essene, cloistral nonentity’.
The Fat Controller's words rung once more in my ears as my rollerskate of a car caromed up the A22 to London.
That fucking woman, the kinky Clytemnestra, how I hated her.
She'd tied my cock to her apron strings in preparation for flour-dusting and rolling out.
She kneaded me, all right, she wanted me transformed into puff pastry just like Daddy.
I had accepted a position with I.A. Wartberg Limited, which, as I had told the aunts, was a company responsible for the manufacture of the deep-bore drilling valves employed in the North Sea oil industry.
Mr Hargreaves at Sussex had been surprised by my choice.
My grades were excellent and I had had hands-on work experience with marketing agencies in the West End.
This was the early-eighties and Britain was clawing its way out of recession on the back of a demand-led boom.
Marketing was the dialectical materialism of the regime and I was in an ideal position to leapfrog my way quickly towards apparatchik status.
However, cautious and pragmatic as ever, I realised that before I could take part in the airier abstractions of my chosen profession I needed to confront the nitty-gritty, the hard business of actually selling things, specific products, to industrial customers.
Added to that, there was something about the Wartberg works that I found soothing the first time I went there for the interview.
The great galvanised iron shed where the valves were made was a cacophonous and tumultuous place, full of Stakhanovite workers torturing plugs of super-heavy metal with screaming drill bits.
The adjoining suite of offices where I reported was inadequately sound-proofed, so that I felt myself both surrounded and shot through by the very processes that I would be attempting to market.
There was also Wartberg himself: he set the pattern for all my future employers.
His father was a German-Jewish refugee and his mother Welsh, but Wartberg was an aggressive anglophile, given to wearing tweed suits and blathering on about flower growing, law and order, the decline of British standards (he had just obtained one for his best-selling valve), the prohibitive business rate and so on.
I warmed to him instantly.
He ran the company as if he had suddenly and unexpectedly found himself on the footplate of a runaway engine.
He was constantly dashing from the shop floor to the offices, to his car, to his suppliers, to his customers and back again.
He was small, sweaty and effusive with shiny brown hair and eyes.
We got on very well together and when after only two months with the company my immediate boss — the marketing manager, a sallow individual with a Solihull whine — suffered a perforated ulcer (I couldn't prevent myself from eidetiking this, the wall of his duodenum like a rusty car door, sharp flakes of oxidised tissue spearing into him), I got his job.
Of course this doesn't cover everything, this simple schema —Bye-bye, Mummy, Whittingtonesque entry to London — wasn't all that was going on, oh no.
My therapy with Dr Gyggle had continued and now entered a new phase.
After the deconstruction of my eidetic capability, Gyggle had insisted that I go on seeing him.
We had continued with our Thursday-afternoon appointments for the duration of my university career.
‘I wish to build up a more intimate relationship with you, Ian,’ the hairy shrink had told me.
‘I know that you are predisposed to leave things here; I have employed purely technical means to help you rid yourself of something you wish to regard as a technical problem but behind this eidetic delusion we both know there lies an emotional reality.
To employ a piece of Freudian jargon, I do not think you will be able to attain full genitality unless we investigate this realm, hmm?’
‘Full genitality?’
‘A successful emotional and sexual relationship.’
‘Oh, oh that.’
Uncanny, the way he pinpointed my preoccupation.
For, if there was one aspect of the Fat Controller's legacy  that still troubled me severely it was the sex thing.
Specifically the grotesque threat that were I to penetrate a woman I would lose my penis.
‘What are you frightened of, Ian?’
He probed me psychologically, whilst laying siege with the battering ram of his biro to the airy battlements of the beard.
I thought to myself: Sit this one out, he'll let it lie.
I knew that shrinks were meant to respect the inability of their patients to express certain fundamental anxieties, that the whole thrust of their endeavour was to move around the edifice of such neuroses, gradually excavating their foundations in memory with a sort of verbal teaspoon.
But Gyggle wasn't that kind of shrink; he kept on at me.
‘I know that you've built up some kind of sustaining narrative behind your eidetic delusion — it cannot but be otherwise.
You've told me that you spent your adolescence in isolation, actually codifying every little bodily habit and cognitive loop —’
‘Yes!
And I told you why, because I was frightened of eidetiking myself.
What bothers me is what bothers everyone else, nothing special.
It's the same common fear that I will fall apart, physically and emotionally, that I will be reduced to a pile of tattered pulp, that I will never be loved by anyone, that I will fail, like…like —’
‘Like your father?’
‘Yeah, like him, the contemptible Essene.’
‘I'm sorry?
What did you say?’
‘Oh, nothing, nothing.’
Gyggle also had some good news for me — he was to accompany me to London.
He was going back into the National Health Service and had taken a consultancy in a drug dependency unit based at the Lurie Foundation Hospital for Dipsomaniacs on Hampstead Road.
‘Not that I'm particularly interested in junkies, you understand.’
Gyggle was driving me along the coast road to Brighton as he spoke.
He had taken me under his featherless wing to this extent, giving me lifts and sharing with me some of his unusual theories.
‘It's just that these kind of obsessive-compulsive personalities provide me with research fodder.
Since no one seems  able to do anything with these people they won't mind what I get up to, tee-hee!’
He giggled girlishly, as if he were contemplating some impromptu lobotomies, and the beard, which flowed down over the steering wheel, rustled suggestively in the hollow socket of the speedometer.
‘It'll be OK for you to go on seeing me there.
I can arrange for you to be an anonymous patient, so that it won't interfere with your prospects at all.’
He turned to me and gave me his habitual smile-implying parting of the beard.
I tried to look grateful.
The whole time that I was working at Erith with Wartberg I would journey right across London every Friday afternoon to see Gyggle at his new office.
I was grateful.
I came to trust Gyggle — and even like him.
After all, he had managed to dismantle the magical aspects of my eidesis and now he began to chew away at the very grist of what he termed my ‘delusionary apparatus’.
It took many months more for me to feel safe enough to talk to him about The Fat Controller, but there came a time, when the memory of our last vertiginous encounter had dimmed, that I became prepared to risk it.
Gyggle was, of course, entranced.
I knew that for him The Fat Controller confirmed it — I was his Wolf Man, his Anna O. He told me as much.
‘If it weren't so entirely destructive of your recovery, Ian, I would love to publish,’ he said to me.
‘For I don't think any clinician has ever had the privilege of witnessing such a complex example of hysteria.
This man, Mr Broadhurst, who you transformed into your ‘Fat Controller’, your personified id, you understand now what he really was?’
‘Well, if I accept your hypothesis that all my subsequent experiences were hysterical embellishments, I suppose he was just a mild eccentric, an ordinary seaside retiree.’
‘Of course, he's probably dead by now .’
‘Oh I doubt that.’
‘Why?
Why do you doubt it?’
There was the rub.
I doubted it because whatever the efficacy of Dr Gyggle's treatment and however convincing his explanation of how a lonely and fucked-up boy built up a delusion both to compensate for the lack of a father and punish himself for his  own Oedipal crime, I still couldn't convince myself that I was entirely rid of my mage.
He continued to dog me.
He was a black penumbra in the corner of my visual field, a shadow that chased the sunlight, the very chiaroscuro of the commonplace.
Sometimes, sitting eating a sandwich on a park bench or jolting on the top deck of a bus through South London, I would hear his voice echo through my inscape.
His jolly, fat man's voice, expansive and chilling.
My inability to unbelieve in him hung on to me by the jaws, as I ascended the corporate ladder.
When I tired of writing press releases on new lube concepts I left Wartberg's valve business to go to the Angstrom Corporation, where I worked on the launch of a new biscuit, the Pink Finger.
After three years there I was head-hunted by a marketing agency, D. F. & L. Associates, which was based just north of the City.
Here I took up a position with the grand title of ‘Consultant’.
My job was to prepare the groundwork for a revolutionary new financial product.
In seven years I had as many new cars, each one more highly powered and larger than the last.
I became a wearer of double-breasted suits, a leaner on bars, a discusser of interest rates.
All to some avail, for I now sank gratefully into my own assembly life line, sank into the forgetfulness of my own habitual patterns.
At Easter and Christmas I still went home to Cliff Top.
Mummy had retired from the hotel business.
She had made enough money to maintain Cliff Top as the substantial manor house it had become.
No matter that it was an ersatz creation — Queen Anne impregnated by Prince Charles — she believed in her haute credentials.
And although I had disappointed her by going into ‘trade’, I was still the son of the house.
As we sat drinking sherry together and I watched her acquire the jowled ovine features of all elderly English gentlewomen, I found it hard to summon up my old anger.
I even found it difficult to believe that she had ever been in cahoots with Mr Broadhurst.
She spoke of him occasionally, as if blithely unaware of any possible alter-egos that he might have.
‘I had a card from  Mr Broadhurst the other day,’ she bleated.
‘You remember him, dear?’
‘Yes, Mama, how could I forget him.’
(And how could Gyggle have been stupid enough to imagine that he was dead?)
‘He's getting on now, of course, poor man.’
‘Yes, he must be very old now.’
‘He tells me he may have to go into a rest home.
He can't really manage by himself any more.’
Apparently he had become nothing more than this, forage for commonplace family small talk.
And as for those alter-egos, his trade name ‘Samuel Northcliffe’ still cropped up in the financial and marketing press.
He was a member of syndicates involved in leveraged buy-outs, he was a prominent Lloyd's underwriter, he was a consultant for this corporation and an adviser to that emirate.
But when I concentrated on the postage-stamp-sized photographs bearing his name that had started to appear, I could no longer be certain that he and The Fat Controller were one and the same.
It seemed far more likely that, as Dr Gyggle suggested, I had become aware of Samuel Northcliffe separately and incorporated information I had gleaned from the newspapers into my fantasy.
Dr Gyggle wasn't satisfied with my progress.
He regarded my attainment of ‘full genitality’ as the ultimate goal of his therapy and he was determined that I should enjoy a complete cure.
Not until the spectre of The Fat Controller was fully exorcised from my psyche would I be able to form an adult relationship.
‘I'm convinced that the resolution of all this lies buried deep in your unconscious,’ he told me as we sat chatting in his office at the DDU.
‘I can talk to you, you can talk to me.
We can try all sorts of techniques to get in touch with the hinterland of your psyche but my feeling is that, unless you yourself are prepared to voyage there, it will prove impossible to extirpate this negative cathexis.
Somewhere deep down, your idea of what it is to be a person, to truly engage in the world, has become critically interfused with childish fantasy.
Your choice of iconography is of course highly significant in this context.’
To begin with Gyggle tried me on sensory deprivation.
He  had hijacked a proportion of the Unit's budget to buy a sensory-deprivation tank which he kept in a basement of the hospital.
It was such wacky financial apportionments as this that — or so he claimed to me — made him a voguish and sought-after practitioner.
Unfortunately, whatever remnants of my eidetic ability remained made me entirely unsuitable for this particular therapy.
Going down to the hospital basement and disrobing in a utility room full of bleach bottles and moulting mops was a  tantalisingly prosaic prelude to my voyages into inner space.
But once Gyggle had positioned me in the tank — which crouched there like a miniature submarine, or a twenty-first-century washing machine — and swung shut the rubber-flanged door, I found it impossible to lose — and therefore as he hoped, reencounter — my self.
The lulling cushion of blood-heat saline solution I floated on did help me to neglect those bodily fears that were so much a part of me.
Awareness of time and even of whether I was waking or sleeping soon drained away.
I would sink down into a velvet void so entire and impenetrable that whether it was I or I was it, became moot.
But then, just at the point where my doubts about the external world had become a crescendo and I was certain that revelation was nigh, some glitch would occur.
Either the salt would sting into a cut or raw spot on my body, bringing back bodily feeling in one fell swoop, or else, from somewhere in the bowels of building, my ears, questing for the remotest of stimuli, would pick up on the sound of a toilet being flushed, or perhaps a trolley banging against a wall.
In a split-second I would build on this particle of noise and construct an idea of the kind of world that could produce such a phenomenon.
Needless to say, this new world always bore an uncanny resemblance to the one I had so recently abandoned.
Gyggle wasn't to be put off by this; instead of retreating or retrenching he suggested even more radical measures.
‘It isn't altogether ethical,’ he said, while watching me shower hexagonal salt crystals from my inner thighs, ‘but then you and I haven't had an orthodox therapeutic relationship.’
‘What isn't altogether ethical?’
‘They used to advocate it for withdrawing heroin addicts — naturally they had little success.
Then they tried it with various kinds of depression, even psychoses.
Invariably the cure proved far worse than the disease.’
‘What the hell are you talking about?’
‘Deep sleep, that's what I want you to let me do, Ian.
I want to put you under for at least forty-eight hours.
I think that only by maximising long periods of REM, or dream sleep, will we be able to summon up this demon of yours.
Then once he's rematerialised we will be able to fight him, hmm?’
Why did I let him persuade me to do this?
The answer is simple.
— Sure, I had a good job and a comfortable home, I even had people who invited me to their houses.
I had the trappings of success, of social acceptability.
I had got over a particularly traumatic childhood and adolescence and looked set fair for a modicum of stability as an adult.
But there was this sex problem, of course, and there was something else, a rootlessness, an atemporality about my life.
Try as I might to be in the present, to subsume myself to history, to see myself as just another corpuscle coursing along the urban arteries, I couldn't.
There was an anachronistic feel to my whole life, a kind of alienation that I couldn't quite understand.
It came out with particular force in my work.
It didn't matter how innovative the products I set out to market actually were, I could not prevent myself from seeing them already in some illimitable bazaar of the far future, long obsolete and hopelessly dated, so much cosmological car-boot-sale fodder.
It impinged on me, this business of always being in the Now.
Riding along in my automobile there was no particular time to go to, just a moiling moment.
I agreed with Gyggle, only by entering the dreamscape, the hypercast of my hotted-up mind, could I hope to resolve this paradox and once and for all free myself from the malevolent force which I felt had shaped my life.
He told me that in the past insulin had been used to put people in coma states but he wouldn't dream of doing anything as  crude or violent; a silky drip of valium sedation was all that was required.
Gyggle would store me in a spare room of the hospital and keep me under twenty-four-hour observation while I was unconscious.
INTERMISSION
What this country needs is a good five-cent cigar.
T.K. Marshall
So, where were we?
Listening to the fridge, right?
Listening to the modulated hum, the gaseous cough, the rubber shudder.
Twenty Great Fridge Hits, now that's an album you could market truly effectively.
There has to be a demand out there for this kind of thing, everyone is so hip to the idea of ambient music nowadays, and what could be more consummately ambient than a fridge?
It's both in the environment, of the environment and apparently a smidgeon of a threat to the precious fucking environment.
OK, granted, perhaps fort -five minutes of different fridge noises alone might be a bit of a non-starter.
We'd have to jazz it up a little, get a few prominent vocalists to sing over the coolant's bubble, a few name producers to chip the chilly vibration down to its component cubes and then restack it into a great wall of freezing sound.
Then I think we'd be in business, then I'm sure you'd have a nice little earner on your hands.
I say you, but I mean me.
I'd dive below the line and use direct marketing for this one.
I'd go to a list broker of my acquaintance.
A nervy man in an electric-blue Anzio suit, his body a twitching live-wire but poorly earthed to the keyboard of his computer.
Whenever I go to see him, he is vivified by his connection with so many passive consumers; their purse-mouths suck greedily at his psychic account.
His fingers are splayed out so that he can feel the very pulse of hundreds of megabytes of information flowing into him.
The hard disc holds the teeming registers of potential purchasers and his own mind is merged with this other, faster random-access memory, so that he can turn to me and say, ‘You want ABC ones with late four-door Volvos?
We've got it.
You  want certified accountants in Acorn areas 117 through 492 with a proven history of competition entering?
We've got it.
You want eighteen to forty-four-year-old ethnic minority home owners?
Hey, we've got it.’
More than that he can mash these lists of prospects together to produce delightfully implausible juxtapositions: exercise-bike owners who take educational holidays to the Ukraine (there are only seven in Greater London); lepers with a penchant for Janet Reger lingerie ( surprisingly enough, several hundred in Roseland alone); Liberal Democrat Nintendo enthusiasts who are also Wagner buffs (not as many as one might have hoped for).
After twenty minutes or so with the list broker you start to see the world as he does.
His vision is a disconcerting one, his eyebeams shoot out, clear but solid room-dividers that slice any gathering, any grouping of people, into their listable characteristics.
He has geo-demo vision (geographic and demographic breakdown, to you).
He peers into a bar and instantly this reticulated gaze comes into play, falling over the assembled suits, so that each one is caught by their vent-gills in the  appropriately sized mesh square, struggling to free themselves before the marketeers close in, wielding stunning Free Offers.
My fridge album is really going to test the list broker, push him to the very limit.
‘You want what?’ he'll say.
‘You want a list of people whose idea of fun is listening to the fridge at three o'clock in the morning?
You don't ask for much, do you, mate?’
He shakes his head, he ums and ahs, his Thelonious Monk fingers chop at the keyboard in talented frustration.
But then he has it, he's off and running, he's merging and purging that database with frantic abandon.
‘Let me see…
Let me see — yeah, yeah’— plastic keys riffling —‘we've got a list that tells us who's bought fridge freezers in the central London area in the past year…
Um, um about sixteen thousand prospects on that one.
And we've got a list of people who have responded to telesales offers for ambient music compilation albums — about three thousand on that one…
Hm, hm, merge and purge, what do we get?
A hundred and fifty-two prospects.
Now, to be fair, you'd have to say that only a few of these are going to be wacky enough to go for the fridge compilation album, but which ones?
Let me see…
Let me see —’
He's back at the main menu, he's calling up the directory, the very List of Lists, the brain surgeon's own encephalogram.
There's a murky region of the VDU, as if someone has rubbed grease on to it.
Through this opacity I can see more lists listed.
These are the secret lists, shadowy rankings of unacceptable groupings.
‘We've got a list of patients being treated for major psychoses at London hospitals — yes, yes, I know that strictly speaking that's a bit unethical, but let me tell you, not nearly as unethical as some of the other things we have here.
Like what?
We-ell, how about Nazi war criminals with late four-door saloons registered in the Potteries?
Or cabinet ministers more than fleetingly attached to exotic prostheses?
Or company directors who like to make free with their own ca-ca?
That one's broken down by business size, and all of them are available on cheshire or self-adhesive labels.
Now then, merge and purge, merge and purge — Whassat?
Data Protection Act?
Don't make me laugh, squire.
Let's see, let's see — humph.
Just the one.
Just the one nutter who listens to the fridge and can heave his plastic in our direction —’
Me of course.
It would have to be me.
It is me, after all, who has been subjected to the direct marketing of my very soul.
You've heard of the rogue male, I am his modern descendant, the junk male.
Let me tell you an anecdote, insert a bitable narrative McNugget into your fast mind, that will illustrate this point.
I recall a weekend when I was maybe nineteen or twenty, at any rate shortly before his disappearance and after his transformation, his farting out of his new identity.
We went up to Yorkshire to seek out some of my grandfather's haunts.
We didn't actually call on Old Sidney — according to my mage that wouldn't be ‘politic’.
Instead, we ended up wandering over the moors above Hebden Bridge.
It was around Easter, and perhaps it was this that led him to wax theological as we bounced across the heather and gorse.
The moors were painfully beautiful that day.
In the sky cumulus clouds formed a startling upside-down scape.
On the ground their scudding shadows dappled the hills, hills that tumbled down to the ragged but level line, where the uplands ended and the deep gorge-like valleys began.
‘There used to be sea here,’ he remarked, sweeping his conning tower of an arm around in a wide arc.
‘Note how the exposed stratification where the valley falls away resembles a shoreline.
If you fill in the valleys with the absent ocean, what d'ye get?
Why, a beautiful inland archipelago, of course.
Charming emerald islands set amongst the lapping waves.’
I did as he told me, eidetically filling in the missing mass of water.
I watched it course in up the dry fjords, finding its correct level, until the two of us, the big man and I, were standing aloft, looking out from our vantage point over the primordial scene, the liquid heart of England.
‘That's why this part of the world is so important to me,’ he resumed, taking a cumbersome leather cigar case from his pocket.
‘It puts one in touch with the sheer scale of geological time, and therefore with the infinite and the ineffable.’
He pulled the sides of the case apart and peered at the tobacco projectiles it contained, each one as potently dangerous as a Sam-7.
‘This one, I think.’
He drew one out, bit off its tip and then lit it with the licking tongue of his petrol lighter.
‘Only a Montecristo number one, but then anything more substantial would be wasted in the open air.’
We walked on.
He swung his alpenstock vigorously, teeing off tussocks of grass.
He was dressed for an Edwardian shooting party in a full suit of tweed plus fours.
On top of the boulder of his head sat a tweed hat with a grouse feather stuck in its band.
For some reason the rumpled appearance of the hat drew my attention.
It was like a deliberately faked natural object, a hide, beneath which the ornithologists of his beady consciousness kept watch on a shy world.
‘You're thinking about my head, aren't you?’
I started, almost treading in the muddy ditch that ran alongside the path.
‘Possibly you are meditating on the fact of my baldness.’
‘I — I wasn't.’
‘No, perhaps not.
But even if you were you needn't expend any sympathy on my behalf — my tonsured condition is a matter of design rather than accident.
A little idea I picked up during a sojourn among the dipsomaniacs of Mother Russia.
Those lost souls are so impoverished that they shave their heads in order that they may rub alcohol into them.
The embrocatory variety of the spirit is, you see, the cheapest available.
Care to try it?’
He pulled a generous hip flask from his other pocket, unscrewed the cap and with one abrupt movement swept off his hat and dashed a handful of the stuff against his brow.
The breeze blew a gust of reeking astringency in my face, whilst he shook himself, his cetacean-sized body wobbling, like an upright dugong.
‘Brrr!’ he exclaimed.
‘That does me a power of good, I can feel the aqua vitae percolating into my brain, freeing up its function, its Babbage clunk, its differential engine.’
The way we had taken was winding down towards a small lock or tarn.
A pool was contained under a miniature cliff, broken half-way up its face by the route the path took in looping round and pressing on down the valley.
It was here, under a straggle of dwarf oaks and rowans that a troupe of elderly walkers had decided to halt for their feed.
They were all sitting, legs stuck out into the path, backs against the cliff, munching on sandwiches and swigging from plastic cups.
Even from across the pool we could hear the yammer of their animated conversation.
‘Harumph!’
He prodded the ground with the tip of his stick.
‘If I'm not far mistaken this must be what is termed ‘an area of outstanding natural beauty’.
It goes without saying that this designation is solely a function of the propensity of such locales to attract the very ugliest examples of Homo erectus .
Observe them, lad, consider their raddled aspect married to the sophistication of their ambulatory equipment and garb.’
I did as he said.
It was true, the old ramblers were both ugly and kitted out in the very best of outdoor clothing.
Gore-Tex cagoules tented over their bony collars and bent spines; plastic map-cases and complicated orienteering compasses dangled against their concave poitrines; their curving shanks were sheathed in fashionable moleskin or corduroy breeches; and their flat feet and weak ankles were shod in flexible casts of the finest shoe leather.
If they had been younger, they could have scaled the Rockies in this high-stepping habit.
‘Absurd, isn't it?’
He took a vigorous pull on his Montecristo and  French-inhaled an Old Smoky-sized plume of fume.
‘These pensioners’ preposterous kit calls forth from me a paraphrase of one of the toy Alsatian philosophe's most renowned apophthegms, to whit, ‘Hell is other people's trousers’.
D'ye like that?
Ahaha, hahaha!’
He disgorged merriment and vapour in equal parts.
‘What's that!?’
He swung back to face the walkers, who were stirring now, as if responding to his pejorative comments.
They screwed the caps back on to their thermos flasks, and jammed down the lids of their now empty plastic sandwich containers.
Gingerly, they attempted to get up.
Liver-spotted hands grasped one another.
It was difficult to tell if those who had already risen were trying to help their fellows, or if those still recumbent were actually pulling the feistier ones back down, into the grave.
Eventually they were all standing, dusting off crumbs and twigs.
Stringing themselves out in a ragged line, a scout-masterish type at the head, they set off down the valley.
‘Feast your peepers on that.’
We were following them at a good clip.
‘Can you imagine what ghastly favours will obtain to the chief baboon, when this band enters a somewhat more farouche environment?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘What I mean is, where they are going the pecking order they have created will take on a mortal significance, red in tooth and claw.’
‘What, in Hebden Bridge?’
‘No, booby!
You know I cannot abide a booby!
We are going to Hebden Bridge, they are going to partake in a spot of rather more radical rambling.’
His lycanthropic finger was out again, the triple jointed middle one.
It was rubbing up and down as if he were titillating an unseen erogenous zone.
As he spoke something untoward had begun to occur, something that was at one and the same time obscene and yet oddly natural.
Up ahead of the scout-masterish walker, who strode along wielding his shepherd's crook, looking a quarter-century late for Aldermaston, a dilation came into being, a tear in the very air.
It appeared to be some disturbance of the atmosphere, a puckering slash of the ethereal epidermis itself.
It widened but nothing could be seen in the gap, save for the path ahead, winding on down to the valley.
The scout-masterish type strode straight into the mouth of this cavity, and vanished.
I stopped walking and stared wide-eyed as the rest of the senescent strollers proceeded out of this dimension.
When the last heel of the last boot had been swallowed up, the shimmering thing pulled its lips together, zipped itself back up and was gone.
‘What did you do to those people?’
I gasped.
‘Where have they gone?
You've killed them, haven't you?
You've destroyed them out of sheer pettiness!’
‘Nonsense, lad, do endeavour not to succumb to melodramatics.’
He'd stopped walking now as well and was regarding the end of his Montecristo with an expression of faintly weary inappetency.
‘I've merely done a little time-tailoring, simply removed one of the pleats or flares from the ostensibly straight leg of time.
‘They are in exactly the same place, walking down the same path’— he paused, pulling back a cuff to expose his stone, circle-sized Rolex —‘some four thousand years ago.
No doubt they will find the experience a tad disorienting, but if they manage to avoid the marauding aurochs by day and the preying sabre-toothed tigers by night, they may find much in their new environment that is congenial.
‘I myself, being an arborophile, am delighted by the dense coniferous forests of the Neolithic period.
Why, I even had this staff carved from one such, during my last venture there.
Each year I whittle away another ring from it, a nice inversion, I may say, of the new science of dendrochronology.’
I had lost him.
He might have been speaking Ursprache, for all that I understood.
I was firmly in the present, watching the starlings cavort over and under the telegraph wires and the wind shimmer the young leaves into a muzzy Monet.
We walked on in silence for a while.
He was smoking concentratedly.
To break it up, fill the hiatus, I asked, ‘Why?
Why, did you do that?’
And braced myself for the deluge of his anger.
But none came.
‘This is, of course, a synecdoche,’ he said.
‘You see, my little licentiate, when these retired schoolmarms and redundant bank  officials pitch up in the petrified era, they will be forced to test their high-tech equipment to its very limit.
They will soon ascertain whether or not Gore-Tex and Timberland live up to their much-vaunted specifications.
‘More to the point, as they struggle to find their way to the coast — having realised the nature of their predicament, pendant to an encounter with their hairy forefathers that will leave half their number blinded and trepanned and two-thirds of the remainder dying from blood poisoning — they will gradually come to see the uttermost folly of their own moral precepts, their spiritual baggage, their transcendental ballast.
They will realise fully the force of Broadhurst's Wager.’
‘I'm sorry?’
‘Broadhurst's Wager is the correct way round of looking at these things, an apt reversal of the sophistries of that anorexic apostate, scribbling on his Post-it notelets.
It states: You are a fool to worship the deity.
For, if he does exist he will surely forgive you for your dereliction, being such a sop in these matters, a meddling milk toast.
And if he doesn't exist, why, at the moment of expiry you will feel an utter ass, the completest of fools.
All those hours spent at tiresome tombolas, all those mornings kneeling on lumpy hassocks, all those pathetic agonies — the temporary loss and then short-lived recovery of the small change of faith, faith in a nothing, a nullity, a vacuum.
‘No, no, realise the full force of Broadhurst's Wager and the Christ-figure's absent father becomes what we all knew him to be.
An errant neurotic, failing to keep up the maintenance payments to support his own creation.
He's probably squandering the wherewithal on some teleological analysis, reclining on a couch that straddles the firmament.
‘Why?’ he moans to his shrink.
‘Why did I do it?’
But he cannot admit any of it really, oh no, for he's in chronic denial, denial of the existence of the world itself.
Although, that being said, during particularly lucid and integrated moments, he will perhaps acknowledge the reality of some small part of it.
Liechtenstein, for example.
‘But that's enough theology for one day.’
The Rolex was consulted again.
‘If we don't step on it the inn will have closed for the afternoon, and we won't get a glass of the  urine of Culex pipiens .
That which passes for beer in these parts.’
So it's Broadhurst's Wager that comes to me now, comes to me at three o' clock in the morning while I harken to the cooling unit.
as if I had to ask why it should be that there isn't any fun any more.
Me of all people.
If I didn't know I doubt I would be sitting here, waiting for the dawn to stream, screaming derision through the louvres, waiting for my wife to die.
No, no, there's no fun any more, just my idea of it.
Mine and his, his and mine.
We're like coke heads or chronic masturbators, aren't we?
Attempting to crank the last iota of abandonment out of an  intrinsically empty and mechanical experience.
We push the plunger home, we abrade the clitoris, we yank the penis and we feel nothing.
Not exactly nothing, worse than nothing, we feel a flicker or a prickle, the sensual equivalent of a retinal after-image.
That's our fun now, not fun itself, only a tired allusion to it.
Nevertheless, we feel certain that if we can allude to fun one more time, make a firm statement about it, it will return like the birds after winter.
Waking in our bed one morning, we'll hear a chorus of trills and cheeps; fun has come back to cluster in the branches of the tree outside our window.
We'll cosy down in joyful anticipation.
But as we rise and dress, as we leave the house to walk to the shop and buy a paper, it ebbs away, this false spring.
We pass a playground.
A group of kids are on a roundabout, one foot on and one foot off, they are pushing it at a giddy speed, round and around until their faces form a single banded blur.
Out of this blur there stares a single set of eyes, eyes as sicklied o'er with cynicism as those of a dying cirrhotic hack, as those of an ecstatic teenager gibbering on a dancefloor, as those of a beaten wife punched in the mouth for the nth time.
Was he right?
Have we fallen from grace?
Is that it?
Have we lost our collective innocence?
Sometimes it seems that way, doesn't it?
We feel like we've been thrust into, deflowered by the smirking, brutal world.
But on the other hand it also feels as if we were the defilers.
We've jiggled and joggled, lurched and reared, wee-ha!
Wee-hey!
Now spent, exhausted, heavier than ever, we pull ourselves off this fun-float, this transport of delight, to see beneath us a crushed flower, a stamped upon camellia, its pollen and sap smeared like blood on the infertile ground, the dry ground, the any old iron, lurking-tetanus ground.
How can it be so, this hovering sense of being both victim and perpetrator, both us and them, both me and him?
Have we been expelled from an arcadia of fun where nature provided us with innocent automata, lowing and braying machines for our amusement?
I doubt it.
I doubt it very much.
I tell you what I think, since you ask, since you dare to push your repulsive face at me, from out of the smooth paintwork of my heavily mortgaged heart.
I think there was only so much fun to go round, only so much and no more available.
We've used it all up country dancing in the gloaming, kissing by moonlight, eating shellfish while the sun shatters on our upturned fork and we make the bon point .
And of course, the thing about fun is that it exists solely in retrospect, in retroscendence; when you're having fun you are perforce abandoned, unthinking.
Didn't we have fun, well, didn't we?
You know we did.
You're with me now, aren't you?
We're leaving the party together.
We pause on the stairs and although we left of our own accord, pulled our coat from under the couple entwined on the bed, we already sense that it was the wrong decision, that there was a hidden hand pushing us out, wanting to exclude us.
We pause on the stairs and we hear the party going on without us, a shrill of laughter, a skirl of music.
Is it too late to go back?
Will we feel silly if we go back up and announce to no one in particular, ‘Look, the cab hasn't arrived.
We thought we'd just come back up and wait for it, have a little more fun.’
Well, yes, yes, we will feel silly, bloody silly, because it isn't true.
The cab has arrived, we can see it at the bottom of the stairs, grunting in anticipation, straining to be clutched and directed, to take us away.
Away from fun and home, home to the suburbs of maturity.
One last thing.
You never thought that being grown up would mean having to be quite so — how can I put it?
Quite so — grown  up.
Now did you?
You didn't think you'd have to work at it quite so hard.
It's so relentless, this being grown up, this having to be considered, poised, at home within a shifting four-dimensional matrix of Entirely Valid Considerations.
You'd like to get a little tiddly, wouldn't you?
You'd like to fiddle with the buttons of reality as he does, feel it up without remorse, without the sense that you have betrayed some shadowy commitment.
Don't bother.
I've bothered, I've gone looking for the child inside myself.
Ian, the Startrite kid.
I've pursued him down the disappearing paths of my own psyche.
I am he as he is me, as we are all…
His back, broad as a standing stone…
My footsteps, ringing eerily inside my own head.
I'm turning in to face myself, and face myself, and face myself.
I'm looking deep into my own eyes.
Ian, is that you, my significant other?
I can see you now for what you are, Ian Wharton.
You're standing on a high cliff, chopped off and adumbrated by the heaving green of the sea.
You're standing hunched up with the dull awareness of the hard graft.
The heavy workload that is life, that is death, that is life again, everlasting, world without end.
And now, Ian Wharton, now that you are no longer the subject of this cautionary tale, merely its object, now that you are just another unproductive atom staring out from the windows of a branded monad, now that I've got you where I want you, let the wild rumpus begin.