

THE INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES
THE subject of statutory interpretation is not usually taught in Law Schools, and you may perhaps not be examined upon it.
An understanding of it is not so essential as that of the working of precedent.
You may, therefore, postpone the reading of this chapter if you wish.
But I hope that you will think, as I do, that because this basic subject is omitted in ordinary teaching syllabuses it is all the more important that law students should pick up something about it on their own.
A practitioner with any pretension to legal learning should certainly know the lines of argument that may be open to him on a disputed point of interpretation.
THE CONTEXT RULE
In ordinary life, if someone says something that you do not understand, you ask him to explain himself more fully.
This is impossible with the interpretation of statutes, because when Parliament has passed an Act the words of the Act are authoritative as words.
It is only these words that have passed through the legal machinery of law-making, and individual Members of Parliament cannot be put into the witness-box to supplement or interpret what has been formally enacted.
Hence the words of an Act carry a sort of disembodied or dehumanised meaning: not necessarily the meaning intended by any actual person in particular, but the meaning that is conventionally attached to such words.
The point must not be pressed too far, since the statute obviously has a broad purpose (or, to speak more precisely, those who collaborated in framing and passing  the statute had a broad purpose) which is expressed in the words.
The most important rules for the interpretation (otherwise called construction) of statutes are those suggested by common sense.
The judge may look up the meaning of a word in a dictionary or technical work; but this ordinary meaning may be controlled by the particular context.
As everyone knows who has translated from a foreign language, it is no excuse for a bad translation that the meaning chosen was found in the dictionary; for the document may be its own dictionary, showing an intention to use words in some special shade of meaning.
This rule, requiring regard to be had to the context, is sometimes expressed in the Latin maxim Noscitur a sociis, which Henry fielding translated: a word may be known by the company it keeps.
One may look not only at the rest of the section in which the word appears but at the statute as a whole, and even at earlier legislation dealing with the same subject-matter — for it is assumed that when Parliament passed an Act, it probably had the earlier legislation in mind, and probably intended to use words with the same meaning as before.
Somewhat anomalously, reference may even be made to later statutes, to see the meaning that Parliament puts on the same words in a similar context.
However, words need not always have a consistent meaning attributed to them: the context may show that the same word bears two different senses even when it is repeated in the same section.
Formerly, the rule permitting recourse to earlier statutes was taken to allow the court to compare the wording of a consolidation Act with the Acts that it superseded, and to conclude that variation of wording indicated a change of meaning.
But this tended to defeat the object of consolidation, which was to supersede a jumble of Acts of various dates by a single statute.
Consolidation would be little help if one still had to look at the old repealed Acts in order to interpret the new one.
Consequently, the rule now laid down by the House of Lords is that where in construing a consolidation Act
‘the actual words are clear and unambiguous it is not permissible to have  recourse to the corresponding provisions in the earlier statute repealed by the consolidation Act and to treat any difference in their wording as capable of casting doubt upon what is clear and unambiguous language in the consolidation Act itself.’
In reading a statute, always look for a definition section, assigning special meanings to some of the words in the statute.
Parliamentary counsel have the inconsiderate habit of not telling you (for example, in a footnote or marginal note) that a particular word in the section is defined somewhere else in the statute; you have to ferret out the information for yourself.
In addition to the interpretation section in the statute, the Interpretation Act 1978 operates as a standing legal dictionary of some of the most important words used in legislation.
This Act declares, among other things, that the plural includes the singular, and the singular the plural, unless a contrary intention appears.
Also, by virtue of the Act, if not independently of it, ‘man’ embraces ‘woman.’
These special meanings are duly noticed in the various annotations of statutes, such as Halsbury's Statutes and Current Law Statutes .
INTERPRETATION IN THE LIGHT OF POLICY: ‘FRINGE MEANING'
When interpreting statutes the courts often announce that they are trying to discover ‘the intention of the legislature.’
In actual fact, if a court finds it hard to know whether a particular situation comes within the words of a statute or not, the probability is the situation was not foreseen by the legislature, so that the Lords and Members of Parliament would be just as puzzled by it as the judges are.
Here, the ‘intention of the legislature’ is a fiction.
Because of this difficulty, some deny that the courts are really concerned with the intention of Parliament.
‘In the construction of written documents including statutes, what the court is concerned to ascertain is, not what the promulgators of the instruments meant to say, but the meaning of what they have said.’
Others, however, think it proper to speak of the intention of  Parliament, in the sense of ‘the meaning which Parliament must have intended the words to convey.’
In case of doubt the court has to guess what meaning Parliament would have picked on if it had thought of the point.
The intention is not actual but hypothetical.
There is, of course, a limit to what a court can do by way of filling out a statute, but to some extent this is possible.
An illustration is the familiar legal problem of ‘fringe meaning.’
The words we use, though they have a central core of meaning that is relatively fixed, have a fringe of uncertainty when applied to the infinitely variable facts of experience.
For example, the general notion of a ‘building’ is clear, but a judge may not find it easy to decide whether a temporary wooden hut, or a telephone kiosk, or a wall, or a tent, is a ‘building.’
In problems like this, the process of interpretation is indistinguishable from legislation: the judge is, whether he likes it or not, a legislator.
For, if he decides that the wooden hut is a building, he is in effect adding an interpretation clause to the statute which gives ‘building’ an extended application; whereas if he decides that the hut is not a building, he adds a clause to the statute which gives it a narrower meaning.
The words of the statute, as they stand, do not give an answer to the question before the judge; and the question is therefore legislative rather than interpretative.
This simple truth is rarely perceived or admitted: almost always the judge pretends to get his solution out of the words of the Act, though he may confess in so doing to be guided by its general policy.
The rational approach would be to say candidly that the question, being legislative, must be settled with the help of the policy implicit in the Act, or by reference to convenience or social requirements or generally accepted principles of fairness.
This kind of ‘interpretation’ may be legally and socially sound although it reaches results that would surprise the lexicographer.
Thus it has actually been held that murder can be  an ‘accident.’
The word ‘accident’ was being interpreted in the context of the Workmen's Compensation Act, and the result of the decision was that the widow of the deceased workman was entitled to compensation from the employer, because the murder in question arose out of and in the course of the employment.
The court admitted that it was giving an unusual meaning to the word, for a historian who described the end of Rizzio by saying that he met with a fatal accident in Holyrood Palace would fairly be charged with a misleading statement of fact.
Similarly, Farwell L.J.
remarked that one would not in ordinary parlance say that Desdemona died by accident, because ‘the horror of the crime dominates the imagination and compels the expression of the situation in terms related to the crime and the criminal alone.’
Yet, if one looks at the situation from the point of view of the victim, it is an accident, in the sense that it was not expected or intended by the victim himself.
In preferring this wider meaning of the term ‘accident’ the court looked to the general purpose of the Act.
THE ‘MISCHIEF’ RULE
As can be seen from the illustration just given, the task of interpreting statutes gives judges the chance of expressing their own opinions as to social policy; and, inevitably, their opinions do not always command universal assent.
However, the judges are on fairly safe ground if they apply the ‘mischief’ rule, otherwise known as the rule in Heydon's case.
This bids them to look at the common law (i.e. the legal position) before the Act, and the mischief that the statute was intended to remedy; the Act is then to be construed in such a way as to suppress the mischief and advance the remedy.
The practical utility of the rule depends to some extent upon the means that the courts are entitled to employ in order to ascertain what mischief the Act was intended to remedy.
A true historical investigation would take account of press agitation, party conferences, Government pronouncements, and debates  in Parliament; but all these are ignored as the result of a rule excluding evidence of the political history of a statute.
The rule is justified by the burden that would be placed upon legal advisers and the uncertainty that would be introduced into the law if such historical materials had to be consulted.
In practice, therefore, the judge generally divines the object of a statute merely from perusal of its language, in the light of his knowledge of the previous law and general knowledge of social conditions.
Many statutes are the result of recommendations made by the Royal Commissions and departmental committees.
Can the reports of these commissions and committees be looked at as an aid to construction?
The rule as now settled is that they are inadmissible in order to show what the committee thought its proposals meant, but admissible under the rule in Heydon's case to the extent that they show the mischief against which the Act was directed.
It may be expected that the practice of referring to these reports will extend itself in the future, because they often supply the best commentary upon the wording of an Act.
THE LITERAL RULE
Granted that words have a certain elasticity of meaning, the general rule remains that the judges regard themselves as bound by the words of a statute when these words clearly govern the  situation before the court.
The words must be applied with nothing added and nothing taken away.
More precisely, the general principle is that the court can neither extend the statute to a case not within its terms though perhaps within its purpose (the casus omissus ) nor curtail it by leaving out a case that the statute literally includes, though it should not have.
(There is no accepted name for the latter, but it may be called the casus male inclusus ).
Lord Diplock expressed the point as follows.
‘At a time when more and more cases involve the application of legislation which gives effect to policies that are the subject or bitter public and parliamentary controversy, it cannot be too strongly emphasised that the British constitution, though largely unwritten, is firmly based upon the separation of powers; Parliament makes the laws, the judiciary interpret them.
When Parliament legislates to remedy what the majority of its members at the time perceive to be a defect or a lacuna in the existing law (whether it be the written law enacted by existing statutes or the unwritten common law as it has been expounded by the judges in decided cases), the role or the judiciary is confined to ascertaining from the words that Parliament has approved as expressing its intention what that intention was, and to giving effect to it.
Where the meaning of the statutory words is plain and unambiguous it is not for the judges to invent fancied ambiguities as an excuse tor failing to give effect to its plain meaning because they themselves consider that the consequences of doing so would be inexpedient, or even unjust or immoral.
In controversial matters such as are involved in industrial relations there is room for differences of opinion as to what is expedient, what is just and what is morally justifiable.
Under our constitution it is Parliament's opinion on these matters that is paramount.’
Lord Diplock went on to say that the principle applies even though there is reason to think that if Parliament had foreseen the situation before the court it would have modified the words it used.
‘If this be the case it is for Parliament, not for the judiciary, to decide whether any changes should be made to the law as stated in the Acts.’
According to this, courts should not use the ‘mischief’ rule when the statute is ‘plain and unambiguous.’
They can use the mischief rule if the statute is ambiguous, but must not ‘invent fancied ambiguities’ in order to do so.
It is, nevertheless, difficult to reconcile the literal rule with the ‘context’ rule.
We understand the meaning of words from their context, and in ordinary life the context includes not only other words used at the same time but the whole human or social situation in which the words are used.
Professor Zander gives the example of parents asking a child-minder to keep the children amused by teaching them a card game.
In the parents' absence the child-minder teaches the children to play strip poker.
There is no doubt that strip poker is a card game, and no doubt that it was not the sort of card game intended by the instructions given.
One knows this not from anything the parents have said but from customary ideas as to the proper behaviour and upbringing of children.
On its face, the literal rule seems to forbid this common sense approach to statutory interpretation.
The rule has often been criticised by writers.
What is a real ambiguity, and what is a fancied ambiguity?
Consider the following case decided by the House of Lords on the construction of the Factories Act.
This Act requires dangerous parts of machines to be constantly fenced while they are in motion.
A workman adjusting a machine removed the fence and turned the machine by hand in order to do the job.
Unfortunately he crushed his finger.
Whether the employers were in breach of the statute depended on whether the machine was ‘in motion.’
In the primary or literal sense of the words it was, but since the machine was not working under power and was only in temporary motion for necessary adjustment, the House of Lords chose to give the words the secondary meaning of ‘mechanical propulsion.’
Since the machine was not being mechanically propelled it was not in motion.
This was a decision of the House of Lords 25 years before the pronouncement of Lord Diplock previously quoted, and no doubt has been cast upon it.
Is the provision in the Factories Act ambiguous or not?
‘Motion’ primarily means movement; the machine was in movement, and therefore, in the ordinary meaning of the phrase, was in motion.
The reason why the House of Lords cut down the meaning of the phrase must have  been because the House did not believe that Parliament intended to cover the particular situation.
According to Lord Diplock it is improper to do this if the meaning of the statute is plain.
So the decision in the Factories Act case was justifiable only if the Act was regarded as not plain.
But in what way was it not plain?
‘In motion’ is on its face a perfectly plain phrase.
Was not the reason why the House thought it not plain that their lordships believed that Parliament did not have this situation in mind and would have cut down the wording if it had?
Yet it seems that according to Lord Diplock such reasoning is merely the invention of a fancied ambiguity, which is no reason for denying the ‘plain’ meaning of a statute.
The literal rule is a rule against using intelligence in understanding language.
Anyone who in ordinary life interpreted words literally, being indifferent to what the speaker or writer meant, would be regarded as a pedant, a mischief-maker or an idiot.
One practical reason for the literal rule is that judges are now deeply afraid of being accused of making political judgments at variance with the purpose of Parliament when it passed the Act.
This fear is sometimes understandable, but not all statutes divide Parliament on party lines.
Other reasons advanced for the literal rule may be briefly answered.
‘Many statutes are passed by political bargaining and snap judgments of expediency; the courts can rarely be sure that Parliament would have altered the wording if it had foreseen the situation.’
This may be true, but is it any reason why the courts should not do justice as best they can, leaving it to Parliament to intervene again if the decision does not meet with Parliament's approval?
‘If courts habitually rewrote statutes in order to effect supposed improvements, this might cause statutes to become more complex in order to exclude judicial rewriting in a way that was politically unacceptable.’
This supposes that the court misjudges what Parliament would wish it to do, whereas in fact the decision may win general approval.
A court that tries to decide as Parliament would have wished is more likely to be right than a court that follows the words believing it was not what  Parliament intended.
‘People are entitled to follow statutes as they are; they should not have to speculate as to Parliament's intention.’
This is a strong reason against the extensive construction of prohibitory legislation, but not in other cases.
‘If the courts undertook to rewrite statutes this would tend to foment litigation, because it would encourage people who objected to the legislation to try their luck with the courts.’
To suggest that the courts will ever completely rewrite a statute is a great exaggeration; and even judges who accept the literal rule in words will depart from it when the circumstances press them hard enough.
Lord Diplock says that there may be differences of opinion as to what is expedient, just and moral, and that Parliament's opinion on these questions is paramount.
This is obviously true, once Parliament's opinion is established.
It is also true that Parliament's opinion is ascertained primarily from the words it has used.
Nevertheless, the facts of the case may be such as to raise serious doubts whether Parliament intended its words to apply.
The decision by a court that a particular situation was not intended to come within the ambit of a statute, though within its words in what may be their most obvious meaning, does not deny the supremacy of Parliament, for if Parliament disagrees with the decision it can pass another Act dealing specifically with the type of case.
However, the hard truth is that Parliament generally pays little attention to the working of the law.
It is not merely that Parliament fails to keep old law under continuous revision; it loses interest in its new creations as soon as they are on the statute book.
INTERPRETATIONS TO AVOID ABSURDITY: THE ‘GOLDEN RULE'
As the factories Act case illustrates, the courts sometimes Allow themselves to construe a statute in such a way as to produce a reasonable result, even though this involves departing from the prima facie meaning of the words.
The rule that a statute may be construed to avoid absurdity is conveniently called the ‘golden rule.’
It is by no means unlimited, and seems to apply only in three types of case.
In its first application, the golden rule allows the court to prefer a sensible meaning to an absurd meaning, where both are linguistically possible.
It does not matter that the absurd meaning is the more natural and obvious meaning of the words.
Lord Reid:
‘Where a statutory provision on one interpretation brings about a startling and inequitable result, this may lead the court to seek another possible interpretation which will do better justice.’
On another occasion Lord Reid put the point more strongly.
‘It is only where the words are absolutely incapable of a construction which will accord with the apparent intention of the provision and will avoid a wholly unreasonable result that the words of the enactment must prevail.’
This application of the golden rule does not contradict the literal rule,provided that the absurdity of the particular proposed application of the statute is conceded to be a reason for finding an ambiguity in it.
If one accepts the golden rule, this involves rejecting Lord Diplock's opinion that the inexpediency, injustice or immorality of the proposed application of the statute cannot in itself be a reason for finding an ambiguity in the statute.
According to the golden rule it can be a powerful motivating force leading the court to detect such an ambiguity.
It is frequently said that the question of absurdity cannot influence a decision in any type of case except the one just stated.
Nevertheless, the courts sometimes act on a second principle, stated by Cross as follows.
‘The judge may read in words which he considers to be necessarily implied by words which are already in the statute, and he has a limited power to add to, alter or ignore statutory words in order to prevent a provision from being unintelligible or absurd or totally unreasonable, unworkable or totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute.’
Acting on this principle judges have occasionally corrected a statute that foolishly said ‘and’ when it meant ‘or,’or that  foolishly said ‘or’when it meant ‘and.’
However, the argument must be very strong to induce the court to meddle with a statute.
Instances occur where the courts feel obliged to construe a statute in a way that they themselves acknowledge creates outrageous injustice.
PRESUMPTIONS
A third principle may be regarded as an application of the second but is best stated on its own.
In interpreting statutes, various presumptions may be applied, all of which are of a negative or restrictive character.
They are the background of legal principles against which the Act is viewed, and in the light of which Parliament is assumed to have legislated, without being expected to express them.
Some embody traditional notions of justice, such as the rule that a statute is presumed not to be retrospective (except in procedural matters).
Others reflect what was almost certainly the intention of Parliament, as that an Act applies only to the United Kingdom unless the contrary is expressed.
The most controversial presumptions are those enshrining the values of a capitalist society — the presumption against interference with vested rights, the presumption against the taking of property without compensation, and the presumption against interference with contract.
The last of these now has few followers; but the first two still retain vitality.
Even so, the judges are hampered by the thought that they must not run counter to political trends, for example by implying a right to full compensation for the appropriation of property when a socialist legislature did not in terms provide for such compensation.
The traditional presumption upon which a clear consensus still exists is that against interference with personal liberty.
that the duty of judges goes beyond the automatic enforcement of the dictates of Parliament.
The judges' function is also to do justice in accordance with certain settled principles of law in a free society; and they are entitled to assume that Parliament  does not intend to subvert these principles, unless there is a clear statement that it does.
for this reason, the courts apply the rule that when Parliament has conferred a judicial or quasi-judicial power upon a person, he must act in accordance with the rules of natural justice.
When Parliament creates a new crime, this is presumed to be subject to certain defences at common law, such as self-defence and duress, and also (very frequently) to the requirement of a state of mind (intention, knowledge or recklessness).
These are judge-made principles required by our ideas of justice and grafted on the statute by ‘implication although there may be no words in the statute to suggest them.
The common law provides quite an armoury of such principles, and new applications can be found for them by a bold judge.
A striking example is Re Sigsworth .
Under legislation now contained in the Intestates’ Estates Act 1952, a child has certain rights of succession on the death of the parent intestate.
For the purpose of his decision in Re Sigsworth , the trial judge assumed it to have been proved that the deceased, Mary Ann Sigsworth, had been murdered by her son; and the question was whether the son was entitled to her estate as ‘issue’ under the Act.
The learned judge held not, for the reason that no one is entitled to profit from his own wrong.
The decision was rendered somewhat easier by the fact that a similar conclusion had already been arrived at in the law of wills: a murderer cannot take under his victim's will.
Long before that — at least as early as 1775 — the courts had laid down the general principle of law that a person cannot bring an action based on his own wrong (ex turpi causa non oritur actio ).
In Re Sigsworth , the judge applied this principle to the interpretation of the intestacy statute which made no mention of it.
Even statutes may be read as subject to certain fundamental principles of justice which are to be discovered in the common law.
Incidentally,Re Sigsworth is enough to disprove the oft-repeated assertion that ‘where the words of an Act of Parliament are clear, there is no room for applying any principles of interpretation.’
This proposition may have a useful  application in limiting some of the more pedantic rules of interpretation, but it does not exclude the application of a presumption or certain common-sense principles.
Although Re Sigsworth was only the decision of a puisne judge it has been approved by the Court of Appeal and extended to other statutes raising a similar question.
One can therefore say that the courts retain the power to read statutes in the light of general principles, the only question being whether the particular court will be able to find or invent a general principle that will enable it to give a sensible effect to the statute.
Much will depend on the legal knowledge and ingenuity of counsel and the court, as well as on the readiness of the court to take a liberal view.
A liberal interpretation to prevent the statute operating upon a casus male inclusus may sometimes be comparatively easy, as it was in Re Sigsworth .
Although the courts have not expressly said so, it may be more difficult to do anything for the casus omissus .
To extend a statute to a regrettably omitted case looks like legislation, whereas refusing to extend it to a casus male inclusus is more like imposing a provisional fetter on legislation (provisional, because Parliament can always come back and include the case expressly if it wants to).
Even so, it is possible for a court to interpret a statute as covering what looks at first sight as a casus omissus if it can find or invent some plausible general principle of interpretation, an exercise that may call for a little ingenuity.
Consider, for example,Adler v. George .
The Official Secrets Act 1920 section 3 prohibits persons ‘in the vicinity of’ any prohibited place from impeding sentries.
The defendant impeded a sentry when he was inside a prohibited place.
The argument for the defence was that the defendant, being inside, was not ‘in the vicinity of’ the place, which meant outside.
The court rejected the argument, holding that the statute was to be read as if it were ‘in or in the vicinity of.’
Obviously, the case was stronger than the one actually provided for, so it could be regarded as a fortiori .
Just as the greater includes the less, so a  provision for the marginal case must include the central case.
Adler v. George shows that statutes may be read not only against the background of notions of justice and settled legal principle (which tend to limit their operation) but also against the background of notions of ordinary common sense (which may extend their operation).
The disquieting feature of the pronouncements of the House of Lords is that by flatly insisting upon the literal rule without expressing any qualifications, they tend to repress the use of the traditional tools by which the judges have in the past introduced rationality into the statute law.
The modern movement for the legislative recognition of ‘human rights’ is in fact a movement for the increased control of legislatures by the judiciary, because the human rights that are claimed are couched in such broad terms, and involve so much balancing of one consideration with another, that they inevitably call for much judicial ‘interpretation.’
The European Convention on Human Rights has not been made part of our law by statute, so it does not in itself create rights enforceable in our courts; but having been ratified by this country it is binding on us as a matter of international law.
There is a long-standing presumption that Acts of Parliament are not intended to derogate from the requirements of international law.
This line of reasoning enables the courts to use the Convention as a means of restricting the operation of statutes.
However, no occasion has yet arisen on which the courts have had an opportunity to demonstrate the Convention as having practical effect in this aspect.
These few words are perhaps sufficient to enable the student to understand what is involved in the interpretation of statutes.
for an enlargement upon the theme see Michael Zander,The Law-Making Process (1980), Chap.
2.
A fuller account of the technical rules will be found in Sir Rupert Cross's Statutory Interpretation .
The practitioner's work is by Maxwell.
WORKING OUT PROBLEMS.
[Since much of the value of this chapter must depend upon the concrete illustrations it gives, I have been forced to assume the reader's knowledge of a certain amount of elementary law.
He should postpone reading it until he has made a start with the study of a case-law subject like Constitutional Law, Criminal Law, Contract or Tort.]
THE object of including problems in the examination paper is to discover legal ability.
But it is not easy even for an intelligent candidate in the heat of the examination to show the calm judgment that a problem requires.
It is, therefore, most important to train oneself in problem answering beforehand.
In doing so the student will not merely be preparing in the best possible way for his examination: he will also be developing his mind as a working instrument and preparing himself for legal practice.
The technique of solving academic problems is almost the same as the technique of writing a legal opinion upon a practical point.
The chief difference is that in practical problems the material facts often lie buried in a much larger mass of immaterial detail, while the examination problem contains comparatively little beyond the material facts.
If the student is studying under a tutor or supervisor an adequate number of problems will be supplied to him.
If not, he will have to buy or otherwise get sight of copies of past examination papers.
Perhaps the most important piece of advice with problems, as with all examination questions, is to read every word of the problem .
Almost every word has been put in for a purpose and  needs to be commented upon.
In the law of contract, for instance, the word ‘orally’ or ‘verbally’or ‘on the telephone,’in describing the formation of a contract for the sale of land, will invite discussion of section 40 of the Law of Property Act 1925.
Even if you are of opinion that a fact stated in the problem is immaterial, you should not (in general) pass it by in silence but should express your opinion that it is immaterial, and, if possible, give reasons.
However, there is no need to deal in this way with an argument that, if raised, would not receive a moment's serious consideration from the court.
FACTS STATED IN THE PROBLEM ARE CONCLUSIVE
A common query on the part of the novice when he reads an examination problem is: ‘How could such facts ever be proved?’
The teacher's answer is that the student must assume this proof.
(Actually, it is surprising how facts often can be proved in practice that at first sight seem to be unprovable if the defendant is prepared to contradict them.
But in any case the student is not concerned with this question.)
The student should not assume facts contrary to those stated in the problem for the purpose of giving the examiner a piece of information for which he did not ask.
Also, there is generally no need to assume facts that go clean beyond those given in the problem: had the examiner wanted a discussion of such facts he would have inserted them himself.
Here is an example of a problem in criminal law where the examiner clearly wanted to confine the facts to a narrow compass.
X and Y, discovering that Z intended to commit a burglary in A's house, arranged together to persuade him to steal therefrom certain articles for them.
Have X, Y or Z committed an offence?
The fact that the question is thrown into the perfect tense shows beyond doubt that no other facts than those stated in the first sentence are to be assumed.
The question is: have they on those facts alone committed an offence?
An answer that assumes that X and Y have persuaded Z to steal, or that Z has stolen, will therefore miss the mark.
The correct answer to the question is that X and Y are guilty of conspiring to incite (or, indeed, of conspiring to commit) burglary or theft.
(There are technical points relating to the charge that need not be considered here.)
OMITTED FACTS
Although supplementary facts should not, in general, be added to a problem, the case is different with what may be called omitted facts.
One of the marks of a competent lawyer is his ability to know what gaps there are in the facts of his case.
The solicitor, for example, when interviewing a client has to draw from him by questions many legally relevant facts that the client has not thought of disclosing.
The barrister, too, may find that such facts are missing from his brief, and have to extract them from his instructing solicitor in conference.
In order to test the candidate's perspicacity a problem may deliberately omit something that is important.
Always look for such omissions and state how your answer will be affected by the presence or absence of the fact in question.
Here is a simple illustration from the law of tort.
B is A's employee.
Discuss A's liability for an accident caused by B's negligence in the following cases:(i) B, when driving A's van, picks up his friend C and gives him a lift to the station.
An accident happens by B's negligence.
(ii)[etc.]
Two vital facts are omitted from this casually stated problem.
First, we are not told who was injured.
We are to understand that owing to B's negligence an injury was sustained either by C or by some other user of the highway.
But the answer may differ according as the person injured was C or some other user of the highway.
This distinction should therefore be taken, and each of the two possibilities discussed separately.
Secondly, we are not told whether the station lay on or near B's proper route, or whether it was so much off the route that every yard he went was a yard away from his employment and not to it.
This distinction, coupled with the previous one, yields four possible combinations of fact, each needing discussion.
Another example of an economically worded problem, this time taken from criminal law:
A killed his baby thinking that it was a rabbit.
Discuss A's criminal responsibility.
Here A's mistake is so extraordinary that we are justified in wondering whether he was not insane at the time of the deed, his insanity being an omitted fact.
On the other hand we are not  positively told that he was insane, and so we must also consider the unlikely hypothesis that the mistake was merely an act of folly.
(As a matter of fact, nature imitates not only art but examination questions; not long ago a man of my acquaintance shot his wife in the leg, in the shrubbery, thinking she was a rabbit.)
Or there is the possibility that A killed his baby in the course of a dream.
The answer, then, again falls into two parts:(i) on the assumption that A was sane,(ii) on the assumption that he was insane.
However, it is not justifiable to discuss a problem from the angle of insanity if there is no indication of insanity in the facts of the problem.
One more example, again from criminal law:
A, a mountaineer, roped to his fellows, cut the rope in order to prevent them from dragging the leader of the party to death.
Discuss.
Presumably A is being prosecuted for murder; but the question does not actually say that A's fellows were killed as a result of what he did.
We must assume that they were killed, or at least injured, in order to create a legal problem.
Presumably, too, A sets up the defence of necessity; we are not expressly told that there was (or that A thought there was) no other way of saving the leader's life, but this is a fair inference from the question.
Finally, the question tells us that A's object was to save the leader; it does not tell us whether his object was also to save himself.
In other words it does not tell us whether he cut the rope above or below himself.
If he cut it below himself his object was presumably to save himself as well as his leader.
If he cut it above himself he presumably fell, and in that case his life was evidently saved by something approaching a miracle — at any rate, we know that he was saved because otherwise he would be beyond the jurisdiction and the question would have no legal interest.
Perhaps this last doubt is irrelevant; it may not matter whether A's object was entirely altruistic or partially self-interested.
But on the other hand it may, and so the point ought to be taken.
Having thus discussed the interpretation of this problem, you would, of course, go on to consider the law relating to it.
If, as in the last illustration, you decide that a fact can be  inferred from what is given, though not explicitly stated, it is wise to guard yourself by stating expressly that you assume the fact to exist.
For the examiner may not agree that the fact is implied in the question; but he will not mind about this if he sees that your assumption is not the result of carelessness but is your considered interpretation of the question.
If you are in any doubt whether a fact is implied you should ‘play safe’ and take the problem each way, that is, first on the assumption that the fact exists and then on the assumption that it does not exist.
Even if all the relevant facts (in one sense of the word ‘facts’) arise on the problem — e.g. a question whether the defendant has, on the facts, been negligent, or whether a lapse of time is ‘reasonable.’
In a real case these would be questions for the jury (if the case were tried with a jury), although the judge might withdraw the issue from the jury if satisfied that there was no evidence of negligence or unreasonableness.
On such a problem, although you may venture an opinion as to the proper verdict on the point, and argue your opinion to the best of your ability, you should not, in the last resort, usurp the function of the jury (or of the judge when there is no jury).
The most you should say is that on these facts there is evidence of negligence (or unreasonableness), and that a finding to that effect would clearly be right (or conversely).
If the point is at all doubtful, take the facts each way and state the legal result following on each possible finding.
The following problem in the law of contract illustrates the importance of this.
A telegraphed an offer to sell his library to B for £1,000.
B telegraphed in reply: ‘Will give £900.
B.’ A day elapsed in which nothing further occurred.
Then at 9 a.m.
A handed to the post office a telegram to B: ‘You can have the library for £900.
A.’ At exactly the same moment B handed to the post office a telegram to A: ‘Cancel my first telegram.
I will take the library for £1,000.
B.’ A received B's telegram at 9.30 a.m.
B received A's telegram at 9.40 a.m.
What contract, it any.
exists?
Everything in this problem turns on the unobtrusive sentence: ‘A day elapsed….’
The question is whether this was an unreasonable delay on the part of A in replying to B's counter-offer of £900.
If it was unreasonable, the offer (i.e. B's counter-offer) has lapsed, and there is no contract.
If it was not unreasonable, the offer was still alive when A handed in at the  post office his telegram of acceptance, and the contract was therefore completed at that moment.
Now it is not possible to give a confident answer to the question whether the delay was unreasonable.
The only rule of law is that an offer by telegram raises a presumption that a speedy reply is expected (Quenerduaine v. Cole ), and therefore the lapse of a whole day would normally be too long.
But it is to be noticed that in our problem the telegraphing business was started not by B but by A. B may have sent his counter-offer by telegram simply out of politeness, and not because he was in any hurry.
It is not certain, therefore, whether the rule in Quenerduaine v. Cole would apply, though on the whole I think it would, because I do not think that a court would speculate on the reasons that moved B to telegraph rather than write.
There is more to say about this problem, but the essence of it is this question of fact.
(Although telegrams are now little used in business matters, the question could arise in connection with international cables.)
It may be added that where facts are given from which the negligence or unreasonableness (or absence of it) may be inferred, you should argue from these facts in much the same way as if you were addressing a jury.
But, as I have said, your opinion on this should not (except in a completely unarguable case) deter you from taking the problem each way.
TWO POINTS IN TECHNIQUE
Some examiners conclude the statement of facts in a problem with the direction to discuss it: others adopt the mannerism of requesting you to advise one of the parties.
This second form of question does not mean that you are expected to bias your answer in favour of the particular party; the legal advice you give in your answer will generally be the same whichever party you are supposed to be advising.
However, there may be some practical advice to be given to the party you are supposed to be advising, and you should certainly comply with the examiner's direction as far as you are able.
By the way, do not use the  second person in your answer — make the answer impersonal, thus you should say ‘X is liable,’ not ‘You are liable.’
If the examiner has exercised his fancy by using fictitious names, like Tomkins, you are perfectly entitled to abbreviate them to the initial letter — unless, of course, two parties in the same problem have the same initial letter.
RULES AND AUTHORITIES
Next, a few remarks upon the giving of reasons and authorities for an opinion.
A bald answer to a problem, even though correct, will not earn many (perhaps not any) marks, because the examiner cannot tell whether the student has knowledge or is just guessing.
Reasons and authorities should, therefore, always be given.
Pretend to yourself that the examiner will disagree with your point of view, and set yourself to win him over by argument.
One of the most important of a lawyer's accomplishments is the ability to resolve facts into their legal categories.
The student should therefore take pains to argue in terms of legal rules and concepts.
It is a common fault, particularly in criminal law, to give the impression that the answer is based wholly upon common sense and a few gleanings from the Sunday newspapers.
The following illustration of a question and answer in criminal law may show this.
Q. — A fire-engine driven at full speed to a fire knocks down and kills somebody.
Discuss the criminal responsibility of the driver.
Student's answer.
—‘If the driver has been careful he is not responsible.
(1) It is a well-known custom that as soon as the siren of a fire-engine is heard, other vehicles should pull up at the side of the road, in order to afford free passage.
It is therefore safe for a fire-engine driver to proceed at a higher speed than would be possible for other drivers.
Further (2) it is reasonable for a fire-engine to proceed quickly to a fire, for life and property may be in danger.
But I do not put much weight on this second ground, for great as may be the importance of putting out a fire, it is not sufficiently great to justify the driver in leaving a trail of destruction behind him.’
Upon reading this answer the examiner may well comment: ‘A commendable effort by an intelligent student who has not read the textbook and knows no criminal law.’
The answer, to be complete, should have stated the crimes for which the driver  may be prosecuted (manslaughter, causing death by reckless driving, or, in the magistrates' court, driving without due care and attention); it should have stated the requirements of each crime, so far as relevant; and it should have pointed out that the burden of proving these requirements beyond reasonable doubt lies on the prosecution.
It should also have discussed the possible defence of necessity, referring to it expressly by that name, not vaguely as the last two sentences of the answer do.
Put into this legal setting the answer would have been first-class.
It is bad style to begin an answer to a problem by citing a string of cases.
Begin by addressing yourself to the problem.
If the law is clear, first state the law and then give the authorities for your statement.
If the law is not clear, first pose the legal question and then set out the authorities bearing on it.
When citing cases, the mere giving of the name is of little use.
What is wanted is not only the name but a statement of the legal points involved in the decision, and perhaps also a consideration of its standing — i.e. whether it has been approved or criticised.
This is so even though the case directly covers the problem.
Still more is it so when the case is not on all fours with the problem.
New points often occur in the law, and the lawyer in advising his client must, in effect, predict the probable decision of the court.
So also in examinations: a problem is often set upon some point of law that is not covered exactly by authority.
No candidate who fails to see this point can get a first class on that question.
The late Dr. Coulton, in his autobiography, told a tale of a great mathematical teacher at Cambridge who met a candidate in the College court just after the Tripos.
‘That was a d — good answer of yours, A, to the sixteenth question.’
Yes, sir, but it was a b — good question, wasn't it?’
In order to create this relationship of mutual esteem between yourself and your examiner, pay him the compliment of searching for the point of his problem.
Ask yourself what is the point it raises that is not precisely covered by authority.
Failure to follow this common-sense rule is a frequent error of the tyro.
Take again, for instance, the ‘mountaineering’ problem already given (p.115).
Most raw beginners think that  they have adequately solved this problem if they quote R .
v. Dudley and Stephens and declare that necessity is no defence.
But if they paused to reflect, they would discover several differences between R .
v. Dudley and Stephens and the facts of their problem.
It cannot be asserted with confidence that every, or even any, of these distinctions would find favour with a judge, but at any rate they are possible distinctions which would certainly be made much of by an experienced counsel for the defence.
They are as follows:
(1) In Dudley and Stephens there was a choice as to who was to die.
It will be remembered that Dudley and Stephens was the case where three men and a cabin-boy were compelled to take to an open boat after the wreck of their yacht Mignonette .
On the twentieth day after the wreck two of the men killed the boy for food; four days later they were rescued.
The two men were convicted of murder.
It may be said that these facts are materially different from those in our problem, for in our problem there seems to be no choice as to who is to die: it is simply (one supposes) a question of some or all.
It is true that in Dudley and Stephens the jury found that the boy was in a much weaker condition than the others and was likely to have died before them.
But the jury did not find that the boy might not have been revived had one of the others been killed to provide food for him.
So long as the boy was alive and had a chance of survival he was as much entitled to retain that chance as the others; whereas in our problem it may be that the men who are cut away have no chance of survival at all.
(2) It is not certain on the facts of Dudley and Stephens that the two defendants would have died had they not killed the boy.
All that the jury found was that had they not done so they would probably not have survived to be rescued.
It may be that on the facts of our problem the death of the leader is certain, hot merely probable, if the rope is not cut.
But it must be admitted that this is not a very strong distinction, for in Dudley and Stephens the jury also found that ‘at the time of the act there was no sail in sight, nor any reasonable prospect of relief’; and it would seem that if the law recognises necessity as a defence it should proceed upon the facts as they appeared to the defendant at the time.
(3) In Dudley and Stephens the cabin-boy was not by his own conduct, voluntary or involuntary, bringing the others nearer to death.
In our problem the men whom the defendant presumably sends to death are themselves dragging the leader to what will otherwise be his death.
It is true that they cannot help it; but does that matter?
If a lunatic attacks me, I am surely entitled to defend myself, even though he is not criminally responsible for his conduct.
Also, I am entitled to defend another.
Is not our problem a case of defending another?
Another illustration, this time from the law of contract, is as follows:
A writes to B offering to sell him his horse Phineas for £100.
B posts a letter accepting, but he misdirects it and in consequence it is a week late in being delivered to A. Meanwhile A has sold Phineas to C. Discuss.
The ordinary beginner answers this problem simply by quoting Household Fire Insurance Co .
v. Grant , or some other authority to the same effect, and saying that by our law an offeror can be landed with a contract even though he never receives an acceptance, since the contract is held to be complete on the posting of the letter of acceptance.
But the whole point of the question is whether Grant's case applies to a misdirected letter of acceptance.
I cannot help thinking that the booby who so completely misses the point of the question is often actuated by some hidden (and mistaken) motive of self-preservation.
He really scents the difficulty but thinks it too hard for discussion and so conveniently pretends that he has not seen it.
If this ostrich only knew, he would gain more marks by posing the legal difficulty , even though he suggested no solution, than he ever could by blinking it completely.
If, in addition to posing the difficulty, he could say that there is no authority in point and that Grant's case is distinguishable, and could also suggest some reasons why on these facts it ought to be distinguished, he would get a first class on that question instead of a very doubtful pass.
One of the techniques of argument is to take an extreme case.
‘I took an extreme case,’ was Alice's tearful reply.
‘My excellent preceptress always used to say, When in doubt take an extreme case.
And I was in doubt.’'
The technique need not always result in tears.
Let us make our problem into a more  extreme case.
A week's delay in a letter does not sound inordinately long, but to isolate the question of principle let us make it longer.
Suppose that the misdirected letter of acceptance had taken two months on its way, or had never arrived.
Had it been properly directed there would have been a good contract and A would have been liable in damages to B for not delivering the horse.
That is a harsh rule from A's point of view (I think a stupid rule, and I hope that if you are the reader of this book who is destined to become Lord Chancellor you will get it changed), but it would be even worse if the same rule were applied where B has carelessly misdirected his letter, resulting in gross delay or loss.
The rule in Grant's case cannot possibly apply to such circumstances.
If this be conceded, the next question is…what?
Close your eyes and think deeply.
If you have done that, compare your answer with mine.
The next question is whether B's letter is to be regarded as an acceptance from the time when A receives it.
If that is the rule, then there will be a good contract if the lapse of a week before acceptance is not thought to be an unreasonable time; and, on these assumptions, A not having revoked his offer before acceptance is liable to B for breach of contract if he does not deliver the horse.
If the lapse of time is held to be unreasonable, there is no contract.
But an alternative rule is possible.
This is that B's letter is a nullity even if it arrives on time.
When A posts the offer to B he impliedly authorises B to conclude the contract by posting a letter of acceptance, but only on the assumption that the acceptance is properly addressed; if it is not, there is no acceptance even though the Post Office cleverly delivers it on time.
I do not myself think that this alternative is correct, but it would be worth putting forward in court.
The general lesson from this is: in all legal problems use your brain and have the courage to argue .
If a case falls midway between two authorities, this may indicate that there is a fundamental conflict of principle between the two authorities, and that it is necessary to hold that one of them was wrongly decided.
Alternatively, you may come to the conclusion that there is a real distinction between the authorities, and in this event the problem must be looked at from the point of view of general legal principle or public policy to decide  whether it should be brought under the one head or the other.
The situation was characterised by Paley, an eighteenth-century divine, as the ‘competition of opposite analogies.’
To sum up, when the problem is possibly distinguishable from the authority or authorities nearest in point, a careful analysis of the possible distinction or distinctions should always be given.
This is particularly important if the authority in question has been doubted by judges or criticised by legal writers.
It may be that the student does not feel competent to discuss the various distinctions, but even so the existence of the possible distinctions should be pointed out in the answer.
Moreover, distinctions should be pointed out even though in the opinion of the student they are not material, if it could conceivably be argued that they are material: of course the student should express his own opinion that they are not material.
If there is a possibility of the authority in question being overruled, it is more important than ever to mention its status in the judicial hierarchy, as well as stating any objections that have been urged against it.
When you have a number of cases to quote.
it is generally best to quote the nearest authority first and to allot it the most space, the other cases can be brought more casually into the discussion, as you have time.
When you have read a case in the reports or in a case book, do your best to convey this fact by referring to some apposite passage in the judgment or some other relevant detail of the report which will indicate that you have not merely relied on a textbook.
If you know that there is no case bearing directly upon the problem, say so.
The fact that the problem is not covered by authority is in itself a valuable piece of information.
If the authority for a proposition is a statute, say this also, even though you have forgotten the name of the statute.
DOUBT
Where the law is doubtful, a categorical statement that the rule is one way or the other will earn few, if any, marks.
This is — particularly important in answering problems.
If the answer to the problem is doubtful, say so, and then suggest what the answer ought to be.
It is a mistake to simulate confidence where you have no certain knowledge.
After discussing a ‘mooty’ problem, try to avoid the weak conclusion that ‘A is perhaps liable.’
Your conclusion may be that if the facts are so-and-so, he is liable; if they are such and such, he is not.
Or, if the court follows Smith v. Jones , then A will be liable, but if it follows Robinson v. Edwards , which is to be preferred for reasons previously given, then A will not be liable.
A point can often be scored by demonstrating that the law applicable to a problem may depend upon the court before which the case comes.
For example, there are some decisions of the Court of Appeal, like that in Musgrove v. Pandelis , that would probably be reluctantly followed by the Court of Appeal but would almost certainly be overruled by the House of Lords.
Consequently, the ‘law’ on the subject of Musgrove v. Pandelis (strict liability for petrol in the tank of a car) may depend upon the number of appeals that the client is prepared to take.
PROBLEMS ON STATUTES
A problem may be set on a statute as well as on a case.
You must then recall the words of the statute as best you can, apply them to the problem and, as in all problems, look for the ‘catch.’
Here is an illustration from constitutional law:
Aikenhead J., a judge of the High Court, is convicted of driving under the influence of drink.
Can he be dismissed from his judicial office, and if so by whom?
The attitude of students towards a problem like this varies.
Some, though knowing the terms of the Act of Settlement, or of the similar statute now in force, steer clear of the problem because they are afraid of it.
Others write down simply:
By the Act of Settlement 1701, ‘Judges’ Commissions [shall]be made quamdiu se bene gesserent , but upon the Address of both Houses of  Parliament it may he lawful to remove them.’
Aikenhead J. can be removed under this provision.
This is not a bad answer and would win a pass.
Had the candidate added that dismissal was actually effected by the Crown he might have risen to a second.
To obtain a first class, one needs to do a little thinking.
Aikenhead J. was appointed ‘during good behaviour.’
He has been convicted of crime, and we shall assume for the moment that he has not behaved himself within the meaning of these words.
Clearly he can be dismissed if both Houses present an Address to that effect.
But can he not, in this case, be dismissed even without an Address?
What the examiner is evidently after is the correct interpretation of the words of the Act of Settlement, or rather of the Act now in force replacing the Act of Settlement.
Do these words mean that judges can be dismissed by the Crown only upon an Address of both Houses (with a direction to the Houses that they are not to present an Address unless the judge has misbehaved himself)?
Or do the words mean that judges can be dismissed by the Crown either if they have not behaved themselves (e.g. been convicted of crime)or on an Address of both Houses?
In other words, are the Houses the sole judges of the correctness of the judges' behaviour, or not?
The second interpretation can be arrived at by reading the provision in two parts:(1) judges' commissions are to be made for as long as they behave themselves, implying that if they misbehave they may be dismissed by the Crown;(2) they may be removed by the Crown on an Address of both Houses, even though they have not misbehaved themselves.
The first interpretation can be arrived at by reading the provision as a whole (judges are appointed during good behaviour, and the two Houses are the sole judges of bad behaviour).
A good lawyer, who reads carefully, ponders meanings and is prepared to discuss difficulties, might be able to see this point in the problem even though he had read nothing upon it.
When one studies the literature one finds that, surprising as it may seem, the weight of legal opinion is in favour of the second view; and it is not even clear what is the proper legal means that the Crown  should use to establish misbehaviour before dismissing a judge.
A further question that arises (and that might be perceived on the face of this problem) is whether dismissal by the Crown can only be for misbehaviour in office or whether it can be for an offence not related to judicial office or affecting judicial ability.
If the latter, can it be for any offence or only for a serious one, and is the offence in the problem sufficiently serious?
In practice the Crown would now be unlikely to dismiss a judge without an Address, and it would be for the two Houses to decide whether the misbehaviour justified dismissal.
This example shows how it is possible to display the qualities of a good lawyer without knowing much law.
Here is another problem in constitutional law to reinforce the point.
A statute is passed giving power to make Orders in Council for the public safety and defence of the realm.
Would it be a valid objection to an Order made under this statute that it imposes a tax?
The type of answer to be expected from the Painful Plodder would be as follows:
‘A statute similar in terms to that in the problem was DORA, passed in the First World War.
By Regulations under this statute the Food Controller was empowered to regulate dealings in any article.
Under these powers the Food Controller ordered that no milk should be sold within certain counties except under licence.
In Att. -Gen .
v. Wilts United Dairies the question arose whether the Food Controller was entitled to charge for the granting of a licence under this Order.
It was held by the H.L. that he was not.
This case was approved by the Court of Appeal in Congreve v. Home Office .
The answer to the question is therefore ‘Yes.’'
This answer exhibits a common defect: it cites a case without explaining the legal principle involved in it, i.e. the legal ground on which the case was decided.
Plodder says that in Att. -Gen .
v. Wilts U.D .
it was held that the Food Controller could not charge for the licence.
This is true, but we need to know why.
The facts of the case contained three elements:(1) DORA, giving power  to make Regulations for the public safety and defence of the realm;(2) the ‘daughter’ Regulations made under DORA, allowing the food Controller to regulate dealings in any article; and (3) the Food Controller's Order (‘granddaughter’of DORA) that no milk should be sold without licence, coupled with his grant of a licence on condition of receiving payment.
Now the decision was that the money promised by the dairy company could not be recovered by the Crown, for the reason that (a) any prerogative power to tax had been taken away by the Bill of Rights 1689, and that (b) as for the statutory powers of DORA, the Regulations under which the food Controller was acting did not on their wording enable him to impose a tax.
The Regulations enabled him to regulate dealings in an article, but regulation of dealings is one thing, taxing another.
Order (3) was therefore ultra vires the Regulations (2).
Had the candidate understood these reasons he would at once have seen that the decision in Att. -Gen .
v. Wilts U. D .
did not conclude the question he was asked.
All that the case decided was that the Food Controller was acting outside the Regulations since the Regulations did not give the power to tax.
The question whether a Regulation that expressly gave the power to tax would itself be ultra vires DORA was not decided.
Now here is the answer of a gentleman who may be called the Discerning Dilettante.
He knows nothing about the Bill of Rights or the decision in Att. -Gen .
v. Wilts U.D. , but he addresses himself to the question and uses his intelligence.
‘It may be that the Order is intra vires the statute.
The statute gives power to make Orders for the public safety and defence of the realm: in other words for the waging of war.
Obviously you cannot wage war without taxing.
Money, it is said, makes the sinews of war.
‘To this it may be objected that although it is necessary to tax in order to wage war, it is not necessary for the Executive to tax without a statute.
Parliament is still in being; why not leave taxation to Parliament?
‘I think that a valid reply to this objection would be that it is a political objection to the passing of a statute worded in this wide way, not a legal objection to the validity of the Order, it a statute worded so widely has been passed.
It the objection were legally valid it could be used to defeat almost all Orders made under this statute, which would be absurd.
Suppose that under this defence statute the Government makes an Order  requisitioning land for anti-aircraft missile sites.
It would obviously be no valid objection to such an Order that the Order is not necessary tor public safety because Parliament could have passed it.
The object of the defence statute is to delegate to the Executive what in peacetime would be the function of Parliament.
Surely the question whether Parliament could have passed the particular legislation is logically irrelevant to the question whether the legislation is for the public safety and defence of the realm.
‘At the same time I do not suppose that a court would take the view that I am here expressing.
The English tradition that it is tor Parliament to do the taxing is so deep-seated that the court would probably assert a legal presumption, as a matter of statute interpretation, that powers of taxation are not included in a statutory delegation of power unless clear words are used, and that a general formula like that in the statute stated in the question is not sufficient.’
Or, as Atkin L.J.
(as he then was) put it in Att. -Gen .
v. Wilts U.D .
in the Court of Appeal, ‘in view of the historic struggle of the legislature to secure for itself the sole power to levy money upon the subject, its complete success in that struggle, the elaborate means adopted by the representative House to control the amount, the conditions and the purpose of the levy, the circumstances would be remarkable indeed which would induce the court to believe that the legislature had sacrificed all the well-known checks and precautions, and, not in express words, but merely by implication, had entrusted a Minister of the Crown with undefined and unlimited powers of imposing charges upon the subject for purposes connected with his department.’
The point is reinforced by Congreve's case (above), where the Court of Appeal assumed that Att. -Gen .
v. Wilts U.D .
was an authority on the application of the Bill of Rights.
In thus unfavourably contrasting Plodder's answer with Dilettante's, I am not, of course, suggesting that book work is useless.
As I have already said, book knowledge should always be used to provide a starting-point.
Dilettante's answer would have been better if he could have shown that the Wilts case, though apparently relevant, was not conclusive on the question.
The point is that although book knowledge is in itself a good thing, it is useless and worse than useless if it deflects your attention from the question that you are being asked.
RELEVANCY
When answering a problem, never preface your answer with a general disquisition on the department of law relating to the problem.
Start straight away to answer the problem.
Problems are set chiefly to test your ability to apply the law you know, and the examiner will speedily tire of reading an account of the law that is not brought into direct relation to the problem.
Where the problem contains several persons, say A and B as possible plaintiffs and C and D as possible defendants, the best course is to begin your answer by writing down the heading:A .
v. C .
When you have dealt with this, write (say) B v. C, referring back to your previous answer for any points that do not need to be repeated.
Then you will deal with A v. D and B v. D .
The advice to plunge into the specific problem, on the model of counsel's opinion, applies even where the problem is divided into several parts, all of which are on the same general department of law.
For instance, suppose that in criminal law a question consists of a chain of short problems on insanity numbered (i),(ii),(iii), etc.
In my opinion it is not advisable to preface the answer with a discussion of McNaghten's case, even though McNaghten's case is relevant to each of the numbered problems.
The examiner is impatient to see you answering the problems, and he may even ignore altogether anything you write before writing down figure (i).
You should therefore write the figure (i) at the very beginning of your answer, and begin to tackle problem (i).
In the course of doing so you can, of course, set out and discuss McNaghten's case.
When you come to (ii),(iii) and the rest, it will be easy enough to put a back reference, if necessary, to your previous discussion of the case.
Although a problem is not an invitation to launch out into a general disquisition on the department of law on which the problem is set, it is important in working out the problem to state all the rules of law that are really relevant to it.
A frequent blemish upon an otherwise good answer is that the relevant rule of law is not expressly stated but is left to be implied from the candidate's conclusion.
Much the better practice is first to state the rule of law and then to apply it to the facts.
DD not write: ‘D  is liable on the contract because he did not communicate his revocation of his offer.’
It is better style to write: ‘An uncommunicated revocation of an offer is ineffective.
Here D's revocation did not come to the notice of the offeree, so the offeree's acceptance of the offer was valid, and D is liable on the contract.’
Here is another illustration of the point, from the law of tort.
Q. — A, finding B, a stranger of rough appearance, in his shed, locks the door in order to keep B there while he fetches the police.
Can B sue A?
Student's answer .
—‘B can sue A for false imprisonment because no ‘arrestable offence’ has been committed by anyone.’
The answer reveals some knowledge of the law, and would be correct in many cases.
But the law is not fully stated (not even the important provision in the Criminal Law Act), and some facts can be imagined that would make the arrest lawful.
To earn marks you must state the law and imagine variations of fact.
Here is a model:
There is no power to arrest for trespass.
But under the Criminal Law Act 1967 anyone can arrest on reasonable suspicion of an arrestable offence, save that where the arrest is by a private person (as here) he must show either (1) that the arrested person was in fact in the act of committing the offence for which he was arrested, or he reasonably suspected the arrested person to be in the act of committing it,or (2) the arrested person had in fact committed the offence, or he reasonably suspected the arrested person of having committed the offence and (in this last case)the offence had in fact been committed by someone .
An arrestable offence is defined as one for which a person may by virtue of any statute be sentenced to imprisonment for at least five years, or an attempt to commit such an offence.
Theft comes within the definition,
A will have the statutory power of arrest it B was in fact attempting to steal something in the shed, or if A reasonably suspected him of being in the act of attempting to steal something in the shed.
A's defence on the latter ground would of course be assisted if there was something in the shed worth stealing.
If there was not, A might still believe that B was looking for something to steal, which could constitute an attempt to steal under the Criminal Attempts Act 1981 notwithstanding that there was nothing there that B would have stolen.
Suppose, now, that the shed was clearly ban of everything and A's suspicions did not relate to theft in the shed.
A might still suspect B of having stolen something from him elsewhere (e.g. if he has just discovered that a bunch of keys is missing from the hall table).
The arrest  could then be lawful if B had in fact stolen the thing in question or if A reasonably suspected B of having stolen it, provided (in the last case) that the thing had in fact been stolen by someone.
If it turned out that Mrs A had gathered up the keys, the, arrest would be unlawful.
This is obviously a trap for private arresters.
Even if A has the power of arrest, he must ordinarily inform the person arrested that he is being arrested and the reason for it, i. e. the act for which arrest is made:Christie v. Leachinsky [facts].
So A must shout to tell B that he is under arrest and why.
Not one candidate in a hundred gives an answer comparable with this; students regularly fail to consider what it is exactly that A suspects.
The Vagrancy Act 1824 section 4 could also be referred to, but those taking an examination in the law of tort would not be expected to know it.
The question just considered asked: ‘Can B sue A?’
This formula, very common in law examinations, means ‘Can B sue A successfully ?’
Examinees sometimes answer it by saying: ‘B can sue A but he will fail.’
This displays the writer's common sense but also his lack of knowledge of legal phraseology.
It is true that there is virtually no restriction upon the bringing of actions: for instance, I can at this moment sue the Prime Minister for assault — though I shall fail in the action.
But when a lawyer asserts that A can sue B, what he means is that A can sue B, successfully; if he meant his words to be taken literally, they would not have been worth the uttering.
For much the same reason, you should never write a sentence like: ‘B can argue that…but the argument will fail,’ or ‘B has committed such-and-such a crime, but he has a good defence.’
The proper way to put the last sentence would be to say: ‘If B is charged with such-and-such a crime, he will have a good defence.’
When a problem is based on a rule — e.g. the rule in Derry v. Peek or Rylands v. Fletcher — it is usually advisable to state the whole rule in a sentence or two, even though some parts of the rule are not material to the problem.
No further details should be given of parts of the rule that are not material.
Where the problem turns on an exception to a rule (e.g. an exception to the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher ), there is usually no  need to state any exceptions other than the one that is relevant.
Z
QUESTIONS DIVIDED INTO PARTS.
Questions are frequently divided into two or more parts, and this division raises difficulties of its own for the inexpert candidate.
Sometimes the problem begins with a common opening part before branching out into its subdivisions.
The following is an example:
A writes to B offering to sell him his horse Phineas for £100. (i) B posts a letter accepting, but he misdirects it and in consequence it is a week late in being delivered to A. Meanwhile A has sold Phineas to C. (ii) B, after posting a letter of acceptance to A, sends A a telegram cancelling ‘my letter now in the post.’
The telegram is delivered to A before B's letter.
Discuss.
It should be obvious that in this type of problem (i) and (ii) are alternative possibilities, to be dealt with separately;(ii) is not meant to follow upon and include the facts of (i).
Yet I have known students to suppose that this is all a single problem, to be disposed of in a single breath.
Another mistake that one student made with this particular problem was to suppose that the opening sentence was itself a question, inviting a general disquisition on the legal nature of an offer.
This, of course, is not so.
A different type of two-part problem is one in which the second part commences: ‘Would it make any difference to your answer if…?’
This means that the second part of the question is the same as the first part, except for the variation expressly stated.
An illustration is as follows:
(i) A is firing with an air gun in his garden at a target on a tree.
The shot glances off the tree and hits A's gardener, B. Can B sue A?(ii) Would your answer be different if the shot had been fired by A's son, C?
Most students assume that (ii) is a question as to the liability of C. Clearly on its wording the question is the same as in (i), namely, as to the liability of A.
Sometimes a problem is so worded as to involve two successive questions, but the second question logically arises only if the first is answered in a certain way.
Suppose that the student has answered the first question in the other way; is he now to answer the second?
The answer is ‘Yes.’
For the purpose of answering the second part of the question he should state that he is assuming that he is wrong in his answer to the first.
An example from the law of contract:
Pickwick, who manufactures cricket bats, affixed a signboard on the boundary of the field belonging to the Dingley Dell Cricket Club, stating that if any batsman hit the signboard with a batted ball during the course of a match Pickwick would pay him the sum of £5.
Podder hit the board whilst batting in a match between Dingley Dell and Muggleton, and afterwards orally requested Pickwick to pay £%; to Mrs Jingle, to whom Podder was indebted for board and lodging.
Mrs Jingle demands payment of the £5 from Pickwick but is refused.
Discuss the rights of the parties.
This problem involves two issues:(i) whether there is a contract between Pickwick and Podder, resulting in a debt owed by Pickwick to Podder;(ii) whether Podder has validly assigned the debt to Mrs Jingle.
Issue (i) turns on the difficult distinction between consideration and the performance of a condition precedent to a gratuitous promise, or if you like on the equally difficult question of intent to contract.
It may well happen that the student in considering this comes to the conclusion that there is no contract between Pickwick and Podder.
If this view is correct, issue (ii) does not really arise.
All the same, it should be dealt with.
It may be that the examiner disagrees with the candidate in his answer to (i), and although that may not affect the candidate's marks on (i), the candidate will lose the marks on (ii) if he does not deal with it.
Even if the examiner agrees with the candidate in his answer to (i), the examiner must have meant (ii) to be dealt with, or else he would not have troubled to put it in.
A fourth kind of two-part question consists of a book-work question followed by a problem.
The difficulty here is often that it is not clear whether the problem is meant to bear a relation to the book-work question or not.
No universal rule can be stated, because examiners differ in their practice, but nearly always there is meant to be a connection, at least if the two parts of the  question are not subdivided by numbers or letters.
I am conscious that this may not sound very helpful advice.
But some examinees fail to search for a connection between the book-work question and the rider, thus missing the point intended by the examiner, while other examinees, finding no connection between the two (in fact there being none), avoid the question altogether.
The student must be left to steer his own course between this Scylla and Charybdis.
THE OVERLAPPING OF SUBJECTS
In a problem on criminal law, make no statement as to the law of tort, unless of course the question whether a crime has been committed involves a question of tort.
Similarly, in a problem on tort make no statement as to the law of crime, unless again the existence of a tort depends on the law of crime.
This mutual exclusiveness of subjects does not hold between tort and contract.
Where a problem is set in a tort paper or in a contract paper involving both a possible tort and a possible breach of contract, both aspects of the matter should be discussed.
This is because a tort and a breach of contract can be proceeded upon in the same action, whereas the distinction between criminal and civil law is more deeply marked.
The overlap between tort and contract should be looked for particularly in problems involving the negligent carriage of passengers by rail, road or sea, and the sale (or repair) of goods or houses that turn out not to be of merchantable quality or reasonably fit and that cause physical injury to the buyer (or owner).
In problems on tort and criminal law the student is expected to enumerate and discuss all the possible torts or crimes that may have been committed on the facts given in the problem, and also all the possible defences that may be raised.
In this respect the answering of an examination question differs somewhat from the giving of an opinion in legal practice, A practitioner will not argue legal points unnecessarily.
He will not, for example, argue the question whether there exists a tort of offensive invasion of  privacy, if his client has a clear remedy in defamation.
But an examiner will usually be disappointed if, in an appropriate problem, both points are not discussed.
In other words, if a point is relevant, discuss it, even though it be not necessary.
THE ANSWERING OF PROBLEMS IN CRIMINAL LAW
Always consider all the possible crimes that have been committed, by all possible persons, and all the possible defences open to them.
By ‘possible’ I mean ‘seemingly possible to an ignorant person.’
If you consider that such-and-such crime has not been committed, or that such-and-such defence is not available (though an ignorant person might think it is), do not pass it by in silence but state your opinion expressly.
You should also give the reason for your opinion as shortly as the importance of the point seems to require.
The reason for this advice is that quite possibly the question was set as a trap, and if you refrain have avoided it by good luck rather than good management.
Never come to the defences until you have stated the crime for which the defendant is in your opinion being charged.
Start with the responsibility of the perpetrator (principal), taking accessories afterwards.
If you think that the problem leaves open some question of fact, state the law according as the fact is present or absent.
If the outcome is clear you can say so — e.g. ‘D is guilty of murder.’
But if the application of law to fact is not clear, you need not state a definite opinion or even ‘submit’ that the position is so-and-so.
For example, the question may state that the defendant shot at a burglar when a bystander was standing dangerously close, and hit the bystander.
It is not for you to say that the defendant foresaw the possibility of hitting the bystander: that is for the jury.
Never assume that the defendant had a particular state of mind unless the question states that he had it.
Instead, consider whether there is any evidence for the jury (sufficient to require the judge to leave the case to the jury); if there is, explain how the judge would direct the jury, and state  whether a verdict of guilty would be likely to be upheld or upset on appeal.
It is at these points in a jury trial that the legal opinion is important: a lawyer is not directly concerned with the work of the jury.
Often the problem will be found to fall short of one of the major crimes.
In such a case it will very frequently involve a lesser or lesser-known crime.
The student should note these lesser or narrower crimes very carefully when they are mentioned in his book.
Here is a short list of them.
When several crimes appear to emerge from the facts of a problem, it is best to start your answer with the gravest crime that seems clearly to have been committed.
For it would be absurd to open your answer by considering some summary offence of which the defendant is guilty, and then to wind up  with the conclusion that he has also committed, say, murder!
The murder should come first, and the summary offence as a rather casual postscript.
If the defendant is clearly guilty of a crime like wounding with intent, and only doubtfully guilty of murder, it is sensible to start with the clear crime before coming to the doubtful one.
Problems in criminal law often start with an inchoate crime — conspiracy, attempt or incitement.
Even though the problem shows that the full crime was consummated, the culprits may be convicted of attempt or incitement, so that it may be relevant to mention these crimes — though normally, of course, the indictment would be for the completed crime, not for a mere attempt or incitement.
If you mention the possibility of a conspiracy charge, it would be wise to add that the addition of conspiracy counts when the crime is consummated must be specially justified.
As for incitement, if the crime is actually committed the inciter becomes an accessory to it.
In other words, the difference between (i) incitement and (ii) being a participant in a crime as one who has counselled or procured it is that in (i) the main crime has not been (or need not have been) committed by the person so incited, and in (ii) it has.
THE ANSWERING OF PROBLEMS IN TORT
As in criminal law, look for all the possible torts that may have been committed, and consider whether their essentials have been satisfied.
Draw into your net all possible defendants, and then turn round and consider all the possible defences open to them on the facts given.
There are not so many ‘obscure’ torts as there are obscure crimes, but a considerable overlap occurs between some of the leading torts.
The following are the chief examples:
In the tort of negligence, it is frequently necessary to consider the machinery as to proof of negligence — the burden of proof, functions of judge and jury,res ipsa loquitur .
Questions of negligence, contributory negligence and remoteness of damage are frequently wrapped up together, and so are questions of contributory negligence and volenti non fit injuria , and of necessity and private defence.
If the problem appears to be a novel one, it may raise the theory of general liability in tort.
ANSWERING BOOK-WORK QUESTIONS
THIS chapter is chiefly concerned with the answering a questions other than problems, though some of the remarks apply also to the answering of problems.
Like the last chapter it is not meant for hasty consumption immediately before the fray.
The wise student will at the outset of his course look at the examination papers for the past few years, and, whether compelled to or not, will write out the answers to some questions (even though only in brief note form) in order to gain practice in self-expression.
Past examination papers will also show him the probable lay-out of the paper that he will be expected to answer, and the amount of time likely to be allowed on each question.
SUBDIVIDED QUESTIONS
If your question is expressly divided into several sub-questions, answer each sub-question separately; and if the sub-questions are numbered (i, ii, iii) or lettered (a, b, c) number or letter them in the same way in your answer.
A question may be divided into parts even though numbers or letters are not used.
For instance, the question —
Summarise the provisions of, and the changes introduced by, the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, Part 1.
— invites an answer in two parts:(1) the provisions of the Act;(2) its impact on the previous law.
It would be wise to write your answer under these two headings (though there would be no objection to applying the double answer to the Act section by  section).
Always model your answer to conform to the question: do not, for instance, on this particular question adopt the chronological order of (1) the pre-Act law, and (2) the Act.
The reason is that if the examiner is reading your script quickly (and he may have hundreds of scripts to mark) he may be puzzled and annoyed by your departure from the order of his question.
Besides, he may have set the question like that with the object of seeing whether your mind is sufficiently adaptable to vary the order of what you have learnt.
RELEVANCY
In answering a question you should, of course, give as much detail as you can within the limits of the question.
It is sometimes possible to answer a question literally in a couple of sentences, but this will not always impress the examiner.
The extreme example of this kind of answer is the story told by Mark Twain, in his Life on the Mississippi , of his piloting lesson.
‘Presently Mr. Bixby turned on me and said: ‘What is the name of the first point above New Orleans?’
‘I was gratified to be able to answer promptly, and I did.
I said I didn't know.’
Not many candidates would attempt this frankness in the examination room, but they often do suppose that an accurate answer directed to the very words of the question is all that is required.
This is frequently a mistake.
For instance, in the law of contract the question, ‘What is the difference between void and voidable contracts?’ can be accurately answered by saying that a void contract is an apparent contract that is in truth no contract at all , while a voidable contract is a contract that is capable of being avoided at the option of one party.
This, though correct, would not score many marks.
It is an accurate statement of the difference of definition between void and voidable contracts, but it says nothing of their different effects .
The candidate should, therefore, add, as a minimum, a discussion of such cases as Cundy v. Lindsay and Lewis v. Averay in order to illustrate the effect of each kind of contract (or apparent contract) upon  third-party rights.
To put this advice generally, if you are asked to distinguish between two legal concepts or institutions, you should give not only the difference of definition but also the difference of legal effect.
It need hardly be added that the examiner always wants reasons and authorities for the answer, even though he does not expressly ask for them.
To say that a question should be answered fully is not to say that irrelevant matter should be introduced into the answer.
Questions are often worded to cover only a fragment of a particular subject; in that case the examiner does not want the whole of it.
This question of relevancy is often the examinee's greatest headache.
Often he has to interpret a badly worded question, with no hope of redress if his guess as to the examiner's meaning should turn out to be wrong.
My advice is this.
If the question is reasonably clear do not wander outside it.
If there is a doubt as to its meaning, the question will usually have at least a central kernel of meaning that is relatively clear.
Answer this to begin with.
Then, as to the doubtful ‘shell’ of the question, if you still have time to write on the question, you should expressly point out the doubt in your mind as to what you are being asked, and proceed to write on the doubtful part of the question for the rest of the allotted time.
If, on the other hand, you have no time left for the doubtful part of the question, declare your doubt whether the question was intended to have any further scope, and leave it there.
The fact that you have been able to spend your whole time on the core of the question is itself some indication that the question was not intended to have any wider scope.
For instance, suppose that a question in the law of contract is:
Discuss the maxim,In pari delicto potior est conditio defendentis .
Clearly this invites a discussion of the general rule preventing recovery of money paid or property transferred under an illegal contract, and this rule, with its exceptions and quasi-exceptions, should therefore be discussed first.
The problem then arises: does the question cover also the general rule against suing for damages for breach of an illegal contract?
However you decide this conundrum, you should state your decision in the answer.
If you rule this second topic out of order, and the examiner wished it  to be included, the examiner will at least see that you have had the point present in your mind, and will probably-also be brought to see that he was at fault in his wording of the question.
In any case, the proper limits of time for the question should not be exceeded.
If in doubt whether a particular matter is relevant, a good test is to ask yourself whether, if the examiner had wished you to discuss it, he would naturally have framed an extra question upon it.
Once the limits of the question are settled, do not canter beyond them.
The examiner cannot give credit for irrelevancy, because that would be unfair to others who have answered only the question that they were asked.
There is, however, a clever way in which matters otherwise irrelevant may be lightly introduced.
This is by the method of comparison.
For instance, if in constitutional law you are directed to write a note on the ‘ kangaroo ’(a method of curtailing discussion in the House of Commons), a discussion of the closure and guillotine (two other methods of curtailing discussion) would generally be out of order.
But a comparison of the  kangaroo with the closure and the guillotine would be admissible, and credit would be given for it.
Many students begin an answer with a prologue.
Cut it out.
In particular, do not start with the historical background if you are not asked for it, unless you have some special reason for doing this — and if so, state the reason.
Sometimes the historical background makes the law more intelligible, or supports one interpretation of the law rather than another.
But if you are asked the history of the action of assumpsit , do not begin with a paragraph on the medieval precursors of assumpsit -debt, detinue and account.
If the questioner had wanted these he would have said so.
If you are asked to discuss, say,Nordenfelt's case, begin by setting out the facts and decision — do not start in the Middle Ages.
Having stated the case you may legitimately put it into its historical setting in order to show what advance it made on the previous law; and you may also indicate the trend of development that it started.
But all this depends on the time you have left after giving your attention to the centre of the question.
Students (particularly advanced students) are frequently vexed by doubts as to the amount of detail that they should put into their answer.
The best advice is: aim at concentrating all your intelligence on the specific question, and bring in your knowledge only so far as it is relevant.
If you show that you are a master of the relevant knowledge, the examiner will readily give you credit for knowing the rest of the subject, An example would be the question: ‘The jury is a historical anachronism.’
Discuss.’
This is not an invitation to give the whole history of the jury system: the question is whether the jury is a historical anachronism.
Are there any features of the modern jury that can be explained only as historical survivals, which are out of place in modern society, or has the jury been so adapted that it is a truly modern institution?’
Again, should you assume that your examiner is an ignoramus and explain everything to him, or can you assume that he is a lawyer so that a hint is sufficient?
The answer lies somewhere between these two extremes.
On the one hand, the examiner wants to be told nothing that is irrelevant to the question.
On the other hand, he is suspicious of nutshell knowledge and footnote knowledge, and he wants as full an explanation of everything that is relevant as is possible in the time allowed.
More specifically, the following rules may be laid down.
(a) If a legal concept is mentioned in the question, do not attempt a full explanation of it unless explanation is requested or necessitated by the question.
For instance, on a question involving the law of wagers, there is generally no need to discuss what is a wager.
Had the examiner wanted such a discussion he would have asked for it in a separate part of the question.
On the other hand, a question in the form of a quotation with a request for discussion normally requires an explanation of everything in the quotation.
Thus the question —
‘The use of impeachment at law is a method of control of the Executive by the Commons has been replaced by the convention of ministerial responsibility to Parliament.’
Comment.
— demands a detailed explanation of impeachment as well as of the convention of ministerial responsibility and of the reasons why the second replaced the first.
(b) If the legal concept is not mentioned in the question but is first introduced by the candidate in his answer, it should be explained.
Take, for instance, the question: ‘When will the right to avoid a voidable contract be lost?’
It is not enough, in the course of answering this question, to mention that the right will be lost if restitutio in integrum ceases to be possible.
You must not assume that the examiner knows what restitutio in integrum means.
Tell him what it means, and when such restitutio ceases to be possible.
GETTING THE POINT
Before unmuzzling your wisdom on any question, ponder the question carefully.
Very often the examiner will have worded it in a particular way in order to enable you to show a little originality of treatment.
Take, for example, the following question in criminal law.
Discuss the decision in R .
v. Dudley and Stephen from the standpoint of the purposes of criminal punishment.
This is not simply a question on the decision in R .
v. Dudley and Stephens , as most students seem to think, nor even is it simply a question on the defence of necessity in general.
It is a question, primarily, on the purposes of criminal punishment.
You are requested to set out the different theories of the purposes of criminal punishment (general and particular deterrence, incapacitation, reformation, ethical retribution) and to consider whether any of these theories can be used to support the conviction in R .
v. Dudley and Stephens .
Another ‘angle’ question, this time from constitutional law:
What parallels may be drawn between royal prerogative and parliamentary privilege?
Examine, in particular, the attitude of the court in questions concerning (a) their exercise, and (b) their extent.
I have marked hundreds of scripts in which the answer offered to this question was a formless mass of cases and propositions concerning prerogative and privilege.
These candidates simply vomited over the page everything they knew upon the two topics; they made no attempt to bring their knowledge into relation with the question, and did not even divide off their answer by the (a) and (b) of the question.
The following is a  skeleton of the answer that an examiner wants.
It should be within the competence of everyone of moderate ability who has worked properly and who directs his mind to what he is being asked.
Prerogative and privilege are somewhat similar in definition.
Prerogative may be defined as the exceptional position of the king at common law.
Privilege is the exceptional position of the two Houses of Parliament and of their members at common law and by statute .
There is, of course, a difference of content between prerogative and privilege.
Turning to (a) in the question, the traditional rule is that the court will not inquire into the mode of user of an undoubted prerogative or privilege.
[Demonstration of this by decided or hypothetical cases.]
Some recent developments suggest that the exercise of the prerogative can sometimes be questioned.
[Demonstration.]
As to(b), the rule is that the court will inquire into the limits of both prerogative and privilege.
[Similar demonstration of this.]
Both prerogative and privilege are subject to statute.
[Demonstration.]
Another example.
‘The legal sovereignty of Parliament has not been affected by the European Communities Act.’
Discuss.
This does not invite a discussion of the basic principles of sovereignty; still less is it an invitation to write a general essay on Parliamentary sovereignty.
It is a question on the consequences of the Act.
It may seem unnecessary to add: if given a choice, do not attempt to answer a question that you do not understand (unless, of course, your plight is such that there is no other you can do instead).
This may seem obvious advice, but it is often ignored.
The following, taken from a constitutional law paper, is a good example of the ‘wrapped-up’ question.
‘Much of the structure of the Constitution is now mere form; it is tolerated only because in practice its form is no indication of the way it functions.’
Comment.
What does this question mean?
If it conveys no clear meaning to you, avoid it.
for if you attempt to answer it and miss the point, the examiner may not be able to give you any marks, because you will not have answered his question.
Actually the question is on our old friends, the conventions of the  constitution.
It is an invitation to enumerate the conventions and to contrast them with the law.
Once the meaning is penetrated, the writing of the answer is easy.
Often the answer to a fearsome-looking question can be divined by a little patient thought.
Here is another specimen from constitutional law.
What is the constitutional importance of the power to dissolve Parliament?
Very probably you have never given a moment's thought to this question.
But that does not mean that you must stand mute to it.
Just ponder for a moment.
Probably you know that, under the Parliament Act, Parliament lasts for five years unless sooner dissolved by the Crown, and that the Crown acts on the advice of the Government of the day.
We are asked to state the constitutional importance of this power possessed by the Government.
Very well: to find the importance of x, the obvious thing to do is to consider what would happen if x were not present.
Let us consider what would happen if the power to dissolve did not exist.
Clearly Parliament would last its full five years and the Government could not bring it to a premature end.
One result would be that the Government could not time a general election to its own advantage, going to the country at the moment when it feels most popular; so general elections might result in a change of Government more often.
But this is not the main point: more important would be the effect on private members.
Suppose that within the five-year term the Government were defeated in the Commons on a topic so important that it regarded it as a matter of confidence in itself.
As things are the Government has the choice of either (a) resigning or (b) advising a dissolution — i.e. going to the country.
If there were no power to dissolve it could only resign, and a new Government would have to be formed from the ranks of the existing House of Commons.
What would be the consequence of that?
A moment's reflection will show that it would make private members more independent.
Government back-benchers do not like elections; they prefer a quiet life.
It is the fear of an election that at present prevents them in many instances from disobeying their party whip.
If they knew for certain that a vote of censure could not result in a general election, but would simply bring about a  reshuffle in the Government, their conduct would become more robust.
Governments would have to give way more often to the opinions of back-benchers, and not force every measure through as a matter of confidence.
But it might occasionally happen that, rather than give way, the Government might prefer to reconstruct itself as a Coalition Government with the support of some middle-of-the-road members of the Opposition.
This might cause a realignment of the parties.
If you happen to know that it is the Prime Minister personally who advises the Queen to dissolve Parliament, you will realise that this gives him the whip hand over other members of the Cabinet — who fear the cataclysm of an untimely election as much as back-benchers do.
Without power to dissolve Parliament, the Prime Minister could only resign, probably to be replaced by a rival within his own party.
So we should have more changes of leadership.
Is it too imaginative to suppose that all these consequences would follow an abolition of the power to dissolve?
If they would, we have demonstrated the importance of the power.
It is the existence of the power that ensures the supremacy of the Cabinet and of the Prime Minister within the Cabinet.
Whether they are too supreme is another question.
Knowledge of recent political history may enable you to correct these generalisations to some extent.
When the parties are evenly balanced in the Commons or when the Government has to depend for support upon minority parties, the Prime Minister may well let it be understood that he will not resign or call an election on an adverse vote in the Commons except on an explicit issue of confidence.
This sometimes emboldens back-benchers belonging to the Government party to vote against the Government on issues on which they feel strongly.
CRITICISM
When the question quotes a statement and asks for a discussion of it, do not be afraid to criticise the statement if you think it is open to criticism.
As often as not the examiner will have disagreed with the statement himself; that is why he thought of setting it.
THE USE OF FORENSIC MANNERISMS
It was said in the last chapter that doubtful law should not be represented as if it were well established.
Conversely, to state the law as doubtful when it is not doubtful will also be penalised in marks.
Excessive caution is therefore as much to be avoided as excessive dogmatism.
This may seem obvious, but I have known students repeatedly use the phrase ‘I respectfully submit’ before some trite proposition or other, purely out of affectation.
Even words like ‘seemingly’ or ‘probably’are out of place if the law is clear.
Strictly, a submission (‘I submit that…’) is an argument advanced in court.
Counsel will use deferential language in court, particularly in respect of a decision that he submits was mistaken; the worse the error, the deeper will be the respect that he expresses for the judges he is criticising.
He will venture to suggest, with the greatest possible respect to Mr. Justice Blank, that his lordship perhaps did not intend his words to be understood in their widest acceptation.
Or counsel may suggest, again with the very greatest respect, that a certain decision may perhaps be reconsidered if the point arises again before a court having power to overrule it; meanwhile, it can be distinguished on the facts before the present court.
Counsel will, in the time-honoured phrase, ‘wrap it up.’
Similarly, a court that feels impelled to depart from its predecessor's decision will do so not only ‘with the deepest respect’ but ‘with great regret.’
These punctilios, which help to moderate tempers and maintain the dignity of the courts, are admirable if not carried too far; but legal writings need not be encumbered in this way.
Some writers express humility in a particularly strange way: when they wish to express an opinion but feel that the first person singular is too assertive, they use the plural (‘we submit’).
It is not proposed to discuss the aesthetics of this usage for the text writer; all that I wish to say is that it should not be copied by the student, for in his mouth it sounds too grandiloquent.
Naturally, one desires to suppress the personal element so far as possible, but if one has an opinion to express there is nothing to offend anybody in a straightforward ‘in my opinion.’
Alternatively, expressions like ‘it is thought that’ or ‘there are good grounds for saying that’or ‘it follows from the authorities that’can be used.
Or you can say ‘the better opinion is that’(since your opinion is inevitably the better opinion — in your opinion).
THE ARRANGEMENTS AND WORDING OF THE ANSWER
Try to make your answer attractive.
Examiners are human beings, and they are easily bored.
If a question is capable of being answered in a sentence, answer it immediately in that sentence and proceed to explanation afterwards.
Within limits, it is permissible (and often desirable) to divide up the answer into numbered ‘points,’ with subheadings underlined.
This both saves your time and enables the examiner to see without effort how you have treated the subject.
But the process of subdivision should not be pushed too far.
An answer that is excessively divided and subdivided gives an unpleasant impression that the candidate has simply learned a crambook or correspondence course by heart.
Lecturers and text writers often indulge in what R.L. Stevenson called ‘a little judicious levity.’
The student, who usually cannot distinguish between the judicious and the injudicious sorts, should avoid levity altogether.
He should likewise shun all colloquialisms and colloquial abbreviations (‘it's,’‘isn't,’ etc.).
In short, the student should write his script upon the model of a counsel's opinion or judge's judgment, with gravity and decorum.
A few remarks may be made about citing authorities.
Never  quote the textbook for an established principle of law.
A sentence like ‘Every simple contract needs consideration to support it, as Treitel points out,’ is infantile.
Textbooks should be quoted only if they express an individual opinion, and the lecturer (qua lecturer) not at all, When quoting authors, if the author is dead he may be referred to by his surname only, but if he is still with us it is polite to give him a handle — Sir or Prof. or Dr or Mr. As regards judges the customary J., etc., should be used irrespective of whether they are alive or dead.
If you cross out some words and subsequently wish to restore them, the accepted way of doing it is to put dots underneath the words so deleted and to write ‘stet ’ in the margin.
The commonest grammatical error (if it is an error) is the split infinitive.
Fowler divided the English-speaking world into (1) those who neither know nor care what a split infinitive is;(2) those who do not know, but care very much;(3) those who know and condemn;(4) those who know and approve; and (5) those who know and distinguish.
Most examinees belong to the first class, most examiners to the third.
Whatever the merits of the dispute, the safe course for the student, as for every writer who does not wish to risk offending the susceptibilities of his readers, is to avoid splitting infinitives.
A split infinitive occurs when a word (usually an adverb) is placed between the word ‘to’ and a following verb, as in ‘to really understand.’
On grammar and style in general, Fowler's Dictionary of Modern English Usage is an invaluable guide; a more recent competitor is Eric Partridge's Usage and Abusage .
Other useful works are H.W. and F.G.
Fowler's The  King's  English , 3rd ed. (£2.50),The Hamlyn Guide to English Usage (£1), and Good English by G.H. Vallins.
HANDWRITING AND ORTHOGRAPHY
Some people write atrociously.
If you feel apprehensive on this, give a page of your notes to a friend and ask him to tell you which letters or words in your handwriting gave him difficulty in reading.
Make a special effort to improve them.
Some people cannot spell and do not care about it.
This may be all very well for those who have no ambitions that involve writing.
But if you want to make a good impression on  examiners, prospective employers or clients, the mastery of our unreasonable orthography is a necessity.
Test yourself with the following passage, which contains misspelt words taken from examination scripts.
Some of the words are correctly spelt, others incorrectly.
Pick out the words that you think are misspelt and write your own version.
Compare your effort with the key at the end of this chapter.
‘The Homocide Act does not effect this problem, for the Act has not superceded the common law on the point.
The question that ocurrs here is whether responsibility is deminished because there is a likelyhood that the provokation would have lead a reasonable man to loose his self-control and inflict this grievious harm.
The affect of provocation in cases of this catagory is always difficult to gauge.
An analagus case is Brown , where something like these facts occured.
The acussed alledged that he could not forsee the harm he would do, and proceeded to argue that since he acted inavertently, he did not committ the offence.
The prosecution tried to rebutt this defence by offerring evidence of a statement made by the defendant to the police in which he inferred that he wanted to get rid of the person he attacked.
After legal arguement the confession was ajudged to be admissable.
The defendent appealed, argueing that he had been lead to make his statement by being promised bail, and had been mislead by being falsely told that his companion had confessed; but the judgment of the court was against him.
On the principle question in the case, the concensus of the judges was that the authorities against the existance of the defence were irresistable, but perhaps this payed too little regard to the paralell rule for the priviledge of self-defence.
I believe it would be indefensable to assert that the court leant it's authority to the test of reasonableness.
In any case, it is permissable to observe that one cannot regard the same problem as occuring here.
As to the wife, she is now treated seperately from her husband, and her responsability is independant of his.
Her ommission to help the victim definately does not mean that she abetts the crime, or is an accessary to it.
In the absense of other facts, she is not guilty.’
The proper spelling is ‘'homicide’.
The word comes from the Latin homo (stem,homin —), a man, or rather a human being of either sex, + cidium , killing.
Contrast the word homosexual , where the prefix comes  from the Greek homos , meaning ‘the same’: a homosexual is a person who is sexually attracted within his or her own sex.
Classically, the first o in both words was short, but both are sometimes lengthened in English.
Effect is wrongly used in the first sentence of the passage.
The Homicide Act can affect (have an influence or bearing upon) a problem, or it can effect (bring about) a result, but we would not speak of ‘effecting’ a problem.
If these two words bother you, try to remember that affect is always a verb (something affects something else), while effect is nearly always a noun ‘the effect of X was disastrous’).
The rule for verbs ending in the sound -er, such as offer, prefer, occur , is to double the r for the -ed and -ing endings if the accent is on the -er syllable, but not otherwise.
Thus prefer, occur,transfer , make preferred, preferring, occurred, occurring, transferred, transferring , but offer makes offered, offering .
The spelling of words derived from appeal is confusing.
Whereas appellant and appellate have two l s,appealed, appealing are like sealed, sealing, peeled, peeling , and have only one.
The ‘seed’ words are also troublesome.
Some are spelt ‘cede,’ as in accede,concede, precede, intercede, recede .
Others are spelt ‘ceed’:exceed, proceed, succeed .
So you must write preceding, proceeding ; yet procedure is so spelt.
Supersede is exceptional, being derived not from cedere but from sedere, and means to ‘sit upon’; remember this, and you will remember the spelling.
The word consensus (agreement) is spelt with an s because it is derived in the same way as consent, from the Latin sentire , to feel.
(Census is spelt with a c at the beginning because it is derived from the Latin censere , to rate).
To express the sound ee , the rule is:i before e , except after c .
So:achieve, believe, grievous ; but deceive, receive .
The word foresee takes an e in the middle, but you can write either forgo or forego .
Judgment is spelt correctly in the above test, but an alternative spelling is judgement .
The rule generally followed in dictionaries is that mute e is dropped before suffixes beginning with a vowel (e.g. deplorable, desirable, likable, movable, notably, ratable , sizable, unusable, milage, suing), but not before suffixes beginning with a consonant (statement ).
Statutes do not altogether follow the former rule: ‘rateable value’ is an established statutory spelling.
Mute e is generally retained after soft c or g (e.g. unenforceable, changeable ); so judgement should really be the preferred spelling,
English has no clear rule on the —ent and —ant endings, but the former is the commoner.
All you can do is to notice the spelling when you read.
One special peculiarity: the adjectives dependent and independent take an e in the final syllable, but the noun dependant (meaning one who is dependent on another for his bread and butter) takes an a .
The difference of spelling in the endings of appellant, respondent,derives from Latin.
The word inferred in the passage is correctly spelt but wrongly used.
The correct word in the context is implied .
Inference is what Sherlock Holmes did: one fact is deduced from others.
A person may imply something in what he says, without actually expressing it.
Implication is an indirect way of conveying one's own meaning; inference is a process of discovering a fact outside oneself.
Dr Watson implies what he means, and Sherlock Holmes infers what Dr Watson means.
It is nonsense to speak of a person inferring what he himself means.
Note that criteria, data and dicta are plural words: the singulars are criterion,datum and dictum .
Say ‘this dictum,’ not ‘this dicta.’
Treating data as singular (as people are coming to do) makes it difficult to speak clearly of ‘this particular datum’ as opposed to‘the rest of the data.’
If the test has convinced you that you are weak on spelling, a useful reference book is Cassell's New Spelling Dictionary (£1.95).
This gives the spelling of words not always included in other dictionaries, e.g. kidnapped .
Key to spelling test .
Homicide affect superseded occurs diminished likelihood provocation led lose grievous effect category [‘gauge’ is correct]analogous occurred accused alleged foresee [‘proceeded’is correct]inadvertently commit [‘offence’is correct]rebut offering argument adjudged admissible defendant [‘appealed’is correct]arguing led misled principal consensus existence irresistible paid parallel privilege believe indefensible lent its permissible occurring separately responsibility independent omission definitely abets accessory absence.
THE EXAMINATION
Examinations are formidable even to the best prepared; for the greatest fool may ask more than the wisest man can answer.
-C.C.
Colton, Lacon.
PREVIOUS chapters gave advice that you can act on when practising writing answers before the examination.
Now some further words of wisdom as to the event itself.
Examinations usually start at 9 a.m., so make sure that you are physically attuned to that time by keeping regular hours and rising sufficiently early for at least a week before.
You may find it helps to form a ‘revision syndicate’ with two or three friends.
Each member revises a different portion of the syllabus, and there is a meeting at which each teaches the others.
The process of interchange helps to fix the memory for both sides.
Some students suffer from excessive anxiety, which produces sleeplessness which in turn aggravates the anxiety.
If you know from experience that you are the over-anxious type you must take yourself firmly in hand and allot a fixed ration of time for revision, the rest of the day being spent in healthy exercise.
Another way of reducing end-of-session flap is to spread the task of memorising over the whole year.
Spend some time each week revising the week's material.
FIRST READ THE PAPER
Before starting to write, read through the whole of the examination paper and jot down in the margin the names of plaintiffs (or criminal defendants) in any relevant cases you remember, the dates of statutes and any other details that are likely to elude you when you come to write out the question.
You thus give your memory two chances of recalling the elusive details.
Also, if during the examination you think of any fresh authorities that you do not propose to incorporate at once in your script, make a similar note of them on your question paper.
Some candidates leave the examination room complaining that at one stage they remembered a case, but later forgot to cite it.
The practice above suggested should obviate this.
The most important general piece of advice on examinations is that every question in the paper that the student is expected to and can answer should be answered.
He should not spend all his time on a few only of the questions.
There is nothing more tedious for the teacher than to hear one of his best students saying, after the examination: ‘Oh, I did very well, but I only had time to answer half the paper.’
In nearly all examinations the scripts are not judged simply on the questions that the student has answered, where he has not answered all he was expected to answer.
On the contrary, the total possible marks are divided equally among all the questions, and no answer can earn more than the appropriate marks for that question.
The result is that a student may have answered half the paper in a manner worthy of a Law Lord, and yet obtain a third class because he has not answered the other half.
Another point to be remembered in this connection is that an examiner is much more willing to give the first 50 per cent.
of marks on a question than the second 50 per cent., and full marks are practically never given.
A candidate may, therefore, get 50 per cent.
on the whole paper if he answers all the questions moderately well, whereas he certainly will not get 50 per cent.
if he answers half the questions almost perfectly.
For the good student, therefore, there is nothing more important in examination technique than dividing up his time as equally as may be between all the questions.
The same remark applies to questions containing two or more distinct parts.
Here the examiner will probably have divided up the possible marks in his mind among the component parts, and an answer to one part, be it ever so brilliant, can earn only the appropriate total for that part.
It is, therefore, most important to search for all the possible angles to a question, and this involves reading the question with meticulous care.
THE CHOICE OF QUESTIONS
All law examinations give a certain choice of questions.
Sometimes questions of enormous width are found in the paper.
They are meant for the pass man.
If a first class student attempts them, he will usually find that the answer required is so long that it will throw his whole script out of balance.
Where a choice is given between problems and book-work questions, there are two reasons why the better candidate should prefer the problems.
First, they are usually shorter to answer, and so save time.
Secondly, an examiner tends to be grudging in his marks for book-work questions, which he knows do not require much intelligence in the answering.
A good answer to a problem, on the other hand, at once evokes his admiration.
There is, it is true, a certain danger in problems, for if the point of the problem is completely missed the result may be catastrophe.
But a good student should be able to sense whether he is getting the point of the problem or not.
If the problem to his eyes appears ‘pointless,’ he had better exercise his choice elsewhere in the paper.
Perhaps I should add a corrective to the foregoing paragraph.
I said that if the point of a problem is completely missed the result may be catastrophe.
This is true, but on the other hand it must be said that to give the wrong answer to a problem is not necessarily to miss the point of it.
If the point is seen and well argued, the fact that the examiner does not agree with your conclusion will not seriously affect your marks.
In legal matters there is usually a certain room for difference of opinion, and even though there be positive authority against your view, the examiner is anxious not so much to test the details of your knowledge as to assess your ability to argue in a lawyer-like way.
A safe course to adopt if in any doubt is to present the argument for both sides — to turn yourself successively into counsel for the plaintiff (prosecutor), counsel for the defendant, and finally the judge.
If then the examiner disagrees with your judgment, it will hardly matter because you will have presented (even though you have also rejected) the argument for his point of view.
Incidentally, you will have shown your ability to accept a brief on either side, or even to be promoted to the Bench.
THE PRESSURE OF TIME
Abbreviations of technical words and expressions should be used only very sparingly in an examination.
If, however, you find that time has run short for the last answer, the best course is to reduce the answer to bare note form, using as many key headings as possible and abbreviating freely.
You may head such an answer with the words: ‘(In note form).’
This course should be adopted only in case of absolute necessity, and you should be able to plan out your time so that it is not necessary.
It is no use writing ‘unfinished’ at the bottom of your answer.
Some candidates send in meagre scripts in which every answer is carefully labelled ‘no time to finish.’
Let me assure them that the phrase has no mark-getting capacity whatever.
There is all the difference between an incomplete answer labelled ‘no time to finish’— when marks can be given only for what is written down — and a complete though condensed answer labelled ‘in note form’— when the examiner may of his charity overlook defects of style, excessive abbreviation and lack of full detail.
The legitimate way to save time in an examination is normally not by extensive abbreviation but by omitting windy phrases, such as‘first it is necessary to consider whether.’
Long before the examination the student should have practised and perfected a clear, incisive style in which every word is made to count.
SELF-CONTRADICTION
There is a story of a party of Americans who stood by the Porters' Lodge at King's College, Cambridge.
One of them pointed north and said: ‘That's the chapel.’
They turned round and another pointed south.
‘No, that's the chapel.’
‘No,’ said a third, pointing west, ‘that's the chapel.’
‘Anyway,’ they said, as they turned to go, ‘we've seen the chapel.’
Many examination scripts are guided by the same philosophy.
The candidate will start with one version of the law and then gradually veer round to a contradictory version — thus making sure that the right rule is there somewhere, even though he cannot pick it out.
Perhaps he hopes by this means to get the best of both worlds; actually, of course, he gets the worst.
If you find yourself changing your mind in the course of an answer, either cross out what you have written and start afresh, or, if there is no time for  that, say frankly that you have changed your mind.
You must show not only that you have seen the chapel, but that you can identify it.
MOOTS AND MOCK TRIALS
MUCH stress is laid by educationalists on literacy and numeracy, but we hear little about the importance of being articulate.
Footballers practise passing and shooting; pianists, singers and clowns also practise assiduously.
Why is it supposed that speaking comes naturally and needs no effort or concentration?
Fluency and clear enunciation are particularly important for the lawyer, when our forensic practice is largely oral.
Taking part in moots will help you in these respects, and also give you experience in the art of persuasion, and of putting a case succinctly and intelligibly.
Moots are legal problems in the form of imaginary cases, which are argued by two student ‘counsel’(a leader and a junior) on each side, with a ‘bench’ of three ‘judges’(or perhaps only one) representing the Court of Appeal or sometimes the House of Lords.
The arrangement of the moots is usually the responsibility of the students' law society, though a law teacher or practising lawyer can usually be persuaded to set the moot and preside on the ‘bench.’
If no one else is arranging them, organise one yourself.
Mooting not only gives you practice in court procedure but helps to develop the aplomb that every advocate should possess.
The moot should ideally have two separate points for argument, one for each of the two pairs of counsel.
Counsel should notify opposing counsel of the main propositions and of all the authorities on which they rely.
(To exchange authorities before an appellate hearing is a practice of the profession).
The Master of Moots or other organiser should also be informed of the authorities to be cited, in order that he may arrange for such reports or case books as are available to be brought to the courtroom.
Since the moot is attended by an audience it is important to confine the proceedings to a reasonable length.
Between half an hour and 40 minutes for each side (to be divided between leader and junior as they think fit) is enough time.
The presiding ‘judge’ begins by referring to the case (he need not read it out if copies have been made available to the audience); then he says: ‘I call upon Mr/Miss X’(the leading counsel for the appellant, who sits upon the judge's left — that is to say, what the judge sees as his left).
Junior counsel for the appellant is then invited to address the court, followed by the two counsel for the respondent (or Crown).
The appellant is supposed to have a right of reply, but this may have to be sacrificed if it has grown too late.
Alternatively, the speaking order can be: leading counsel for the appellant; both counsel for the respondent; junior counsel for the appellant (who thus has the last word).
Both counsel and judges follow the punctilios of court procedure and conduct, and a few words may be said on these.
Counsel rise to their feet when addressing or being addressed by the court.
If your opponent interrupts you, resume your seat while he is speaking.
If you have occasion to refer to your colleague he is your ‘learned junior’ or ‘learned leader,’as the case may be, and your opponent is ‘my learned friend,’or occasionally, informally, ‘my friend’(not ‘the opposition’!).
‘It has been argued on the other side that’ is permissible.
Do not interrupt anyone, ever, if this can be avoided.
If you must interrupt, do so as gently and courteously as possible.
Beginners sometimes get confused between the two polite  ways of addressing a judge —‘My Lord’ and ‘Your lordship.’
The difference is that ‘My Lord’ is the mode of addressing a judge in the vocative case, while ‘Your lordship’is the mode of referring to the judge in the course of a sentence,i.e .
as a polite substitute for ‘you.’
The formula for opening a case is: ‘May it please your lordship(s), I am appearing with Mr/Miss. — for the plaintiff (prosecution)(appellant), and my learned friends Mr — and Mr — are for the defendant (respondent)(Crown).
The claim (charge) is….’
Other counsel will begin by saying: ‘May it please your lordship(s).’
Female judges are addressed as ‘my Lady,’‘your ladyship.’
In referring to the Queen as prosecutor in the course of a case one speaks not of ‘the Queen’ but ‘the Crown.’
The most common breach of etiquette committed by the enthusiastic beginner when arguing a moot case is the expression of a personal opinion on the merits of his case.
Counsel may ‘submit’ and ‘suggest’as strongly as he likes, and he may state propositions of law and fact, but he should not express his own belief or opinion.
It is disrespectful to the Bench to say: ‘My Lords, in my opinion the law is so-and-so,’ still more to say: ‘My Lords, in my opinion this man is innocent.’
As an advocate you are paid to present your client's case, not to offer a sincere opinion on how you would decide if you were the judge.
It is only by maintaining this rule that the advocate can be kept free from any possible charge of hypocrisy.
Begin your address to the court by stating quite briefly what you wish to show.
Enumerate the points to be made, and state what part of the argument is being left to your junior (if you are acting as leader).
This will enable the court, if it so wishes, to express particular interest in one point, in which case you should of course respond by devoting yourself chiefly to it.
Take any hint the court drops: if the presiding judge indicates that as  at present advised the court is with you on a particular matter, leave it alone — do not insist upon reading out your argument merely because you have come prepared upon it.
State your main point as impressively as you can.
After stating it, pause to give time for it to sink in.
Speak slowly, and get as soon as possible to the core of your case.
Your time is much more limited than it would be in a real case, and you cannot afford to waste it; on the other hand, it is no use gabbling what you have to say, for then it will not be understood.
Establish eye contact with the judge, and make sure that you can be heard.
Do not read out your argument if you can possibly avoid it, but in any case do not mumble into your notes.
While you must consistently keep your voice at a level at which it can be easily heard, you should try to put expression into it, avoiding a dull monotone.
If you permit yourself a joke in arguing a moot you should not joke in court, at least until you are sufficiently experienced to know when one is allowable.
A frequent fault is to read out passages from textbooks as though they represented the last word on the law.
Although textbooks and treatises are not taboo in court, they should be used sparingly and cautiously.
What the judge principally wants to hear are the relevant cases (and, of course, statutes).
It is always desirable, at least in the superior courts, to refer the court to the cases cited by the writer for his propositions.
When you read an authority, do so slowly, with proper periods and emphasis.
If possible, the reports of cases cited should be produced at the moot.
If the reports are not available, case books should be used for the cases contained in them.
Case books should also be available for the use of the bench.
When citing cases the reference should always be given; and it should be pronounced in full, not in abbreviated form.
For instance,[1944]A.C. 200  is: ‘reported in the Appeal Cases for 1944 at page two hundred’; and 2 B. & Ald. 6 is: ‘in the second volume of Barnewall and Alderson's Reports at page six.’
The facts of cases should be read, unless the case is relied upon only for an obiter dictum .
Usually it is sufficient to read the headnote and the passage you want; but if the case is an important part of your argument you would, in court, read what you consider the essential facts in full.
Refer to judges by their full title (see pp. 64–65).
Citing cases, though usually a necessary part of the moot, tends to take a long time and to be boring for the audience.
Try, therefore, to pick out the cases that are most apt for your argument, and rely on them.
In professional practice it is the duty of the advocate to call the attention of the court to all decisions that are in any way against the submissions he makes; but this may not be possible in moot conditions.
It is not a bad plan to have a positive rule that not more than, say, six cases shall be cited on each side.
The object of a moot is to provide practice in developing an argument, and while the reading out of decided cases is often the necessary foundation of an argument, it should not constitute the whole of it.
Remember that your primary object as an advocate is to persuade: the citing of cases is only a means to this end.
Just as you should not overload your argument with cases, you should not load it with too many separate points of law.
‘Mooty’ as the case may be, it is unlikely that there are many good points to be made for your side.
All first-class advocates  concentrate on what they consider to be their good points; they do not run the risk of alienating the judge's affections by producing obviously bad ones.
If you must add indifferent points to good ones, at least put the good ones first.
As will have appeared previously, judges do not take kindly to abbreviations in speech.
Always use the official longhand.
The Royal Air Force, for example, should be so referred to; and the Navy is the Royal Navy.
All moot court judges may and should give counsel a hot time by interjecting questions and objections to his argument.
(In this they will not behave quite like real judges, who interrupt only occasionally.)
The objection need not represent the judge's real opinion; he makes it in order to see how the student counsel responds.
If you are counsel and recognise that the judge's objection is valid, concede the point gracefully by saying: ‘I am obliged to your lordship.’
If you think you have an argument, stand up for yourself and say: ‘With great respect, my Lord,’ and so on.
It does not matter how convinced or dogmatic the judge appears to be: keep at him as long as you think you have some hope of success and he is willing to listen to you.
When you think that the judge has got your point, do not go on repeating it.
If you have presented your case to the best of your ability, and the judge is evidently unconvinced, accept defeat and sit down.
All this advice applies equally to argument in real cases.
If the judge intimates that you should take a certain course, say: ‘If your lordship pleases.’
The judge may have tried to throw you with an interruption partly because you were reading your argument in a monotonous way.
In answering the judge you will have had to abandon your notes.
Try to continue your argument without them, referring to them only in order to read out an authority.
In a moot, you should keep punctiliously to your allotted time.
In real life you will not have this limitation, but it will still be important not to ramble and repeat yourself.
After counsel have concluded their arguments the presiding judge may invite members of the audience to express their opinions upon the legal problem as amici curiae .
The members  of the court may then confer, and may deliver their judgments in turn.
If there are two student members on the bench they may be asked to deliver their judgments before the senior member.
(My own opinion is that, owing to the pressure of time, it is best if the senior member alone gives the judgment without consulting the other members.
The main function of the other members of the court is to assist in putting possible objections to counsel.)
The organiser of a moot should consider its timing.
Half an hour is the minimum for each side; so if the moot starts at 8.30 p.m., and if three judges each take ten minutes to give judgment, it is 10 p.m. even if not a minute has been lost — and this does not allow time for the presiding judge to invite the audience to comment before judgment is given.
It would be much better to hold the moot, say, between 2 and 5 p.m.
The presence of an audience is relatively unimportant.
Far better have many moots with a small or even no audience than one moot with a large audience.
The moot competition provides a further element of rivalry.
At the close of a moot the judge or judges declare which counsel or side performed best; he, she or they then go on to the next round.
Men cannot improve the beauty of their countenances, but almost all of us can, if we wish, add to the attractiveness of our speech.
You will not be at ease speaking in court if you are conscious of defects in this respect.
For all who have to speak regularly, money is well spent on lessons in elocution (speech training) g; but some blemishes can be cured by self-help.
Many experienced speakers mar their conversations as well as their orations with a profusion of ums and ers which distract attention.
Other bad habits are using ‘I mean’ and ‘you know.’
The simplest way to cure these defects — which probably exist in your own speech, although you are unaware of them — is to tape-record your conversation with some other person on a serious subject in which you are both interested, and then listen to it critically.
Probably you will be surprised at the imperfections to your own expression.
Only by means of a tape-recorder can you hear yourself as others hear you.
Try to eliminate all the ‘filled  pauses’ in your speech: moments of silence are far more impressive than meaningless noises.
Poor, slurred speech is another common defect.
As a Spanish observer caustically wrote: ‘To learn English you must begin by thrusting the jaw forward, almost clenching the teeth, and practically immobilising the lips’(José Ortega y Gasset).
As things are going, the clarity and music of our language will remain only in the BBC sound archives.
Good diction can still be heard occasionally, particularly on Radio 3, so that no one who wishes to improve himself need lack exemplars; yet many people are content to mumble and fumble their words.
If your speech suffers from this defect, your teachers will not tell you of it.
They have not the time for speech training, and are perhaps afraid to embarrass you, and by criticising your speech to add to your shyness in discussion.
(They may themselves have fallen victims to the cult of mediocrity in articulation, as though slovenly speech is a way of expressing radical views.)
Lawyers, above almost all others, should be able to express themselves clearly and pleasantly.
Do you open your lips properly when speaking, or do you try to talk like a ventriloquist?
(If you took singing lessons the first instruction would be to open your mouth, and the same applies to speech.)
Do you need to turn your volume control up?
Quite a number of the people you speak to will be getting on in years and have lost their sharpness of hearing.
Some people not only fail to speak up but talk with their hands wandering to cover their mouths.
Listen to that tape-recording again.
Do you make distinct sounds for each of the vowels, or do you use pretty well one indeterminate noise for the whole lot?
What I am aiming against is the indistinct mutter; it is not a question of regional idiom, which is often charming.
Your aim should be to speak as educated people you admire speak, clearly and without affectation.
Record a good speaker on the radio, play back a sentence and then record your own utterance of the same sentence.
Compare.
Repeat the effort until you feel that your own speech is as clear as his — and, if possible, as musical!
Do not be afraid to mouth your words.
And speak deliberately, not fast.
SPEAKING IN PUBLIC It is an excellent thing to take part in debates.
The skills involved in addressing a jury are common to the skills involved in public speaking.
Here are a few hints for speech-making of any kind.
Plan your speech under a number of points so that it has a definite structure.
Write it out in full, reflect on it overnight and polish it the next day.
Then summarise the main headings on a small card or cards about the size of a postcard.
Include in the card any figures, quotations, names, key phrases or other material which you wish to state exactly.
Read through your full speech several times, preferably aloud and preferably into a tape-recorder, but do not try to memorise it word for word.
You will probably not succeed in being word-perfect, and there is danger in reciting a memorised speech either of appearing unnatural or of forgetting a complete section or even coming to a dead halt.
If you play back a recording of the rehearsal, consider whether you spoke at the right pace, and particularly whether you made an impressive pause at the right moment.
When on your feet before the audience, have the outline card or cards in your hand and, with this aid, speak naturally in the way you have planned.
The commonest fault among inexperienced speakers (and even many experienced ones) is to speak too fast.
All good advocates speak with great deliberation and force.
Tell yourself before you begin that you are going to speak slowly, and keep reminding yourself to do so.
Stand up: don't sit on an upturned seat.
(And never do this in court, not even in a magistrates' court!)
Don't hide behind any furniture if you can help it, and don't fold your arms or fiddle with your ears, your spectacles, or anything else.
Look at the audience as you speak, and turn to different sections of it.
You may use your hands to emphasise points — not in too exaggerated a way, but sufficiently to show that you are putting your whole being into it.
When you are not using your hands in this manner, keep them at your sides.
Don't sidle around; keep your feet still.
If you make a joke, pause before the punch line — and let the  audience know that humour is about to enliven the proceedings by enjoying it yourself beforehand.
If you are nervous, console yourself with the thought that the initially nervous speaker often performs far better than the stolid chap with no nerves.
And remember that the audience are on your side.
They want to be engrossed by your speech; they want the occasion to be a success.
They are not there to criticise you, unless you force the criticism on them.
Ask a friend to observe your performance and to report to you on it with ruthless candour.
Ask him particularly whether you have any irritating mannerisms: scratching yourself, adjusting your tie, pulling your clothes, waving your arms unduly, or swaying hypnotically.
MOCK TRIALS
A mock trial differs from a moot in that it is a mock jury-trial, with jury and witnesses, not an argument on law.
The proceedings may be somewhat humorous; witnesses may dress themselves up, and court and counsel wear robes (if procurable).
The audience may consist of non-lawyers, who, of course, come simply to be entertained.
Since the trial is unrehearsed, it requires a high standard of forensic ability on the part of the student ‘counsel’; and the proceedings should either be leavened by humour or present an intellectual problem of the ‘whodunit’ type.
There are two ways in which the ‘case’ may be got up.
It may have been enacted beforehand by the witnesses, so that they testify to what they have actually witnessed; alternatively, the organiser of the mock trial may simply have given to each witness a statement of his evidence, which he is expected to remember.
The former method requires some effort, but it makes the case more realistic when it comes to cross-examination, and it enables the preliminary proceedings, including the interviewing of witnesses and briefing of counsel, to be done by student ‘solicitors.’
The actual trial is, of course, a valuable experience for budding advocates who take part in it as counsel.
It is a good plan to set the scene of the case (e.g .
the murder) in some place known to the audience (e.g .
the College or Law  School).
Alternatively, the case can be modelled upon an actual case in one of the Trials Series (below, p.233).
Try to depart from your model trial just sufficiently to prevent counsel using the same speeches and the same questions to witnesses.
Keep the number of witnesses down to five or six.
See that the legal participants have attended real trials in order to learn how things are done; the clerk of the court in particular should know his job.
If you are at all doubtful about the success of the evening, do not advertise the event outside your Law Society.
As another diversion from the serious business of moots, the students' law society may like to try one evening the game of ‘Alibi.’
The gathering divides into groups of four, each group being composed of two prosecuting counsel and two defendants.
It is assumed that the two defendants have committed some crime at a stated time — say between 10 and 11 p.m. last Wednesday — and have set up an alibi.
They go out of the room for not more than ten minutes in order to prepare their story.
They then return, one at a time, for cross-examination by the prosecuting counsel.
Counsel's aim is to break down the alibi by asking unexpected questions and so getting contradictory answers from the two defendants.
After the two cross-examinations, lasting perhaps ten or fifteen minutes in all, the two counsel put their heads together for a minute, and then one of them addresses the rest of the gathering, who have acted as jury, and submits that the alibi has been broken down because of this and that discrepancy.
The jury signify their verdict by a show of hands, the opinion of the majority being taken.
A master of ceremonies is needed to dispatch successive pairs of defendants out of the room, in order to keep the game going continuously.
Would-be lawyers will find this game not at all a bad test of their powers of advocacy.
No training for would-be defendants is intended.
A somewhat similar game is called ‘False Evidence.’
Three masked ‘defendants’ are interrogated on their day-to-day lives by two counsel.
One of these defendants has assumed a completely false name and occupation, and it is the jury's task to decide which.
Each defendant must submit to counsel a week in advance a couple of hundred words summarising his life, and this enables counsel to prepare their questions.
Each defendant calls  a witness who has also submitted a statement with the facts of his or her life, particularly where that life crosses that of the defendant.
In the case of the innocent parties they must have known each other for at least two years.
The witness is not in court during the interrogation of the defendant, and counsel try to shake the evidence and establish discrepancies between the defendant and his witness.
Each defendant and his witness are given a limited time — say fifteen minutes altogether — in the box.
The judge sums up briefly to the jury, who consider and announce their verdict.
The imposter then declares himself, and it is interesting to see if the judicial process has succeeded in ascertaining the truth of the matter.
It may be mentioned that the written statements do not contain sufficiently specific information to enable counsel to identify who the person is.
Two or three trials may be held on the same evening.
Yet another variant is ‘Third Degree.’
One member of the party is selected as the defendant: he is told the outline of an alibi defence and has to fill in the details impromptu under questioning.
For example, he may be told that his alibi relates to a period between 2 and 5 p.m. last Thursday, when he left the refectory after lunch and took a train to a named neighbouring town and visited a friend in time for tea.
The defendant on being told this alibi must immediately amplify it under questioning, and can be ‘gonged’ for undue hesitation in answering or for any vagueness in answering (he must not say ‘I think so’or ‘That is probably what I would have done’).
He can also be gonged for self-contradiction.
The object of the rest of the company, who question him for fifteen minutes, is to establish a self-contradiction.
Leading questions may be asked: for example, if the defendant says that he was not carrying a mackintosh, he can later be asked whether his host put his mackintosh on a peg in the hall or where else?
If the defendant is gonged, or runs for the allotted time without mishap, another outline alibi can immediately be supplied to another volunteer defendant.
A beauty of this game is that it can be played by two players only, and it may help you to bring out unsuspected ability as an implacable interrogator.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Books on advocacy are referred to in Chapter 13 (p.201).
For the  procedure at a mock trial, consult any book on criminal or civil procedure.
‘Counsel’ should make themselves acquainted not only with this procedure but with the main rules of evidence — e. g. those relating to leading questions.
LEGAL RESEARCH
GEORGE III is reputed to have said that lawyers do not know much more law than other people, but they know better where to find it.
This chapter is written to help the reader to a more intimate knowledge of his law library, and also to guide the first steps of the research worker.
Whatever you write, remember that one of the prime qualities of a lawyer is accuracy.
All your quotations must be verbatim; all your citations must follow accepted forms; all your statutes must be checked to make sure that they have not been amended or repealed; and if there be any doubt, your cases must be checked to make sure that they have not been reversed, overruled, or questioned.
LOOKING UP PRACTICAL POINTS
The only type of legal research that most practising lawyers want to do is research into the law relating to a case that they have on hand.
A convenient place in which to start looking is frequently Halsbury's Laws of England .
The 4th edition is in course of publication.
If you know that your subject is in these volumes of the 4th edition, go straight to the volume and use the index at the end (there is a separate index for each title).
When you have found the page, check the latest Cumulative Supplement, which is arranged alphabetically under the titles.
There are annual abridgments of authorities since 1974, containing the headnotes  of cases and summaries of legislation etc., arranged according to the titles of the main work.
Also a Current Service Binder for the latest information.
If you do not know where your subject is located, use the index volumes 41–42 to the 3rd edition and the index to such of the volumes of the 4th edition as have been published.
Use the Cumulative Supplement, etc., as before.
Often Halsbury will give the answer without further trouble, but if further detail is needed it may be necessary to turn to a specialised treatise.
The experienced practitioner carries in his head the names of the best works on the subjects with which he usually deals, and the sooner the student gets to know some of them the better.
Consult Raistrick and Rees,Lawyers' Law Books (1977) with supplement.
A much larger and more widely-based list is the Catalogue of the Institute of Advanced Legal Studies (6 vols. 1978).
A useful selective bibliography is A.G. Chloros,A Biographical Guide to the Law of the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man .
An American counterpart is Law Books in Print , ed.
J. Myron Jacobstein and Meira G. Pimsleur, which covers books in English published throughout the world.
Recent books can be found in the catalogues published by Butterworth and Sweet and Maxwell.
It the question is one of common law, much assistance can be got from The Digest (formerly English and Empire Digest ).
This digests practically every reported case, and is well arranged and well indexed.
A valuable aid to the interpretation of legal expressions is Words and Phrases Legally Defined .
This is a collection of words and phrases in statutes which have been interpreted by the judges, together with statutory definitions of terms and definitions advanced by legal writers.
Another excellent work of the same type is Stroud's Judicial Dictionary .
CASES JUDICIALLY CONSIDERED
The method of tracing cases has been explained in Chapter 3.
Cases on which you are relying should be checked in the list of cases judicially considered in the Law Reports Indexes (red and pink) or in The Digest , lest they have been overruled, not followed or doubted, or in the hope that they have been followed  or approved.
Alternatively, the Current Law Citator indexes all the cases, of whatever date, that have been judicially considered or affected by statute since 1947.
STATUTES
Many statutes can already be summoned up on a video screen at the touch of a few buttons, and complete coverage is in the offing; but, since the use of these computerised systems is expensive, the old-fashioned methods will long be with us.
The most convenient place to find a statute that is still in force is in the official publication Statutes in Force .
This is arranged in encyclopaedic form, in loose-leaf binders, some statutes being reprinted with amendments from time to time.
If your statute obviously belongs to a particular title, like ‘Contract,’ take down that volume of the collection and open it at the title (known as the ‘group’).
This begins with a blue divider; look at it first, to see if it contains the name of the statute you are after.
Some groups are subdivided; here the blue divider states the subgroups, which are divided by yellow dividers, and the latter carry the names of the statutes in the particular subgroup.
Each group is supposed to have a subject-index at the end, though some indexes are at present missing; there is also to be a general index to the whole work.
The divider will tell you the date up to which amendments have been included in the statute.
Unless you are certain that the statute has not been amended since that date, take the cumulative supplement, which is arranged in the same way as the main work.
Turn up the same group in the supplement, to see if your statute has been amended or repealed, or whether there are other relevant statutes on the point.
The divider sheets are not necessarily replaced when new statutes are added, so look for a recent statute in its proper chronological place, and if necessary check with the cumulative supplement before deciding that it is not included.
If you are not certain which group your statute falls under, turn it up in the tables provided.
There is an alphabetical table, and also a chronological table in case you know only the date of the statute.
Unfortunately these tables are not kept up to date, so even if your statute is not in the table it may be found in the relevant group in the main work.
The only defect in Statutes in Force , apart from the fact that at the time of writing it is incomplete, is that it does not provide proper annotations to the statutes.
For these you have to use Halsbury's Statutes of England .
(This also gives the texts of the statutes, but they are often broken up between different titles in rather an inconvenient way, which is one of the reasons why the text in Statutes in Force is preferable.)
The procedure for turning up Halsbury is much the same as for Statutes in Force .
After volume 45 comes a volume entitled ‘Tables of Statutes and Index for Vols. 1–45;’ this contains both an alphabetical and a chronological list.
From this you can trace your statute in the main work, supposing it to be there.
If the statute is later than about 1968 it will be found in the Continuation Volumes, which are all indexed in the latest Cumulative Supplement.
This Supplement is a noter-up which lists amendments to the statutes; both the main work and the Supplement also note cases decided on the statutes.
If your statute is later than the last Continuation Volume it will probably be in the Current Statutes Service, composing loose-leaf binders containing the latest statutes, annotations and index.
To take an example, suppose that you wish to find the late annotations to a statute printed in the Continuation Volumes of Halsbury, such as the Children Act 1975.
The index to the Continuation Volume for 1975 (or to the Cumulative Supplement) will tell you that it is in the 1975 volume (vol. 45) under the heading ‘Infants, Children and Young Persons,’ page 669.
Supplement under the same heading.
When you turn over the pages of the Supplement, pay no attention at first to the volume numbers at the top left-hand corner of the pages; look only at the headings at the top right-hand corner, which are in alphabetical order.
The Acts are arranged in chronological order under the heading, so the Children Act 1975 is found near the end of the group.
As you turn the pages, keep your eye on the volume numbers printed at the top left-hand corner till you see the number of the volume you are seeking (45); then go down the  page-numbers in the left-hand margin till you see your page-number (p.669).
This will be the annotation you are looking for, assuming that there is an annotation there.
But you are not yet finished, because you must also check the annotation in the Noter-up binder of the Current Statutes Service.
This gives the very latest annotation, and the mechanics of looking it up are the same.
Once you know the volume and page of your statute in the main work (or in the Continuation Volumes), it only takes a few minutes to find the annotations in the Cumulative Supplement and Current Statutes Service.
Take this book into the library and follow the above routine for yourself.
A useful feature of Halsbury is the ‘Destination Table,’ which will be found at the end of some consolidating Acts and which enables the provisions of the Act to be traced back to earlier legislation.
For the names of statutes that have received the royal assent since the last supplement of Statutes in Force and Halsbury, consult the current numbers of Current Law .
There is also an official edition of the statutes in yearly volumes (called either Public General Statutes or Law Reports — Statutes ).
Before 1952 the only alphabetical index was at the end of the volume.
Until 1940 these volumes contained the statutes passed during a particular session.
This has one tiresome consequence, that if one knows only the short title and calendar year, the statute may sometimes be in either of two volumes, and nothing but a process of trial and error can ascertain which.
Since 1939 a very sensible change has been made: each volume contains the statutes passed during a single calendar year, and so the difficulty arises only for statutes passed before 1940.
Statutes since 1947 are better consulted in the annual volumes of Current Law Statutes Annotated than in the official annual edition.
This is published in parts which are subsequently bound into a volume for the year.
Amendments, etc., can be traced through two Current Law Statute Citators , one for 1947–1971, and one for 1971 onwards.
An excellent feature is the Table of  Derivations showing sections in previous statutes now replaced.
An alternative to Current Law Statutes is Butterworth's Annotated Legislation Service .
Both these publications are useful when the statute first appears, but both suffer from the defect that they are not regularly kept up to date by reprints or supplements.
For this reason,Statutes in Force and Halsbury's Statutes are generally better.
There are two other methods of checking the legislative history of a statute.
(1) By using the cumulative Current Law Citator , which is published annually; this can be brought up to date with the Statute Citator in Current Law Statutes — a table of the effect the statutes have on earlier legislation.
These give only amendments and repeals since 1947 (the year when Current Law began), which is satisfactory if your main statute was passed after 1947, but otherwise not.
It may be mentioned that the Statute Citator in Current Law Statutes includes statutory instruments issued under rule-making powers, cases decided on the construction of statutes, and legal literature dealing with statutes, as well as all statutes of any year that are attended by legislation during the years covered.
(2) The other method is to use the official work called Chronological Table of Statutes .
This will show amendments and repeals up to the date of last publication; more recent changes are listed in an annual publication entitled Annotations to the Acts .
A very convenient source for some statutes is the Local Government Library, which publishes statutes and statutory instruments on certain topics in loose-leaf form with annotations and indexes.
The subjects covered are: Health and Safety at Work; Highways; Housing; Planning; Compulsory Purchase and Compensation; Public Health; and Road Traffic.
There are also the British Tax Encyclopedia , the Encyclopedia of Value Added Tax ; the Industrial Relations Encyclopedia , and the Encyclopedia of Social Security Law .
Criminal statutes can conveniently be consulted in Archbold or Stone.
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
Nearly all Government Orders made under statute are now  generically called Statutory Instruments.
They are cited by title, date and number,e.g .
the County Court Fees (Amendment) Order 1981/898 (L.5).
(The last reference in brackets is added to instruments concerned with legal procedure.)
Such instruments can generally best be looked up in Halsbury's Statutory Instruments .
The index volume 24 is arranged alphabetically by subject, with a supplementary index at the end.
There is also a loose-leaf binder entitled Service.
Chronological List of Instruments , which contains an annual supplement, monthly news sheets, and a chronological list.
The work is updated by an Additional Texts binder.
An alternative source is the Stationery Office volumes.
Orders in force in 1948 were reprinted under subject titles in a series of blue-bound volumes, continued in annual volumes (there are several to the year).
There is an Index to Government Orders in force in 1979, arranged alphabetically under subject-headings, and continued by annual volumes.
A Table of Government Orders lists all Orders, distinguishing between those repealed and those in force; continuation volumes are published annually, with monthly and daily Lists of Statutory Instruments in addition.
The arrangement is chronological.
Statutory instruments made under particular sections of statutes are listed under the section in front of the Index of Government Orders , and in the Index to the Statutes in Force .
RESEARCH PROPER
The ordinary practitioner will not need to dig any deeper than this — apart, of course from references to the statutes and law reports.
I should, however, add a few words for the benefit of  any student who wishes to research more deeply.
For periodical literature, consult the Index to Legal Periodicals and Index to Foreign Legal Periodicals , published for the American Association of Law Libraries.
The Current Law Index is a similar publication started in 1980.
There is also an Index to Periodical Articles Relating to Law which is supplementary to the Index to Legal Periodicals .
A list of American and other periodicals in English libraries is published by the Institute of Advanced Legal Studies.
See also W.A. Friend,Anglo-American Legal Bibliographies (1944).
The finding of an undated Command Paper may give trouble unless the following table is known.
There are five series.
From 1833 to 1869 they were numbered ‘1’ to ‘4222.’
From 1870 to 1899 they were numbered ‘C.1’ to ‘C.9550.’
From 1900 to 1918 they were numbered ‘Cd.1’ to ‘Cd.9239.’
From 1919 to 1956 they were numbered ‘Cmd.1’ to ‘Cmd.9889.’
The new series is numbered ‘Cmnd.1’ consecutively.
An extremely useful general guide is British Official Publications by John E. Pemberton (1971).
Much good work can be done by comparing legal development in the various common-law countries.
Part II of the Manual of Legal Citations , referred to before, explains the mode of citation of Commonwealth material.
Australian cases can be traced through the Australian Digest , Canadian through the Canadian Abridgement , New Zealand through the Abridgement of New Zealand Case Law .
There are various Irish Digests.
The Institute of Advanced Legal Studies, 17 Russell Square, London, WC1B 5DR, publishes a Union List of Commonwealth legal literature in English libraries.
See also Reynold Boult,A Bibliography of Canadian Law (1966), and Paul O'Higgins,A Bibliography of Periodical Literature relating to Irish Law (1966).
Turning to American material, the Middle Temple possesses an excellent collection of American reports, and a certain number of American textbooks.
The libraries of the Inns of Court have a duplicated list showing which American reports are in which libraries.
The Middle Temple has the American equivalent of Halsbury, the Corpus Juris Secundum .
Copies of  the American Restatement are fairly common.
The Institute of Advanced Legal Studies, already mentioned, is also building up a library of American law.
Useful guides to American law reports and digests are Jackobstein and Mersky,Fundamentals of Legal Research (2nd ed. 1981), and the work by Beardsley and Orman already cited.
There are an Annual Survey of American Law , an Annual Survey of Commonwealth Law , and an Annual Survey of South African Law .
The libraries mentioned above are, of course, private libraries, and non-members of the bodies to which they belong must obtain permission to use them.
In addition the Libraries of the Commonwealth Relations Office, Downing Street, S.W.1, the Privy Council, Old County Hall, Spring Gardens, S.W.1, and the Colonial Office, Church House, Great Smith Street, S.W.1, possess some series of reports of other Commonwealth countries.
Members of the public are permitted upon application to consult them.
Those reading French law may be helped by A. W. Dalrymple's French-English Dictionary of Legal Words and Phrases (2nd ed., 1948); there is also a companion English-French volume.
Similar dictionaries for German have been compiled by Erdsiek, Dietl and Weil, and for Spanish by Louis A. Robb.
There is a Directory of Law Libraries in the British Isles , edited by Barbara Mangles (1977).
Those working in London may be helped by Irwin and Staveley,The Libraries of London (2nd ed., 1961).
Further information on law libraries and their use is given in Derek J. Way, The Student's Guide to Law Libraries (1967), the Manual of Law Librarianship , ed.
Elizabeth M. Moys (1976), and Jean Dane and P. A. Thomas,How to use a Law Library (1979).
If the reader's research carries him beyond familiar legal fields into a large general library, he will find E.J. Dingwall's How to Use a Large Library a useful guide.
Much the most important of general works of reference is the British Museum Subject Index , which classifies books according to their subject-matter.
Where a book is not in a library, the librarian may be willing to apply to the National Central Library for a copy on loan.
Three hints may be given on the preparation of the finished script.
(1) Frequently the date of decision of a case is a year before the date by which it is cited in the Law Reports.
It is  customary to take the date of the volume of the Law Reports as the date of the case.
(2) If the case is reported in the Law Reports it may be thought sufficient to cite only the Law Reports; but if it is not in the Law Reports the main ‘collateral’ reports should be cited in which the case appears.
A list of references can be obtained from one of the Digests.
(3) Useful advice on citations will be found in Part I of the Manual of Legal Citations published by the Institute of Advanced Legal Studies.
Those who are troubled by questions of style and grammar would be well advised to read Complete Plain Words , by Sir Ernest Gowers.
A revised edition by Sir Bruce Fraser has been published by H.M.S.O.
in elegant hardback at a very reasonable price.
FROM LEARNING TO EARNING
MANY Arts graduates now find it impossible to obtain a post that matches their training and ability, unless they are willing to teach.
The law offers better prospects; but the profession is crowded, and therefore competitive and tough.
It is as difficult for beginners (except perhaps those of exceptional ability) as other professions are; many give up and leave it each year.
If you have a career open to you in a family business you would probably be well advised to enter it; and in that case there is no point in obtaining a professional qualification.
If you have specialised in Law in your University, Polytechnic or College, your knowledge will give you a useful background in many walks of life.
It is always a help to know when precisely a contract is concluded, for example, and of possible legal liabilities against which it is advisable to insure.
If you are reading this book before starting on your higher studies, the present chapter may cause you to decide not to study Law at all, or not to specialise in it.
A more general course in Business Studies, which includes some Law, may be better for your career.
For advice on institutions offering Business Studies courses, write to The Observer Student Service, Middlesex Polytechnic, 114 Chase Side, London N14 5PN, when the service restarts at the end of July, giving your examination record.
The Observer carries helpful articles on careers during the late summer months; so do The Daily Telegraph and The Guardian.
These pages are written mostly for those who think they may wish to become qualified as a lawyer.
An initial choice must be made between the Bar and the solicitor's profession, at a time when the aspirant will probably know little of the implications of the choice, or of his own potentialities.
It would be sensible if we had a common system of training for the two sides of the  profession (apart from specialist subjects), so that the choice could be postponed until the last; but this has not been done.
It is, nevertheless, pretty easy for a solicitor to transfer to the Bar: the most onerous requirement is that he must spend six months in pupillage.
Barristers are specialist consultants and advocates, and are given exclusive rights of audience in the superior courts; this creates a class of specialists whose services are available to all solicitors.
At the same time, an experienced solicitor may well be able to give a better legal opinion and be a far better advocate than a beginner at the Bar.
It is, therefore, right that a solicitor who finds that his talents run to advocacy should be able to change to the Bar with a minimum of fuss.
Any solicitor who proposes to do this can take inspiration from the example of Lord Lane C.J., and of his predecessor in office Lord Widgery C.J., both of whom were solicitors before turning to the Bar.
PRACTICE AT THE BAR
There are severe discouragements to new entrants for practice at the Bar.
First, apart from certain transitional arrangements you will need an approved degree (not necessarily a law degree, though that gives you the advantage of providing you with examination exemptions).
Then you will have to pay fees, eat dinners, attend courses and pass the Bar examination.
(If you have an approved degree but not in law, you will first need to study law for a year at the Polytechnic of Central London or the City University, and pass an appropriate examination).
So far, it is only a matter of funds and conscientious work; and some financial assistance is available.
After or shortly before taking your call, if you intend to practise, you will read in the chambers of a junior barrister.
This is called pupillage, and arranging it may present a problem.
But the end of pupillage is likely to be only the beginning of your real difficulty: ‘no room in the Inns.’
The practising barrister is a member of a group who share a set  of chambers; one of these barristers, the head of chambers, appoints the clerk and secretaries.
He may also allocate seats to new entrants, but the decision on this is now generally taken on the vote of all members of the chambers.
In London your pupil-master is unlikely to be able to arrange for an offer of a seat (i.e. a room, or share of a room) to be made to you.
A set of chambers in London may have as many as twenty pupils and only keep on two.
The situation has arisen because of recent large recruitments to the Bar, the traditional but constricting attachment of the Bar to the Temple and Gray's and Lincoln's Inn, and the natural reluctance of established practitioners to colonise new chambers.
Consequently, there are many ‘floaters’— unhappy beginners who, having no local habitation, are gravely handicapped in building up a practice.
They live in perpetual hope of persuading some head of chambers to take them in when a vacancy occurs; meanwhile, to confer with a client they can only occupy someone else's desk, by his good grace, when he is not using it.
Women and non-whites are likely to experience particular difficulty.
You should think long and hard before deciding to join the unhappy throng.
The chances of the new entrant will improve slightly as new chambers are opened — by conversion from residences in the Temple, or in Gray's Inn, or outside the ancient purlieus of the law.
But it is unlikely that this will keep pace with the flow of new entrants.
If you are considering pupillage or a seat in new chambers, make careful enquiry into the status of the place and the kind and amount of work coming in.
Some do not offer good prospects.
The position in the provinces is better, because the provincial Bar very sensibly controls its intake.
If you obtain pupillage in provincial chambers, and perform satisfactorily, you are likely to be offered a place.
This is a strong reason for starting in a provincial city rather than in London, especially as the provincial Bar is now as good as London, apart from specialist chambers.
Another argument in favour of the provinces is that the steady decentralisation of justice from London naturally increases the importance of the provincial Bar.
In 1979 there were 3,080 barristers practising in central London and 1,283 spread over the rest of england and Wales; considering that most courts are now decentralised, this certainly seems to indicate an imbalance.
We may well reach a situation in which all trials are held in the area in which they arise, and London retains special importance chiefly as the centre of appellate courts for the south of England.
Solicitors in the north and west will no longer brief London barristers except in matters in which such barristers profess particular expertise.
Unless local Bars are then strong enough to cope with the demand for advocacy, this will pass more and more to the solicitors.
Then there is the question of finance.
During the first six months of pupillage the fledgling barrister is not allowed to accept briefs.
During the second six months he can, and may get a little work; but until at least a year after the end of pupillage he will probably have to live on his parents or spouse.
In addition to his living there will be professional expenses, including rent of chambers, clerk's commission, secretarial assistance, travel etc.
The sum remaining from his fees will be subject to further deductions for income tax, national insurance and national insurance self-employed tax.
Fees take months or years to come in, and quite a proportion are never recovered.
In specialist chambers the time that must elapse before making a living is longer.
As to the volume of work available, crime is still a growth industry, and the constantly increasing complexity of many parts  of the law inevitably creates a demand for skilled legal advice.
The enlargement of the powers and pretensions of government gives administrative law great practical importance, while tax law creates continual problems for business and industry.
For these and other reasons the Royal Commission on Legal Services expected ‘a long-term increase in the demand for the services of lawyers.’
However, legal work tends to rise and fall with the prosperity of the country: people avoid litigation in hard times.
Owing to legal changes, young barristers can no longer earn easy money on undefended divorces, which are now done by solicitors.
The Bar has lost by the gradual extension of county court jurisdiction (where solicitors have the right of audience); and the income limit for legal aid in civil cases has fallen well behind inflation, so that few people are now eligible for it.
Account must also be taken of the degree of competition for the work.
The Royal Commission on Legal Services reported in 1979 that ‘across the country as a whole there is now a surplus of barristers;’ and the number has certainly not fallen since.
How does all this come out in actual figures?
A survey of earnings in the tax year 1976–1977 made by the Bar for the purpose of its evidence to the Royal Commission on Legal Services showed that the net fees of junior barristers (before provision for pension, sickness insurance, indemnity insurance and national insurance contributions) averaged £7,319, but for barristers who had been only three years or less in practice were only £2,769.
These were very modest incomes by then current standards.
For leaders the average was £21,087.
Legal aid fees and the scales allowable on taxation have been improved since then.
A friend at the Bar estimated to me in 1981 that a youngster of ability on the common law side can go up to eight or ten thousand pounds, but then tends to reach a plateau.
The barristers who make a lot of money are those who are not dependent on fees allowed by the State — for example, those who practise in the fields of commerce, industry, insurance and banking.
As to the future, a good deal of personal injury litigation will disappear if State insurance is introduced as proposed by the  Pearson Commission.
If we have a Family Court on the lines of the Crown Court, as seems inevitable eventually, it is unlikely that the Bar will have an exclusive right of audience.
Finally, the gross overloading of the Crown Court, coupled with the great cost of criminal legal aid to the Exchequer, will probably bring about a further shift of criminal cases from the Crown Court to magistrates' courts, which will involve a reduction in the number of cases in which barristers are engaged.
The same result will follow if solicitors are given the right of audience in the Crown Court, as is by no means impossible.
The present arrangements, under which a defending barrister will often not see his client until the morning of the trial, is unsatisfactory in the extreme.
To allow the solicitor who has prepared the case to take it in court would not be a perfect solution, but might be some improvement.
Having done my best to put you off the Bar, I must add that the public interest strongly requires that the profession should continue to attract a flow of top quality recruits.
Great success at the Bar leads to a very considerable income and the strong possibility of a judgeship.
Those who do not reach this level but are pretty good can aspire to a circuit judgeship eventually, but the chances of rising beyond that are problematical.
For those in this upper-middle range of ability employment in the civil service may well offer better rewards.
You may make a switch of this kind after starting at the Bar.
Many barristers who fail in practice, or who do not find it congenial, obtain employment in salaried posts, as will be explained later.
Let me assume that you would like to enter for practice at the Bar and are prepared to brave all hazards.
Have you the right qualities?
For advocacy, obviously, the prime need is the ability to communicate by speech.
Judges confess in private that there are counsel now practising whom they cannot understand.
If you mumble or burble, give up all thought of advocacy.
Not only must you be able to speak up loud and clear, but you should be able to put a case relevantly, neatly, succinctly, and generally in a way pleasing to the tribunal before which you are appearing.
The last means that good manners are important.
Quickness of thought is a considerable asset.
Cases on the  common law side are usually won not through counsel's address to the court, which there is usually a little time to prepare in advance, but through the effective examination of witnesses.
Now cross-examinations cannot be prepared, because you can never be quite sure what the other side's witnesses are going to say until they are actually in the box.
A certain nimbleness of wit is therefore essential.
Some people are very sound but can formulate opinions only after prolonged consideration.
That type of mind is no use for advocacy.
A good barrister must also be able to assimilate facts quickly.
He may have a brief with correspondence numbering two or three hundred letters delivered to him the night, or two nights, before the case begins, and all the facts must be mastered before he goes into court.
The best advocates have had prodigious memories, enabling them to retain the details of one complicated case after another for presentation in court.
Lord Alverstone recorded that when at the Bar he was able to read the sheets of correspondence almost as fast as he could turn them over, and he never required to read them twice.
Hawkins, one of the most powerful leaders of the common law Bar in the nineteenth century, used to give the following advice.
‘Never examine or cross-examine from your brief.
Know your brief and examine from your head.’
The student can best test and foster his powers of advocacy by making full use of his debating society.
A sound constitution is another requirement, as can be realised from the following passage from Gilchrist Alexander's The Temple of the Nineties .
Anyone who has seen a busy barrister at work will bear out the truth of the picture.
‘Few people realise under what pressure successful barristers live….
The busy barrister is on the qui vive all the time.
In court he has to be on the alert every moment and is watched by a highly trained expert on the other side who pounces upon his slightest mistake.
Out of court he has to work far into the night, night after night, working hard and continuously at a mass of detail.
He cannot, like the head of a big business, delegate to subordinates the actual carrying out of his work.
His ‘devils’ prepare for him notes of his material but once he has gone into court he has to take entire responsibility on his own shoulders.’
The advocate needs a sound knowledge of the law, especially that of evidence and procedure.
If evidence and procedure are among the subjects available to you at the University, you  should either include them in your course or, at least, attend the lectures as an extra.
Then again the advocate, like every kind of lawyer, needs accuracy.
Your ability to write and argue is of little avail if you get your facts wrong, fail to find the relevant authorities, rely on a statute that has been superseded or a case that has been overruled, or simply misunderstand the authorities.
All these mistakes are only too easy to make, and it takes constant effort to keep oneself up to the mark.
On the Chancery side the chief qualifications are, I think, patience and thoroughness.
There is not so much advocacy to be done; much of the work is non-litigious (such as drafting documents and advising on title), and the cases that do get into court tend to turn upon technicalities of company law, taxation, property and wills, or upon questions of company finance, rather than upon controversial questions of fact.
Also, a good deal of litigious work is disposed of not in open court but before a judge or master in chambers.
To some types of mind work at the Chancery Bar appears dull and repellent, because it tends to lack human interest.
On the other hand, existence is more placid than on the common law side.
It is better remunerated, too, since the continual rise in property values helps to keep incomes not too far behind inflation.
At the time of writing the Chancery Bar offers considerably better prospects than the common law; there is reported to be a shortage of good applicants for tenancies.
It is hardly necessary to emphasise the necessity of probity for all members of the Bar.
A barrister must have the confidence of the Bench.
Any kind of sharp practice or dishonest dealing will infallibly ruin his career.
Make up your mind that whatever the short-term temptations may be, you will never deviate from the highest standards of honour.
This remark applies to solicitors as well, of course .
A sound lawyer who has found a seat in chambers on the common law side can expect at least some work.
Even indifferent lawyers may be kept going by their clerk arranging for briefs to be passed to them from dud solicitors.
This is, of course, a criticism of the system.
One of the deficiencies of our arrangements is that no provision is made for young barristers obtaining a salaried position in chambers, allowing them to do minor work under supervision.
Since even the neophyte  practises on his own, there is no senior partner to keep an eye on him and to clamp down upon him if he is incompetent.s
In specialist chambers (such as taxation, family law, employment law, company law, local government law, town and country planning, rating, commercial law, shipping, restrictive practices, libel law, and patent), it is harder for the beginner to get a start and less likely that the incompetent can make headway.
There may be virtually no briefs for a year or more, and it will be longer still before the young barrister pays his way.
However, his prospects then are better than in general practice.
His life is likely to be less hectic, and his income distinctly greater.
There is no official limit to the fees chargeable to clients who are not legally aided, so that when practitioners in a particular speciality are in short supply, their fees rise.
For those who have an eye to practise eventually at the Parliamentary Bar a scientific qualification is a help, and in patent work it is a necessity.
Apart from the fees he earns, a practising barrister is not feather-bedded in any way.
There is no pension (except the which have to be paid for), no goodwill to sell, no partner to help earn your money if you are ill.
Even if you succeed in building up a good practice as a junior your troubles will not be at an end, because at that point in your career you will have to decide whether to apply for silk.
These expressions need a word of explanation.
A ‘junior’ means any barrister who has not taken silk; and some highly successful barristers (especially on the Chancery side) remain juniors all their lives.
‘Taking silk’ means obtaining the right to wear a silk gown by becoming a Q.C.
or (to use the language of lawyers) a leader.
Whereas a junior does both advocacy and the preliminary paper work, a leader confines himself to advocacy (apart from the giving of oral and written opinions, an activity common to both grades),
One of the many indefensible anomalies of practice at the Bar is that the grant of silk is entirely in the discretion of political officer, the Lord Chancellor; but he canvasses the views of various legal eminences including the heads of the judicial divisions.
Only about a quarter of the applicants survive the rigorous screening and obtain silk.
Certainly the Lord Chancellor weighs the needs of the various circuits and branches of law.
But the result of this restrictive attitude to the grant of silk is that successful leaders are in such short supply, and consequently are able to charge such high fees, that the cost of fighting an important case in the High Court is a public scandal.
One day the whole silk system may be reconsidered.
Why should it not be left to individual members of the Bar to decide whether they wish to specialise in advocacy?
Anyway, the position now is that if you do not take silk at the right moment, it may mean that you have to continue working much too hard for your time of life; on the other hand some barristers who take silk repent it, for they find too late that their services in the more expensive class of advocacy are not in demand.
Once you have taken silk there is no going back to a  junior s practice.
It seems a perverse arrangement to add this hazard to a profession that is already too full of risks for our comfortable age.
Assuming that you decide to take the plunge, you should if possible determine at the same time whether you are going to practise on the common law or on the Chancery side.
For the latter you will probably join Lincoln's Inn, for the former one of the three other Inns.
(This is the usual course, but there is nothing to prevent a member of any Inn from practising on either side of the profession.)
As between the three common law Inns the choice does not really matter: you can quite well be a member of one Inn, become a pupil in chambers belonging to a second, and in due course attain a seat in chambers belonging to a third.
Apart from the difficulty of chambers, the ordinary person who has no special connections normally finds it easier to get some kind of start on the common law side, where there is a great deal of small work, in county courts and the criminal courts; on the Chancery side there is no criminal work and all the civil work tends to be fairly important.
The Chancery side is much more concentrated in London than the common law side, though some Chancery chambers have now been established in the provinces.
The bar student must, according to the quaint custom, eat dinners at his Inn of Court as well as passing the Bar examinations before he can be called.
In general the dinners must extend over two years, but there are certain exemptions, and in particular students who are exempted from the ‘academic’ stage of the Bar examinations (as most are) can cut their dining period down to one year by double dining, i.e. by dining 24 times that year instead of the usual 12.
There is no need to enter further into the details of dinners, examinations and fees.
The Consolidated Regulations of the Inns of Court, together with the particulars of the scholarships and prizes available, can be had by applying to the Sub-Treasurer at the Inner Temple or to the Under-Treasurer at the other three Inns.
The total fees up to and including call (including the cost of dinners) are about £670.
Attendance at the course at the Inns of Court School of Law, including the practical exercises, is compulsory for those who intend to practise in England and Wales; so including living expenses in London and  books the law graduate can reckon on expenses of at least £2,300 for the eight months of the course, with another £180 for robe and wig.
Many local authorities award grants to students reading for the Bar on the same basis as University awards.
Some discriminate against University graduates.
A year's pupillage is (in general) compulsory for those who intend to practise in England and Wales.
Certain limited exemptions are allowed.
Generally, no fee is charged for pupillage, but local authorities do not give grants for maintenance, which has the unfortunate result that students without adequate parental means may find it impossible to establish themselves at the Bar.
You have to reckon not only on the cost of living in London or some other city but also the expense of accompanying your master when he travels.
The Inns of Court and Senate have modest funds for the purpose of alleviating hardship.
How does one find a barrister who will accept one as a pupil?
There is no fully organised system.
A few chambers have set a shining example by stating that they will grant pupillages (some of them accompanied by monetary awards) by open competition; if you wish to apply, write for details to John Stuart Colyer Esq.
Q.C., 11 King's Bench Walk, Temple, London EC4.
Apart from that, one of your law lecturers may be able to help.
When a barrister comes to address your University or College law society, you can beard him on the subject.
A solicitor may also be able to give you a recommendation.
Oxford and Cambridge undergraduates receive the benefit of advice from special committees of old University men.
Each Inn of Court has a Pupillage Committee which manages to fix up all suitable applicants in suitable places eventually.
(The phrase ‘suitable applicants’ refers only to ability and motivation.)
Those who think that they may wish to practise in the North may avail themselves of advice kindly offered by Mr J.M. Shorrock, Hon.
Sec., Northern Circuit Executive Committee, 2 Old Bank Street, Manchester M2 7PF.
If you fail to arrange pupillage you will naturally be very  disappointed, but should not feel aggrieved.
Far more pupils are taken on than can hope to succeed in practice, and if you have not been able to impress any barrister sufficiently with your qualities to be taken on, it may perhaps be for the best that you are forced to look to a different career at this juncture.
You may, for example, become a legal adviser to a firm (see later).
Or you may transfer to the solicitors' branch.
The difficulties of the student in arranging pupillage make it rather theoretical to give advice on the assumption that he can pick and choose.
If you have the opportunity of an introduction to a particular barrister, find out as much about him as you can.
There are two dangers to be avoided, if you can avoid them, in the choice of chambers: reading with someone who is too busy, who cannot spare the time to give you instruction, except possibly over a snack lunch, and reading with someone who has not enough work to give you proper experience.
The ideal person, if he can be found, is the young barrister in good practice who is rapidly rising and who may take you up with him.
Someone, in other words, who is likely to take silk, but likely to take it at a time sufficiently far in the future to give you a chance of stepping into part of his practice as a junior.
If your pupilmaster is now above doing the humbler type of work (in the county court or before magistrates) with which you will have to start in your own practice, he will arrange for you to accompany more junior members of chambers to these lower courts.
You may make your pupillage contract for six months in each of two different chambers.
You may, for example, spend six months in London and six months with a local barrister if your intention is to join the local Bar.
Some spend six months in Chancery chambers before turning to the common law side.
An incidental advantage of splitting pupillage is that you thereby become known in two places instead of one.
Wherever you spend your time, the most important thing to enquire about is the prospect of obtaining a seat after pupillage.
If you do not get a seat in the chambers of which you are a pupil, you stand little chance elsewhere.
The reason is that heads of chambers are not required to notify vacant tenancies to a central office, so that there can be fair competition for them; the tenancy is given to the person who happens to be on the spot and who is acceptable, or to a relative of the head of chambers, or otherwise by favour.
A pupil must do his level best to please his master (and the clerk) if he hopes to be invited to remain.
He has the right, which he should exercise to the full, of reading his master's papers and accompanying him to court.
He may be asked to take notes of the evidence.
There is a temptation on both sides for the pupil to spend his time doing this, but it soon becomes rather profitless.
The pupil spends his days far better drafting a pleading or writing an opinion and having his master criticise his work afterwards.
When listening to cases in court you should do so not passively, like the spectator of a play, but with active thought, as though you were yourself taking part; framing in your mind during the examination-in-chief the questions you would put to the witness if the cross-examination fell to you.
If possible, the cases you attend should be those in which you have contrived to read the papers beforehand: the educational value of hearing them is then much greater.
Always attend your master's conferences with solicitors if he allows you to do so.
By the way, barristers usually talk about cases by identifying themselves with their lay client.
‘I am a girl who was assaulted,’ etc.
If (as often happens) you find that your pupilmaster does not have enough work in the smaller courts and in administrative tribunals to give you adequate experience, ask him if he will arrange with another member of chambers to enable you to see more of these courts and tribunals.
Copy the dress of respected members of the Bar.
A man should wear a dark suit and sober shirt, and a woman their equivalent.
I need hardly add that men should remember the importance of regular haircuts.
The Bar examinations should, of course, be got out of the way before pupillage commences, for you cannot do two things at once .
Pupillage in itself does not give experience in the art of advocacy, and you should therefore play your full part in the forensic exercises provided in the Inns of Court School and in the moots held at your Inn.
If insufficient moots are organised, try to  get a law teacher or barrister to judge a private one for yourself and friends.
To go back a little, there is much to be said for spending six months to a year (a small-minded regulation forbids any longer time) in a solicitor's office before pupillage.
You could very well spend one of your Long Vacations in a solicitor's office (obviously, the Vacation immediately before your final year would be best), and it should not be difficult to arrange; the experience will be of great value whichever branch you intend to enter, and it could help you to make a wise choice.
Work in a solicitor's office can give an understanding of the solicitor's difficulties and requirements which the ordinary barrister often lacks.
If we had a sensible ordering of the legal profession everyone would start as a solicitor, moving to the Bar only when he felt ready to do so.
You may possibly have the chance of being marshal to a judge; if so, of course jump at it.
There may be a circuit/county-court judge you know who would be willing to give you this experience.
When pupillage is over the young barrister may join a local Bar instead of practising in London.
The Senate keeps a register of vacant places in chambers, both in London and in the provinces.
You would be well advised to consider the local Bar, particularly (though not only) if you do not feel yourself to be of outstanding ability.
The local Bar is less of a gamble; on the other hand, the most lucrative work is in London.
If the young aspirant survives all the obstacles and makes a start in practice he may still find himself with serious financial problems.
On this it is worth quoting the comments of Lord Justice Lawton in a letter to The Times.
‘A private income, a working wife, superb contacts or exceptional ability may help, but what really matters is a desire to be a barrister and nothing else.
I know.
I had none of [the former]assets when I started at the Bar; but my 25 years in practice were the happiest in my life.
I often wish I could live them over again, even though for the first four years I had to supplement my poor earnings by doing evening jobs.’
A few will now find their position alleviated by obtaining a scholarship from their Inn of Court or a loan from funds administered by the Senate, but these cannot be counted.
on.
There is the possibility of ‘devilling’ for fellow members of the Bar.
This means giving them assistance in their cases, and even (with the client's consent) taking cases for them in court if owing to some clash of appointments they find themselves unable to appear.
It is now obligatory to pay the devil a share of the fees (usually half) and the work therefore helps one's livelihood, as well as providing experience and (sometimes) bringing one to the notice of the professional client.
But the possibilities of devilling must not be exaggerated.
On the common law side only the busiest barristers have any devilling to give: they will themselves do all that they possibly can.
On the Chancery side there is rather more, because of the amount of drafting work to be done.
But drafting for a fellow-barrister, though desirable for experience, does not bring one into contact with the instructing solicitor, and so does not nurture one's own practice.
After three years' practice, you could make a comparatively painless change to the solicitors' branch, being exempted from articles, and also (at discretion) from some papers in the Final.
If the young barrister has any spare time in his early years he should use it to prolong his pupillage in fact if not in name.
Perhaps his former master will allow him to continue to read his papers; or he may be permitted to read the papers of another in his own chambers with whom he is on friendly terms.
There are many gaps in his legal knowledge that he now has an opportunity to make good, as he never will again.
When his own practice begins he will find that his clerk has arranged conferences for him, and before the conference he will often know nothing of the questions that are likely to be put to him.
If, for instance, he is on the common law side, the case that he is asked to consider may turn on the Landlord and Tenant Acts, the Rent Acts, the Consumer Protection Act, the Food and Drugs Act, the Town and Country Planning Acts, the Arbitration Act, tax law, separation, bankruptcy, conflict of laws, carriage of goods, insurance, and many other topics that he may never have studied at the University or for his Bar examinations He will not be expected, and will not need, to have every detail of all these subjects in his mind.
But complete ignorance of their general structure will not raise him in the esteem of his professional clients.
If you have a social conscience you can satisfy it handsomely by taking part in your local legal advice centre or Citizens' Advice Bureau; and the same remark applies, of course, to solicitors.
Some Bar students and pupil barristers offer their services in a Free Representation Unit for industrial tribunals; the office is at 3 Middle Temple Lane, London EC4Y 9AA (tel. 01–353 3697).
Other barristers (as well as solicitors) take salaried employment in a community law centre, providing legal services for poorer people.
A waiver is needed to permit working for clients without referral by a solicitor.
You may feel it worth while to spend a year abroad.
Details are given below under Teaching, but it is worth mentioning here the training course in French law at the University of Aix/ Marseille, for which scholarships have for some years been offered by the Cultural Service of the French Embassy, 22 Wilton Crescent, London SW1.
Applications must be received by early January.
The scholarships are open to young barristers and solicitors.
When your own practice starts it is of the utmost importance to give your cases the most meticulous attention of which you are capable, and particularly, before going into court, to familiarise yourself with the various procedural contingencies.
When you ask for damages on a continuing cause of action, do you know precisely the period for which you are claiming, so as to help the judge in framing his judgment?
When you ask for costs, do you know the relevant Rule stating the power of the judge or master in this matter?
It is quite wrong to expect to be prompted by the judge.
In criminal matters you should know the sentencing powers of the court in case your client is convicted; not only may this help you in your plea in mitigation (if one is possible), but it is your duty to intervene if the judge by mistake exceeds his powers.
For magistrates' courts, familiarise yourself with The Sentence of the Court , the booklet published by the Government for magistrates; for the Crown Court read particularly D.A.
Thomas,The Principles of Sentencing , 2nd ed.
Take with you to court all the authorities that you may possibly require: leave them in the robing room if you think they will probably not be needed, but have them ready to back you up in case they are.
Otherwise you may land your client in an unnecessary appeal.
Since most of the beginner's forensic work will be in county courts and magistrates' courts, he should make a special point of familiarising himself with the procedure and powers of these courts.
The Association of Magisterial Officers, in their evidence to the Royal Commission on Legal Services, spoke of a ‘woeful lack of knowledge with regard to the rules and procedures of magistrates’ courts’by both solicitors and barristers, who were equally poor.
A few remarks- on addressing your colleagues and your betters.
Every barrister is entitled and expected to address other practising barristers of whatever eminence by their surnames.
High Court judges and circuit judges are addressed by barristers out of court as ‘Judge’(not ‘Judge Smith’), a Law Lord as ‘Lord Smith,’ and other judges as ‘Lord Chancellor,’‘Lord Chief Justice’(or ‘Lord Chief’), ‘Lord Justice,’‘Master of the Rolls,’‘President,’‘Vice-Chancellor,’‘Common Sergeant,’and ‘Recorder.’
These conventions are followed both in speech and in correspondence.
Members of the public, on the other hand, would speak to a judge as they would to any other knight or peer — Sir John, or Lord Smith.
(All judges of the High Court and Court of Appeal are knights, if they are not peers.)
In court, address all judges from the High Court upwards (including both circuit judges and recorders when acting as High Court judges, and including also all judges sitting at the Central Criminal Courts) as ‘my Lord/Lady.’
Otherwise, circuit judges (and their deputies) and recorders and bankruptcy registrars are called ‘your Honour.’
Masters are called ‘Master,’ magistrates are called ‘Sir/Madam’(or ‘your Worship’), and all other judicial officers (like registrars) are called ‘Sir/Madam.’
THE BAR AS A STEPPING STONE
In addition to the barristers in practice, a considerable number have used the Bar as a stepping stone or crutch leading them on to other things.
There is, in fact, a glittering array of dignified and sometimes very lucrative offices open to members of the Bar.
I shall proceed to describe some of them, prefacing the list only with the warning that for the more attractive of them there is, of course, considerable competition.
For the brilliantly successful or the politically fortunate there are the offices of Attorney-General and Solicitor-General and about 110 superior judgeships, the latter carrying very comfortable stipends, plus pensions.
As consolation prizes there are many pensionable posts as circuit judges, recorders, chairmen of industrial tribunals, stipendiary magistrates, official referees, bankruptcy registrars, national insurance commissioners, and industrial injuries commissioners and deputy commissioners.
Among miscellaneous posts are certain Parliamentary and Court of Protection appointments, and offices as Registrar of Companies, Masters and Registrars of the Supreme Court, and Clerk of the Crown Court.
A list of most of the offices referred to in this paragraph, and others, will be found in the Law Society's Handbook , and in Halsbury's Laws of England , 4th ed., iii, 605–609.
A barrister who applies for any office may reckon as part of his qualification period any time he has spent in practice or in employment as a solicitor.
Other legal posts in government are discussed later in the chapter.
Many private concerns also employ a legal staff of barristers and solicitors.
(It was recently calculated that these barristers probably number about 3,000 and solicitors between 1,000 and 2,000.)
Banks, for instance, have executor and trustee departments.
The work involves the legal processes of obtaining probate of wills and the winding up of a deceased person's affairs so that the wishes expressed in those wills may be carried out.
This entails such transactions as the settlement of business contracts, the purchase and sale of stocks and shares, house property and lands, and provision for beneficiaries under wills and other trust instruments.
It may mean managing an estate worth several millions of pounds.
Then there are the legal departments of transport undertakings and big insurance companies, which deal principally with claims for damages, and the legal departments of large business forms and combines.
The legal adviser helps to negotiate the firm's contracts (and may have to travel all over the world in order to do so), keeps it right on matters of company law and employment law, pilots takeovers, etc., and may, on a wider front, advise on what is proper conduct within a system of self-regulation adopted within the industry by means of a Code of Practice.
For all these purposes he needs not only to be a good lawyer but to have business acumen and an intimate knowledge of the problems of the trade or industry in question.
All the big newspapers employ a legal staff to read proofs in order to minimise the risk of libel  actions, and also to watch the interests of the newspaper generally.
Salaries are substantial; a survey for the years 1978–1980 found that the middle remuneration bracket for lawyers in a wide variety of industries was £16,000-£18,000, which placed lawyers on a level with the average director.
Thirty per cent.
earned over £20,000.
Barristers do better than solicitors, but both do better than lawyers in private practice.
Many of these posts carry fringe benefits such as a company car, pension scheme, free medical insurance, and assistance with house purchase.
Appointments are not confined to those with professional qualifications or a knowledge of law; men and women not uncommonly read for the Bar or for an external University degree after appointment.
But naturally a person who already has these qualifications starts with an advantage.
After taking the Bar examination you may obtain employment in the legal department of a commercial firm under the aegis of an employed barrister as a ‘commercial pupil,’ and this will give you three months' exemption from pupillage if you afterwards decide to take up practice at the Bar.
You are, however, unlikely to want to change.
Unless you are very strongly attracted to private practice you would be well advised to prefer one of these careers in salaried employment.
Information is given in a booklet published by the Bar Association for Commerce, Finance and Industry entitled Barristers in Business : address to 63 Great Cumberland Place, Bryanston Square, London W1H 7LJ (tel. 01–723 9556).
Apply to the Secretary if you wish to become a commercial pupil.
SOLICITORS
The life of a successful solicitor is not so exacting as that of his opposite number at the Bar: the solicitor has his clerks and junior partners, assistant solicitors and legal executives to do some of his work for him.
He misses the camaraderie of the Bar and the exhilaration of forensic battle in the exalted courts.
Nor does his work lead to the same fame as does great success at the Bar; but some solicitors are as affluent as their opposite numbers at the bar, and they achieve their wealth in a more relaxed way.
(An able pupil of mine who became a successful solicitor was  glad he did not become a barrister, who in his experience is driven too hard; the clerk piles too much work on him, he has no one to delegate to, and has virtually no assistance except of a secretarial kind; also, counsel in general common law practice has much travelling to do.)
As between youngsters of the same ability, there is better assurance of reasonable success in the solicitors' branch.
Not all solicitors have large incomes: the 1976 Remuneration Survey (given in evidence by the Law Society to the Royal Commission on Legal Services) showed that half of those working in private practice earned less than £7,050.
The median earnings of all principals were £8,630, but of sole practitioners were £5,750, and of principals doing only contentious work were a disappointing £4,100.
Legal aid fees have been improved substantially since then.
The type of work done by a solicitor is well known.
On the property side he investigates title to land, prepares contracts of sale, conveyances and wills, obtains probate of wills, and frequently acts as executor and trustee.
He interviews clients, advises them generally on their legal position, and writes letters.
He pilots company promoters through the legal technicalities of forming companies.
On difficult questions he takes the opinion of counsel, and he also prepares briefs for counsel in legal proceedings in which counsel are employed.
As in the United States, English lawyers are now distinctively class-structured.
A few very large and affluent City firms have adapted themselves to act as the agents and advisers of commerce and industry; they have modern offices with every aid and convenience, and the partners specialise intensively.
They may be asked, for example, to draft and help negotiate important commercial contracts of all kinds.
These firms may even have overseas branches.
Next come medium-sized firms with about ten partners, specialising in some particular field of commerce or industry such as shipping or insurance or property development, and other smaller but still highly-specialised firms, all of them mainly in London.
The great majority of solicitors continue in their traditional ways, making their staple living from  conveyancing, probate, advising middle-class clients in minor disputes and business affairs, and litigation — though some firms prefer not to do the last if they can help it.
The qualities required of a country-town solicitor appear clearly enough from the foregoing description of his work.
He should be able to interview all types of client in order to ascertain what their problem is.
He should have a knowledge of human nature, practical wisdom, and the ability to dictate a good letter.
Naturally he needs a working knowledge of property and company law and the law of procedure; and the better his knowledge, the better he is at his job.
It is a great mistake to suppose that a solicitor can get along without having mastered the legal topics with which he is called upon to deal.
However, the finer points of such subjects as tort can with relative safety be left to repose in his books of reference.
It is solicitors, not barristers, who conduct much the greater number of cases in the lesser courts — county courts and magistrates' courts.
What I have written in relation to barristers as advocates applies equally to solicitors.
However, a solicitor is unlikely to be able to concentrate on advocacy as a barrister can.
He has to do much interviewing and paper work, and his advocacy is confined to the comparatively small cases.
The training provided for solicitors now lags behind that of the Bar; it does not invariably include the instruction in advocacy, practical exercises and discussions of court cases now required for Bar students.
The spate of new legislation imposes a great strain upon the smaller firm.
One client will have a problem under some recent Act relating to divorce or maintenance; another will need advice on capital gains tax, or redundancy payments, or VAT, or company law, or agricultural tenancies, or rent control; another will be enraged by a refusal of planning permission, or the threat of a motorway through his garden.
Each of these subjects involves a highly intricate body of law, and it is not to be expected that any one man or even three or four men can master them all.
At present, many solicitors simply fail to give adequate advice, and this is not because of any immediate fault on their part but because they are operating in units that are too small.
The constantly increasing complexity of the law is one reason, but by no means the only reason, why many solicitors in small  practices are now dissatisfied with their position.
Over the years, the solicitor has slowly lost the prestige he formerly held as family  counsellor and preserver of the family property.
Lawyers are criticised for being slow to adapt to demands for new legal services, particularly services to the poor.
(Although the charge has some basis, the lawyer is a professional, not a charity, so the failure to make proper provision is primarily a failure of government.)
Again, many solicitors are incompetent, and leave important matters to unsupervised articled clerks or inadequately trained legal executives.
The very work that solicitors are called to perform, which includes doing certain nasty things to people, cannot be expected to make them universally popular,; so the profession can retain public respect only if it observes high ethical standards, which not all practitioners do.
Many solicitors, in writing a letter for a client, will misrepresent the law, even though they are addressing themselves to a layman, and will lend themselves to various abuses and suppressions (not involving a breach of law) in order to obstruct a just claim.
The Law Society takes virtually no interest in these matters, or in the too frequent instances of gross negligence or dilatoriness by solicitors in dealing with their clients' affairs.
Blemishes like these upon the work of the profession obscure but do not efface the public services it renders.
Competent solicitors are a blessing to their clients and a necessity for the economic life of the country.
Unfortunately, firms have had to face discouraging difficulties in recent years.
They have been hit by sharply rising expenses without corresponding rises in income.
While the principals are required to confer the benefits of the various employment protection laws upon their employees, they themselves are deprived of any such security, and must pay the special tax for self-employed people masquerading as national insurance, in addition to the insurance premiums needed to provide for retirement or illness.
Solicitors also complain of the expense of the practising certificate, the contribution to the compensation fund to recompense defrauded clients, the professional negligence indemnity premium, and the contribution to the Law Society advertisements for the profession.
These disbursements do not worry the senior partner in a  large firm who makes £40,000 or more a year net, but they fall heavily upon the less successful.
The most profitable part of the solicitor's work is conveyancing.
But this depends in practice, even though not in theory, on the current aggregate value of property transactions; and the conveyancing monopoly is under attack from non-solicitor conveyancing firms (who use a solicitor only to draw up the conveyance itself).
Again, implementation of the Pearson Report would put an end to many compensation claims handled by solicitors.
The extension of the fixed penalty system that is now projected will reduce the number of small cases in magistrates' courts.
A more important consideration is that the large increase in recruitment to the profession during the last few years means that new entrants (unless of top quality) are quite likely to fail to get started in private practice.
The President of the Law Society calculated in 1980 that, with some 44,000 solicitors in practice, the number of young people actively trying to qualify was 15,000, and this at a time when work was stagnating.
Those of my readers who are already in articles will know the technicalities of becoming a solicitor, and I can therefore address myself to those who are not yet in articles.
The Law graduate who has gained full exemption proceeds at once to the Final; this requires attendance for nine months at one of the law schools recognised by the Law Society for this purpose.
As with the Bar, many local authorities award grants for maintenance, but some do not, and the grants that are made are often inadequate.
Two years' service under articles is required, which must be after passing the Final.
A non-graduate, or a graduate (Law or otherwise) who has not obtained full exemption because he lacks one or more of the ‘core’ subjects in his degree, is required to take the new Common Professional Examination before the Final; and this again needs a year's attendance at a law school.
However, exemption is granted in respect of particular subjects taken at University, and the requirement of attendance at the lecture course for the C.P.E. can be waived.
The six core subjects are: Constitutional and Administrative Law; Contract; Torts; Criminal Law; Land Law; and Trusts.
Finding a suitable firm for articles can present problems if you have no friends or relatives who are in a position to help.
There is no system of open competition: the grant of articles, like kissing, goes by favour.
The Law Society keeps a register for those seeking articles, but many applicants fail to be placed in this way.
Some local Law Societies (of solicitors in the area) will help.
You can put an advertisement in the Law Society's Gazette or write to firms at random, but if this method produces an offer you will need to take all possible steps to sound opinions upon the standing of the firm.
A bad firm can only teach you bad practices.
Advice may be obtained from the Law Society or the teaching staff of your law school or your University Careers Service.
So tight is the position at present that many would-be solicitors have to take the gamble of completing the Final before they have fixed up articles.
They then knock at solicitors' doors, presenting their credentials and asking if there is a vacancy for an articled clerk.
Under new Law Society regulations the articled clerk must be paid an ‘acceptable’ salary, the intention being that this shall be at least equivalent to the undergraduate maintenance grant, grossed up to cover 52 weeks instead of 38 and further increased to take account of the income tax and national insurance contributions payable.
The principal is required to give his clerk specified minimum training (or to enable him to receive it from others).
If you are about to enter articles, make yourself familiar with the kind of training to which you are entitled, though you should of course use tact in bringing any inadequacies to the attention of your principal.
Let me now assume that you are being considered by a prospective principal and are seeing him for the first time.
A number of important questions need to be asked, with all the tact at your command; some of them may be best addressed to an articled clerk who is already with the firm.
How often will you be  allowed to sit in with your principal or another solicitor?
Will you have to do your own typing or will you be allowed to use the office typists?
What courts will you be able to attend?
If in local government, will you attend committee meetings?
How wide will be the experience you will receive in the firm?
Before the new regulations were introduced it was found that most prospective solicitors gained some practical experience of: registered and unregistered conveyancing, landlord and tenant, matrimonial causes, probate and succession, family law, criminal law, accident claims, litigation generally and briefing counsel.
Most of them never had experience of: town and country planning, administration of trusts, company law, partnership law, tax planning, book-keeping and accounts, commercial law, or (doubtless) advocacy.
The law has become so complex that it cannot be expected that the solicitor will be proficient in everything, and the trend is towards the large firm with specialised partners.
All the same, it is important that the trainee should have as broad a base as possible, particularly if he is not certain which field is likely to offer the best opening.
For this reason, an all-round practice gives better training than a specialised one — but it may be well worth taking articles in a specialised firm if you are assured that they are looking out for a bright young man/woman like you to be a partner.
Large firms generally move their protégés around from one department to another — a very satisfactory arrangement.
Will you have the opportunity of spending some time with London Agents, and if so what are the financial terms likely to be?
What about holidays and paid sickness leave?
Will you be paid while attending an examination course?
If you can attend any practical exercises or advocacy training courses provided for those in articles (e.g .
in London or Birmingham), do so.
It is probably too delicate to ask the principal the final question: How much of your time will you give to instructing me?— but you may be able to find out the probabilities from any other articled clerks in the firm.
Proposals have been made to replace the outmoded apprenticeship system by a proper training course, but they have foundered because no one is willing to put up the funds.
Among the skills that are in short supply are advocacy and probate, so procedure, evidence and wills are good subjects to  choose when planning your academic course.
On advocacy, the advice to solicitors is the same as to barristers (see also Chapter 11 on mooting).
Remember the importance of neat and sober suiting when you are in court, or indeed out of it.
Newly qualified solicitors begin as salaried assistant solicitors.
Getting a partnership is not easy, and the new partner who cannot provide capital is inevitably burdened with some form of payment for his share.
One practice is to establish a retirement benefit scheme, whereby the younger partners, instead of paying an initial sum as their share of capital, contribute to the pensions of the senior partners as they go.
Another plan is for the new partners to be admitted merely on undertaking to contribute their share of the partnership capital, and this may either be raised by borrowing from a bank or insurance company (with periodic repayments) or be left to be paid over a period of years by deduction from their share of the profits.
Either way, the new recruit's earnings are greatly reduced, and some legal assistants continue in their salaried position because they cannot afford a partnership.
Instead of going into private practice, or after some years of practice, the solicitor may seek an appointment.
The most favourable field is in the local government service, which will be described in the next section.
In addition, solicitors are eligible for appointment to the legal departments of Government Departments as described in connection with the Bar, though not always to the head positions.
In some cases, by law or practice, the chief appointments are confined to solicitors.
Within the judicial system solicitors are appointed as masters and registrars of the Chancery Division, taxing masters, Official Solicitor, bankruptcy registrars, district registrars of the High Court, registrars of county courts, stipendiary magistrates, recorders (and, by way of promotion, circuit judges), magistrates' clerks, and as various kinds of clerk in the Supreme Court, the last with opportunities of promotion (see later, under Civil Service).
However, the better judicial and quasi-judicial appointments generally go to barristers.
Then again, various public utility undertakings offer important positions to solicitors.
Details of the foregoing can be seen in the Law Society's  Handbook , or in Halsbury's Laws of England , 3rd ed., xxxvi, 52–55.
Current vacancies both in private practice (for legal executives, assistants and partners) and in outside appointments are listed by the Law Society's Appointments Registry.
Solicitors may be appointed to positions in industry, and remarks made previously in relation to barristers apply equally to solicitors.
Most legal departments in industry merely do the work that would ordinarily be entrusted to a solicitor; sometimes it is largely confined to routine conveyancing and the drawing of contracts, but a much wider field may be touched, including the formation of subsidiary companies, company finance, insurance and employers' liability, patents, trade marks — there is, in fact, hardly any limit to the economic activities upon which a large corporation may engage.
In addition, all concerns need advice on labour law.
Some corporations entrust their routine legal work to outside solicitors, but have legal advisers whose task is to give advice at high level within the industry; these advisers organise the legal work which is to be executed by the outside solicitors — perhaps in many countries.
The position of legal adviser to a large and growing industry can be of high importance and interest.
In view of the difficulty of obtaining articles with a reasonable salary in private practice, the prospect of obtaining a salaried position and articles in the legal department of a company is attractive.
The Royal Commission on Legal Services found that in 1976 the apprentice in commerce or industry received a considerably greater salary than that paid by private practitioners; also, the median salary of solicitors in this type of employment was substantially more than in private practice (£7,584 outside Greater London, as compared with £4,346 in private practice).
On the other hand, the openings in companies' legal departments are much fewer than in private practice; and in any case you should not consider articles in commerce or industry unless you are keen to make this your career.
You will only be taken on if you can convince your employer of this keenness.
Articles in industry are not the best preparation for private practice, and unless you have a fairly fixed intention to  make your career in industry or commerce you may find it difficult to settle down even for only two or three years in the atmosphere of a company's legal department.
Another possibility worth considering is taking articles with the clerk of a magistrates' court with a view to this type of appointment.
Solicitors are frequently appointed not only in the legal departments but in the secretarial departments of large concerns; but a person who intends to go for a secretarial department would be better advised to obtain a secretarial rather than a legal qualification (to have both would, of course, be best of all).
To these possibilities must be added miscellaneous positions not capable of concise description, in building societies, insurance companies, and so on.
A highly specialised profession, open to barristers and solicitors and indeed to those who are neither, is that of Parliamentary Agent, whose work lies in promoting and opposing Bills and Departmental Orders.
A description of this work will be found in 7 The Lawyer 21.
LAWYERS IN THE CIVIL SERVICE
Most Government Departments make appointments from professional lawyers, and here, although practical experience is an important qualification, it is not always regarded as essential.
Barristers and solicitors are appointed in about equal proportions.
(Even when the head of the department is a barrister, he may be known as the department's solicitor.)
The career is very rewarding in every sense.
Pay in the professional grade of the civil service is better at starting than in the administrative grade, and it is only one step down at the top.
A list of the Departments concerned will be found in the Law Society's Handbook and in Halsbury.
No examination is required; vacancies are advertised in the legal weeklies (Law Society's Guardian Gazette, New Law Journal, Solicitor's Journal , and in The Times .
Since it is hard to change departments once you are in, choose the department in which you think you will be able to settle down.
You can write to the Establishment Officer of the department of your choice and ask for an interview in expectation of the next vacancy.
In this case you will probably join as temporary legal assistant with a view to establishment later.
Alternatively, you may be immediately recruited as an established legal assistant (or senior legal assistant) through the Civil Service Commission, the address of which is Alencon Link, Basingstoke, Hants, RG21 1JB.
Pupillage or articles can be waived for candidates with outstanding examination results.
In addition, a method of entry has been devised by which legal training is obtained after entry.
Young men and women with honours degrees or postgraduate degrees can be appointed as ‘legal trainees’ and be articled to solicitors in the Legal Service, normally after obtaining exemption from passing or obtaining exemption from the C.P.E. An appointment as Legal Assistant follows admission as a solicitor.
Unfortunately, not many clerkships are offered, so competition  is likely to be keen.
Details can be obtained from the Civil Service Commission.
Those who have worked in the legal civil service report that it is much more interesting than appears at first sight.
The work is not purely legal, and in no department is it narrowly specialist.
There are opportunities for foreign travel, as adviser to international conferences, etc., in several Departments, including the Diplomatic Service.
The Board of Inland Revenue has many problems wholly unrelated to tax law.
A barrister who left the Inland Revenue for practice at the Bar summed up his opinion of the service in the following words: ‘I enjoyed it, they enjoyed me, and I would always consider returning if the Bar did not prove satisfying.’
Most legal civil service posts do not require advocacy at any level.
By a discreditable rule of the Bar, a member who is in paid employment (apart from the Attorney-General and Solicitor-General) cannot appear in court in his professional capacity.
However, civil servants may appear in magistrates' courts as prosecutors without violating this restrictive practice.
The legal staff of Customs and Excise, for example, carry on prosecutions for smuggling in magistrates' courts, and brief counsel for the higher courts.
The various public corporations (such as the National Coal Board, the Airways Corporations, the Railways Board, and the Development Corporations under the New Towns Act 1946) require some lawyers on their staffs, but there is no standard method of recruitment.
Vacancies are generally advertised in The Times.
There is no more important, exciting and intellectually rewarding work for a lawyer than that of drafting legislation.
The post of Parliamentary Counsel is open to both barristers and solicitors, and candidates of adequate intellectual quality are in short supply.
My little book will have performed -a useful function if it persuades one or two of the best of its readers to take up this career.
Vacancies are notified by the Civil Service Commission.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Local government offers a highly attractive field for the lawyer.
Solicitors in local government take articled clerks, who are paid salaries, and local authorities are more generous than most private employers in giving paid study leave and assistance for the purchase of books.
Lawyers have been conspicuously successful in obtaining the top job of chief executive (the former town clerk or county clerk).
The valuable pension rights attaching to these posts must also be remembered.
The work of local authorities is wide-ranging; it includes public health in all its branches, education, housing and town planning, public utilities, transport, recreation and social services.
It is good practice for a trainee to be given the opportunity to work in more than one department to broaden his experience.
The drawback of employment in central and local government, to some minds, is that so often you fail to see any outcome to your work.
You may toil on a project enthusiastically for many years, only to find that it all comes to naught because of a political change of direction.
To be a good government officer you must be able to put up with these frustrations.
The price of all social improvement is effort, often wasted effort.
For advice and assistance on articles write to Mr R.A.Leyland, LL.B., Hon.Sec. of the Society of County Secretaries, The Castle, Winchester SO23 8UJ, or Mrs M. Mullins, Asst.Sec. of the Association of District Secretaries, Smokey Acre, Broadoak Hill, Dundry, Bristol BS18 8NB.
Nearly all lawyers in local government are solicitors, and it is better to qualify this way than at the Bar.
If, however, you have started at the Bar, there is no reason why you should not apply for any local government post that tempts you.
Pupillage is not require your Bar examination.
Solicitors are appointed as county prosecutors, and they can also be appointed as prosecutors for the Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise.
The work is interesting, but promotional prospects are limited.
THE GENERAL CATEGORY OF THE CIVIL SERVICE
For the man or woman with a first-class academic brain the administrative posts in the Home Civil Service have great attraction, above all because they give the satisfaction of doing work of paramount social and national importance.
There is the interest of being ‘in the know’ when important governmental decisions are being made, and at the rank of Assistant Secretary there is real governmental power.
Promotion, however, tends to be slow, since it is generally governed by the principle of ‘Buggins's turn’; one reaches the top or near-top only at about the age of 55, when one is not far off retirement.
The qualities looked for in a higher civil servant are: intelligence; fluency of mouth and pen, particularly in producing a persuasive argument and in composing a good ministerial speech; the capacity to induce other people to carry out a policy that perhaps they do not much wish to carry out; a political ‘nose’; the ability (in a Department or a local or regional office) to organise those beneath him or her; and capacity for hard work (many of those at the top work extremely hard).
The civil service is organised into three groups of staff — the General Category, the Science Category and the Professional and Technology Category.
The last, as it affects lawyers, has already been dealt with, and we are now considering the General Category, where the prospects at the top levels are better than in the others.
All civil servants, however, have the very valuable privilege of an index-linked pension.
A graduate may join the General Category either as an Administrative Trainee or as an Executive Officer.
Selection is by qualifying tests (meant to assess general ability) and interviews.
An alternative mode of entry is available for the Tax Inspectorate.
If you are undecided whether to apply, you may visit a Government Department during vacation in order to see what goes on, your reasonable expenses being refunded.
The mode of entry described above covers not only the administrative class of the Home Civil Service, but also certain  clerkships in the House of Commons, the administrative class of the Northern Ireland Civil Service, and the diplomatic service.
There is a shortage of suitable recruits in the diplomatic service, which offers varied experience abroad and a good career structure.
Administrative trainees obtain a salary on a par with that obtainable from industry; they enjoy incremental salary scales which ensure progress even during periods of pay restraint, together with near-certain promotion within the administrative grade to under-secretary level.
Small wonder that industry feels itself to suffer unfairly in the competition for talent.
Intending candidates should obtain further information as soon as possible from the Secretary, Civil Service Commission, Alencon Link, Basingstoke, Hants, RG21 1JB (tel. 0256–68551).
BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
Large industrial and business concerns provide many places for Arts graduates — an expression which for this purpose includes law graduates.
One advantage is that salaries are paid even during training; and a career in the world of manufacture and commerce is attractive to those who want to do something ‘real,’ to take part in the basic process of creating wealth, to tackle a variety of problems and jobs and to have a chance to organise and administer, and perhaps to travel.
The general impression of investigators is that the great majority of the graduates, in spite of certain difficulties, enjoy their work.
At the same time, the vast output of Arts graduates from the Universities, coupled with high unemployment, means that competition for vacancies is acute.
If your ambition takes this line, there are certain basic truths that you will have to recognise.
First, your company is out to make money, to provide goods and services at a profit, for otherwise it cannot survive.
This does not mean that you should stay in a firm that stoops to fraud or illegality; but idealistic notions have to face an economic assessment.
Secondly, whatever knowledge you have acquired before, you are now at the starting-post of your career and have to serve an apprenticeship.
This means being ready and anxious to learn, approaching problems with an open mind, and being sensitive to the feelings of others.
Success in business requires a knowledge of human nature and an acceptable personality.
Seize every opportunity for formal training that is open to you.
Do not be afraid to ask questions, particularly, perhaps, questions as to why things are done in the way they are — though you should for a long time be very restrained in any suggestions you make for improvement.
Some of this advice was put better and more fully by Mr A.D. Bonham-Carter.
‘I would say to every ambitious and able young man who is choosing to make his career in industry: first, you must realise that the way to the top is something which has to be worked out with your employer, and although you have to fight your way up in the face of keen competition your employer is not one of your competitors but is just as keen that you should reach the top as you are.
Secondly, you will best get there by squeezing all you can out of every position you hold and out of the experience of every man you serve or meet: pick their brains, study their successes and their failures; never be afraid to ask questions or put new ideas, but do not get upset or angry if they are not accepted at first, and do not assume that the other man's judgment is wrong.
Maybe it is, but it is just as likely that your idea was not quite right.
Finally, look after your health — if you are really going to the top enormous demands are going to be made on your time and strength and you cannot afford to be careless.’