

Grammatical equivalence
Even the simplest, most basic requirement we make of translation cannot be met without difficulty: one cannot always match the content of a message in language A by an expression with exactly the same content in language B, because what can be expressed and what must be expressed is a property of a specific language in much the same way as how it can be expressed.
Winter, 1961:98
language…gives structure to experience, and helps to determine our way of looking at things, so that it requires some intellectual effort to see them in any other way than that which our language suggests to us.
Halliday, 1970:143
In Chapters 2 and 3 we saw that the lexical resources of a language influence to a large extent what can be said in that language as well as how it can be said.
The lexical structure of a language, its stock of words and expressions and its established patterns of collocation, provides its speakers with ready-made ways of analysing and reporting experience.
We do find new ways of reporting experience when necessary, but, on the whole, we tend to rely heavily on existing lexical resources in order to communicate successfully and easily with other members of our language community.
Lexical resources are not the only factor which influences the way in which we analyse and report experience.
Another powerful factor which determines the kind of distinctions we regularly make in reporting experience is the grammatical system of our language.
In the course of reporting events, every language makes a different selection from a large set of possible distinctions in terms of notions such as time, number, gender, shape, visibility, person, proximity, animacy, and so on.
There is no uniform or objective way of  reporting events in all their detail, exactly as they happen in the real world; the structure of each language highlights, and to a large extent preselects, certain areas which are deemed to be fundamental to the reporting of any experience.
Grammar is the set of rules which determine the way in which units such as words and phrases can be combined in a language and the kind of information which has to be made regularly explicit in utterances.
A language can, of course, express any kind of information its speakers need to express, but the grammatical system of a given language will determine the ease with which certain notions such as time reference or gender can be made explicit.
Centuries ago, the Greeks and Romans assumed that notional categories such as time, number, and gender existed in the real world and must therefore be common to all languages.
All languages, they thought, must express these ‘basic’ aspects of experience on a regular basis.
With greater exposure to other languages, it later became apparent that these so-called ‘basic’ categories are not in fact universal, and that languages differ widely in the range of notions they choose to make explicit on a regular basis.
In this chapter, we will take a brief look at the variety of grammatical categories which may or may not be expressed in different languages and the way this area of language structure affects decisions in the course of translation.
But before we do so, it may be helpful to outline some of the main differences between lexical and grammatical categories.
4.1 GRAMMATICAL VS LEXICAL CATEGORIES
the grammatical pattern of a language (as opposed to its lexical stock) determines those aspects of each experience that must be expressed in the given language.
Grammar is organized along two main dimensions: morphology and syntax.
Morphology covers the structure of words, the way in which the form of a word changes to indicate specific contrasts in the grammatical system.
For instance, most nouns in English have two forms, a singular form and a plural form: man/men, child/children, car/cars.
English can therefore be said to have a grammatical category of number.
The morphological structure of a language determines the basic information which must be expressed in that language.
Syntax covers the grammatical structure of groups, clauses, and sentences: the linear sequences of classes of words such as noun, verb, adverb, and adjective, and functional elements such as subject, predicator, and object, which are allowed in a given language.
The syntactic structure of a language imposes certain restrictions on the way messages may be organized in that language.
Choices in language can be expressed grammatically or lexically, depending on the type and range of linguistic resources available in a given language.
Choices made from closed systems, such as the number system (singular/plural) or the pronoun system in English, are grammatical; those made from open-ended sets of items or expressions are lexical.
Grammatical choices are normally expressed morphologically, as in the case of the singular/plural contrast in English.
They may also be expressed syntactically, for instance by manipulating the order of elements in a clause to indicate certain relations between the elements or the function of the clause (cf. the difference between the order of elements in a statement and a question in English: She had forgotten about the party.
/Had she forgotten about the party?).
The most important difference between grammatical and lexical choices, as far as translation is concerned, is that grammatical choices are largely obligatory while lexical choices are largely optional.
Languages which have morphological resources for expressing a certain category such as number, tense, or gender, have to express these categories regularly; those which do not have morphological resources for expressing the same categories do not have to express them except when they are felt to be relevant.
Because a grammatical choice is drawn from a closed set of options, it is (a) obligatory, and (b) rules out other choices from the same system by default.
The fact that number is a grammatical category in English means that an English speaker or writer who uses a noun such as student or child has to choose between singular and plural.
Apart from a few nouns which allow a choice of singular or plural concord (e.g. The committee is/are considering the question), the choice of singular in English rules out the possibility of plural reference by default, and vice versa.
The same is not true in Chinese or Japanese, where number is a lexical rather than a grammatical category.
A Chinese or Japanese speaker or writer does not have to choose between singular and plural, unless the context demands that this information be made explicit.
Where necessary, number is indicated in these languages by means of adding a word such as‘several’ or a numeral such as ‘one’or ‘five’to the noun, rather than by changing the form of the noun itself.
Grammatical structure also differs from lexical structure in that it  is more resistant to change.
It is much easier to introduce a new word, expression, or collocation into a language than to introduce a new grammatical category, system, or sequence.
The grammatical structure of a language does, of course, change, but this does not happen overnight.
Grammatical change occurs over a much longer time scale than lexical change.
On the whole, the grammatical structure of a language remains fairly constant throughout the lifetime of an individual, whereas one encounters new words, expressions, and collocations on a daily basis.
Grammatical rules are also more resistant to manipulation by speakers.
A deviant grammatical structure may occasionally be accepted in very restricted contexts, for instance in order to maintain rhyme or metre in poetry.
A very small number of text types, such as poems, advertisements, and jokes, will occasionally manipulate or flout the grammatical rules of the language to create special effect.
The well-known poet, e.e.
cummings, does precisely that; he achieves special effect by using unusual grammatical configurations.
The following recent advertisement by Access, the credit card people, provides an example of a similar type of manipulation in non-literary contexts: t t
Does you does or does you don't take access?
7 million outlets worldwide does.
On the whole, however, deviant grammatical configurations are simply not acceptable in most contexts.
This means that, in translation, grammar often has the effect of a straitjacket, forcing the translator along a certain course which may or may not follow that of the source text as closely as the translator would like it to.
4.2 THE DIVERSITY OF GRAMMATICAL CATEGORIES ACROSS LANGUAGES
languages are differently equipped to express different real-world relations, and they certainly do not express all aspects of meaning with equal ease.
It is difficult to find a notional category which is regularly and uniformly expressed in all languages.
Even categories such as time and number, which many of us take as reflecting basic aspects of experience, are only optionally indicated in some Asian languages such as Chinese and Vietnamese.
On the other hand, a number of American Indian languages such as Yana and Navaho have grammatical categories which in many other languages would hardly ever  be expressed even by lexical means.
These languages, for instance, have a category of ‘shape’, which means that an object must be classified according to whether it is long, round, or sheet-like.
Some languages, such as Amuesha of Peru, regularly indicate whether a person is dead or alive by adding a suffix to the name of any person referred to after his/her death.
The absence of the suffix indicates that the person concerned is alive, in much the same way as the absence of a plural suffix such as -s in English indicates a choice of singular as opposed to plural reference.
Languages therefore differ widely in the way they are equipped to handle various notions and express various aspects of experience, possibly because they differ in the degree of importance or relevance that they attach to such aspects of experience.
Time is regarded as a crucial aspect of experience in English, so that it is virtually impossible to discuss any event in English without locating it in the past, present, or future.
In Aztec, the notion of deference is regarded as crucial.
Consequently, according to Nida, ‘it is impossible to say anything to anyone without indicating the relative degree of respect to which the speaker and hearer are entitled in the community’.
Differences in the grammatical structures of the source and target languages often result in some change in the information content of the message during the process of translation.
This change may take the form of adding to the target text information which is not expressed in the source text.
This can happen when the target language has a grammatical category which the source language lacks.
In translating from English or French into an American Indian language such as Yana or Navaho, one would have to add information concerning the shape of any objects mentioned in the text.
Likewise, in translating into Amuesha, one would have to indicate whether any person mentioned in the text is dead or alive.
Details which are ignored in the source text but which have to be specified in the target language can pose a serious dilemma for the translator if they cannot be reasonably inferred from the context.
The change in the information content of the message may be in the form of omitting information specified in the source text.
If the target language lacks a grammatical category which exists in the source language, the information expressed by that category may have to be ignored.
Jakobson suggests that ‘no lack of grammatical device in the language translated into makes impossible a literal translation of the entire conceptual information contained in the original’.
This is true in theory, but in practice the lack  of a grammatical device can make the translation of ‘the entire conceptual information’ very difficult indeed.
First, the lack of a grammatical category in a given language suggests that the indication of information associated with that category is regarded as optional.
The frequency of occurrence of such optional information tends to be low, and a translation which repeatedly indicates information that is normally left unspecified in the target language is bound to sound unnatural.
Second, because such information would have to be expressed lexically, it is likely to assume more importance in the target text than it does in the source text.
The fact that lexical choices are optional gives them more weight than grammatical choices.
A brief discussion of some major categories, with examples, is intended to illustrate the kinds of difficulty that translators often encounter because of differences in the grammatical structures of source and target languages.
4.2.1 Number
The idea of countability is probably universal in the sense that it is readily accessible to all human beings and is expressed in the lexical structure of all languages.
However, not all languages have a grammatical category of number, and those that do do not necessarily view countability in the same terms.
As explained above, English recognizes a distinction between one and more than one (singular and plural).
This distinction has to be expressed morphologically, by adding a suffix to a noun or by changing its form in some other way to indicate whether it refers to one or more than one: student/students, fox/foxes, man/men, child/children.
Some languages, such as Japanese, Chinese, and Vietnamese, prefer to express the same notion lexically or, more often, not at all.
The form of a noun in these languages does not normally indicate whether it is singular or plural.
For example, my book and my books are both wo-de-shu in Chinese.
Unlike Japanese, Chinese, and Vietnamese, most languages have a grammatical category of number, similar but not necessarily identical to that of English.
Arabic, Eskimo, and some Slavonic languages formally distinguish between one, two, and more than two.
These languages have a dual form in addition to singular and plural forms.
In most European languages today, dual is a lexical rather than a grammatical category; it can only be indicated by the use of a numeral.
And so English regularly expresses a meaning contrast between house and houses, whereas Eskimo regularly expresses a  meaning contrast between iglu, igluk, and iglut (‘one/two/more than two houses’).
A small number of languages, such as Fijian, even distinguish between singular, dual, trial (covering three or a small number), and plural.
Such additional refinements to a system can sometimes pose problems in translation.
A translator working from a language which has number distinctions into a language with no category of number has two main options: s/he can (a) omit the relevant information on number, or (b) encode this information lexically.
The following examples illustrate how information on number is often left out in languages such as Chinese and Japanese.
The source language in both examples is English.
Items in angle brackets are not specified in the target text but they are not ruled out either since Chinese and Japanese do not have a category of number.
The first example is from China's Panda Reserves:
China's Panda Reserves.
Target text (back-translated from Chinese):
China's Panda Protection-zone<s>.
‘Protection-zone’ is a literal rendering of the accepted Chinese translation of reserve.
It is not marked for number.
The reader of the Chinese text has no way of knowing, from this title, whether China has one or more than one panda reserve.
The following example is from The Fix: the Inside Story of the World Drug Trade:
Enforcement officials — particularly the front-line US Customs Service — have produced a series of recognisable profiles in order to identify and intercept drug runners.
It is a system that works particularly well with the Yakuza because of the bizarre but rigid code of ethics by which the Japanese Mafia conducts itself, quite different from any other criminal society in the world.
It concerns finger<s>, or rather the lack of them.
And tattoo<s>.
Target text (back-translated from Japanese):
…
This concerns finger<s>, or rather the lack of finger<s>.
And tattoo<s>.
Here again the highlighted nouns are not marked for number in any way and the Japanese reader can only guess whether the writer is talking about one or several fingers and tattoos.
This apparent lack of interest in the difference between one and more than one is no  more surprising than the lack of interest in duality in English and most European languages.
Chinese and Japanese speakers are not too concerned with establishing in each case whether there is one or more than one of a given referent, just as English speakers are not particularly interested in establishing whether there are two or more than two persons or objects.
It may sometimes be necessary or desirable in certain contexts to specify plurality or duality in languages which do not normally specify such information because they do not have a category of number or a dual form.
In this case, the translator may decide to encode the relevant information lexically, as in the following examples.
The first example is from Palace and Politics in Prewar Japan; the source text is English:
The heads of the ministries created in 1869 were not directly responsible for ‘advising and assisting’(hohitsu) the emperor, though they were to become so in 1889.
Target text (back-translated from Japanese):
The head<s> of various ministry<ies> created in Meiji 2nd are not directly responsible for ‘hohitsu’ the emperor.
A Japanese word meaning ‘various’ is added in the translation to indicate that reference is made to more than one ministry and, by implication, more than one head of ministry.
The second example is from an unpublished document about arbitration procedures in Cairo.
The source text is Arabic.
Back-translation:
When the appointment of three arbitrators is required, each party chooses one arbitrator, and the arbitrators-dual appointed-dual in this way choose the third arbitrator and it is he who takes on the presidency of the arbitration authority.
English target text:
When the appointment of three arbitrators is required, each party selects one arbitrator, and the two arbitrators thus appointed select the third arbitrator who then heads the Arbitration Committee.
Where it is felt to be important, information on number can therefore be encoded lexically.
However, as with any grammatical category, a translator working from a language with a category of number into one without such a category must be careful not to overspecify this type of information in the target text.
Unless the context specifically demands it, regular reference to information normally left unspecified in a given language will only make the translation awkward and unnatural because it will not reflect normal ways of reporting experience in the target language.
4.2.2 Gender
Gender is a grammatical distinction according to which a noun or pronoun is classified as either masculine or feminine in some languages.
The distinction applies to nouns which refer to animate beings as well as those which refer to inanimate objects.
For example, French distinguishes between masculine and feminine gender in nouns such as fils/fille (‘son’ /‘daughter’) and chat/chatte (‘male cat’/‘female cat’).
In addition, nouns such as magazine (‘magazine’) and construction (‘construction’) are also classified as masculine and feminine respectively.
Determiners, adjectives, and sometimes verbs (as in the case of Arabic and Swahili) usually agree with the noun in gender as well as in number.
English does not have a grammatical category of gender as such; English nouns are not regularly inflected to distinguish between feminine and masculine.
The gender distinction nevertheless exists in some semantic areas and in the person system.
Different nouns are sometimes used to refer to female and male members of the same species: cow/bull, sow/boar, doe/stag, mare/stallion, ewe/ram.
A small number of nouns which refer to professions have masculine and feminine forms, with the suffix -ess indicating feminine gender.
Examples include actor/actress, manager/manageress, host/hostess, and steward/stewardess.
These, however, do not always reflect straightforward gender distinctions as in the case of other European languages; some of them carry specific connotations.
For instance, the distinction between author and authoress may carry more expressive than propositional meaning: authoress tends to have derogatory overtones, with author being the unmarked form for both sexes.
In addition to gender distinctions in specific semantic areas, English also has a category of person which distinguishes in the third-person singular between masculine, feminine, and inanimate (he/she/it).
This distinction does not apply to the third-person plural  (they).
Russian and German make similar gender distinctions in the third-person singular pronouns and, like English, do not apply these distinctions to the third-person plural.
On the other hand, languages like French and Italian maintain the gender distinction in the third-person plural: for example, ils vs. elles in French.
In some languages, such as Arabic, gender distinctions apply to the second- as well as third-person pronouns.
In addition to gender distinctions in the third-person singular and plural, Arabic has different forms for ‘you’, depending on whether the person or persons addressed is/are male or female.
Other languages such as Chinese and Indonesian do not have gender distinctions in their person systems at all.
In most languages that have a gender category, the masculine term is usually the ‘dominant’ or ‘unmarked’term.
In French elles is used only when all the persons or things referred to are feminine; if one or more persons or things in a group are masculine the form used is ils, even if the feminine referents outnumber the masculine ones.
Similarly, if the sex of a referent is not known, the masculine rather than the feminine form is used.
In effect, this means that the use of feminine forms provides more specific information than the use of masculine forms can be said to provide; it rules out the possibility of masculine reference, whereas the use of masculine forms does not rule out the possibility of feminine reference.
There is now a conscious attempt to replace the unmarked masculine form he in English with forms such as s/he, he or she, and him or her.
This is particularly true of academic writing.
But even among the general public, overtly masculine nouns such as chairman, spokesman, and businessman are consciously and systematically being replaced by more neutral ones such as chairperson and spokesperson, or by specifically feminine nouns such as businesswoman when the referent is clearly feminine.
A few attempts have even been made to use the feminine form as the unmarked form in English.
Diane Blakemore for instance uses she and her to mean any person, male or female:
It is clear that because of the role of the context in all aspects of utterance interpretation, a speaker who intends her utterance to be taken in a particular way must expect it to be interpreted in a context that yields that interpretation.
(my emphasis)
This ideological stance is somewhat difficult to transfer into languages in which gender distinctions pervade the grammatical system.
It is fairly easy to make the switch from he to something like s/he or him/her  in English because the change affects these items only.
But in a language such as Arabic, where gender distinctions are reflected not only in nouns and pronouns but also in the concord between these and their accompanying verbs and adjectives, the resulting structures would clearly be much more cumbersome than in English.
With all the good will in the world, an Arab writer or translator cannot side with this admittedly more enlightened approach to gender without sacrificing the readability of the target text.
Gender distinctions are generally more relevant in translation when the referent of the noun or pronoun is human.
Gender distinctions in inanimate objects such as‘car’ or ‘ship’and in animals such as ‘dog’and ‘cat’are sometimes manipulated in English to convey expressive meaning, particularly in literature, but they do not often cause difficulties in non-literary translation.
Making the necessary adjustments, for instance by adding the gender dimension in the target text (English table: French la/une table) is usually straightforward and automatic because the distinctions themselves are largely arbitrary.
But gender distinctions in the case of human referents are not arbitrary, and that is why Lyons, for instance, suggests that what is important in communication is the pronominal function of gender rather than the category of gender in general (1968).
The pronominal function of gender reflects a genuine, non-arbitrary distinction between male and female.
Although languages differ in the extent to which they regularly specify the gender of human referents (cf. English they and French ils/elles), we all readily recognize the distinction and expect it to reflect a genuine aspect of experience.
The following text illustrates the kind of problem that the pronominal function of gender can pose in translation.
As in previous examples, the problematic items in the source text are underlined and the items which replace them in the target text are highlighted in bold.
Only those strategies used to overcome difficulties arising from gender distinctions will be commented on.
Source text (English: Kolestral Super):
Instructions for use:
Shampoo the hair with a mild WELLA-SHAMPOO and lightly towel dry.
Apply KOLESTRAL-SUPER directly onto the hair and massage gently.
— For maximum effect, cover the hair with a plastic cap or towel.
— KOLESTRAL-SUPER can be left on the hair for 10–20 minutes.
— After the developing time rinse off thoroughly before styling — no shampooing required.
— Style the hair as usual.
Target text (Arabic):
Back-translation:
Instructions and guide to use:
— The hair is washed with ‘Wella’ shampoo, provided that it is a mild shampoo.
Then the hair is dried by means of a towel, a simple drying so that the hair is left damp.
— Kolestral-Super is put directly on the hair and massaged with softness and gentleness.
— For obtaining maximum effectiveness, the hair is covered by means of a cap, that is a plastic hat which covers the hair, or by means of a towel.
— Kolestral-Super is left for a period of 10–20 minutes.
— After the end of the reaction period, the hair should be rinsed well and in depth before starting on the desired hair-do.
No need for shampoo in this final stage.
— The hair is styled and combed as usual and in the desired fashion and the result is ideal and marvellous.
I mentioned earlier that the gender distinction in Arabic applies to the second as well as third person.
An Arabic speaker or writer has to select between ‘you, masculine’(anta) and ‘you, feminine’(anti) in the case of the second-person singular.
Moreover, this type of  information must be signalled in the form of the verb itself: an Arabic verb has different forms depending on whether its subject is, for instance, second-person singular feminine or third-person plural masculine.
In fact, pronouns such as‘she’ and ‘I’are usually redundant in Arabic and are used mainly for emphasis, since all the information they carry is incorporated in the form of the verb.
In translating the imperative verbs in the above text into Arabic, the translator would normally have to choose, as far as gender is concerned, between a masculine and a feminine form for each verb.
As is the case in most languages which have a gender category, the masculine form is the unmarked form in Arabic and is therefore normally selected in most advertisements, leaflets, and in wording general instructions.
However, the Kolestral Super text is a leaflet which accompanies a hair conditioner, the sort of product which is predominantly used by women rather than men.
In the Arab context, it is likely to be used exclusively by women.
This situation would make the use of the masculine form in this instance highly marked.
The translator could have used the feminine form of the verb, but s/he possibly felt that it would also have been marked or that it might have unnecessarily excluded potential male users.
The gender distinction is avoided by using a totally different structure throughout the whole set of instructions.
The use of the passive voice instead of the imperative form of the verb allows the translator to avoid specifying the subject of the verb altogether.
Although gender is also a grammatical category in French, gender distinctions are only expressed in nouns, articles, and adjectives, and in third-person pronouns; they do not affect the form of the verb.
The French translation of the Kolestral Super leaflet can therefore follow the source text more closely than the Arabic translation.
The infinitive form of the verb is used, as is the norm in wording instructions in French.
The first few lines of the instruction section are quoted below for illustration:
— Laver le cheveux avec un shampooing doux Wella et bien les essorer.
— Appliquer KOLESTRAL-SUPER directement sur les cheveux et bien faire pénétrer.
4.2.3 Person
The category of person relates to the notion of participant roles.
In most languages, participant roles are systematically defined through  a closed system of pronouns which may be organized along a variety of dimensions.
The most common distinction is that between first person (identifying the speaker or a group which includes the speaker: English I/we), second person (identifying the person or persons addressed: English you), and third person (identifying persons and things other than the speaker and addressee: English he/she/it/they).
A number of languages spoken in North America have four rather than three distinctions in the category of person.
In these languages, the fourth person refers to ‘a person or thing distinct from one already referred to by a third person form’.
Russian similarly uses a form of the pronominal adjectives svoj (masculine), svoja (feminine), svojo (neuter), and svoi (plural) to refer to a participant already referred to in the same clause, but in Russian this is not restricted to third-person forms; the participant referred to by the pronominal adjective may be first, second, or third person.
For instance, in I'm meeting my teacher, my would be translated by svoj or svoja (depending on the gender of the following noun).
Likewise, in He's meeting his teacher, his would be translated by the appropriate case form of svojlsvoja provided the referent of his is the same as the referent of he; otherwise the pronoun used is jego.
In addition to the main distinction based on participant roles, the person system may be organized along a variety of other dimensions.
As mentioned earlier, the person system in some languages may have a gender or number dimension which applies to the whole system or to parts of it.
Although number is not a grammatical category in Chinese, the pronoun system in Chinese features a number distinction (e.g. Wo ‘I’ vs.
Wo-men ‘we’; Ni ‘you’ singular vs.
Ni-men ‘you’ plural).
On the other hand, it does not feature any gender distinctions at all(e.g. Ta ‘he/she/it’ vs.
Ta-men ‘they’).
In Japanese, the person system features distinctions in gender as well as social status and level of intimacy.
Some languages have rather elaborate person systems.
Catford (1965) explains that Bahasa Indonesia has a nine-term pronoun system where English has only seven.
The gender dimension is absent from Bahasa Indonesia, but two other dimensions are of relevance:
1
the inclusive/exclusive dimension: English we has two translations in Bahasa Indonesia, involving a choice between kami and kita, depending on whether the addressee is included or excluded;
2
the familiar/non-familiar dimension which necessitates a choice between for instance aku and saja for English I, depending on the relationship pertaining between speaker and hearer.
A large number of modern European languages, not including English, have a formality/politeness dimension in their person system.
In such languages, a pronoun other than the second-person singular, usually the second- or third-person plural, is used in interaction with a singular addressee in order to express deference and/or non-familiarity: French vous as opposed to tu; Italian lei (third-person singular) and in certain regions, classes, and age groups voi (second-person plural) as opposed to tu; Spanish usted as opposed to tu; German Sie as opposed to du; Greek esi as opposed to esis; and Russian vy as opposed to ty.
Some languages also have different forms of plural pronouns which are used to express different levels of familiarity or deference in interaction with several addressees.
All languages have modes of address which can be used to express familiarity or deference in a similar way, cf. the difference between you, mate, dear, darling, and Mr Smith, Sir, Professor Brown, Mrs Jones, Madam.
The difference between modes of address and pronouns is that the use of pronouns is unavoidable, particularly since pronominal reference is coded in the inflection of verbs in many languages, whereas one can often avoid addressing a person directly.
What all this amounts to, among other things, is that in translating pronouns from English to, say, French, Italian, Greek, Spanish, Russian, German, or Bahasa Indonesia, decisions may have to be made along such dimensions as gender, degree of intimacy between participants, or whether reference includes or excludes the addressee.
This information may or may not be readily recoverable from the context.
Translating in the other direction, from one of the above languages into English, will frequently involve loss of information along the dimensions in question.
It is possible in theory to encode all the relevant information in an English translation, for example by using a circumlocution such as‘he and I but not you’ for an exclusive ‘we’, but this kind of detail would be too cumbersome in most contexts.
The following examples illustrate the more problematic situation of having to make decisions in the target language along dimensions which are not explicitly stated in the source text.
The examples are taken from a French translation of one of Agatha Christie's thrillers, Crooked House (1949).
The events of the novel involve a number of key characters who are related to one another in a variety of ways.
In the French translation, the nature of each relation has to be reflected in the choice of pronouns that various characters use in addressing each other.
The characters in the following dialogue are  a young man, Charles, and a young lady, Sophia.
They have worked together and have been friends for some time.
Charles has just asked Sophia to marry him.
English source text:
‘Darling — don't you understand?
I've tried not to say I love you —’
She stopped me.
‘I do understand Charles.
And I like your funny way of doing things…’
French translation:
— Mais vous ne <comprenez> donc pas?
Vous ne <voyez> donc pas que je fais tout ce que je peux pour ne pas vous dire que je vous aime et …
Elle m'interrompit.
 — J'ai parfaitement compris, Charles, et votre façon comique de presenter les choses m'èst très sympathique…’
Note the use of the vous form in the French translation, indicating a level of formality and politeness which are not overtly conveyed in the English original.
Compare the level of formality in the above dialogue with that in the following extract from another dialogue where Charles is talking to his father, who happens to be the Assistant Commissioner of Scotland Yard:
English source text:
‘But your police force is fully efficient,’ I said.
‘A nice Army type tracked her to Mario's.
I shall figure in the reports you get.’
French translation:
— Mais ta police a l'oeil et un de tes hommes l'a suivie jusqu'au restaurant.
Je serai mentionné dans le rapport qui te sera remis.
The selective use of vous and tu forms in dialogues involving different characters suggests that the French translator had to make conscious decisions about the nature of the relationships among different characters in the story and about the social standing of these characters as reflected in their adoption of certain conventions to do with approved/non-approved expression of familiarity and/or deference.
You may agree or disagree with these decisions; the important thing is that we learn to appreciate the influence that the grammatical system of a language has on the way events are  presented in that language.
The difficulties that arise from the different demands made by the grammatical systems of different languages in translation should not be underestimated.
The familiarity/deference dimension in the pronoun system is among the most fascinating aspects of grammar and the most problematic in translation.
It reflects the tenor of discourse and can convey a whole range of rather subtle meanings.
The subtle choices involved in pronoun usage in languages which distinguish between familiar and non-familiar pronouns is further complicated by the fact that this use differs significantly from one social group to another and that it changes all the time in a way that reflects changes in social values and attitudes.
Brown and Gilman suggest that the Gujarati and Hindi languages of India have very strict norms of pronoun usage, reflecting asymmetrical relations of power between, for example, husband and wife.
And yet, they explain, ‘the progressive young Indian exchanges the mutual T with his wife’.
4.2.4 Tense and aspect
Tense and aspect are grammatical categories in a large number of languages.
The form of the verb in languages which have these categories usually indicates two main types of information: time relations and aspectual differences.
Time relations have to do with locating an event in time.
The usual distinction is between past, present, and future.
Aspectual differences have to do with the temporal distribution of an event, for instance its completion or non-completion, continuation, or momentariness.
In some languages, the tense and aspect system, or parts of it, may be highly developed, with several fine distinctions in temporal location or distribution.
Bali, for instance, has a rather precise system of time reference.
Apart from indicating past, present, and future reference, each past or future reference is marked to show whether the event in question is immediately connected to the present, is separated from it by a period of time but taking place on the same day, or is separated from the present by at least one night.
Wishram, an American Indian language, makes no fewer than four distinctions in reference to past events alone, each distinction expressing a certain degree of remoteness from the moment of speaking.
In some languages, it is obligatory to specify more unusual types of temporal and aspectual relations.
For instance, in the Villa Alta dialect of Zapotec (Mexico), it is necessary to  distinguish between events which take place for the first time with respect to particular participants and those which are repetitions.
Some languages, such as Chinese, Malay, and Yurok, have no formal category of tense or aspect.
The form of the verb in these languages does not change to express temporal or aspectual distinctions.
If necessary, time reference can be indicated by means of various particles and adverbials.
The following examples show how time relations are typically signalled in Chinese when the context demands that such information be made explicit:
ta xian-zai zai bei-jing gong-zuo (lit.: ‘he now in Peking work’, i.e. ‘he is working in Peking’)
ta dang-shi zai bei-jing gong-zuo (lit.: ‘he at that time in Peking work’, i.e. ‘he was working in Peking’)
from Tan, 1980:111)
Because tense and aspect are not grammatical categories in Chinese, their specification is largely optional.
Context is relied on much more often than in English or Bali to establish time reference.
If the adverbials in the above examples were not included in the clause, one would have to rely entirely on the context to establish the time of the event.
The following examples from China's Panda Reserves illustrate (a) the use of adverbials to indicate time reference where necessary and feasible in a Chinese translation, and (b) the omission of time reference altogether where it can be inferred from the context or where the information is not felt to be important.
Example A
This attractive black and white mammal has widespread human appeal and has become a symbol for conservation efforts both within China and internationally as the symbol of The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
Target text (back-translated from Chinese):
This attractive black-white mammal widely liked by people and already become a symbol of conservation efforts…
The adverbial yi-jing, meaning ‘already’, is added to the equivalent of become to give the effect of the present perfect in English has become.
Example B
Species like this mountain rhododendron were collected by 19th century botanists and then transported back to Europe for horticultural collections.
Target text (back-translated from Chinese):
Species like this mountain rhododendron collect <b> by 19th century botanists and then transport <b> back to Europe for horticultural collections.
The connotations of pastness in the above extract can be inferred from the context, because of the reference to nineteenth-century botanists.
There is therefore no need to signal the past overtly in the Chinese text.
Although the main use of the grammatical categories of tense and aspect is to indicate time and aspectual relations, they do not necessarily perform the same function in all languages.
For instance, the main function of the tense system in Hopi is to signal modal meanings such as certainty, uncertainty, possibility, and obligation.
Hockett (1958) describes Hopi as having three main ‘tenses’: the first is used to express timeless truths, as in ‘The sun is round’; the second is used in connection with events which are either known or presumed to be known, as in ‘Paris is the capital of France’; and the third is used for events which are in the realm of uncertainty, as in ‘They will arrive tomorrow’.
Tense and aspect distinctions may also take on additional, more subtle meanings in discourse.
In a brief discussion of the use of tense in English and Brazilian academic abstracts, Johns (1991) points out that some verbs refer to what is stated in the academic paper itself (these he calls indicative verbs), while other verbs refer to what was actually done in the research on which the paper reports (these he calls informative verbs).
Johns suggests that in both English and Brazilian academic papers, the indicative/informative distinction correlates with the choice of tense: the present tense is used for indicative and the past tense for informative statements.
Verbs such as present, mention, propose, and refer to, which relate to what the writer is doing in the paper itself, are usually in the present tense while verbs such as determine, record, select, and detect, which have to do with actual research, are usually in the past tense.
This regular correlation influences the way we  interpret statements in academic papers.
As Johns points out, ‘the fact that the results of an experiment are analyzed reports the contents of the paper, but that they  were analyzed reports one of the procedures undertaken in the research’.
Johns (personal communication) also suggests that in English science and engineering academic abstracts, the present perfect is specifically used to refer to the work of other scientists.
For example, It is proposed that…suggests that the writer of the abstract is doing the proposing, but It has been proposed that…suggests that the proposing is done by someone other than the writer.
This signalling system is apparently more or less the same in Brazilian Portuguese.
However, Johns found that translated Brazilian abstracts tend to follow textbook rules of grammar which favour ‘consistent’ use of tense and aspect.
Many translators, for instance, use the present perfect or the simple past throughout the abstract in order to achieve ‘consistency’, thereby destroying the natural signalling system of the target language.
Signalling systems such as those outlined above can be significantly different in the source and target languages, even when the basic tense and aspect systems are very similar.
Japanese has a grammatical category of tense which is not too dissimilar to that of English.
The suffixes -ru and -ta are regularly added to verbs to indicate non-past and past reference respectively.
However, this does not mean that every past tense in an English text can be translated into Japanese with a -ta form or that every present or future tense can be translated using a -ru form.
A translator has to bear in mind the additional meanings that these forms can assume in a Japanese text.
In the following example, the past tense in the English text is rendered by a non-past form in the Japanese translation because the non-past is often used in Japanese to express personal judgement.
Source text (Palace and Politics in Prewar Japan:
The heads of the ministries created in 1869 were not directly responsible for ‘advising and assisting’(hohitsu) the emperor, though they were to become so in 1889.
Target text (back-translated from Japanese):
The head<s> of the various ministr<ies> which were created in Meiji 2nd are not directly responsible for ‘hohitsu’ the emperor.
It was in Meiji 22nd that it became so.
In this instance, the use of the non-past suggests that the statement made about the role of the heads of the ministries prior to 1889 is based on the author's personal assessment of the situation, as opposed to the statement concerning their role from 1889 onwards, which, presumably, is supported by hard facts.
(Meiji 2nd and Meiji 22nd refer to the equivalents of 1869 and 1889 respectively in the Japanese calendar.)
4.2.5 Voice
A passive is translated with a passive, an active with an active…even when this is unnatural in the RL (receptor language) or results in wrong sense.
When faced with a choice of categories in the RL, say active and passive, the literal approach to translation leads the translator to choose the form which corresponds to that used in the original, whereas the use  of that category in the RL may be quite different from its use in the original.
A Chinese translator…uses a preposition bei ‘by’ whenever he sees a passive voice in the original verb, forgetting that Chinese verbs have no voice….
Once this sort of thing is done often enough, it gets to be written in originals, even where no translation is involved….
Such ‘translatese’ is still unpalatable to most people and no one talks in that way yet, but it is already common in scientific writing, in newspapers, and in schools
The use of the passive voice is extremely common in many varieties of written English and can pose various problems in translation, depending on the availability of similar structures, or structures with similar functions, in the target language.
Because of its widespread use in technical and scientific English in particular, it has had a strong influence on similar registers in other languages through translation.
The tendency to translate English passive structures literally into a variety of target languages which either have no passive voice as such or which would normally use it with less frequency is often criticized by linguists and by those involved in training translators.
Voice is a grammatical category which defines the relationship between a verb and its subject.
In active clauses, the subject is the agent responsible for performing the action.
In passive clauses, the subject is the affected entity, and the agent may or may not be specified, depending on the structures available in each language.
Active:(a) Nigel Mansell opened the Mansell Hall in 1986.
Passive:(b) The Mansell Hall was opened in 1986.
(c) The Mansell Hall was opened by Nigel Mansell in 1986.
Note that the form of the verb changes in a passive structure to indicate that its subject is the affected entity rather than the agent.
Chao's comment above about Chinese verbs having no voice refers to the fact that the form of the verb in Chinese does not change to indicate its relationship with the subject of the clause.
The structure illustrated in (c), where the agent is specified in a passive clause, is much less frequent than the structure illustrated in (b), where the agent is left unspecified.
This is because the main function of the passive in most languages is to allow the construction of ‘agentless’ clauses.
In some languages, such as Turkish, this seems to be its only function.
In other languages, the use of the passive is obligatory in certain contexts; for instance, the passive has to be used in Yana, an American Indian language, when the agent is a third person acting upon a first or second person.
Most languages have a variety of mechanisms for constructing ‘agentless’ clauses; for instance, the French statement On parle anglais and the German Man spricht Englisch leave the agent unspecified by using a ‘dummy’subject, on and man respectively.
They can be translated into English either by using a similar ‘dummy’ subject, They speak English, where they does not refer to a specific agent, or by using the passive voice, English is spoken.
Languages which have a category of voice do not always use the passive with the same frequency.
German uses the passive much less frequently than English.
The same is true of Russian and French, where reflexive structures are relied on much more heavily to fulfil similar functions.
The frequency of use of the passive in languages which have a category of voice usually expresses a stylistic choice and, in some registers, may be a question of pure convention.
Scientific and technical writing in English, for instance, relies heavily on passive structures.
This is done to give the impression of objectivity and to distance the writer from the statements made in the text.
It has, however, come to represent the ‘norm’ in technical writing to such a degree that, even if a writer was not particularly interested in giving an impression of objectivity, s/he would find it difficult to break away from the convention of using predominantly passive structures in technical writing.
The more pervasive a structure becomes in a given context, the more difficult it becomes for speakers and writers to select other structures or to depict events differently.
Some languages use the passive more frequently than English in everyday contexts.
In Tjolobal of Mexico, passive structures are the norm, with active structures being used very rarely.
Nida similarly explains that ‘in some Nilotic languages the passive forms of verbs are so preferred that instead of saying ‘he went to town’, it is much more normal to employ an expression such as‘the town was gone to by him’.
Rendering a passive structure by an active structure, or conversely an active structure by a passive structure in translation can affect the amount of information given in the clause, the linear arrangement of semantic elements such as agent and affected entity, and the focus of the message.
However, one must weigh this potential change in content and focus against the benefits of rendering a smooth, natural translation in contexts where the use of the passive for instance would be stylistically less acceptable than the use of the active or an alternative structure in the target language.
The conference circular and back-translated Russian text on pages 23–4 are quoted at length to illustrate that, in some contexts, professional translators may decide to replace passive structures in the source text with stylistically more acceptable alternative structures, such as the active and reflexive in the case of Russian.
The relevant structures are highlighted in the English and back-translated Russian texts for ease of comparison.
Readers familiar with Russian can refer to Appendix 8 for the Russian translation.
English has many formulae or semi-fixed expressions in formal correspondence which rely heavily on using the passive for distancing, to project the writer as an agent of an objective process.
Russian, on the whole, does not favour this strategy.
Common fixed and semifixed phrases in Russian make use of the active voice.
An expression such as‘we invite you to…’ is more natural in Russian than ‘you are invited to…’, although both are possible.
The last highlighted expression in the Russian back-translation, ‘the opportunity will make itself available’, illustrates the use of the reflexive, which is particularly common in Russian and is generally considered stylistically equivalent to the passive in English.
The main function of the passive in English and in a number of other languages is, as already mentioned, to avoid specifying the agent and to give an impression of objectivity.
This is not necessarily the function of the passive in all languages which have a category of voice.
Larson explains that in Aguaruna, a language of Peru, ‘the passive is used almost exclusively in introductions and conclusions, but not in the body of the text.
A shift to passive would indicate that the author is now giving a summary statement’.
In some languages, notably Japanese, Chinese, Vietnamese, and Thai, the  main function of the passive, or passive-like structures as in the case of Chinese, is to express adversity.
In these languages, the passive is traditionally used to report unfortunate events;’ for instance, one would say something like ‘I was rained on’in Japanese, rather than ‘It rained on me’or ‘I got wet in the rain'.
Even events which we would never passivize in English because they involve only one participant and therefore cannot ‘logically’ be passivized are expressed in passive structures in these languages if they are unpleasant, for example‘I was died on by my father’in Japanese.
The regular association of passive structures with adversity in certain languages means that the passive can often carry connotations of unpleasantness even when the event depicted is not normally seen as unpleasant.
For example, using the passive in Japanese can imply that a certain event is viewed by the speaker or writer in unfavourable terms, as the following example illustrates.
The source text, Palace and Politics in Prewar Japan, is English.
However, the example used here is originally a quote from Japanese, translated into English and used in the source text.
The Japanese translator of the English book seems to have recovered the original Japanese text (written in Classical Japanese) and quoted it in the Japanese translation.
The English text will still be quoted first as this will hopefully make it easier for the reader to follow the back-translation from Japanese.
Items in angle brackets in the back-translation do not actually occur in the Japanese text; grammatical subjects are often suppressed in Japanese clauses.
Possible subjects are nevertheless inserted in the back-translation to make the text readable.
English/Target text:
Komeda Torao, Jiho of the third rank, was the most blunt: ‘If in the past [Your Majesty]had shown as much care for politics as he had passion for horsemanship, no such criticism from the public as ‘politics by two or three Ministers' would have occurred.’
Back-translation of Japanese/source text:
The most blunt one was Komeda Torao who was the third Jiho.
‘If <Your Majesty> pours his wise consideration into politics as much as <he> likes riding in his daily life, <I> would not think that <he/the government> would have been said as two or three ministers' politics by the public.
So <I> am> sincerely concerned.’
Because it is used in the passive, ‘said’ in the Japanese text is understood to mean something like ‘criticized’, and this meaning is correctly rendered in the English translation.
Note that it is the use of the passive structure rather than the lexical item ‘said’ which signals this ‘adverse’meaning of criticism.
The fact that the passive can and often does communicate adverse meanings in languages such as Japanese and Chinese must be borne in mind by translators working from or into these languages.
Here are some examples which confirm that professional Japanese and Chinese translators are sensitive to the difference in function of the passive in English and in their target languages and generally tend to replace a large number of English passive structures with active structures in their target texts in order to avoid negative connotations.
Example A
Source text (A Study of Shamanistic Practices in Japan:
…there is no barrier to be crossed, no mysteriously other kind of being to be met and placated.
Target text (back-translated from Japanese):
There is no barrier that <one> should go over, and <we> do not meet or placate a mysterious different being.
Example B
Source text (Palace and Politics in Prewar Japan:
If the personality and policy preferences of the Japanese emperor were not very relevant to prewar politics, social forces certainly were.
There are two reasons for giving them only the most tangential treatment here.
First, this study simply had to be controlled in scope.
Obviously not everything relevant to Japanese political development could be encompassed.
Target text (back-translated from Japanese):
…
The first reason was a simple reason which is <we> had to limit the area of research.
It is obviously impossible to take up all the matters which are concerned with Japan's political development.
Example C
Source text (China's Panda Reserves):
…many have been nursed back to health from the brink of starvation.
Target text (back-translated from Chinese):
…many pandas have already through nursing recovered health from the brink of starvation and death.
The most important things to bear in mind as far as voice is concerned are the frequency of use of active, passive, and similar structures in the source and target languages, their respective stylistic value in different text types, and — most important of all — the function(s) of the passive and similar structures in each language.
The idea is not to replace an active form with an active one and a passive form with a passive one; it is always the function of a category rather than the form it takes that is of paramount importance in translation.
The categories discussed and exemplified above are among the most problematic in translation but are by no means the only ones that cause difficulty.
The expression of modal meanings, for instance, can vary widely from language to language and has to be handled sensitively and carefully in translation.
Modality or modal meanings have to do with the attitude of the speaker to the hearer or to what is being said, with such things as certainty, possibility, and obligation.
The expression of modal meanings can take quite a different form in each language.
In an article on political interviews on Israeli television, Blum-Kulka (1983) explains that English tends to use expressions such as Let's…and Shall we…in directing the actions of others, in controlling talks, and in making polite requests that have the force of commands.
Hebrew, on the other hand, expresses similar modal meanings by ‘addressing a question about the possibility of getting something done.
For example, ‘Perhaps you'll go to sleep’(ulay telex lišon) from a mother to a child simply means ‘go to sleep’.
Throughout her article, Blum-Kulka renders Hebrew expressions used by the interviewer to direct each talk with natural-sounding English expressions which are not literal renderings of the Hebrew but which express similar modal meanings.
For example, she uses Let's go on to another topic where a literal translation of the Hebrew would be ‘Perhaps we shall/should go on to another topic’ and Let's begin with the question of defence policy where the Hebrew is literally ‘Perhaps we shall start with the question of defence policy’.
Other grammatical categories which can pose difficulties in translation include mood, direct and indirect speech, causativity, and many  others.
Translators should find it useful to investigate and compare the expression of such categories and the meanings associated with various structures in their source and target languages.
For a good overview of a number of grammatical categories and their expression in various languages see Robins (1964) and Lyons (1968).
For a detailed discussion of the main categories and their realization and function in English, see the Collins COBUILD English Grammar (Sinclair, 1990).
4.3.
A BRIEF NOTE ON WORD ORDER
The syntactic structure of a language imposes restrictions on the way messages may be organized in that language.
The order in which functional elements such as subject, predicator, and object may occur is more fixed in some languages than in others.
Languages vary in the extent to which they rely on word order to signal the relationship between elements in the clause.
Compared to languages such as German, Russian, Finnish, Arabic, and Eskimo, word order in English is relatively fixed.
The meaning of a sentence in English, and in languages with similarly fixed word order such as Chinese, often depends entirely on the order in which the elements are placed (cf. The man ate the fish and The fish ate the man).
Some languages have case inflections which indicate the relationship between the elements in a clause, for instance who does what to whom.
In such languages, the form of a noun changes depending on its function in the clause.
In Russian, both Ivan videl Borisa and Borisa videl Ivan mean ‘John saw Boris’, because -a marks Boris as the object, regardless of its position with respect to the subject and verb.
Languages which have elaborate systems of case inflections tend to have fewer restrictions on word order than languages like English which have very few case inflections.
In languages with elaborate case inflections, word order is largely a matter of stylistic variation and is available as a resource to signal emphasis and contrast and to organize messages in a variety of ways.
Word order is extremely important in translation because it plays a major role in maintaining a coherent point of view and in orienting messages at text level.
Because of its particular importance to the overall organization of discourse, the next chapter will be devoted to discussing word order at length from a purely textual point of view.
But before we move from discussing the lower levels of language — words, phrases, grammatical categories — to talking about the text as a unit of  meaning, it would perhaps be useful to explain briefly what a text is and why we identify a given stretch of language as a text rather than assume that it is a set of unrelated words and sentences.
4.4 INTRODUCING TEXT
So far in this book we have attempted to deal with some of the basic ‘building blocks’ of language: its lexical stock and grammatical structures.
In order to make some headway in describing and analysing language, we have had temporarily to treat linguistic units and structures as if they had an independent status and possessed ‘meaning’ in their own right.
We now need to take a broader look at language and to consider the possibility that, as part of a language system, lexical items and grammatical structures have a ‘meaning potential’.
This ‘meaning potential’ is only realized in communicative events, that is, in text.
Following Brown and Yule, text is defined here as ‘the verbal record of a communicative event’; it is an instance of language in use rather than language as an abstract system of meanings and relations.
4.4.1 Text vs non-text
The nearest we get to non-text in actual life, leaving aside the works of those poets and prose writers who deliberately set out to create non-text, is probably in the speech of young children and in bad translations.
(my emphasis)
As translators, we have to operate with lexical items and grammatical structures at various stages of the translation process.
It is nevertheless imperative that we view the text as a whole both at the beginning and at the end of the process.
A good translator does not begin to translate until s/he has read the text at least once and got a ‘gist’ of the overall message.
But this is only the first step.
Once the source text is understood, the translator then has to tackle the task of producing a target version which can be accepted as a text in its own right.
The phraseology and the collocational and grammatical patterning of the target version must conform to target-language norms, but even then the translation may still sound foreign or clumsy.
Worse still, it may not even make sense to the target reader.
Acceptable collocational patterns and grammatical structures can only enhance the readability of individual sentences, but they do not in themselves ensure that sentences and paragraphs add up to a readable or coherent text.
In an unpublished manuscript, ‘Ingredients of good, clear style’, Wilson comments as follows on the difference between an old and a revised version of the Bible in Dagbani:
For a native speaker it was difficult to express what was wrong with the earlier version, except that it was ‘foreign’.
Since superficially there seemed to be no obvious grammatical blunders, and the vocabulary was not obviously faulty, the ingredients of this foreignness were not at first apparent.
Now, however, a comparison…has made clear that what the older version mainly suffers from are considerable deficiencies in ‘discourse structure’, i.e., in the way the sentences are combined into well-integrated paragraphs, and these in turn into a well-constructed whole.
The new version, on the contrary, shows native-speaker mastery over the means of signposting the text into a coherent, clear prose, which is…a real pleasure to read.
A text, then, has features of organization which distinguish it from non-text, that is, from a random collection of sentences and paragraphs.
Just like collocational and grammatical patterning and a host of other linguistic phenomena, these features of text organization are language- and culture-specific.
Each linguistic community has preferred ways of organizing its various types of discourse.
This is why target readers can often identify what appears to be a lexically and grammatically ‘normal’ text as a translation, or as ‘foreign’.
A translation may be undertaken for a variety of purposes.
However, in the chapters that follow we will assume that the ultimate aim of a translator, in most cases, is to achieve a measure of equivalence at text level, rather than at word or phrase level.
More often than not, a translator will want the reader to accept a given translation as a text in its own right, if possible without being unduly alerted to the fact that it is a translation.
To achieve this, the translator will need to adjust certain features of source-text organization in line with preferred ways of organizing discourse in the target language.
The following chapters will attempt to outline some of the main features of discourse organization by looking at a number of factors which constrain or aid the way we produce and understand text.
This area of language study is somewhat ‘messier’ than the study of lexis and grammar.
Texts may be organized in a variety of ways, the naturalness or otherwise of their organization being determined  by a multitude of factors.
De Beaugrande and Dressler rightly point out that it is ‘much more straightforward to decide what constitutes a grammatical or acceptable sentence than what constitutes a grammatical or acceptable sentence sequence, paragraph, text, or discourse’.
More importantly, text studies are a relatively recent development in linguistics.
There is, admittedly, a long tradition both in linguistics and in literary studies of analysing the works of individual writers, particularly literary writers, but relatively little work has been done on such areas of text studies as the conventions of non-literary writing within a community or the preferred patterns of organization in different types of discourse.
Moreover, of the studies now available, most are concerned with describing the patterning and conventions of spoken and written English.
Very little is available in the way of describing the types of texts available in, say, Chinese or Spanish, or of how such texts are organized.
Readers will note that the rest of this book will sometimes raise more questions than it answers, but they will, I hope, agree that raising questions is at least a step towards providing answers and solving problems.
4.4.2 Features of text organization
Any text, in any language, exhibits certain linguistic features which allow us to identify it as a text.
We identify a stretch of language as a text partly because it is presented to us as a text, and we therefore do our utmost to make sense of it as a unit, and partly because we perceive connections within and among its sentences.
These connections are of several kinds.
First, there are connections which are established through the arrangement of information within each clause and the way this relates to the arrangement of information in preceding and following clauses and sentences; these contribute mainly to topic development and maintenance through thematic and information structures.
Second, there are surface connections which establish interrelationships between persons and events; these allow us to trace participants in a text and to interpret the way in which different parts of the text relate to each other(cohesion).
Finally, there are underlying semantic connections which allow us to ‘make sense’ of a text as a unit of meaning; these are dealt with under the heading of coherence and <implicature> in Chapter 7 (‘Pragmatic equivalence’).
Another important feature of text organization derives from the overlapping notions of genre and text type.
Both relate to the way in  which textual material is packaged by the writer along patterns familiar to the reader.
Texts have been classified in two main ways to capture this type of ‘packaging’.
The first and more straightforward classification is based on the contexts in which texts occur and results in institutionalized labels such as‘journal article’, ‘science textbook’, ‘newspaper editorial’, or ‘travel brochure’.
The second is a more subjective, less institutionalized and therefore much vaguer classification which does not normally apply to a whole text but rather to parts of it.
Typical labels used in this type of classification include ‘narration’, ‘exposition’, ‘argumentation’, and ‘instruction’.
The first classification abstracts across contexts, the second abstracts across such factors as the nature of the messages involved or the addresser/addressee relationship.
Both types of classification are useful in defining translation problems and in justifying specific strategies to overcome them.
Reference to institutionalized genres, such as‘religious texts’ and ‘newspaper editorial’, is made wherever applicable throughout this book.
For an interesting discussion of translation problems which makes frequent references to the second type of classification, see Hatim and Mason (1990).
EXERCISES
1 Choose a notional category such as time reference, gender, countability, visibility, or animacy and compare the way it is expressed in your target language with the way it is expressed in English.
Comment in particular on the sort of problems that could arise in translation from differences in the way the notion in question is expressed in the two languages.
You may find it helpful to refer to grammars of your source and target languages and to base your discussion on an analysis of authentic translated texts.
2 Imagine that you have been provisionally asked to translate John Le Carré's The Russia House (1989) into your target language.
Before you can sign the translation contract, the publishers insist that you provide a sample translation of a couple of pages to allow them to assess your competence as a translator of this type of literature.
They choose the following extract and ask you to submit a target version of it, stating that they appreciate that you may not have had time to read the whole novel but that they just want to see how you might handle Le Carré's language.
They provide you with a short summary of the context to help you assess the tone of the extract.
Note to the translator:
John Le Carré's The Russia House is a spy thriller which revolves around the new era of glasnost in the Soviet Union.
The general feeling that one gets from reading this novel is that nothing much has changed and that the cold-war machinations are still at play and are as irrelevant and as brutal as ever.
The narrator in the following extract is Palfrey, legal adviser to the British secret service or, in his own words, ‘Legal adviser to the illegals’.
In this passage, which is very near the end of the book, he ironically sums up the manner in which the hypocritical bureaucrats of Whitehall and Washington dealt with their own inadequacies when their major spying operation went wrong.
The various people mentioned, such as Ned and Barley, had all been involved in the operation in one way or another.
Extract for translation:
Oh, and note was taken.
Passively, since active verbs have an unpleasant way of betraying the actor.
Very serious note.
Taken all over the place.
Note was taken that Ned had failed to advise the twelfth floor of Barley's drunken breakout after his return from Leningrad.
Note was taken that Ned had requisitioned all manner of resources on that same night, for which he had never accounted, among them Ben Lugg and the services of the head listener Mary, who sufficiently overcame her loyalty to a brother officer to give the committee a lurid account of Ned's high-handedness.
Demanding illegal taps!
Imagine!
Faulting telephones!
The liberty!
Mary was pensioned off soon after this and now lives in a rage in Malta, where it is feared she is writing her memoirs.
Note was also taken, if regretfully, of the questionable conduct of our Legal Adviser de Palfrey — I even got my de back* — who had failed to justify his use of the Home Secretary's delegated authority in the full knowledge that this was required of him by the secretly agreed Procedures Governing the Service's Activities as Amended by etcetera, and in accordance with paragraph something of a deniable Home Office protocol.
The heat of battle was however taken into account.
The Legal Adviser was not pensioned off, neither did he take himself to Malta.
But he was not exonerated either.
A partial pardon at best.
A Legal Adviser should not have been so close to an operation.
An inappropriate use of the Legal Adviser's skills.
The word injudicious was passed around.
It was also noted with regret that the same Legal Adviser had drafted a glowing testimonial of Barley for Clive's signature not forty-eight hours before Barley's disappearance, thus enabling Barley to take possession of the shopping list**, though presumably not for long.
In my spare hours, I drew up Ned's terms of severance and thought nervously about my own.
Life inside the Service might have its limitations but the thought of life outside it terrified me.
* Palfrey's full name is Horatio Benedict de Palfrey, but, as he explains earlier, ‘you may forget the first two (names) immediately, and somehow nobody has ever remembered the ‘de’ at all.’
** A document detailing information required by Whitehall and Washington from the informant/potential defector on the Russian side.
When you have translated the above text into your target language, discuss any differences between the source and target versions in terms of grammatical meaning, paying particular attention to the use of passive structures and the reflexive take himself to Malta (paragraph 6).
You may also wish to use this opportunity to consolidate your knowledge of other areas covered so far: namely semantics and lexis.
Consider, for instance, the evoked meaning of an expression such as all over the place (paragraph 1), or the impact of an unusual collocation such as lives in a rage (paragraph 4); how well do these expressions translate into your target language?
Comment at length on the strategies you used to overcome difficulties at the grammatical level in particular.
Textual equivalence: thematic and information structures
a sentence is not autonomous, it does not exist for its own sake but as part of a situation and part of a text.
And one of the most important functions of information dynamics is precisely to link a sentence to its environment in a manner which allows the information to flow through the text in the desired manner.
A translator should be aware not only of cognitive meanings and basic syntactic structures in his text, but also of its information dynamics.
Such an awareness does not necessarily imply theoretical sophistication in linguistics, or an ability to analyze sentences into themes, rhemes, and focally marked or unmarked elements.
Here too a translator must rely on intuition and Sprachgefühl.
But in situations where theory may be of help, even in defining problems rather than in solving them, it should not be avoided.
We ended the last chapter with a brief discussion of word order and of text.
It was suggested then that the linear arrangement of linguistic elements plays a role in organizing messages at text level.
In this chapter, we resume our discussion of word order as a textual strategy (rather than a grammatical feature) and explore a number of ways in which its role in controlling information flow can be explained.
To illustrate what is meant by ‘information flow’, consider some possible formulations of sentence (2) in the following extract from Stephen Hawking's A Brief History of Time.
(1) Ptolemy's model provided a reasonably accurate system for predicting the positions of heavenly bodies in the sky.
(2) a.
But Ptolemy had to make an assumption that the moon followed a path that sometimes brought it twice as close to the earth as other times, in order to predict these positions correctly.
b.
But an assumption that Ptolemy had to make in order to predict these positions correctly was that the moon followed a path that sometimes brought it twice as close to the earth as at other times.
c.
But in order to predict these positions correctly, Ptolemy had to make an assumption that the moon followed a path that sometimes brought it twice as close to the earth as at other times.
(3) And that meant that the moon ought sometimes to appear twice as big as at other times!
Sentences (2a-c) consist of the same elements, but the sequencing of elements is different in each one.
The progression of links between each of the middle formulations and the preceding and following sentences can be visually represented as follows:.
It should be clear from the above diagram that the sentence which forms the most readily accessible link between (1) and (3) is (2c)(it is also the one that appears in the actual text).
The flow of information is smoother in (2c) because the progression of links is less messy and therefore easier to follow than in (2a) and (2b).
Another factor which makes the extract easier to process if (2c) is selected is that sentences (2c) and (3) both start with an element that has already been established before presenting new information.
The starting point of (2c), these positions, is already known to the reader because it occurs at the end of sentence (1).
Similarly, the starting point of sentence (3), that is an assumption already explained in the previous sentence.
Linear arrangement, then, has a role to play in processing information and organizing messages at text level.
Of the numerous formulations available for expressing a given message, a speaker or writer will normally opt for one that makes the flow of information clearer in a given context.
In order to appreciate the factors which motivate a writer or speaker to make this kind of selection, one needs  to think of the clause as a message rather than as a string of grammatical and lexical elements.
Over and above its propositional organization in terms of elements such as subject/object and agent/patient, a clause also has an interactional organization which reflects the addresser/addressee relationship.
It is this interactional organization which motivates us to make choices that ensure that a clear progression of links is achieved and that a coherent point of view is maintained throughout a text.
Clause as a message can be analysed in terms of two types of structure:(a) thematic structure and (b) information structure.
There are two main approaches to the analysis of clause as a message.
The Hallidayan approach treats thematic and information structures as separate, though often overlapping features of discourse organization.
The two structures are seen to be essentially distinct from each other.
Linguists belonging to the Prague School by and large conflate the two structures and combine them in the same description.
The two approaches are often at odds with each other and can produce completely different analyses of the same clause.
However, translators with different linguistic backgrounds should benefit from a brief exposure to both points of view.
Here, as elsewhere, a translator would be well advised to use those explanations which are compatible with the languages that are of interest to him/her and ignore the rest.
Both approaches are outlined below, starting with a general overview which follows the Hallidayan or ‘separating’ approach.
For a good overview of both positions, see Fries (1983), who refers to them as the ‘separating’ approach and the ‘combining’approach.
5.1 A GENERAL OVERVIEW BASED ON THE HALLIDAYAN APPROACH TO INFORMATION FLOW
5.1.1.
Thematic structure: theme and rheme
One way of explaining the interactional organization of sentences is to suggest that a clause consists of two segments.
The first segment is called the theme.
The theme is what the clause is about.
It has two functions:(a) it acts as a point of orientation by connecting back to previous stretches of discourse and thereby maintaining a coherent point of view and,(b) it acts as a point of departure by connecting forward and contributing to the development of later stretches.
In Ptolemy's model provided a reasonably accurate system for predicting the positions of heavenly bodies in the sky, the theme is Ptolemy's  model.
This is what the clause is about.
At clause level, a speaker announces the topic of his/her message by thematizing it, that is, by putting it in initial position.
The second segment of a clause is called the rheme.
The rheme is what the speaker says about the theme.
It is the goal of discourse.
As such, it is the most important element in the structure of the clause as a message because it represents the very information that the speaker wants to convey to the hearer.
It is the rheme that fulfils the communicative purpose of the utterance.
In the above example, the rheme is: provided a reasonably accurate system for predicting the positions of heavenly bodies in the sky, which is what the writer has to say about Ptolemy's model.
This basically means that every clause has the structure of a message: it says something (the rheme) about something (the theme).
Let us now look at a slightly more extended example of how a Hallidayan-style thematic analysis of a text might proceed in English.
The following short extract selected for analysis is from Stephen Hawking's A Brief History of Time:
Aristotle thought that the earth was stationary and that the sun, the moon, the planets, and the stars moved in circular orbits about the earth.
He believed this because he felt, for mystical reasons, that the earth was the center of the universe, and that circular motion was the most perfect.
Suggested analysis:
.
A number of interesting points arise from the above analysis:
(a) Thematic analysis can be represented hierarchically.
Since sentences often consist of more than one clause, they will have several  layers of thematic structure.
Each clause will have its own theme-rheme structure which may be subordinate to a larger theme-rheme structure.
The above visual representation of the hierarchical nature of theme-rheme structures is meant to illustrate the point without having to go through complex technical discussions.
(b) You will note that I have put some elements in parentheses, for example because, to suggest that they do not quite fit into the analysis.
The reason is that, strictly speaking, some elements are not part of the basic thematic structure of the text because they are not part of the propositional meaning of the message.
These include special linking devices such as however, nevertheless, because, and moreover which are called conjunctions.
They also include items which express the attitude of the speaker, such as unfortunately, in my opinion, frankly, and clearly (these are called disjuncts).
Both conjunctions and disjuncts usually come at the beginning of English clauses; it is natural for the speaker to place in initial position an element which relates what s/he is about to say to what has been said before (conjunction) or an element which expresses his/her own judgement on what is being said (disjunct).
In this sense, conjunctions and disjuncts are inherently thematic.
However, because conjunctions and disjuncts are not part of the propositional content of the message, they are not considered thematic in the same way as the main clause elements subject, predicator, object, complement and adjunct.
There are ways of incorporating conjunctions and disjuncts into thematic analysis, but this type of detailed analysis is not necessary for our current purposes.
For a fuller discussion of this subject, see Halliday (1985: Chapter 3, ‘Clause as message’).
(c) Conjunctions and disjuncts aside, there tends to be a very high correlation between theme/rheme and subject/predicate in the Hallidayan model (cf. the Prague position, section 5.2).
The correlation does not hold in the case of marked themes as we shall see shortly, but, generally speaking, the distinction between theme and rheme is more or less identical to the traditional grammatical distinction between subject and predicate.
In fact, Plato, who as far back as the fourth century BC had divided the sentence into what we now know as subject and predicate, used the terms ónoma and rhema (which originally meant ‘name’ and ‘saying’respectively).
However, the modern distinction between theme and rheme differs from Plato's original dichotomy in one important  respect.
The theme-rheme distinction is text-based.
Its real value does not lie in explaining the structure of individual sentences but rather in shedding light on a number of important areas which control information flow.
These are discussed briefly in sections 5.1.1.1. — 5.1.1.3. below.
5.1.1.1 Thematic structure: grammaticality vs acceptability
Unlike the subject-predicate distinction, the notions of theme and rheme can be used to account for the acceptability (rather than grammaticality) of a given sequence in a given context.
Theme and rheme are not grammatical notions.
They have little to do with whether a given sequence is or is not grammatical.
Grammatical sequences are part of the abstract system of language.
In context, grammaticality does not necessarily ensure acceptability or coherence.
For example, the following text is well-formed grammatically, but is ill-formed in terms of its thematics:
Now comes the President here.
It's the window he's stepping through to wave to the crowd.
On his victory his opponent congratulates him.
‘Gentlemen and ladies.
That you are confident in me honours me…’
A grammatical sequence such as On his victory his opponent congratulates him can be reordered in a number of different ways without affecting its propositional content.
The writer could have selected a sequence such as His opponent congratulates him on his victory or He is congratulated on his victory by his opponent.
The acceptability, rather than grammaticality, of any of these sequences in a given context depends on how it fits into its surrounding textual environment.
Reasons for the thematic ill-formedness of the above extract will become clear as we explore various aspects of thematic organization.
At this point, it is sufficient to point out that it is difficult to see a link between the themes of the above clauses, or even between a rheme and a following theme, for instance.
The result is that the text feels disjointed and lacks orientation.
The individual clauses are perfectly grammatical but, taken together, they are not acceptable as a stretch of discourse.
The above text is fabricated for the purposes of illustration.
Halliday argues that one does not normally meet non-text of this sort in real life.
Those of us who read a lot of translated texts know otherwise.
Unlike the above constructed text, the following is an  authentic advertisement for Mazda cars (most likely a translation of an Italian text) which appeared in the Alitalia in-flight magazine (February 1991, 20–1).
What inspired that rebellious young poet called Rimbaud?
What drove him to reach into the innermost part of his soul in search of the undiscovered?
It allowed him to take words that already existed and yet express himself in a completely new way.
Some creators are brave enough to realise their dreams without compromise.
It is men like this who created the MX-5 in 1989.
By ignoring the rules they are constantly reshaping the future.
Even now they are realising a new dream.
They work for Mazda.
The Mazda text has the same feel of awkwardness and lack of orientation about it as Halliday's constructed example.
To start with, none of the themes seem to link in with a previous theme or rheme; each sentence seems to stand on its own in a sort of vacuum.
For instance, the theme of the third sentence, It, does not relate to either of the previous themes or rhemes.
The theme of the fourth sentence, Some creators, relates to Rimbaud only indirectly on the basis that poets are some sort of creators, but it does not link in with the theme or rheme of the previous sentence.
The reader initially gets the impression that the purpose of the text is to identify Rimbaud's source of inspiration.
In the fourth sentence, the focus suddenly shifts to talking about creators in general and how they realize their dreams.
Another source of distraction is that the initial what-questions (first and second sentences) are followed not, as one might expect, by an identification of the thing that inspired Rimbaud and drove him to reach into his soul, but by the pronoun It.
It suggests that the reader should know what inspired Rimbaud, etc.
But the reader has no way of knowing because the relevant information has not been given by the writer.
The arrangement of given and new elements is discussed in detail under information structure (section 5.1.2).
The Mazda text illustrates that, quite apart from any considerations of grammaticality, it is necessary to take account of thematic structure and to maintain a coherent point of view in any act of communication.
5.1.1.2 Thematic structure: text organization and development
In addition to complementing the notion of grammaticality with notions of acceptability and naturalness, the theme-rheme distinction  can also be useful in explaining methods of organization and development in different types of text.
In this area, a great deal of emphasis has traditionally been placed on theme rather than on rheme.
By definition, theme represents the speaker's/writer's point of departure in each clause, which suggests that its organizational role is more important than that of rheme.
The selection of an individual theme of a given clause in a given text is not in itself particularly significant.
But the overall choice and ordering of themes, particularly those of independent clauses, plays an important part in organizing a text and in providing a point of orientation for a given stretch of language.
It is no surprise, for instance, that travel brochures, at least in English, are characterized by a proliferation of place adjuncts in theme position.
In the context of travel, location provides a natural point of orientation around which the text as a whole can be organized.
The following extract from A Hero from Zero shows how a series of homogeneous themes can provide a point of orientation and a method of development for a given stretch of language.
The extract comes right at the end of the Foreword.
Here, Tiny Rowland concludes his version of events leading up to the Fayed brothers' acquisition of the House of Fraser with a first-hand account of the situation in question against the background of his personal experience in business.
The high frequency of I as theme helps to maintain a sense of continuity and a coherent point of view.
I had nothing against his [Fayed's]being a wealthy commission agent — I had everything against his cheating his way into House of Fraser, helped by Kleinwort Benson and Norman Tebbit.
It was bitter, but funny, to see that Professor Smith had doubled his own salary before recommending the offer from Fayed, and added a pre-dated bonus for good measure.
I saw how Brian Basham of Broad Street Associates and the barrister, Royston Webb, helped venal journalists to turn a sow's ear into a golden purse, and how that golden purse was well received everywhere that it opened.
I saw how the well-documented material containing the truth about Fayed that we began to put before the DTI was received in embarrassed silence.
I saw how Leon Brittan, the incoming Secretary of State for Trade, was prepared to say he could find nothing wrong with the matter.
I took my first job in the City in 1936, working for Kittel and  Company at 5 Fenchurch Street.
I've been a director of British public companies for thirty-one years.
It is the worst thing I've ever seen in business, that deceits triumph so well, and can even find apologists when they are exposed.
I am glad that after two years inspectors were appointed, and that they have expended 18 months upon investigating the take-over of House of Fraser.
The above pattern can be reproduced in many, but not in all, languages.
The thematic structure of the Arabic translation of this extract deviates from the original for a number of reasons.
First, Arabic rarely uses independent pronouns because Arabic verbs are inflected for person, number, and gender.
This means that any combination of pronoun plus verb, such as I took or I saw, is rendered by an inflected verb as theme in Arabic.
It is important to bear in mind that while inflected verbs in languages such as Arabic, Spanish, and Portuguese (to name but a few) do carry the same information as an English pronoun-plus-verb combination, the effect of placing them in theme position is not the same.
The impact of a series of I's in theme position is not the same as the impact of a series of verbs inflected for first person, such as‘saw-I’, ‘took-I’, etc., where it is difficult to discern a theme line as clearly as in the pronoun-plus-verb combination.
Second, Arabic negative particles come in front of the verb, so that an expression such as I had nothing against becomes literally ‘not was for me any objection’, thus pushing the ‘me’ further away from thematic position.
Third, Arabic does not have an equivalent of the present perfect: I've been a director is rendered into Arabic as ‘since then become-I’, thus putting a temporal adjunct in theme position and pushing the inflected verb further towards the rheme.
Here is a summary of the elements occurring in initial position in the English and Arabic versions of the extract.
A literal translation is given of the Arabic themes to highlight the partial loss of orientation through discontinuity of theme.
English: I, I, It, I, I, I, I, I, It, I.
Arabic: not-was, but-I, was-it, saw-I, saw-I, saw-I, occupied-I, since then, among the worst saw-I, pleases-me.
Having said that there is a partial loss of orientation in the Arabic version, it must be emphasized that the Arabic version does display a reasonable level of thematic continuity in its own right.
What gives the Arabic version its sense of continuity is not, as in the case of English, the use of a series of identical themes (I, I, I,…) but rather the frequent thematization of processes as expressed in verbs, mainly ‘saw’ but also ‘occupied’and ‘pleases’.
Attempting to analyse verb-initial languages such as Arabic in terms of Halliday's model highlights the fact that, for some languages, this type of analysis may not be as workable as it is in English.
But whatever its status in other languages, exploring the thematic analysis of English is useful in illuminating certain areas of discourse organization.
In so far as it applies to Arabic, for instance, it suggests that an ego-centred pattern which is perfectly feasible and natural in English has to be replaced in most contexts by a process-centred pattern which is far more typical of Arabic.
It seems to me that at this level of textual analysis, translators generally face three main possibilities:
(a) You may find that you can preserve the thematic patterning of the original without distorting the target text.
If the elements placed in theme position in the source text can easily and naturally be placed in theme position in the target text, the method of development of the two texts will be the same or very similar.
The French translation of the above extract from A Hero from Zero manages to maintain ‘I’ as theme in all instances as the original and even adds one of its own: instead of It was bitter, but funny, the French literally goes ‘I felt bitterness, but also amusement’.
Here is a summary of the elements placed in theme position in the French version:
Je, Je, Je, Je, Je, Je, J'ai, Je, La pire chose, Je.
The method of development in both extracts is therefore the same and the French translation manages to retain the egotism of the original.
(b) You may find that you cannot preserve the thematic patterning of the original without distorting the target text.
There are many factors which can restrict the choice and ordering of themes in translation.
These factors may be grammatical; for instance it is ungrammatical to put verbs in theme position in English, though not in Arabic or Spanish.
On the other hand, the restriction on placing independent pronouns in theme position in Arabic is not, strictly speaking, grammatical.
An independent pronoun may occasionally be placed in theme position for emphasis, but a series of independent pronouns in theme position would be highly unnatural.
If the thematic patterning of the original cannot be reproduced naturally in the target language, then you will have to abandon it.
If you do, you must ensure that your target version has its own method of development and maintains a sense of continuity in its own right.
(c) You may find that Halliday's model of thematic analysis does not apply to your language at all or does not apply to some of its sentence patterns.
If this is the case, you may find the Prague model discussed in section 5.2 more helpful.
Whatever the difficulties involved in applying Halliday's model of thematic analysis to a given language, and irrespective of whether it is possible to reproduce the thematic patterning of the source text on a given occasion, one thing is certain: translators must not underestimate the cumulative effect of thematic choices on the way we interpret text.
As Fries points out,
if the themes of most of the sentences of a paragraph refer to one semantic field (say location, parts of some object, wisdom vs chance, etc.) then that semantic field will be perceived as the method of development of the paragraph.
If no common semantic element runs through the themes of the sentences of a paragraph, then no simple method of development will be perceived.
And that is why you have to ensure that whatever elements you put in initial-clause position in your target text or in a given part of your target text add up to something that can be understood as a method of development and that can provide a point of orientation for that part of the text.
5.1.1.3 Thematic structure: marked vs unmarked sequences
A further area in which the notions of theme and rheme have proved very useful relates to marked and unmarked structures.
This particular aspect of thematic organization is of special relevance in translation because understanding it can help to heighten our awareness of meaningful choices made by speakers and writers in the course of communication.
Thematic choice involves selecting a clause element as theme.
The main clause elements are subject, predicator, object, complement, and adjunct.
In the Hallidayan model, thematic choice is expressed by placing one of these elements in initial position in the clause.
Thematic choice is always meaningful because it indicates the speaker's/writer's point of departure.
But some choices are more meaningful than others, because they are more marked than others.
Meaning, choice, and markedness are interrelated concepts.
A linguistic element carries meaning to the extent that it is selected.
Meaning is closely associated with choice, so that the more obligatory  an element is, the less marked it will be and the weaker will be its meaning.
The fact that adjectives have to be placed in front of nouns in English, for instance, means that their occurrence in this position has little or no significance because it is not the result of choice.
On the other hand, putting a time or place adverbial, such as today or on the shelf, say, at the beginning of the clause, carries more meaning because it is the result of choice: there are other positions in which it can occur.
This is one aspect of the relationship between meaning, markedness, and choice.
A second aspect has to do with the degree of expectedness or unexpectedness of a choice.
The less expected a choice, the more marked it is and the more meaning it carries; the more expected, the less marked it is and the less significance it will have.
For example, it is possible but uncommon to place a complement in initial position in an English clause (as in Beautiful were her eyes, rather than Her eyes were beautiful).
A complement is therefore highly marked in this position and indicates a more conscious effort on the part of the speaker/writer to highlight this particular element as his/her point of departure.
It carries more textual meaning than an adverbial occurring in the same position.
The more marked a choice the greater the need for it to be motivated.
Conversely, unmarked options are those which are normally selected unless the context motivates the selection of another option from the same system.
It follows from the above discussion that placing a certain element in theme position does not necessarily constitute a marked thematic choice.
The degree of markedness involved will depend on the frequency with which the element in question generally occurs in theme position and the extent to which it is normally mobile within the clause.
A given type of clause will therefore have one unmarked thematic structure, variations of which will produce different types of marked theme.
In English, it has been shown that an unmarked theme is one that signals the mood of the clause: in declarative clauses the unmarked theme is the subject (Jane said nothing for a moment); in interrogative clauses it is the wh-word (What did Jane say?), or the auxiliary in the case of polar questions (Did Jane say anything?); in imperative clauses it is the verb (Say something).
These unmarked choices are a natural extension of the function of theme, which is to provide a point of departure and orientation.
A speaker normally signals his/her point of departure by indicating whether s/he is making a statement, asking a question, or giving an order.
Thus, in the case of an imperative clause, for instance, the verb naturally occupies thematic position because that is what the message  is about: getting the addressee to do something.
Going back to the question of markedness, we can say that subject as theme in a declarative clause is not marked at all because this is the position it normally occupies in English declarative clauses.
In other words, the subject is never selected as theme in an English declarative clause, it occupies that position by default.
By contrast, a predicator hardly ever occurs in theme position in English declarative clauses, and so, when it does, it is highly marked.
The same cannot be said about languages in which the predicator frequently comes at the beginning of the clause and therefore represents an unmarked — or at least less marked — thematic choice.
So far so good, but what is the function of marked theme?
Is it, as one might expect, a question of rejecting the default option (such as thematizing the subject in English declarative clauses) in favour of an element which provides a smoother link with the preceding discourse?
This may partly explain why a speaker or writer opts for a marked theme in a given context.
However, there are always unmarked options in every language which provide ways of changing the position of elements in a clause to fit in with the surrounding context.
The passive is one such option in English (cf. John gave me this book and This book was given to me by John, which are both unmarked).
This suggests that a marked theme has an additional or different function.
A marked theme is selected specifically to foreground a particular element as the topic of the clause or its point of departure.
This is often explained in terms of making the element in question more prominent or emphasizing it, an explanation which some may find confusing.
I have already suggested that rheme, which comes in final position in the clause, is more important than theme, which comes in initial position.
We might then expect that final rather than initial position in the clause is where prominence can be achieved.
How can this statement be reconciled with the suggestion that in order to make an element prominent a speaker places it in theme position?
The answer may lie in making a distinction between local prominence and overall discourse prominence.
In marked thematic structures, theme position is associated with local prominence at the level of the clause.
Rheme position, on the other hand, is prominent on an overall discourse level.
In other words, placing an element in theme position gives that element local, temporary prominence within the clause.
Putting an element in rheme position means that it is part of what the speaker has to say, and that is the very core of any message.
Kirkwood (who adopts the Prague School rather than the Hallidayan definition of theme and rheme), suggests that placing an element in initial position will give it a certain prominence but that it will still ‘carry less weight than the actual rheme’.
It may be helpful at this point to illustrate the function of marked theme by discussing some examples of the way it works in one language, English.
Hallidayan linguists identify three main types of marked theme in English: fronted theme, predicated theme, and identifying theme.
These are explained below with examples from translated texts where applicable.
(a) Fronted theme
According to Greenbaum and Quirk, fronting involves ‘the achievement of marked theme by moving into initial position an item which is otherwise unusual there’.
Taking an unmarked structure such as The book received a great deal of publicity in China as a starting point, we can suggest a number of possible thematic structures in English, starting with the least marked and ending with the most marked.
Fronted thematic elements are underlined.
Fronting of time or place adjunct
In China the book received a great deal of publicity.
This is a marked structure, but it is not highly marked because adverbials are fairly mobile elements in English.
As we noted earlier, thematizing place adjuncts is very common in certain types of text in English, such as travel brochures, where locative themes offer a natural method of text development.
Enkvist (1987) found that the same is true of guidebooks.
Thematizing temporal adjuncts is similarly common in any type of narrative text, that is, any text which recounts a series of events.
In the following example from the Foreword to A Hero from Zero, Tiny Rowland presents a summary of the events leading up to the Fayed brothers' acquisition of the House of Fraser.
Thematized temporal adjuncts are highlighted in bold.
On 4th March 1985, the Fayed brothers made an offer of four pounds a share for House of Fraser.
We applied twice more to the DTI for release.
We immediately notified the Department of Trade that Mohamed Fayed's representations were incorrect, and gave what information we had at the time, which was sufficient to alarm, or at least give pause for basic investigations.
On 11th March the merchant bank Kleinwort Benson announced on behalf of its brand new client, Fayed, that they had acceptances from House of Fraser shareholders for more than fifty per cent of the issued share capital.
Three hours later a junior official of the DTI sent a note, uselessly releasing Lonrho from the undertakings not to bid.
In ten days, the unknown Fayeds gained permission to own House of Fraser, and throughout the ten days they put continuous lies before the public to justify the Government permissions they had got with such ease.
Thematizing place and time adjuncts is less marked in some languages, such as Spanish and Portuguese, than in English.
In German, a structure such as Hier steigen wir aus (literally: ‘Here we get out’) is totally unmarked.
Similar choices in other languages may, on the other hand, be even more marked than in English.
Wilkinson (1990) suggests that temporal adjuncts are rarely placed in theme position in Dutch.
A temporal adjunct therefore represents a more marked thematic choice in Dutch than in English.
The series of marked themes in the above extract from A Hero from Zero basically foreground temporal sequence as the writer's point of departure.
They can be reproduced with similar effect in French and Arabic.
The French and Arabic translators of the above extract are therefore able to follow the same method of thematic development by placing the temporal adjuncts in theme position.
This document has not been translated into Dutch, but I imagine that, had it been, extracts such as the one quoted above would have presented the Dutch translator with a problem (bearing in mind that the above is only a short extract and that a similar pattern of thematic development runs throughout the Foreword).
On the one hand, placing all the above temporal adjuncts in theme position would be highly marked in Dutch; on the other hand, changing the thematic structure of the original may disrupt the natural development of the text — unless the translator finds a thematic element other than time which can provide a consistent point of orientation.
Fronting of object or complement
Object: A great deal of publicity the book received in China.
Complement: Well publicized the book was.
The fronting of objects and complements is much more marked than the fronting of adjuncts in English because objects and complements  are fairly restricted in position.
Again, the same is not true of other languages.
Fronting an object is less marked in Chinese than in English.
In German, it is totally unmarked if accompanied by a definite determiner.
Note that, unlike fronting, using the passive voice allows the speaker to select as theme what would have been the object of an active clause without making it marked.
Fronting the object, on the other hand, foregrounds it and gives it local prominence (cf. A great deal of publicity was received in China and A great deal of publicity the book received in China).
You are unlikely to find a series of fronted objects or complements similar to the series of fronted temporal adjuncts quoted above.
This is because, unlike adjuncts, objects and complements are not usually fronted to provide a point of orientation or method of development for a stretch of language.
The effect of thematizing an object or complement in English is to provide contrast and to emphasize the speaker's attitude to the message.
It foregrounds the expressive meaning of the utterance.
This can be seen in the following examples.
The first, from Le Carré's The Russia House (1989:19) illustrates a fronted object:
But Landau's clients were young and rich and did not believe in death.
‘Niki boy,’ said Bernard, walking round behind him and putting a hand on his shoulder, which Landau didn't like, ‘in the world today, we've got to show the flag.
We're patriots, see, Niki?
Like you.
That's why we're an offshore company.
With the glasnost today, the Soviet Union, it's the Mount Everest of the recording business.
And you're going to put us on the top, Niki.
Because if you're not, we'll find somebody who will.
Somebody younger, Niki, right?
Somebody with the drive and the class.’
The drive Landau had still.
But the class, as he himself was the first to tell you, the class, forget it.
The second example, from Le Carré's The Little Drummer Girl (1983: 19), illustrates a fronted complement.
In my next life I shall be a Jew or a Spaniard or an Eskimo or just a fully committed anarchist like everybody else, Alexis decided.
But a German I shall never be you do it once as a penance and that's it.
Fronting of predicator
They promised to publicize the book in China, and publicize it they did.
This is the most marked of all thematic choices in English.
In addition to fronting the predicator, this choice also involves re-arranging other clause elements and adjusting the form of the verbal group.
Authentic examples are hard to find because fronted predicators are very rare in English.
In languages such as Arabic, verbs frequently occur in thematic position and the fronting of a predicator is therefore not a marked thematic choice.
In translating from a language such as Arabic to a language such as English, the unmarked predicator + subject structure would normally be translated by an equally unmarked structure such as subject + predicator rather than by an identical but highly marked structure which places the predicator in initial position.
Going in the other direction, say from English into Arabic, a translator should try to find some way of conveying the emphasis attached to a fronted predicator.
I cannot comment on the devices available in other languages, but in Arabic, for instance, the particle qad may be used with the past tense of the verb to convey emphasis.
A lexical item such as‘in fact’ may also be used to convey even stronger emphasis.
The effect would be similar to something like and they did in fact publicize it in English, except that the verb in Arabic would be in theme position (literally: qad publicize-they-it in fact).
(b) Predicated theme
Predicating a theme involves using an it-structure (also called a cleft structure) to place an element near the beginning of the clause, as in It was the book that received a great deal of publicity in China, it was a great deal of publicity that the book received in China, or It was in China that the book received a great deal of publicity.
Apart from conjunctions and disjuncts which we have decided not to take into account for our current purposes, this is the only instance in which the theme of the clause is not the element that occurs in initial position.
The theme of an it-structure is not It but rather the element which occurs after the verb to be.
It simply acts as an empty subject which allows a certain element such as the book or in China to be placed near the beginning of the clause and to be interpreted as its theme, that is, what the message is about.
Predicating an element foregrounds it by placing it in theme position.
One of the options it allows a speaker is to select the element acting as subject as a marked thematic choice, an option not normally available since the subject is the unmarked theme of a declarative clause in English.
Like all marked themes, predicated themes often imply contrast.
It was in China that the book received a great deal of publicity would generally suggest that in China contrasts with other places where the book did not receive a great deal of publicity.
Another important function of predicated theme is to signal information structure by presenting the element following It + BE in the main clause as the new or important item to which the hearer's/reader's attention is drawn.
For a detailed discussion of information structure, see section 5.1.2. below.
(c) Identifying theme
Identifying themes are very similar to predicated themes.
Instead of using It (a cleft structure), an identifying theme places an element in theme position by turning it into a nominalization using a wh-structure (called a pseudo-cleft structure), as in What the book received in China was a great deal of publicity, or What was received by the book in China was a great deal of publicity.
Both predicated and identifying themes are often associated with implicit contrast.
They tend to imply that the item in theme position (in the case of predicated themes) or the item in rheme position (in the case of identifying themes) is chosen from a set of possible items as the one worthy of the hearer's/reader's attention: It was the book (rather than something else) which received a great deal of publicity in China; What the book received in China was a great deal of publicity (rather than bad reviews, for instance).
Items in theme position are prominent in both structures.
The difference is that in predicated themes, the thematic element is presented as new information; in identifying themes, the thematic element is presented as known information (see section 5.1.2 below for a discussion of known vs new information).
Predicated and identifying themes are marked but fairly common in English because they offer a thematization strategy that overcomes restrictions on word order.
They also offer a way of signalling known vs new information independently of the use of intonation.
Stress offers a reliable signal of information status in spoken English (see 5.1.2 below) but it is not available as a signalling device in written English.
For this reason, predicated and identifying themes tend to be more common in written than in spoken English.
By contrast, the two structures are of equal frequency in spoken and written Chinese because stress is not available as a device for signalling information structure in spoken Chinese.
Predicated and identifying themes must be handled carefully in translation because they are far more marked in languages with relatively free word order, such as German, than they are in English.
Transferring all instances of predicated and identifying themes into a German translation would make it sound very un-German.
An experienced German translator will normally replace all or most predicated and identifying themes with less marked German structures.
An example of this can be found in the Morgan Matroc text.
The English extract in question and its German translation are quoted below for convenience:
English Extract from Morgan Matroc Text:
And yet there are some customers who in their search for a suitable material prefer to study complex tables of technical data.
It is for such customers that we have listed the properties of Matroc's more widely used materials.
German translation:
…
Für solche Kunden haben wir die Eigenschaften der gängigsten Matroc Werkstoffe aufgelistet.
Back-translation:
…
For such customers have we the properties of the most popular Matroc materials listed.
Another example comes from an interview with the chairman of the Japanese Sony organization, Akio Morita, published in an edition of Playboy magazine and translated into Brazilian Portuguese.
Predicated themes are more marked in Brazilian Portuguese than they are in English:
English Extract from the Playboy text: It was about thirty years ago that a young Japanese businessman visited the West and was deeply humiliated to learn that ‘Made in Japan’ was an international synonym for shoddiness a phrase that produced jokes and laughter.
Today, the laughter is heard mainly on the way to the bank as Akio Morita, 61, the cofounder and the chairman of the Sony Corporation, continues to make his five-billion dollar corporation a fount of ever newer and more dazzling inventions.
It was Sony that gave the world mass-produced transistor radios, Trinitron television sets, Betamax video recorders and Walkman portable cassette players.
Portuguese translation:
Back-translation:
Thirty years ago, a young man of Japanese business…
Was Sony that gave to the world transistor radios…
In the Portuguese translation, the first cleft structure is rendered by an unmarked fronting of a time adjunct.
The second cleft structure is rendered by a marked (but not highly marked) structure in which the verb is fronted.
Here is a further example, this time of identifying theme, from The Independent (8 November 1988), article attached to A Hero from Zero.
English extract from The Independent article:
The report had meanwhile been referred to the Serious Fraud Office.
A reference to that office is made only where an inquiry concludes that an offence may have been committed.
Lonrho has been informed that the report made no criticism of its conduct.
What Mr Rowland wants is the early publication of this report.
Arabic translation:
Back-translation:
And seeks Mr Rowland now to publish this report as soon as possible.
The Arabic predicator + subject structure is not marked at all and it therefore fails to convey the emphasis signalled by the English identifying structure.
It can be argued that ‘normalizing’ the marked English structure is not a good strategy in this instance and that a slightly different but similarly marked Arabic structure (using a particle such as inna) would have preserved the prominence given by the writer to the first part of the statement (Mr Rowland wants) and still sounded natural in Arabic:
Inna Mr Rowland seeks now…
Inna what seeks Mr Rowland now is…
Generally speaking, languages with relatively free word order like German can thematize clause elements simply by fronting them.
They therefore rarely use intricate structures that languages with relatively fixed word order resort to in order to thematize elements.
Apart from being aware of the level of markedness of a given structure in the source and target languages, a translator should also learn to make use of the thematization devices available in each language.
For instance, Wilkinson (1990: 81) suggests that ‘information which has been highlighted by being fronted in the Dutch clause lends itself to a translation in English using an IT cleft’, but notes that trainee translators working from Dutch into English fail to make use of predicated and identifying themes in their English translations.
In addition to fronted, predicated, and identifying themes, other types of marked theme exist in English, but they tend to be much more restricted and more likely to be used in informal language.
These are preposed theme and postposed theme (Young, 1980).
Both involve using a gloss tag.
In preposed theme, the gloss tag occurs at the beginning of the clause, in postposed theme, it occurs at the end of the clause.
The following examples of both types are from Young (1980: 145):
Preposed theme: The fitter, he sent these documents to the office.
These documents, the fitter sent them to the office.
Postposed theme: He sent these documents to the office, the fitter.
He sent these documents to the office, the fitter did.
The fitter sent them to the office, these documents.
An authentic example of a preposed theme can be found in the extract from Le Carré's The Russia House quoted on page 134 above:
With the glasnost today, the Soviet Union, it's the Mount Everest of the recording business.
5.1.1.4 A brief assessment of the Hallidayan position on theme
Any approach to describing information flow in natural language will generally recognize that clauses are organized in terms of theme and rheme.
But, as already noted, different linguists give different accounts of the way in which theme and rheme are realized in discourse.
Each account is naturally biased towards the native language of the linguist in question as well as other languages with which s/he may be familiar.
One of the main differences between the Hallidayan and other approaches is that Halliday has always insisted that, at least in English, the theme-rheme distinction is realized by the sequential ordering of clause elements.
Theme is the element placed by the speaker in first position in the clause; rheme is whatever comes after the theme.
A rheme-theme sequence therefore has no place in Halliday's system.
This position contrasts sharply with that taken by Prague linguists, such as Firbas, who reject sentence position as the only criterion for identifying theme and rheme (see section 5.2 below).
The attraction of the Hallidayan view is that, unlike the rather complex explanations of the Prague School, it is very simple to follow and apply.
To some extent, it is also intuitively satisfying to suggest that what one is talking about always comes before what one has to say about it.
Its disadvantages, on the other hand, include (a) its partial circularity: theme is whatever comes in initial position and whatever comes in initial position is theme; and (b) its failure to relate descriptions of SVO languages, particularly those with relatively fixed word order such as English, to descriptions of languages  with relatively free word order in which, for instance, the verb often occurs in initial position.
If theme is whatever occurs in initial position we would have to acknowledge that some languages prefer to thematize participants (expressed as subjects in SVO and SOV languages) on a regular basis while other languages prefer to thematize processes (expressed as verbs in VSO languages).
But Halliday does not attempt to address these preferences; nor does he discuss language features which restrict a speaker's choice of thematic elements.
For instance, in Harway (a Papuan language) where the verb is always final, a speaker/writer does not have the option of thematizing processes.
It is possible to see Halliday's view of theme — as whatever comes in initial position in the clause — as a reflection of (a) the nature of English as a language with relatively fixed word order, and (b) his study of Chinese, this being a language with a special category of topic which always occurs at the beginning of the clause.
It may be useful at this point to explore the possible link between Halliday's notion of theme and the category of topic in Chinese and other topic-prominent languages.
Apart from providing some insight into Halliday's view of the way in which theme is realized in discourse, the discussion of topic is also of particular interest here because it highlights an area of considerable potential confusion for translators interested in the thematic analysis of topic-prominent languages.
Theme and Chinese-style topic
Chinese has been identified by Li (1976) as a topic-prominent language.
Unlike subject-prominent languages such as English, French, and German, topic-prominent languages appear to have double subjects.
Li gives the following examples from a variety of topic-prominent languages.
The topic of each sentence is underlined:
Animals, I advocate a conservation policy.
(Mandarin)
This field, the rice is very good.
(Lahu)
The present time, there are many schools.
(Korean)
Fish, red snapper is delicious.
(Japanese)
Several questions need to be raised here to explore the relationship between theme and topic, if any exists.
For instance, how do topics relate to themes?
Do they behave in the same way syntactically, or, to put it more accurately, do topics, like themes, have no syntax?
Does topic mean the same thing as theme, that is, what the message is about?
Can topics be translated into languages which are not topic-prominent?
The topic of a clause in topic-prominent languages always occurs in initial position (Li, 1976).
In this respect, it coincides with theme in Halliday's model.
If initial position is reserved for theme and if topic always occurs in initial position, then theme and topic are presumably the same thing.
In some languages such as Lisu, Japanese, and Korean, topics are further marked by the addition of a morpheme: for example, the suffix -nya is always added to the topic of a sentence in Lisu.
Japanese has two suffixes, -wa and -ga, the functions of which are explained in different ways by different linguists but which are said to mark, among other things, topic and non-topic respectively.
Another syntactic feature of topic is that it controls anaphoric reference so that(a) once an element is announced as topic, this element may be omitted altogether in subsequent clauses, hence the proliferation of subjectless clauses in languages such as Chinese and Japanese (see Chapter 6, p. 185, for an example of Japanese subjectless clauses), and (b) an element announced as topic overrides possible coreferential links with other elements in the sentence.
Li gives the following example from Mandarin Chinese (1976: 469):
Nèike shù yèzi dà, su  yi w  bu x  huá0n
that tree leaves big so I not like
‘That tree (topic), the leaves are big, so I don't like <it>.’
Topic-comment structures such as those given above are sometimes translated into English as, for instance, Concerning animals…,
About this field,…,
As for fish,…, etc.
There is, of course, a limit to how often this can be done in English.
It is a marked structure in the sense of being relatively infrequent.
Its overuse by Japanese and Chinese learners of English, for instance, is immediately noticeable.
King (1990) similarly suggests that topicalization, as evident in the use of expressions such as os pros, oson afora, and oso ya (all of which mean something like ‘as for’ or ‘with regards to’), is more common in Greek than in English and that Greek learners of English tend to overuse this structure.
Translators are in a position similar to that of advanced learners of a language, and pitfalls of this sort become more common when the direction of translation is into the non-native language rather than the translator's mother tongue.
Li (1976: 484) suggests more natural structures for achieving something similar to topicalization in English:
Remember Tom?
Well, he fell off his bike yesterday.
You know Tom?
These structures may be natural in some situations, particularly in informal spoken exchanges, but they are undoubtedly inappropriate for most contexts.
Like all the English structures suggested above for expressing Chinese-style topics, they remain far more restricted than the normal topic-comment structure in languages such as Chinese and Korean.
In topic-prominent languages, these structures are the norm rather than the exception.
Chafe (1976) suggests that it is incorrect to translate a Chinese-style topic with an English expression such as As for.
This is because the English expression suggests contrastiveness.
A statement such as As for animals, I advocate a conservation policy, implies that animals are being contrasted with something else for which the speaker perhaps does not advocate a conservation policy.
The Chinese structure, on the other hand, need not imply any contrast, and Chafe therefore concludes that
Chinese seems to express the information in these cases in a way that does not coincide with anything available in English.
In other words, there is no packaging device in English that corresponds to the Chinese topic device, and hence no fully adequate translation.
Syntactic behaviour and contrastiveness aside, it is tempting to interpret a Chinese-style topic in the same way as theme, that is, as meaning something like ‘This is my starting point; this is what I am talking about.’
But the scope of a topic is not restricted to the clause as the example on page 142 might suggest.
Topic does not just control reference within clause boundaries, it controls reference outside clause boundaries as well.
That is why once a topic is announced, the subject(s) of subsequent clauses can be omitted.
Also, unlike themes (and subjects) which may be definite or indefinite, topics are always definite (Li, 1976).
This indicates a possible difference in meaning or function between the two.
Chafe (1976: 51) suggests that the function of topic is to specify some kind of framework, for instance in terms of time, location, or individual reference, within which the main statement applies and that ‘real’ topics (in topic-prominent languages) are not so much ‘what the sentence is about’as ‘the frame within which the sentence holds’.
Li agrees with Chafe's  interpretation of topic and links this to the observation that topics are always definite.
A topic has to be definite because of its function of setting the framework for interpreting the sentence as a whole.
To my knowledge, no one has yet addressed the relationship between topic and theme in topic-prominent languages.
These languages, presumably, have clause themes as well as sentence topics.
Their organization into topic-comment structures must add to the complexity of their thematic analysis and to the difficulty of identifying signals of thematic status.
There are, for instance, several conflicting claims concerning the function of the Japanese suffix -wa: some suggest that it is an obligatory marker of topic (this claim is implicit in Li, 1976: 465); others suggest that it marks given information (see 5.1.2. below for an explanation of given vs new information).
Maynard (1981: 124) seems to suggest that -wa marks topic, although she uses the term ‘theme’:
-WA serves to create a theme by identifying NP's [i.e. noun phrases]that are to be placed on what we may call the ‘thematic stage’.
The thematic stage may be defined as the conceptual framework within which the story is told, presented and performed.
The choice of using -WA…reflects the writer's thematic choice.
This is clearly an area of some difficulty for translators working from or into a topic-prominent language such as Korean, Japanese, or Chinese.
The above discussion does not cover all aspects of thematic structure, but it is probably sufficient for our current purposes.
We now turn our attention to the second aspect of the interactional organization of messages: information structure.
5.1.2 Information structure: given and new
The distinction between theme and rheme is speaker-oriented.
It is based on what the speaker wants to announce as his/her starting point and what s/he goes on to say about it.
A further distinction can be drawn between what is given and what is new in a message.
This is a hearer-oriented distinction, based on what part of the message is known to the hearer and what part is new.
Here again, a message is divided into two segments: one segment conveys information which the speaker regards as already known to the hearer.
The other segment conveys the new information that the speaker wishes to  convey to the hearer.
Given information represents the common ground between speaker and hearer and gives the latter a reference point to which s/he can relate new information.
Like thematic structure, information structure is a feature of the context rather than of the language system as such.
One can only decide what part of a message is new and what part is given within a linguistic or situational context.
For example, the same message may be segmented differently in response to different questions:
What's happening tomorrow?
We're climbing Ben Nevis.
NEW
What are we doing tomorrow?
We're Given climbing Ben Nevis.
New
What are we climbing tomorrow?
We're climbing Given Ben Nevis.
New
The organization of the message into information units of given and new reflects the speaker's sensitivity to the hearer's state of knowledge in the process of communication.
At any point of the communication process, there will have already been established a certain linguistic and non-linguistic environment.
This the speaker can draw on in order to relate new information that s/he wants to convey to elements that are already established in the context.
The normal, unmarked order is for the speaker to place the given element before the new one.
This order has been found to contribute to ease of comprehension and recall and some composition specialists therefore explicitly recommend it to writers.
The given-before-new principle influences other sequencing decisions in language.
Greenbaum and Quirk posit a principle of end-focus to account for the tendency to process information' so as to achieve a linear presentation from low to high information value'.
Moreover, they suggest that
Since the new information often needs to be stated more fully than the given (that is, with a longer, ‘heavier’ structure), it is not unexpected that an organization principle which may be called END-WEIGHT comes into operation along with the principle of end-focus.
In other words, the same principle which motivates speakers to place given before new information also motivates them to place longer  and heavier structures towards the end of the clause, as in the following examples:
She visited him that day.
She visited her best friend that day.
She visited that day an elderly and much beloved friend.
A similar principle seems to operate in German where, Herbst et al.suggest, ‘there is a stylistic tendency to place the more complex element (ie the one containing relatively more words) after the less complex’.
At least one genre of Brazilian Portuguese, that of academic abstracts, also seems to follow the principle of end-weight.
The results of a study carried out by Johns (1991) suggest that in this genre simple verbs without modals or closely linked prepositional phrases are regularly fronted while long and syntactically complex subjects are not.
Problems arise in translation when a principle such as end-weight or end-focus seems to clash with more basic grammatical principles in the target language.
For instance, one of the basic grammatical principles in English involves placing the subject before the predicate.
In translating from Brazilian Portuguese, which allows the fronting of simple verbs, into English, a translator may be tempted to ignore the principle of end-weight in order to preserve the subject-before-predicate arrangement.
The following example from a Brazilian Portuguese academic abstract illustrates the problem:
The above extract was rendered as follows by the writer/translator:
The effects of light, temperature and the presence or absence of the seed coat on limão-cravo (Citrus limonia) seed germination have been studied.
The influence of rehydration rate on germination of artificially dried seed has been also verified.
Note that by adhering to the subject-before-predicate principle, the translator of the above extract has had to ignore the principle of end-weight.
The result is awkward, unnatural, and recognizably  un-English.
Each sentence consists of a very heavy subject followed by a very light verb.
The clash between the end-weight and subject-before-predicate principles could have been avoided by switching from passive to active and inserting a subject such as We or This paper:
This paper examines the effects of light, temperature and the presence or absence of the seed coat on limão-cravo (Citrus limonia).
In addition, it verifies the influence of rehydration rate on germination of artificially dried seed.
5.1.2.1 How are given and new signalled in discourse?
As far as Halliday and Hasan are concerned, information structure is a feature of spoken rather than written English:
The information systems are those concerned with the organization of the text into units of information.
This is expressed in English by the intonation patterns, and it is therefore a feature only of spoken English.
Strictly speaking (for them), the domain of information structure is not the clause as a grammatical unit but the tone group as a phonological unit.
Each information unit consists of either a combination of given-plus-new elements or of just a new element.
This is realized phonologically as a tone group, with the peak of prominence or tonic accent falling on the new element.
The new element on which the tonic accent falls carries the information focus.
This is the device used by English speakers to highlight the core of a message.
The tonic accent is what we normally perceive as stress.
In the following examples (from Halliday, 1985), the element which receives the tonic accent is underlined.
The symbol // marks the boundary of a tone unit.
// now silver needs to have love //
// I haven't seen you for ages //
While clearly relevant to interpreting activities, this approach may seem of limited applicability in translation since it appears to rely heavily on phonological evidence.
This, however, is not the case, for there is undoubtedly more to the distinction between given and new than the assignment of phonological stress.
Halliday (1985) explains that the boundaries of given and new  elements are undecidable on phonological evidence alone.
The tonic accent normally falls on the last item, but this does not tell us where the given element ends and the new one begins.
To establish this, we have to look at other evidence in the surrounding context.
For instance, by expanding the context of the first example above, we can establish which element is given: In this job, Anne, we're working with silver.
Now silver needs to have love.
The context, rather than phonological evidence, tells us that silver is given in the above example and that the new element therefore starts at needs.
The analysis of the tone group is now as follows:
// now silver Given needs to have love New //
This is an example of a normal, unmarked structure (see sections 5.1.2.3 and 5.1.2.4 below for a discussion of marked information structure).
Here, the tone unit coincides with the clause as a grammatical unit, theme coincides with given, and rheme coincides with new.
The importance of context in establishing the boundaries of given and new elements is worth noting because it suggests that analysing written language in terms of given and new is feasible.
In written language, as in spoken language, one can refer to the context to establish whether a piece of information has or has not been introduced earlier.
Moreover, many of the devices used to signal information status are common to both spoken and written language.
For instance, in both spoken and written English definiteness is generally associated with given information and indefiniteness with new information.
The girl walked into the room suggests, in most contexts, that the identity of the girl has already been established.
This contrasts with A girl walked into the room, which suggests that a new entity is being introduced into the discourse.
Similarly, in both spoken and written English given information tends to be grammatically subordinate to other information.
In Heseltine's appointment as Minister of the Environment came as no surprise, the event of Heseltine's appointment is presented as given; the reader is assumed to know about it.
Had it been new information, it would have been presented independently in the predicate, because this is where new information normally occurs in English: Heseltine has been appointed as Minister of the Environment.
This comes as no surprise.
The use of subordination as a syntactic device for marking given information may be a common feature of information structure  in many languages: for instance, Maynard (1981) suggests that given information in Japanese also tends to be subordinate.
Some items are inherently given because of their meaning and this generally applies not only to spoken and written English but also to most languages.
Pronouns present the most obvious case, with first- and second-person pronouns being the prime example of items whose givenness is determined contextually.
Because stress is not available in written language, intricate syntactic devices have to be used to perform a similar function.
For example, one of the most important functions of cleft and pseudo-cleft structures in English (discussed under predicated and identifying theme, section 5.1.1.3) is to signal information status.
In cleft structures, the item in theme position is presented as new and the item in rheme position is presented as given.
In the following extract from Morgan Matroc's brochure (Appendix 2) the new item is underlined:
And yet there are some customers who in their search for a suitable material prefer to study complex tables of technical data.
It is for such customers that we have listed the properties of Matroc's more widely used materials.
A shorthand representation of the above structure would be ‘It is for X that we have listed the properties…’ where the element presented as given is ‘we have listed the properties…for X’and the element presented as new is ‘X = such customers’.
Compare this with the following pseudo-cleft structure from The Independent:
Lonrho has been informed that the report made no criticism of its conduct.
What Mr Rowland wants is the early publication of this report.
Here, the information presented as given is that Mr Rowland wants something and the information presented as new is that this something is the early publication of the report.
Failure to appreciate the functions of specific syntactic structures in signalling given and new information can result in unnecessary shifts in translation.
The following example is from Arab Political Humour (Kishtainy, 1985: x).
The source text is English.
The kind of joke related by any man is a good indicator of his character, mood and circumstance — a fact which is as valid when applied to the nation as a whole.
It is a general picture this book tries to depict rather than the detailed idiosyncrasies of any political leader.
Arabic translation:
Back-translation:
…
And this general picture is, primarily, that which we attempt to draw in this book, not the detailed personal characteristics which distinguish any of the political leaders.
An exact translation of the above English cleft structure would be very unnatural in Arabic but the structure opted for is also clumsy.
Apart from being awkward, the Arabic version also distorts the information structure of the original by presenting the first element (‘general picture’) as given when the point of the cleft structure is to present it as the new information worth attending to.
The cleft structure quite reasonably presents as given the assumption that the book is trying to depict something (all books do).
The Arabic version, on the other hand, presents ‘general picture’ as given and offers as new information in the predicate a definition or identification of what this general picture is.
The shift in information structure could have been avoided by using a pseudo-cleft structure (a marked but natural structure in Arabic).
Rewording the message as  ‘What we are attempting to draw in this book is a general picture, not…’ could have preserved the given/new status of the relevant elements, although their order would have changed.
This pseudo-cleft structure would signal that the first part ‘we are attempting to draw something in this book’ is given and the second part ‘this something is a general picture’is new.
Although unavailable in written language, stress is often implicit in certain structures which involve emphasis.
We generally assume that stress falls on DO when used for emphasis, as in I did see him.
The same applies to the repetition of an auxiliary, particularly if it can be replaced by a contracted form.
A: It's about time you went home.
B: I am going.
(cf. I'm going).
Apart from syntactic structure, punctuation can also be used as a device for signalling information structure in written language.
It is used, for example, to distinguish between a defining relative clause such as He was waving to the girl who was running along the platform and a non-defining relative clause such as He was waving to the girl, who was running along the platform.
In the first example, who was running along the platform identifies the girl and therefore does not add new information (if it did, it would be useless as a way of identifying the girl).
In the second example, the comma is used to signal that the same clause represents new information.
The above discussion suggests that, when needed, clear signals of information status can be employed in written language.
Different languages use different devices for signalling information structure and translators must develop a sensitivity to the various signalling systems available in the languages they work with.
This is, of course, easier said than done because, unfortunately, not much has been achieved so far in the way of identifying signals of information status in various languages.
As is the case with most areas of text-linguistics, linguists tend to concentrate on the analysis of signalling devices in English and extrapolate from that to other languages.
For example, Chafe sums up the expression of givenness as follows:
The principal linguistic effects of the given-new distinction, in English and perhaps all languages, reduce to the fact that given information is conveyed in a weaker and more attenuated manner than new information.
This attenuation is likely to be reflected in two principal ways: given information is pronounced with lower pitch and weaker stress than new and it is subject to pronominalization.
Brown and Yule reiterate Chafe's views in suggesting that ‘speakers usually refer to current given entities with attenuated syntactic and phonological forms’.
These comments may well apply to English, and perhaps even a large number of languages, but they certainly do not apply to all.
It is well known, for instance, that pronominalization is rare in Japanese and it is therefore unlikely to play a significant role in signalling givenness.
On the other hand, some languages (Japanese included) use special affixes to mark given and new information or thematic and non-thematic elements.
This kind of feature is difficult to describe in terms of attenuation.
In some languages, stress and intonation are not available as devices for signalling new information.
They are not available in Chinese (Tsao, 1983) or in French (Paula Chicken, personal communication).
These languages rely on lexical and syntactic devices to signal information status.
For instance, in Chinese definiteness and indefiniteness (which reflect given and new information respectively) are typically signalled by means of word order:
The most usual way of showing definiteness [in Chinese]is by means of word-order arrangement.
And the most general principle is: nominals occurring before the main verb of a sentence tend to be definite while those occurring after the main verb can be either definite or indefinite.
Finnish is another language that does not have an article system.
It uses case endings and word order to signal definiteness and indefiniteness.
This type of signalling does not seem to support the attenuation theory.
Similarly, one could argue that the attenuation theory does not apply to languages such as Arabic which have a definite article but no explicit marker of indefiniteness.
Like English, these languages tend to use definiteness as a signal of givenness and indefiniteness as a signal of newness.
However, if anything, it is the new rather than the given entity which is regularly referred to by an attenuated syntactic structure.
5.1.2.2 How is givenness determined?
Identifying signals of information status is one area of information structure that is clearly relevant in translation.
Another area which can pose problems in translation relates to the ability to determine when and when not a certain item of information can be treated as given.
Most commonly, a given element is an element which is recoverable because it has been mentioned before.
This is the basis on which the various elements in the answers to the questions given on page 145 have been labelled as given or new.
But information may be treated by the speaker as given for a variety of other reasons.
It may be predictable, or it may be contextually salient, as in the case of first-person pronouns.
Rather than use a variety of notions such as recoverability, predictability, and saliency to explain givenness, Chafe suggests that the key to givenness lies in the notion of consciousness:
Given (or old) information is that knowledge which the speaker assumes to be in the consciousness of the addressee at the time of  the utterance.
So-called new information is what the speaker assumes he is introducing into the addressee's consciousness by what he says.
The fact that the speaker and addressee themselves are regularly treated as given (and pronominalized as I and you respectively) stems from the same consideration.
The speaker is conscious of the addressee, and the addressee is conscious of the speaker.
An important question with implications for some translation-related activities such as abridging, expanding, or any form of rewriting which introduces or deletes gaps between a certain item and its subsequent mention in a text is this: how long can an element be assumed to remain in the addressee's consciousness?
In other words, under what circumstances would a previously mentioned item have to be re-introduced as new?
Chafe suggests two variables which can be used to determine whether an item may or may not have left the addressee's consciousness:
The number of intervening sentences in which the item was not mentioned is one obvious variable, but more interesting would be the effect of such discourse boundaries as a change of scene, where a whole set of items can be assumed to enter the consciousness of the addressee, presumably pushing out old ones.
The following example from Autumn of Fury: the Assassination of Sadat (Heikal, 1983) illustrates the effect of both variables: number of intervening sentences and change of scene.
This book was originally written in English and then later translated into Arabic (with considerable additions) by the author himself.
Possible explanations for these additions are discussed in Chapter 7.
The extract forms part of the description of events following the shooting of President Sadat (English version: p. 271; Arabic version: pp. 527–31).
Items relevant to the present discussion of givenness are underlined.
According to Heikal, Sadat was put into a helicopter, accompanied by his wife Jihan.
But instead of flying straight to the hospital, the helicopter first stopped by Sadat's residence:
Jihan is known to have rushed into the house and put through two telephone calls to the United States.
One was to her elder son Gamal, who was then in Florida.
She learnt that Gamal had gone  with some friends to an island off the coast of Florida, so she told the person who answered the telephone to get hold of him immediately at any cost and tell him to call his mother on a matter of the greatest urgency.
Who the other call was to Jihan has never revealed, but it is certain that it must have been someone of the highest importance, and that her purpose was to obtain from the most authoritative source possible some outside indication of what was happening in Egypt.
After these two telephone calls had been made Jihan rejoined the helicopter which continued its course up the Nile to the Maadi hospital.
The official report from the hospital stated that when the President arrived he was in a state of complete coma, with no recordable blood pressure or pulse, ‘the eyes wide open, with no response to light’, and no reflexes anywhere.
The report went on to list his injuries, which included two bullet entrances under the left nipple, one entering below the knee and exiting at the top of the left thigh, as well as several wounds in the right arm, chest, neck and round the left eye.
There was ‘a foreign substance which can be felt by touch under the skin of the neck’, which was presumably the first and fatal bullet fired by Abbas Mohamed.
The doctors detailed the attempts made at resuscitation, but by 2.40 it was concluded that there was no activity in either heart or brain and that the President must be declared dead.
The cause of death was given as shock, internal haemorrhage in the chest cage, lesions in the left lung and all main arteries.
The report was signed by twenty-one doctors.
From the outset Jihan had realized that there was no hope of her husband's survival.
As she waited outside the room where the doctors were operating the call came through from Gamal in Florida.
The middle paragraph, which summarizes Sadat's condition on arriving at the hospital and the doctors' report, is expanded into three pages in the Arabic version.
Furthermore, the whole list of injuries is set aside as a sort of sub-section, marked by three asterisks at the top and three at the bottom, so that the change of topic or scene is explicitly signalled to the reader.
The following condensed version illustrates the main differences.
Back-translation of selected extracts from pages 527–31 in Arabic version:
…
Some reliable sources report that the President's wife, Mrs Jihan, rushed to the telephone to make some telephone calls to  the United States.
Among these was definitely a call to her only son Gamal, who was then in Florida.
During the call she discovered that Gamal had gone with some of his friends to an island on the coast of Florida.
She asked the person who answered her to try and find him as soon as possible and to ask him to contact her in Cairo immediately as there is an extremely urgent matter she needs to talk to him about.
There were other telephone calls that Mrs Jihan made to the United States…
The official report of the Maadi Hospital states that when Sadat arrived at the hospital and was examined he was in a state of complete coma.
The official report issued by the Maadi Hospital was as follows:
[complete report quoted — three pages, ending with signatures of members of the medical team]
Mrs Jihan was waiting outside the examination room, knowing in her heart of hearts that her husband has departed.
A telephone call came from the United States.
It was her son Gamal on the line calling from Florida…
Unlike the English version, the last paragraph in the Arabic version re-introduces Gamal's telephone call to his mother as new information.
This is signalled in Arabic through the use of an indefinite noun group: ‘a telephone call’ rather than‘the call’.
It would have been unreasonable of the author/translator to expect this item of information to remain in the reader's consciousness after three intervening pages and an explicitly marked change of scene or topic.
A final point to bear in mind is that givenness is assigned by the speaker and, as such, does not necessarily correlate with the reality of the linguistic or extra-linguistic situation.
A speaker may decide to present an element as given even when there is no sufficient reason to assume that it is in the addressee's consciousness.
This may be done for rhetorical reasons and is a common ploy in politics.
Presenting a piece of information as given suggests that it is already established and agreed and is therefore non-negotiable.
Similarly, an element which has been mentioned before may be presented as new because it is unexpected or because the speaker wishes to present it in a contrastive light.
5.1.2.3 Marked vs unmarked information structure
Unlike thematic structure (at least in English), information structure is not realized by the sequencing of elements.
It is realized chiefly by tonicity.
In unmarked information structure, the information focus falls on something other than the theme.
It falls on the whole rheme or part of it; for example, in John was appointed Chairman, the tonic accent will normally fall on Chairman:
// John was appointed Chairman //
This information structure would give the message the meaning of a statement of what happened or what John was appointed as.
Other options are available to the speaker, depending on where s/he feels the burden of his/her message lies.
For instance, the information focus may be placed on John, and in this case the message will be understood as a statement of who was appointed Chairman and may imply surprise or contrast:
// John was appointed Chairman //
Similarly, the focus may be placed on was to stress the truth of the utterance:
// John was appointed Chairman //
In written language, marked information structure is often signalled by means of typography or punctuation devices.
In the following example from Agatha Christie's Crooked House (1949), italics are used to highlight the elements on which the information focus falls:
‘The family!
Beasts!
I hate them all.’
She looked at me, her mouth working.
She looked sullen and frightened and angry.
‘They've been beastly to me always — always.
From the very first.
Why shouldn't I marry their precious father?
What did it matter to them?
They'd all got loads of money.
He gave it to them.
They wouldn't have had the brains to make any for themselves!’
She went on:
‘Why shouldn't a man marry again — even if he is a bit old?
And he wasn't really old at all— not in himself.
I was very fond of him.
I was fond of him.’
She looked at me defiantly.
Here, the elements which are selected as focal (them, he, and was) are not new in the sense of not having been mentioned before, but  they are new in the sense of being in some way contrastive.
For instance, the last item, was, contrasts with what the speaker thinks the hearer believes about her feelings.
In the French translation of this extract, the italics are left out.
As mentioned earlier, French does not generally use phonological stress to highlight a clause element; instead, lexical means are employed to signal what would normally be conveyed by means of intonation in English.
Thus
The English have changed can be rendered as
Les Anglais, eux aussi, ont évolué where the lexical item eux aussi (‘as well’) replaces stress in highlighting the previous item Les Anglais.
Instead of italics, the French translator of the above extract opts for repeating the last statement to achieve similar emphasis:
…
D'ailleurs, il n'était pas vieux du tout!
Il y a vieux et vieux.
Je l'aimais bien.
Comme me defiant des yeux, elle répéta:
— Oui, je l'aimais bien…
The emphasis in the French version does not just come from the repetition of je l'aimais bien, which also occurs in the original, but rather from the fact that the repetition is labelled as repetition: elle répéta.
5.1.2.4 Marked information structure and marked rheme
To my knowledge, Hallidayan linguists have always concentrated on marked theme and do not seem to have considered that a rheme can also be marked.
But the notion of marked rheme may prove helpful in accounting for the communicative force of some utterances.
For instance, there are times when a speaker/writer seems to be deliberately highlighting a rheme by stripping the message of its initial element, that is , the theme.
The following example illustrates the point.
English extract from A Hero from Zero (p. v)
House of Fraser shares were highly sensitive to any rumours of a bid, and we waited with caution and anxiety for the green light from the ministry.
And waited.
It seems reasonable to suggest that the natural theme we is omitted in the second sentence in order to foreground the rheme.
The rheme is all there is in the clause and so it receives the reader's undivided attention.
To distinguish between the function of marked theme and that of marked rheme, we could say that marked theme gives prominence to an element as linking information, whereas marked rheme gives prominence to an element as the core of the message.
Another reason for the prominence of And waited in the above example is that it repeats verbatim information that has already been established in the previous sentence.
It therefore has a surprise effect on the reader who expects each new clause to move the discourse forward.
In cases of this sort, the pure repetition of information and the reader's expectation that the discourse should be moving forward are reconciled by finding an indirect interpretation of the message.
In this particular instance, we interpret And waited as meaning something like ‘we went on waiting and nothing happened’ or ‘we waited in vain'.
In French, it is impossible to reproduce the above themeless clause.
A French verb has to be accompanied by an immediate subject.
This is, of course, also true of English grammar (taken as an abstract system), but unlike French, English employs themeless sentences as a fairly common stylistic device which is both acceptable and effective in many contexts.
The French translation overcomes the problem by spelling out the interpretation: Nous attendimes en vain (literally: ‘we waited in vain’); but loses the surprise element because it conforms to the given-plus-new pattern.
The Arabic translation preserves the surprise element by employing a mixture of repetition and temporal signalling: literally ‘and waited-we then waited-we’, i.e. ‘we waited and then we waited <some more>’, meaning ‘we waited in vain'.
Apart from deleting the theme in order to highlight the rhematic element, it is also possible to use punctuation in written language to signal an unusual arrangement of clause elements into tone groups.
Consider the following example from Le Carré's The Little Drummer Girl (1983: 8):
As a further precaution, the addresses of Israeli staff were not printed in official diplomatic lists for fear of encouraging the impulsive gesture at a time when Israel was being a little hard to take.
Politically.
The full stop before Politically does a number of things simultaneously.
First, it forces an end of a tone group on the previous stretch of language, thus presenting what follows as a separate unit of information.
A unit of information must include a new element (the given element being optional).
The new element, a complete unit of information in this case, is a simple adverb: Politically.
This in itself is unusual and therefore marked in English.
Second, in order to interpret Politically as a unit of information, we have to assume that it is meant as a foregrounded rheme — foregrounded by omitting the thematic element Israel was being a little hard to take.
Third, in forcing an end of a tone group at this point, the full stop also foregrounds the previous rheme.
It gives greater rhematic emphasis to the previous chunk of information: was being a little hard to take.
Here is another example of marked information structure, this time from an advertising leaflet which accompanies a range of cosmetic products by Estée Lauder.
Extraordinary new colors.
Extraordinary new compacts.
ESTÉE LAUDER SIGNATURE.
Singular.
Intense.
Privileged.
Provocative.
Colors to astonish.
Make resistance impossible.
Consider them.
Yours.
Like a fingerprint.
The strategy used to foreground rhematic elements and to create highly marked information structures in the above extract is the same as that used by Le Carré in The Little Drummer Girl example.
Thematic elements are omitted to foreground a rheme, for example Make resistance impossible (They/These colors?).
Full stops are inserted in unexpected places to force the reader to treat certain elements as complete units of information.
This is particularly effective in the case of Consider them.
Yours, where one automatically gets the two interpretations: ‘consider them’(i.e. think about them), ‘they are yours’, and ‘Consider them yours’.
Only the first interpretation is successfully conveyed in the French version of the leaflet (Regardez-les.
Elles sont à vous).
Since information focus normally falls on the rheme or part of it, and since unmarked information structure involves placing the given  element before the new one and unmarked thematic structure involves placing theme before rheme, it is not surprising that theme often coincides with given, and rheme often coincides with new.
This is probably why, for most Prague linguists, part of the definition of theme is that it is given and part of the definition of rheme is that it is new.
We will now look at this alternative view to explore its relevance to translation activities.
5.2 THE PRAGUE SCHOOL POSITION ON INFORMATION FLOW: FUNCTIONAL SENTENCE PERSPECTIVE
The Prague School position on theme/rheme and given/new is quite distinct from Halliday's and results in a significantly different explanation of how these categories are realized in discourse.
This approach is generally referred to as functional sentence perspective (FSP).
The theory of functional sentence perspective was developed by a group of Czech linguists who pioneered most studies investigating the interaction between syntax and communicative function.
The details of FSP theory are rather complex and there are several distinct approaches within the Prague tradition itself.
Nevertheless, it is important for translators to become familiar with at least one of the major models proposed within this alternative tradition.
For one thing, a functional sentence perspective approach may prove more helpful in explaining the interactional organization of languages other than English, particularly languages with free or relatively free word order.
For another, FSP theory often forms the basis for highly relevant discussions of translation problems and strategies (see, for example, Hatim, 1984, 1987, 1988, 1989; Hatim and Mason, 1990), and basic familiarity with this approach tends to be taken for granted by those exploring its relevance to translation studies.
A simplified general outline of one FSP model is therefore given below in the hope that it will prove useful to translators interested in resolving, or at least identifying, translation problems relating to information flow.
The main premise in FSP theory is that the communicative goals of an interaction cause the structure of a clause or sentence to function in different kinds of perspective.
Jan Firbas, one of the main proponents of this approach, gives the following example (1986).
A sentence such as John has been taken ill has a certain syntactic structure which remains unchanged in different communicative settings.
In context, it will function in a certain kind of perspective, depending on the purpose of communication; for instance, it may function as a statement of a person's state of health (John has been taken ill), as an identification of the person affected (John has been taken ill), or as an affirmation that the information conveyed is really valid (John has been taken ill).
Note that what Firbas describes as functional sentence perspective in this example would be analysed purely in terms of information structure in Halliday's model.
The concepts of theme/rheme and given/new are supplemented in Firbas' model with a non-binary notion that determines which elements are thematic and which are not thematic in a clause.
This is the notion of communicative dynamism (CD).
Firbas (1972: 78) explains it as follows:
communicative dynamism…is based on the fact that linguistic communication is not a static, but a dynamic phenomenon.
By CD I understand a property of communication, displayed in the course of the development of the information to be conveyed and consisting in advancing this development.
By the degree of CD carried by a linguistic element, I understand the extent to which the element contributes to the development of the communication, to which, as it were, it ‘pushes the communication forward’.
In order to relate the notion of CD to the question of identifying theme/rheme and given/new in discourse, Firbas suggests the following.
A clause consists of different types of elements.
Some elements lay the foundation on which other elements may convey a message.
These foundation-laying elements are context-dependent and constitute the theme.
They carry a low degree of CD because, being context-dependent, they do not play a major role in pushing the communication forward.
If we take the example of John has been taken ill (as a statement of John's state of health), the foundation-laying element would be John.
The remaining elements complete the information and fulfil the communicative purpose of the utterance.
These core-constituting elements form the non-theme, are context-independent, and carry a higher degree of CD.
What Firbas seems to be suggesting so far is that theme consists of context-dependent and rheme of context-independent items.
He does, however, modify this position slightly in his later writings as we shall see shortly.
It is also important to point out at this stage that Firbas' notions of context-dependence/independence are much more restricted than Halliday's notions of given/new:
context dependence/independence is judged by a very narrow criterion.
Any kind or aspect of information that is not present in  the immediately relevant verbal or situational context is to be regarded as irretrievable and hence context-independent.
Firbas' notions of context-dependence/independence are therefore purely linguistic and do not extend to the psychological aspect of communication as Halliday's notions do.
Firbas goes on to explain that the non-theme consists of two elements: the transition and the rheme.
The transition consists of elements which perform the function of linking the foundation-laying and the core-constituting parts of the clause.
It generally consists of the temporal and modal exponents of the verb, which are ‘the transitional element par excellence: They carry the lowest degree of CD within the non-theme and are the transition proper’(Firbas, 1986: 54).
In the example given above, John has been take ill, the transition would be has been + -en.
The transition may also consist of a link verb such as be or seem, or any verb whose main function is simply to link the foundation-laying and core-constituting elements of a clause.
In The weather is fine, for example, is would normally constitute the transition (assuming the communicative purpose of the utterance is to state what the weather is like).
The rheme represents the core of the message and carries the highest degree of CD.
It consists of the notional component of the finite verb and the rest of the message.
In John has been taken ill, the rheme is take + ill.
In The weather is fine, the rheme is fine.
Apart from the notion of transition outlined above, and unlike the Hallidayan approach, where the verb is generally considered part of the rheme, FSP theory assigns thematic or rhematic status to the verb depending on the context and the semantics of the verb itself.
Semantically, the less of a notional component the verb has, the more naturally it goes with the theme as a foundation-laying element.
Link verbs are a clear case of verbs with a very limited notional component whose function seems to be simply linking the theme to the rest of the message.
In fact, in many languages (for instance, Arabic and Russian) equative sentences such as The weather is fine are verbless.
It is also possible to omit a link verb in English in some contexts, as in the following example from Le Carré's The Russia House (1989: 18):
And in the corner of his eye — an anxious blue blur was all that she amounted to — this Soviet woman he was deliberately ignoring.
This seems to support the view that link verbs play little or no role in pushing the communication forward and therefore have no rhematic status.
Contextually, the notional component of the verb is assigned thematic status if it has already been mentioned.
Scinto (1983: 80) gives the following example:
Consider the following utterance:
Leander bought a new book.
To this sentence we can pose the wh-question: What did Leander buy? or, What did Leander do?
In the case of the first question the response is ‘a new book’.
In the case of the second, ‘bought a new book’.
What these answers demonstrate is that the verb may be part of either Theme or Rheme proper.
In the case of the first question the verb is thematicized; in the second it is rhematic and is substituted for by a categorical verb, i.e. to do.
Which question to ask will, of course, depend on whether the context already tells us that Leander bought something.
Note that this approach tends, by and large, to equate theme with given (context-dependent) and rheme with new (context-independent) elements.
However, Firbas does modify this position when he insists that, as far as he is concerned, this is not necessarily the case:
I consider rhematic information to be always new, but thematic information old and/or new.
On the other hand, old information is always thematic, but new information thematic or rhematic.
In other words, Firbas, like Halliday, acknowledges that a unit of information may consist of a given plus new element, or of just a new element.
In the first case, the given element would be considered thematic and the new element would be considered rhematic.
In the second case, a theme still has to be identified and, for Firbas, this would be the least context-independent element (i.e. the element with the lowest degree of CD).
So far, Firbas' approach to information flow can be summed up as follows.
A clause consists of two types of elements: foundation-laying/context-dependent elements and core-constituting/context-independent elements.
The former have a lower degree of CD and are always thematic.
The latter, however, may be thematic or rhematic.
A clause may totally consist of context-independent elements and, in this case, the theme will be the element with the  lowest degree of CD and the rheme will be the element with the highest degree of CD.
5.2.1 Linear arrangement and thematic status in FSP
It will, I hope, be clear by now that, unlike Hallidayan linguists, FSP theorists do not see theme and rheme as being realized chiefly by their relative positions in the clause.
This is not to say that they do not acknowledge the role played by sequential ordering in signalling the communicative function of an utterance.
Firbas, for instance, suggests that ‘the basic distribution of CD is implemented by a series of elements opening with the element carrying the very lowest and gradually passing on to the element carrying the very highest degree of CD’(1974: 22).
This is more or less the same as saying that theme normally precedes rheme.
However, as can be seen from the above brief discussion of the verb as a thematic or rhematic element, FSP theorists also acknowledge semantic structure and context as factors which further determine the distribution of CD.
Communicative dynamism is therefore assumed to be achieved by the interplay of these three factors: linear modification (i.e. gradation of position, syntax), semantic structure, and context.
Semantic structure and context ‘operate either in the same direction as or counter to’ linear modification (Firbas, 1974: 22), but both are hierarchically superior to it.
For example, with the exception of contexts in which they are presented contrastively, pronouns, being context-dependent, always carry a low degree of CD irrespective of where they occur in the clause.
In I gave the book to him or I gave him the book, him would normally be considered thematic in FSP theory.
Similarly, definite expressions would be considered thematic and indefinite expressions rhematic in most contexts.
The following examples, adapted from Firbas (1986: 58) illustrate the priority given to context over linear arrangement.
Rhematic elements are italicized.
(1) A heavy dew (Rh) had (TME) fallen (Th; TME).
(2) The grass (Th) was (TME) blue (Rh).
(3) Big drops (Rh) hung (TME) on the bushes (Th).
(Rh = rheme; TME = temporal modal exponent/transition; Th = theme.)
The analysis of clause elements in terms of FSP is clearly a complex business.
It is not as easy to apply or follow as Halliday's system.
However, as explained earlier, a basic understanding of this approach may well prove helpful in some contexts.
5.2.2 Linear arrangement and marked structures in FSP
Since FSP theorists do not take sentence position as the only criterion for assigning thematic status to clause elements, it follows that two alternative formulations of the same message can have the same thematic analysis.
For example, In China the book received a great deal of publicity and The book received a great deal of publicity in China would be analysed in the same way.
In China would be considered rhematic in both formulations (unless stress is used to signal a difference in its thematic/rhematic status).
Compare this with the Hallidayan approach, where In China would be considered rheme in the second and marked theme in the first example.
It also follows that one cannot talk specifically about ‘marked theme’ in FSP theory, since the question of producing a marked theme by putting an element in initial position in the clause assumes that initial position is reserved for theme.
FSP theorists do, however, acknowledge that there are marked and unmarked structures in every language.
They also attempt to explain the difference in terms of theme/rheme, though their explanation is somewhat different from Halliday's.
Very briefly, according to Prague linguists such as Mathesius and Firbas, the nature of interaction suggests that the usual, unmarked order of message segments is that of theme followed by rheme.
It is clearly easier to follow a message that announces its subject and then says something about it than the other way round.
Weil (1844, discussed in Firbas, 1974), one of the pioneers of this area of study, suggested that the movement from the initial notion of subject of utterance (theme) to the goal of utterance (rheme) represents the movement of the mind itself.
The organization of a message into a theme + rheme sequence is therefore the unmarked, ordinary order.
He further suggested that sequences which deviate from this ordinary order do occur, and he called a rheme-theme organization of a message the ‘pathetic order’(Firbas, 1974).
The pathetic order is marked and its function is to convey emotion of some sort: it may be contrastive or contradictory, for example.
Instead of conveying a message in a straightforward way, the pathetic order allows the speaker to add an emotional layer to it.
An English clause such as Well-publicized the book was would therefore be considered marked in both Hallidayan and Prague linguistics.
However, a Hallidayan linguist would analyse it as a fronted theme + rheme sequence, whereas a Prague linguist would analyse it as a rheme-theme sequence.
What we have here, then, are two different explanations of the feature of marked organization of the clause as a message.
The  Hallidayan approach explains it in terms of the fronting of an element to make it thematic.
The Prague linguists' approach explains it in terms of reversing the theme-rheme sequence.
For the purposes of translation, what matters is that both types of analysis recognize the sequence as marked.
5.2.3 The tension between word order and communicative function: a problem in translation?
According to FSP scholars, restrictions on word order in various languages result in a linear arrangement that may or may not coincide with the interpretative arrangement of an utterance.
Firbas (1986: 47) gives the following examples (always assuming a neutral context for each utterance):
Interpretative arrangement
I him used to know.
Ich ihn habe gekannt.
Je l'ai connu.
Linear arrangement
I used to know him.
Ich habe ihn gekannt.
Je l'ai connu.
Irrespective of the specific examples used by Firbas, this view implies that, generally speaking, in languages with relatively free word order there will be less tension between the requirements of syntax and those of communicative function.
Conversely, in languages with relatively fixed word order there will be greater instances of tension between syntax and communicative function.
Word-order patterns fulfil a number of functions in all languages: syntactically, they indicate the roles of subject, object, etc; semantically, they indicate roles such as actor, patient, beneficiary; communicatively, they indicate the flow of information (however we may wish to represent this: in terms of theme/rheme, given/new or communicative dynamism).
Several linguists have suggested that different languages give different priorities to each of these functions, depending on how fixed their system of word-order is.
Mathesius (quoted in Firbas, 1974: 17) compares English and Czech in this respect and concludes that in English, the grammatical principle (i.e. syntax) plays the leading role in the hierarchy of word order principles and that ‘English differs from Czech in being so little susceptible to the requirements of FSP as to frequently disregard them altogether’.
De Beaugrande and Dressler (1981: 75) make the same assertion:
In English, the lack of a differentiated morphemic system in many areas places heavy constraints on word-order patterns.
In Czech, with its richer morphemic systems, word order can follow the functional sentence perspective much more faithfully.
Johns (1991: 10–11) makes similar claims with respect to topic-prominent vs. subject-prominent languages: ‘in a topic-prominent language linear arrangement follows the scale of CD far more closely than it does in a subject-prominent language’.
This is an interesting view of word order vs communicative function.
It suggests that translating between languages with different priorities and different types of syntactic restrictions necessarily involves a great deal of skewing of patterns of information flow.
The question is: can translators do anything to minimize this skewing?
5.2.4 Suggested strategies for minimizing linear dislocation
A number of linguists have suggested a variety of strategies for resolving the tension between syntactic and communicative functions in translation and language learning.
In this section, I will attempt to explore some of these strategies, with examples from translated texts where possible.
The strategies discussed are drawn from two main sources: Johns (1991) and Papegaaij and Schubert (1988).
Strategy no. 1: voice change
This strategy involves changing the syntactic form of the verb to achieve a different sequence of elements.
A good example of this is voice change in languages with a category of voice.
The following examples, from Johns (1991), involve the substitution of active for passive.
The reverse, the substitution of passive for active, is, of course, also possible.
Example A 
English Text
This paper reports observations about the phenology of Magonia pubescens St. Hil.
Example B 
English text
This paper deals with the anatomy and histology of the male reproductive system of the freshwater prawn Macrobrachium acanthurus (Wiegmann, 1836).
Johns notes that the strategy of substituting active for passive raises the problem of supplying a subject for the active clause.
He rightly points out that the subject of the active clause must preserve the impersonality we normally associate with passive structures in many European languages.
In the above examples, the choice of This paper as subject satisfies this condition of impersonality.
Ergative structures may provide a strategy similar to that of voice change in some languages.
Ergativity involves using the object of a transitive verb as the subject of an intransitive verb: cf. An explosion shook the room and The room shook (with the explosion).
This type of structure is very common in some languages, such as Finnish, for instance.
Strategy no. 2: change of verb
This involves changing the verb altogether and replacing it with one that has a similar meaning but can be used in a different syntactic configuration.
Examples of pairs of verbs that describe an event from different perspectives in English include give/get and like/please.
These often allow reordering the sequence of elements in a clause without a significant change of meaning (cf. I like it and It pleases me).
I have not been able to find any examples of this strategy in my data or in Johns' data.
The reluctance of translators to use it is understandable to some extent.
Expressions such as I like it and It pleases me are ‘equivalent’ only in theory.
In real life, one of the options — in this case, It pleases me — tends to be very unnatural.
Each language has its own phraseology, its own idiom which rules  out many options that are potentially available as grammatical sequences.
Reciprocal pairs that offer more natural alternatives than like/please do exist, however.
For instance, I bought it from John and John sold it to me, or I received/got a letter from John and John sent me a letter are equally ‘natural’ as far as the phraseology of English is concerned; their ‘acceptability’is, of course , determined by the context in which they occur.
Strategy no. 3: nominalization
Some languages allow the order verb + subject.
If the translator wishes to maintain this thematic organization and, at the same time, adhere to an obligatory order of subject + verb in the target language, nominalization could probably provide a good strategy in many contexts.
Nominalization involves replacing a verbal form with a nominal one (e.g. describe → description).
This can then be followed by a semantically ‘empty’ verb such as give or take in the passive.
For example, the Portuguese sequence  can be turned into
A study was carried out of the behaviour of…
Alternatively, the nominalization can follow a ‘weak’ subject such as This in the following example (from Johns, 1991):
This is a study of the behaviour of…
I have not found any examples of the use of this strategy in actual translations.
Johns similarly confirms that, in his own data, this ‘sophisticated strategy of nominalisation is under-represented’(1991: 7).
The fact that it is underrepresented highlights the need to draw translators' attention to it.
If sophisticated strategies such as nominalization have not so far been recognized as viable options in resolving the tension between syntax and communicative function, this does not imply that they are not viable — just that they have been largely overlooked.
To illustrate the potential usefulness of the strategy of nominalization, we could perhaps look at how it might be used to improve an existing translation.
Below is a Brazilian academic abstract (from  Ciência e cultura 32, 7 (1980), 857), followed by its existing English translation.
Initial verbs are highlighted in the Portuguese text.
Existing English translation:
Dopamine and motor function.
The relations between dopamine and motor functions were analyzed.
Several references were presented suggesting not only that drugs that increase central dopaminergic transmission increase locomotor activity and induce stereotypy and hyperkinesia but also that neuroleptic drugs like haloperidol, that block dopamine receptors, induce hypokinesia and rigidity.
The effects of long-term neuroleptic treatment and the symptoms of tardive dyskinesia were associated to the development of central dopaminergic supersensitivity.
Suggested Version:
Dopamine and motor function.
An analysis is carried out of the relations between dopamine and motor functions.
Several references are presented which suggest not only that drugs that increase central dopaminergic transmission increase locomotor activity and induce stereotypy and hyperkinesia but also that neuroleptic drugs like haloperidol, that block dopamine receptors, induce hypokinesia and rigidity.
An association is established between the effects of long-term neuroleptic treatment and the symptoms of tardive dyskinesia on the one hand and the development of central dopaminergic supersensitivity on the other.
With the exception of the use of nominalizations and a change from the past to the present tense, my suggested version is identical to the existing translation (the present tense is the correct one to use here because it signals that the abstract reports the contents of the paper, not the procedures undertaken in the research — see discussion of tense as a signalling device in academic abstracts, Chapter 4, section  4.2.4).
The nominalizations offer a way of presenting the information from a perspective similar to that of the Portuguese text.
This is not a question of adhering to the structure of the source text for the sake of preserving form.
The placement of verbs in initial position in the Portuguese text has a communicative function: it thematizes processes as the writer's point of departure, an arrangement particularly suited to the reporting of academic research and scientific methods.
Strategy no. 4: extraposition
Extraposition involves changing the position of the entire clause in the sentence by, for instance, embedding a simple clause in a complex sentence.
Cleft and pseudo-cleft structures, discussed under predicated and identifying themes in 5.1.1.3 above, provide good examples.
Papegaaij and Schubert (1988: 182) explain that the main advantage of extraposition is that it ‘provides an escape to a higher and, in this particular respect, freer level’ when word order is relatively fixed at clause level.
For various examples of cleft and pseudo-cleft structures, see sections 5.1.1.3 and 5.1.2.1 of this chapter.
The above strategies are potentially available for resolving the tension between word order and communicative function.
In practice, syntactic and semantic considerations often override or interact with communicative considerations to produce structures that do not follow the arrangement of the source text.
I have to admit that it is very difficult indeed to find clear examples of any of the above strategies in authentic translations.
If anything, the most common strategy by far seems to be to abandon the thematic organization of the source text in favour of adhering to whatever word-order principles may be operating in the target language.
In other words, most translators prefer to give priority to the syntactic principles of the target language rather than to the communicative structure of the source text.
Generally speaking, this strategy does not, in itself, seem to interfere with the natural flow of information in the target text.
In his study of Portuguese and English versions of Brazilian academic abstracts, Johns (1991: 6) found that abandoning the thematic organization of the source language, in this case Portuguese, ‘often gives a perfectly acceptable English text’.
In outlining the strategies potentially available to a translator, I am therefore not suggesting that translators should necessarily follow the  thematic organization of every clause in the source text.
Nor am I suggesting that these strategies are in fact used by professional translators in any significant way; one has to acknowledge that, in spite of being available in theory, they are in fact rarely used in practice.
What I am suggesting, however, is that an awareness of aspects of information flow and potential ways of resolving tension between syntactic and communicative functions is important in translation.
The fact that certain strategies which can be shown to be useful in translation have not been made use of so far suggests that translators are simply not aware of them, rather than that they are familiar with them but consciously or subconsciously choose not to use them.
To sum up, a translator cannot always follow the thematic organization of the original.
If at all possible, s/he should make an effort to present the target text from a perspective similar to that of the source text.
But certain features of syntactic structure such as restrictions on word order, the principle of end-weight, and the natural phraseology of the target language often mean that the thematic organization of the source text has to be abandoned.
What matters at the end of the day is that the target text has some thematic organization of its own, that it reads naturally and smoothly, does not distort the information structure of the original (see 5.1.2 above), and that it preserves, where possible, any special emphasis signalled by marked structures in the original and maintains a coherent point of view as a text in its own right.
EXERCISES
1 John Le Carré's novel The Russia House opens with the following three paragraphs.
In a broad Moscow street not two hundred yards from the Leningrad station, on the upper floor of an ornate and hideous hotel built by Stalin in the style known to Muscovites as Empire .
During the Plague, the British Council's first ever audio fair for the teaching of the English language and the spread of British culture was grinding to its excruciating end.
The time was half past five, the summer weather erratic.
After fierce rain showers all day long, a false sunlight was blazing in the puddles and raising vapours from the pavements.
Of the passers-by, the younger ones wore jeans and sneakers, but their elders were still huddled in their warms.
The room the Council had rented was not expensive but neither was it appropriate to the occasion.
I have seen it — Not long ago, in Moscow on quite another mission, I tiptoed up the great empty staircase and, with a diplomatic passport in my pocket, stood in the eternal dusk that shrouds old ballrooms when they are asleep — With its plump brown pillars and gilded mirrors, it was better suited to the last hours of a sinking liner than the launch of a great initiative.
On the ceiling, snarling Russians in proletarian caps shook their fists at Lenin.
Their vigour contrasted unhelpfully with the chipped green racks of sound cassettes along the walls, featuring Winnie-the-Pooh and Advanced Computer English in Three Hours.
The sackcloth sound-booths, locally procured and lacking many of their promised features, had the sadness of deck chairs on a rainy beach.
The exhibitors' stands, crammed under the shadow of an overhanging gallery, seemed as blasphemous as betting shops in a tabernacle.
Nevertheless a fair of sorts had taken place.
People had come, as Moscow people do, provided they have the documents and status to satisfy the hard-eyed boys in leather jackets at the door.
Out of politeness.
Out of curiosity.
To talk to Westerners.
Because it is there.
And now on the fifth and final evening the great farewell cocktail party of exhibitors and invited guests was getting into its stride.
A handful of the small nomenclatura of the Soviet cultural bureaucracy was gathering under the chandelier, the ladies in their beehive hairstyles and flowered frocks designed for slenderer frames, the gentlemen slimmed by the shiny French-tailored suits that signified access to the special clothing stores.
Only their British hosts, in despondent shades of grey, observed the monotone of socialist austerity.
The hubbub rose, a brigade of pinafored governesses distributed the curling salami sandwiches and warm white wine.
A senior British diplomat who was not quite the Ambassador shook the better hands and said he was delighted.
(Le Carré, 1989:17–18) Imagine that you have been asked to translate Le Carré's novel into your target language.
You have not yet read the whole novel — and you would normally read a text all the way through before you seriously get down to translating it.
However, you decide that it might be helpful to ‘warm up’ to Le Carré by translating a few extracts to get the hang of his unusual style.
Translate the above extract into your target language and comment on any difficulties involved in maintaining the flow of information in terms of thematic and information structures.
You should pay particular attention to marked information structures in the third paragraph.
How does Le Carré's manipulation of English syntax foreground certain items of information?
Can this be successfully conveyed in your target language?
2 The following extract is from Swee Chai Ang, From Beirut to Jerusalem: a Woman Surgeon with the Palestinians (1989).
This book gives a first-hand account of death and suffering in Palestinian refugee camps in war-torn Beirut.
Ms Ang, a surgeon, volunteered to provide medical assistance to Palestinians and was with them during the Israeli invasion of West Beirut in 1982.
She also lived through the appalling 1982 massacres in the Sabra and Shatila camps.
Since then, she has returned repeatedly to Lebanon and the Occupied Territories to help Palestinians.
Israeli bomber planes were breaking the sound barrier in south Lebanon.
Villages in the south, as well as the Palestinian refugee camps, were attacked.
In May 1988, two thousand Israeli troops crossed into southern Lebanon.
People in Lebanon told me: ‘The Israelis failed to stifle the uprising in the occupied territories, so they take it out on us by threatening to invade Lebanon again.’
It was a multi-pronged attack on the Palestinians in Lebanon.
Saida and the south were bombed by Israeli aeroplanes, and shelled from the sea by Israeli gunboats.
The Beirut camps were attacked from the mountains, not by the Israelis, but by anti-PLO forces.
Shatila and Bourj el-Brajneh were shelled incessantly from the month of May 1988.
Both camps were flattened; homes and hospitals demolished.
Shatila finally collapsed on 27 June 1988, followed by Bourj el-Brajneh a few days later.
I got the news of the fall of Shatila in London, having just returned from a fund-raising trip in the Gulf countries.
People all over the Gulf wanted to support the uprising and build hospitals and clinics to mend the wounds of the Palestinians.
What can I say?
Each time I think of Shatila, I still cry.
It was nearly six years since I first met the people of Sabra and Shatila.
My understanding of the Palestinians began with them.
It was they who taught a naive woman surgeon the meaning of justice.
It was they who inspired me to struggle incessantly for a better world.
Each time I felt like giving up, they would strengthen me with their example.
Swee Chai Ang, 1989: 299–300)
the uprising: commonly known in the West as the intifada — the Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation in Gaza and the West Bank of Jordan.
Saida: Lebanese town.
PLO: Palestine Liberation Organization
Bourj el-Brajneh: Palestinian refugee camp.
Imagine that you have been asked to translate the above extract for inclusion in a review of the book, to be published in one of the leading newspapers in your country.
Various reviews of the book in English papers have suggested that the poignancy of Dr Ang's narrative is enhanced by her unadorned style, by her awkward, artless prose which is described as having ‘the raw immediacy of everyday speech’.
Consider how this straight-to-the-point, free-from-rhetoric, ‘artless’ style is reflected in the simplicity of the thematic and information structures in the above extract.
How does the contrast between this general feature and the build-up of emotion, culminating in marked thematic structures towards the end of the extract, enhance the emotional impact of the message?
How successfully are these features reflected in your target version?
6 Textual equivalence: cohesion
Each language has its own patterns to convey the interrelationships of persons and events; in no language may these patterns be ignored, if the translation is to be understood by its readers.
The topic of cohesion…has always appeared to me the most useful constituent of discourse analysis or text linguistics applicable to translation.
The last chapter dealt with one type of connectivity which helps to distinguish text from non-text, namely thematic and information structure.
In this chapter, we resume our discussion of translation difficulties and strategies at the level of text by looking at cohesion, the second feature of text organization which was mentioned at the end of Chapter 4.
Cohesion is the network of lexical, grammatical, and other relations which provide links between various parts of a text.
These relations or ties organize and, to some extent create a text, for instance by requiring the reader to interpret words and expressions by reference to other words and expressions in the surrounding sentences and paragraphs.
Cohesion is a surface relation; it connects together the actual words and expressions that we can see or hear (cf. coherence, Chapter 7).
This chapter draws heavily on the best known and most detailed model of cohesion available.
This is the model outlined by Halliday and Hasan in Cohesion in English (1976).
It is worth noting, however, that other models have been proposed by various linguists (see, for instance, Callow, 1974; Gutwinski, 1976; de Beaugrande and Dressler, 1981; Hoey, 1988, 1991).
Halliday and Hasan identify five main cohesive devices in English: reference, substitution, ellipsis, conjunction, and lexical cohesion.
Each device is explained below in some detail, followed by an attempt to explore its relevance to translation.
6.1 REFERENCE
The term reference is traditionally used in semantics for the relationship which holds between a word and what it points to in the real world.
The reference of chair would therefore be a particular chair that is being identified on a particular occasion.
In Halliday and Hasan's model of cohesion, reference is used in a similar but more restricted way.
Instead of denoting a direct relationship between words and extra-linguistic objects, reference is limited here to the relationship of identity which holds between two linguistic expressions.
For example, in
Mrs Thatcher has resigned.
She announced her decision this morning
the pronoun she points to Mrs Thatcher within the textual world itself.
Reference, in the textual rather than the semantic sense, occurs when the reader has to retrieve the identity of what is being talked about by referring to another expression in the immediate context.
The resulting cohesion ‘lies in the continuity of reference, whereby the same thing enters into the discourse a second time’(Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 31).
Every language has certain items which have the property of reference in the textual sense.
These reference items have the potential for directing the reader to look elsewhere for their interpretation.
The most common reference items in English and a large number of other languages are pronouns.
Third-person pronouns are frequently used to refer back (and occasionally forward) to an entity which has already been introduced (or is about to be introduced) into the discourse.
Apart from personal reference, English also uses items such as the, this, and those to establish similar links between expressions in a text.
In
Mrs Thatcher has resigned.
This delighted her opponents
the reader has to go back to the previous stretch of discourse to establish what This refers to.
So, reference is a device which allows the reader/hearer to trace participants, entities, events, etc. in a text.
One of the most common patterns of establishing chains of reference in English and a number of other languages is to mention a participant explicitly in the first  instance, for example by name or title, and then use a pronoun to refer back to the same participant in the immediate context.
Those languages which have number and gender distinctions in their pronoun system are less constrained in using this cohesive device, since different pronouns can be used to refer to different entities within a text with less possibility of confusion.
The following example, from Agatha Christie's Triangle at Rhodes, illustrates networks of personal reference in a short paragraph:
Hercule Poirot sat on the white sand and looked out across the sparkling blue water.
He was carefully dressed in a dandified fashion in white flannels and a large panama hat protected his head.
He belonged to the old-fashioned generation which believed in covering itself carefully from the sun.
Miss Pamela Lyall, who sat beside him and talked carelessly, represented the modern school of thought in that she was wearing the barest minimum of clothing on her sun-browned person.
(Christie, 1936: 196) Although Halliday and Hasan use a restricted notion of reference based on textual rather than extra-linguistic relations, they still acknowledge that the relationship of reference may be established situationally.
For example, a given pronoun may refer to an entity which is present in the context of situation rather than in the surrounding text.
The first- and second-person pronouns are typical examples in that they do not refer back to a nominal expression in the text but to the speaker and hearer (or writer and reader) respectively.
Third-person pronouns typically refer back (or forward) to a nominal expression in the text but may also be used to refer to an entity which is present in the immediate physical or mental context of situation.
An utterance such as He's not back yet is perfectly feasible provided the speaker and hearer are clear about the identity of ‘he’, for example in the case of a couple referring to their son.
Another type of reference relation which is not strictly textual is that of co-reference.
An example of a chain of co-referential items is Mrs Thatcher → The Prime Minister → The Iron Lady → Maggie.
Halliday and Hasan do not discuss this type of referential linkage and Hoey (1988: 162) points out that co-reference ‘is not strictly a linguistic feature at all but a matter of real-world knowledge’.
It is, of course, true that recognizing a link between Mrs Thatcher and The Iron Lady, for instance , depends on knowledge of the world rather than on textual competence.
However, it is generally difficult and, for the purposes of translation not particularly helpful, to attempt to  draw a line between what is linguistic or textual and what is extra-linguistic or situational.
It may be useful at this point to suggest, following Halliday and Hasan, that there is a continuum of cohesive elements that may be used for referring back to an entity already mentioned in the discourse.
This continuum stretches from full repetition at one end of the scale to pronominal reference at the other.
The following example is adapted from Halliday and Hasan (1976: 283) to illustrate the point:
There's a boy climbing that tree.
a.
The boy's going to fall if he doesn't take care.
(repetition)
b.
The lad's going to fall if he doesn't take care.
(synonym)
c.
The child's going to fall if he doesn't take care.
(superordinate)
d.
The idiot's going to fall if he doesn't take care.
(general word)
e.
He's going to fall if he doesn't take care.
(pronominal reference)
Co-reference can be incorporated somewhere around the repetition/synonym level of the continuum if we decide to adopt a more flexible notion of reference for our current purposes.
Patterns of reference (also known as anaphora) can vary considerably both within and across languages.
Within the same language, text type seems to be an important factor in determining the choice of pattern.
Fox (1986) examined patterns of reference in three genres of American English: spontaneous conversation, written expository prose, and written fast-paced popular narratives.
She found that ‘the distribution of pronoun versus full noun phrase differed dramatically from one discourse type to the next’(1986: 27).
Each language has what we might call general preferences for certain patterns of reference as well as specific preferences that are sensitive to text type.
Callow (1974) explains that Hebrew, unlike English, prefers to use proper names to trace participants through a discourse.
So, where English would normally use a pronoun to refer to a participant who has already been introduced, provided there is no possibility of confusing reference, Hebrew is more likely to repeat the participant's name.
Similarly, she explains, for the Bororos of Brazil the normal pattern is to refer to a participant by using a noun several times in succession before eventually shifting into a pronominal form.
Unlike English, which tends to rely heavily on pronominal reference in tracing participants, Brazilian Portuguese generally seems to favour more lexical repetition.
In addition, Portuguese inflects verbs for person and number.
This grammatical feature provides additional means of relating processes and actions to specific participants  without the use of independent pronouns.
The following example is from an article on Akio Morita, Chairman of the Sony Corporation.
The article was published in the English and Portuguese editions of Playboy magazine.
References to Akio Morita are highlighted in both extracts, with the exception of verb inflections in Portuguese.
Items in angle brackets are not in the Portuguese text — they are inserted to make the back-translation readable.
English text:
Surrounded by the toys and the gadgets of his calling — tape recorders, mini television sets, world-band radios — he is the quintessential Japanese combination that has conquered the world: a tinkerer turned businessman.
As the eldest son of a wealthy sake and soy-sauce producer in conservative Nagoya, he was expected to take over the family business — and perhaps become the 15th generation of Morita Mayors in the local community.
Instead, he spent his time taking apart clocks and listening to Western classical music and preferred the study of physics to business.
During World War Two, he went into naval research as a lieutenant, working on a thermal-guided missile and other projects, and it was there that he met his future partner, Ibuka.
After the war, the two set up a business after a false start in the home-appliance market manufacturing rice cookers.
Total production: 100.
Total sales: 0.
Back-translation:
Product of a culture that values subtlety and indirect manners, Morita, with his frank way, is an ideal bridge between Japan and the West.
The eldest son of a prosperous producer of soya oil and saki, in Nagoya, the parents of Morita expected that he should take over the control of the family business.
Instead of this, Morita spent the time taking clocks apart, listening to Western classical music and preferring to study physics to putting himself into business.
During the Second World War  <he> dedicated himself to naval research, as a civilian, and it was in this period that  <he> made a partnership in a factory of rice cooking pots.
Total production: 100 pots.
Total sales: 0.
The first sentence in each of the above extracts occurs at the end of the paragraph immediately before the one we are examining.
The two sentences are not ‘equivalents’ of each other, but they are quoted here to show that, in spite of the fact that the last mention of the particular participant being traced is by pronominal reference in the English version and by a proper noun in the Portuguese version, English still prefers to pick up the reference in the new paragraph by means of a pronoun while Portuguese prefers lexical repetition.
Within the main paragraph under examination, Portuguese further repeats Morita twice while English persists in using pronominal reference.
Note that the finite verbs in the Portuguese text establish additional cohesive links with Morita because they are marked for person.
In some languages, such as Japanese and Chinese, a totally different pattern seems to be in operation.
Pronouns are hardly ever used and, once a participant is introduced, continuity of reference is signalled by omitting the subjects of following clauses.
This is a sort of default mechanism which tells the reader that the participant last mentioned or, alternatively, the one in focus or the one that can be inferred on grounds of logic or context, is the subject of the following clause(s) unless otherwise indicated (see discussion of theme and Chinese-style topic in Chapter 5, section 5.1.1.4).
In the following example from Palace and Politics in Prewar Japan (Appendix 6), we already know that the person addressed is the Emperor.
The reader has to supply all the missing subjects and create his/her own chains of reference.
Possible subjects and other pronominal references are inserted here in angle brackets for the reader's benefit — they do not appear in the Japanese text:
The most blunt one was Komeda Torao who was the third Jiho.
‘If <The Emperor/Your Majesty> pours <his/your> wise  consideration into politics as much as <he/you> likes riding in <his/your> daily life, <I> would not think that <he/you/the government>, would have been said as ‘two three ministers' politics' by the public.
So <I> am sincerely concerned.
The English translation naturally tries to approximate as much as possible to English patterns of cohesion:
Komeda Torao, Jiho of the third rank, was the most blunt: ‘If in the past [Your Majesty]had shown as much care for politics as he had passion for horsemanship, no such criticism from the public as ‘politics by two or three Ministers' would have occurred.’
Note the various rewordings and omissions in the English version.
These allow the translator to use a chain of reference which is typical of English (Your Majesty → he) as well as avoid creating other chains which can only be inferred.
The square brackets around Your Majesty in the English translation are presumably meant to alert the reader to the fact that the expression does not occur in the original, or that the translator is ‘guessing’ what might fill the subject slot in this case.
Note also the use of the colon after blunt to provide additional cohesion.
The above examples illustrate that different preferences exist across languages for certain general patterns of reference.
A good example of a language- and genre-specific type of pattern is explained in Hatim and Mason (1990: 97):
It is a recognised text convention governing the field of discourse of news reporting/investigative journalism in French that a concept referred to in a noun phrase will not be expressed in the same way twice running in a text.
Thus, le dollar américan will, in a subsequent lexicalisation, become le billet vert; le Président de la Republique will become, as well as the anaphoric il, perhaps le chef de l'Etat or even l'Elysée.
6.2 SUBSTITUTION AND ELLIPSIS
Unlike reference, substitution and ellipsis are grammatical rather than semantic relationships.
In substitution, an item (or items) is replaced by another item (or items):
I like movies.
And I do.
In the above example, do is a substitute for like movies.
Items commonly used in substitution in English include do, one, and the same, as in the following examples from Halliday and Hasan (1976: 89; 105):
You think Joan already knows?— I think everybody does.
(Does replaces knows).
My axe is too blunt.
I must get a sharper one.
(One replaces axe).
A: I'll have two poached eggs on toast, please.
B: I'll have the same.
(The same replaces two poached eggs on toast).
Ellipsis involves the omission of an item.
In other words, in ellipsis, an item is replaced by nothing.
This is a case of leaving something unsaid which is nevertheless understood.
It does not include every instance in which the hearer or reader has to supply missing information, but only those cases where the grammatical structure itself points to an item or items that can fill the slot in question.
Here are some examples of ellipsis:
Joan brought some carnations, and Catherine some sweet peas.
(ellipted item: brought in second clause).
Here are thirteen cards.
Take any.
Now give me any three.
(ellipted items: card after any in second clause and cards after any three in third clause).
Have you been swimming?— Yes, I have.
(ellipted items: been swimming in second clause).
(Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 143; 158; 167) Halliday and Hasan give a detailed description of several types of substitution and ellipsis in English.
Since substitution and ellipsis are purely grammatical relations which hold between linguistic forms rather than between linguistic forms and their meanings, the details are highly language-specific and are therefore not worth going into here.
Note that the boundary lines between the three types of cohesive device (reference, substitution, and ellipsis) are not clear cut.
Hoey (1991) gives the following example.
A question such as Does Agatha sing in the bath? may elicit three answers, of which answer (a) is an example of substitution, answer (b) of ellipsis, and answer (c) of reference:
(a) No, but I do.
(b) Yes, she does.
(c) Yes, she does it to annoy us, I think.
Answer (b) is an example of ellipsis because does cannot be said to substitute for sing in the above question.
The ellipted items in Yes, she does are sing in the bath.
The fuzziness of the boundaries and the technical differences between the three types of cohesive device need not concern us here; after all, they may not even operate in the same way in other languages.
At this stage, the translator need only be aware that there are different devices in different languages for creating ‘texture’ and that a text hangs together by virtue of the semantic and structural relationships that hold between its elements.
This has clear implications in practice.
Every language has its own battery of devices for creating links between textual elements.
Unless the translator is carrying out some kind of linguistic exercise, for instance for research purposes, transferring the devices used in the source text into the target text will not do.
Under normal circumstances, what is required is a reworking of the methods of establishing links to suit the textual norms of the target language.
The grammatical system of each language will itself encourage the use of certain devices in preference to others.
The textual norms of each genre will further suggest certain options and rule out others that are grammatically acceptable and may, in other genres, be textually acceptable as well.
Here is an example of the way in which changes at this textual level are normally handled, consciously or subconsciously, by a professional translator.
The original text is Arabic, the target text is English.
It is part of a document explaining arbitration procedures at the International Centre for Arbitration in Cairo.
Arabic original: Back-translation:
If thirty days elapse from the date on which one of the parties received a proposal submitted according to the first item without the parties agreeing to appoint the one arbitrator, his appointment is done by the appointing authority which the parties agreed to name.
If the parties had not agreed on the naming of the appointing authority, or if the authority which <They> agreed on nominating declines to appoint the arbitrator or is unable to nominate him within sixty days of the date of receiving the request which one of the parties presented to it in this regard, each of the parties may ask the Secretary-General of the Permanent Arbitration Court to nominate an appointing authority.
English translation:
If thirty days elapse from the date on which either party received a proposal — submitted according to the first item [(a)]— without the two parties agreeing on appointing one arbitrator, the authority nominated by the two parties undertakes to appoint the arbitrator.
If the parties had not agreed on nominating such authority, or if the nominated authority declines to appoint an arbitrator or is unable to nominate one within sixty days of its receipt of either party's request to that effect, both parties may ask the Secretary-General of the Permanent Arbitration Court to nominate an appointing authority.
The length and complexity of the sentences in the above extracts, and hence the potential difficulty of tracing participants, makes it necessary to use a variety of devices for establishing cohesive links in both texts.
The level of linkage is quite dense in both extracts, but there are striking differences in the choice of devices used in each case.
Arabic uses a number of devices which cannot be easily represented in back-translation.
For instance, all verbs agree with their subjects in gender and number, which means that links between the two are clear even when they are separated by a number of embedded clauses with their own subjects and verbs.
As well as using the equivalent of ‘which’ to establish linkage, as in ‘receiving the request which one of the parties presented to it’, the following verb is further suffixed for pronominal reference (literally: ‘which one of the parties presented-it-masculine to it-feminine’).
With ‘request’ being a masculine noun and ‘authority’a feminine noun in Arabic, the referential chains are not confused.
The grammatical structure of Arabic therefore favours  pronominal reference as a common device for tracing participants and establishing cohesive links in general.
In addition, however, this type of text tends to favour a high level of lexical repetition, and so the Arabic noun for ‘parties’, which is marked for duality, is repeated even in instances where no ambiguity would arise from using a pronoun or pronominal suffix.
English, like most languages, will generally use whatever means are necessary to reduce ambiguity in tracing participants.
Unlike the Arabic grammatical system, the English system makes very few distinctions in terms of number, gender, and verb agreement.
Lexical repetition is therefore a much safer option in cases where ambiguity of reference may arise and in contexts which do not tolerate ambiguity in general and ambiguity of reference in particular.
In legal and semi-legal texts, it has become the norm to use lexical repetition even in instances where no ambiguity might result from using pronominal reference.
Although the Arabic text makes considerable use of pronominal reference, there are no instances of pronominal reference at all in the English text.
It would be possible, but textually odd, to replace several of the lexical repetitions in the English text with the appropriate pronouns.
In addition to lexical repetition, the English version also uses substitution to establish cohesive links (if the nominated authority declines to appoint an arbitrator or is unable to nominate one).
There are also several instances of ellipsis.
In the example just quoted to illustrate substitution, the subject of the second clause (‘the nominated authority/it’) is ellipted.
To reiterate: every language has its own devices for establishing cohesive links.
Language and text-type preferences must both be taken into consideration in the process of translation.
With this in mind, let us now move on to examine other types of cohesive device that often require careful handling in translation.
6.3 CONJUNCTION
Conjunction involves the use of formal markers to relate sentences, clauses and paragraphs to each other.
Unlike reference, substitution, and ellipsis, the use of conjunction does not instruct the reader to supply missing information either by looking for it elsewhere in the text or by filling structural slots.
Instead, conjunction signals the way the writer wants the reader to relate what is about to be said to what has been said before.
Conjunction expresses one of a small number of  general relations.
The main relations are summarized below, with examples of conjunctions which can or typically realize each
a.
additive: and, or, also, in addition, furthermore, besides, similarly, likewise, by contrast, for instance ;
b.
adversative: but, yet, however, instead, on the other hand, nevertheless, at any rate, as a matter of fact;
c.
causal: so, consequently, it follows, for, because, under the circumstances, for this reason;
d.
temporal: then, next, after that, on another occasion, in conclusion, an hour later, finally, at last;
e.
continuatives (miscellaneous): now, of course, well, anyway, surely, after all.
A number of points need to be borne in mind here.
First, the same conjunction may be used to signal different relations, depending on the context.
Second, these relations can be expressed by a variety of means; the use of a conjunction is not the only device for expressing a temporal or causal relation, for instance.
In English, a temporal relation may be expressed by means of a verb such as follow or precede, and a causal relation is inherent in the meanings of verbs such as cause and lead to.
In fact, a language user will often recognize a semantic relation such as time sequence even when no explicit signal of such a relationship exists in the text.
Third, conjunctive relations do not just reflect relations between external phenomena, but may also be set up to reflect relations which are internal to the text or communicative situation.
For instance, temporal relations are not restricted to sequence in real time; they may reflect stages in the unfolding text.
A good example is the use of first, second, and third in this paragraph.
There is some uncertainty in the literature as to whether conjunctions which occur within sentences can be considered cohesive, since cohesion is considered by some linguists to be a relation between sentences rather than within sentences (see Halliday and Hasan, 1976: 232; see also note 2 at the end of this chapter).
This means that subordinators are not, strictly speaking, considered a type of conjunction.
For example, Halliday and Hasan (ibid.: 228) do not consider after a conjunction in
After they had fought the battle, it snowed
because it subordinates one part of the sentence to another but does not directly establish a link with another sentence.
In the following  example, by contrast, afterwards is considered a conjunction because it establishes a link between two sentences:
They fought a battle.
Afterwards, it snowed.
In this book, and for the purposes of translation, it makes more sense to take a broader view of cohesion and to consider any element cohesive as long as it signals a conjunctive-type relation between parts of a text, whether these parts are sentences, clauses (dependent or independent), or paragraphs.
To reiterate, subtleties of technical definition are not the main issue here and are not likely to prove directly relevant in translation.
The following example from A Study of Shamanistic Practices in Japan (Appendix 5) illustrates the use of conjunction in text:
The shamanic practices we have investigated are rightly seen as an archaic mysticism.
On the basis of the world view uncovered by the shaman's faculties, with its vision of another and miraculous plane which could interact causally with our own, the more advanced mystical intuitions of esoteric Buddhism were able to develop.
Today, however, this world view is fast disappearing.
The vision of another plane utterly different from our own, ambivalent, perilous and beyond our control, has faded.
Instead the universe has become one-dimensional; there is no barrier to be crossed, no mysteriously other kind of being to be met and placated.
Languages vary tremendously in the type of conjunctions they prefer to use as well as the frequency with which they use such items.
Also, since conjunction is a device for signalling relations between chunks of information, it is naturally bound up with both the chunking of information, how much to say in one go, and with how the relations between such chunks of information are perceived and signalled.
In fact, the use of conjunction provides an insight into the whole logic of discourse (Smith and Frawley, 1983).
Some languages, such as German, tend to express relations through subordination and complex structures.
Others, such as Chinese and Japanese, prefer to use simpler and shorter structures and to mark the relations between these structures explicitly where necessary.
One noticeable difference in the use of conjunctions which is well documented in the literature is that between English and Arabic.
Compared to Arabic, English generally prefers to present information in relatively small chunks and to signal the relationship between these chunks in unambiguous ways, using a wide variety of  conjunctions to mark semantic relations between clauses, sentences, and paragraphs.
In addition to the types of conjunction discussed by Halliday and Hasan, English also relies on a highly developed punctuation system to signal breaks and relations between chunks of information.
Unlike English, Arabic prefers to group information into very large grammatical chunks.
It is not unusual for Arabic paragraphs to consist of one sentence.
This is partly because punctuation and paragraphing are a relatively recent development in Arabic (Holes, 1984).
Moreover, Arabic tends to use a relatively small number of conjunctions, each of which has a wide range of meanings which depend for their interpretation on the context, thus relying heavily on the reader's ability to infer relationships which are only vaguely alluded to by the writer.
The most frequently used conjunctions in Arabic are wa and fa (Al-Jubouri and Knowles, 1988).
According to Holes, ‘/wa/ can mark temporal sequence, simultaneous action, semantic contrast and semantic equivalence, amongst other things; /fa/ can be a marker of temporal sequence, logical consequence, purpose, result or concession’(1984: 234).
Short sentences, a varied array of conjunctions, and absence of the typical conjunctions (mainly wa, fa, and a few other particles) are associated with translated Arabic texts — original Arabic texts do not normally display these features.
The following is an example of a fairly free translation into Arabic.
The source text uses no conjunctions but relies instead on punctuation devices.
The translated version conforms more to Arabic than to English norms of cohesion.
Note, in particular, the use of typical Arabic conjunctions: wa (roughly: ‘and’), hatha-wa (literally: ‘this and’), and kama (roughly: ‘also'/'in addition’).
Note also that there are fewer sentence breaks in the Arabic version (sentence breaks are highlighted by slashes in both texts).
English source text (Brintons — press release; see Appendix 9):
Brintons have been manufacturing fine quality woven carpet over 200 years /.
/They are a privately owned company specializing in Axminster and Wilton carpets, using wool-rich blends /.
/They have a totally integrated operation from the preparation of the yarn through to the weaving process /.
/All their products are made on looms designed and built by their own engineers, and recognized as the most technically superior weaving plant in the World /.
/Brintons are one of the largest weavers with a production capacity in excess of 100,000 square metres per week /.
/
Back-translation:
Brintons company has been manufacturing the finest quality of woven carpets for over 200 years, and it is a private company which specializes in producing Axminster and Wilton carpets in which enters a high percentage of wool /.
/This and the company carries out all steps of production in its factories, from preparing the yarn to weaving it on looms designed and manufactured by company engineers, and Brintons factories are considered the most advanced weaving factories from the technical aspect in the whole world, also Brintons company is considered among the largest weaving companies with a production capacity exceeding 100,000 square metres per week /.
/
The above example illustrates how conjunctions which are typically used in Arabic discourse are added to a translation to make it smoother, even when no conjunctions are used in the source text.
But given the greater semantic generality of typical Arabic conjunctions, what does an Arab translator do when faced with an array of explicit conjunctions in the source text?
Should preference be given to producing a smooth text with typical but semantically less precise conjunctions, or should the translator give priority to ‘meaning’ by opting for an equally varied array of conjunctions with precise meanings?
What happens in practice is often something in between the two extremes outlined here.
Most translators will try to do a bit of both.
Here is an example from the preface to Arab Political Humour by Kishtainy (1985).
Conjunctions are highlighted in both texts.
Arabic conjunctions follow their English back-translations in italics to show the variety of items used.
English text:
Writing on the political humour of the Arab World, past and present, is a hazardous undertaking which I was resolved to risk, much against the advice of many friends.
Some felt a shudder at the thought of tackling the sense of humour of the Prophet Muhammad and the holy imams of Islam, and counselled that the subject matter should be confined to modern times.
Others, however, felt a similar shudder at the thought of telling and discussing the political jokes about contemporary leaders of the modern Arab World and advised me to confine myself to the days of the Prophet and the early imams.
After all, these are men of God and are guided by his spirit of indulgence and forgiveness.
They are, furthermore, dead and buried and have no recourse to the revenge squads despatched from the Middle East to the four corners of the world.
Yet, a full picture of Arab political humour truly reflecting the psychology, thought and politics of the Arab peoples cannot be adequately drawn without covering the entire span of Arab history, at least from the rise of Islam.
Back-translation:
Writing on the topic of political humour in the Arab World, past and present, is a task full of danger.
But [laakin]I made the decision of taking the risk, against the advice of a large number of friends to avoid the dangers involved.
For [fa]some of them  felt a strong shock just at my thinking of tackling the subject of the sense of humour of the Prophet Muhammad and the holy imams of Islam and advised me to confine my research to modern times.
And [wa]others felt a similar shock at my intention to talk about political jokes relating to contemporary leaders of the modern Arab World and suggested that I should confine myself to the days of the Prophet and the early imams.
For [fa]these, after all considerations, are men of God and they follow in their indulgence and forgiveness the spirit of God.
Furthermore [thumma anna]they are dead and cannot come back to join the revenge squads in the Middle East and the four corners of the world.
And yet [wa ma'a thaalik], it is impossible to draw a full picture of Arab political humour, reflecting the psychology of the Arab peoples, their way of thinking, and their politics without casting an overall glance on Arab history, beginning at least with the rise of Islam.
The translator of the above passage attempts, as most translators do in practice, to strike a balance between accuracy and naturalness.
At the level of cohesion, naturalness is enhanced by using typical Arabic conjunctions such as wa and fa, sometimes at the expense of accuracy.
For instance, using wa rather than something closer to English however (third sentence in the English text), reads smoothly in Arabic but sacrifices some of the precision of the English conjunction.
On the other hand, the direct translation of After all (Fourth sentence in the English text) into ‘after all considerations’, which is a paraphrase of the meaning of After all rather than an established conjunction in Arabic, represents a sacrifice of naturalness for the sake of accuracy.
You will have noted from the Brintons extract on page 106 that some English texts make little or no use of conjunctions.
There are often pragmatic reasons for the preference of certain types of conjunction and the frequency with which conjunctions are used in general.
Smith and Frawley's (1983) study of the use of conjunction in different genres of English suggests that some genres are generally ‘more conjunctive’ than others and that each genre has its own preferences for certain types of conjunction.
Religion and fiction use more conjunctions than science and journalism.
Religion displays a particular preference for negative additive conjunctions such as nor.
Smith and Frawley explain this feature by suggesting that ‘the high percentage of negative additive conjunctions…indicates a tendency toward falsification, the most consistent method of proof’(1983: 358).
Religious texts also make heavy use of causal conjunctions such as because, since, and for.
In science and journalism, by contrast, conjunctions in general and causal conjunctions in particular are relatively infrequent.
This is partly explained by the high level of assumed shared knowledge in science and by the need to give an impression of objectivity in both genres.
Restrictions on space and the need to avoid giving an overt explanation of reported events which risks the danger of legal suits and liability further restrict the use of conjunctions, particularly causal conjunctions, in journalism.
Adjusting patterns of conjunction in line with target-language general and specific text-type preferences is less straightforward than adjusting patterns of reference.
The problem with conjunction is that it reflects the rhetoric of a text and controls its interpretation.
This suggests that adjustments in translation will often affect both the content and the line of argumentation.
Let us look at an example of a German translation of an English text, the first page of Morgan Matroc's company brochure: Technical Ceramics (see Appendix 2 for the German text).
The German version conforms to German style to such an extent that it is generally taken by German speakers to be a very well written ‘original’.
Conjunctions are highlighted in both texts.
The English source text consists of six paragraphs; the German translation, on the other hand, consists of eleven paragraphs.
This rechunking of the text may be an idiosyncratic adjustment on the part of the German translator, as it appears that German does not generally favour more breaks than English.
Generally speaking, rechunking is done for two main reasons:(a) the source text is divided into chunks (whether sections, paragraphs, sentences, or clauses) that are either too long or too short in terms of target-language average chunking of similar material; or (b) the nature of the target audience is different in terms of level of specialization, age, etc.
A text addressing an audience of specialists will tend to group information into larger chunks than one addressing laymen or children, for instance.
It may be that the target reader of the German translation is not envisaged to have the same familiarity with or interest in the ceramics industry as the prospective readers of the English version.
Moving on to the use of conjunctions, here is an initial breakdown of the ones used in each text.
English: Today (temporal);
so (causal);
because (causal), but (adversative);
Source text — English:
Today people are aware that modern ceramic materials offer unrivalled properties for many of our most demanding industrial applications.
So is this brochure necessary; isn't the  ceramic market already over-bombarded with technical literature; why should Matroc add more?
Because someone mumbles, ‘our competitors do it.’
But why should we imitate our competitors when Matroc probably supplies a greater range of ceramic materials for more applications than any other manufacturer.
And yet there are some customers who in their search for a suitable material prefer to study complex tables of technical data.
It is for such customers that we have listed the properties of Matroc's more widely used materials.
Frankly however without cost guides which depend so much on shape such an exercise is of limited value.
There are others in the market place who simply want to know more about us and what we are doing.
For them we offer illustrated commentaries on Matroc applications in many market sectors — from gas heaters to medical implants.
And finally there is a third class of customer who knows that a brief telephone conversation with a skilled Matroc engineer and the subsequent follow-up are more effective than 50 pages of technical data — such customers are our life blood — as we are theirs.
For them this brochure is unnecessary.
Matroc like other Morgan subsidiaries acknowledges that customers and engineers will have a variety of approaches to problem solving.
We hope that this publication will aid that process.
We have no doubt about the most effective route however and suggest that the starting point should be the list of telephone numbers and addresses on the final page of this brochure.
Back-translation of German text:
Today experts are fully agreed that modern ceramic materials offer unsurpassed qualities for many of the most demanding industrial applications.
So we asked ourselves whether this catalogue would still find a corresponding resonance, given the flood of technical literature which is currently circulating in the ceramics market.
Should Matroc also add its contribution to this?
On the one hand, some would say: ‘that is quite usual for business’ but on the other hand will we reach our customers just by eagerly imitating others?
Finally, Matroc offers a greater range of ceramics for more applications than most other firms.
Now, there are customers who in their search for suitable materials prefer to study copious technical data sheets.
For such customers we have listed the properties of the most popular Matroc materials.
Yet one must consider that such an undertaking without cost information can only be expected to give a limited explanation because the production yield depends considerably on the geometry of the articles.
And then there are others in the market who simply want to know what we make.
For this purpose we have chosen illustrated commentaries from the most wide-ranging market sectors of Matroc — from gas heaters to medical implants.
Lastly we have a third group of customers who know that a brief telephone call with an experienced Matroc technician and the subsequent systematic processing would bring them significantly more than 50 pages of technical details.
Our existence rests on such customers — and vice versa!
What does yet another brochure offer these people?
Now, Matroc like other firms in the Morgan Group acknowledge that customers and technicians as a rule follow more than one path in solving a problem.
We hope that this publication serves its purpose.
Yet/in any event we have a firm idea about the most effective path and unreservedly recommend that at the beginning of the project one looks at the list of telephone numbers and addresses on the last page of this brochure.
and yet (additive + adversative), however (adversative); and finally (additive + temporal);
however (adversative) German: Today (temporal);
so (causal);
on the one hand (additive, comparison), but on the other hand (adversative + additive, comparison);
finally (temporal);
now (continuative, with additional force of adversative);
yet (adversative), because (causal);
and then (adversative), for this purpose (causal);
lastly (temporal);
now (continuative or concession — see below);
however/in any event (adversative); There are noticeably fewer conjunctions in the English text (eight) than in the German (twelve).
German seems to be generally more conjunctive than English  The use of explicit conjunction makes the structure of the text more transparent.
For instance, the ‘reason’ relation between the limited value of the brochure and cost information (English, third paragraph; German, sixth paragraph) is made more explicit in German by the addition of denn ‘because’.
Both texts proceed by questioning the need for a company brochure.
To start with, an attempt is made to find the answer by considering what Matroc's competitors do and weighing up two possibilities:(a) Matroc's competitors have company brochures and therefore Matroc has to do the same; and (b) Matroc does not need to imitate its competitors.
The German conjunctions used to signal this structure (Einerseits ‘on the one hand’, aber…andererseits ‘but on the other hand’) are more transparent than the mixture of causal Because and adversative But used in the English text.
Both texts then seem to abandon the question of what Matroc's competitors do and move on to consider the types of customer in the market place and whether the brochure would be of any value to them.
This departure is signalled more firmly in the German text through the use of Schließlich (‘finally’) and the additional paragraph break.
None of this means that the German text is ‘better’ or ‘worse’than its English counterpart.
The two texts simply address different readerships and in so doing reflect different textual preferences.
If the English text seems less straightforward than the German one so far, it is not without reason.
The English text achieves a higher level of informality by appearing to consider various angles of the problem in a relaxed, casual way, as if the writer is simply taking up issues as  they occur to him/her.
The use of And yet in the third paragraph, for instance, gives the impression that the writer is thinking aloud, or perhaps just moving back and forth along the same line of argument — as one would do in chatting to a friend — rather than firmly wrapping up one stage in the argument before moving on to the next as is the case in the German text.
Both styles, the chatty English and the formal German, seem appropriate to their particular contexts.
There are other interesting differences between the two texts.
The German translation makes a further internal relation between two parts of the text clearer by using Zu diesem Zweck (‘for this purpose'; seventh paragraph), instead of the English For them (fourth paragraph).
However, it loses the contrast that is developed in the fourth and fifth paragraphs in English: ‘There are others…
For them we offer…’ /‘And finally there is a third class of customer….
For them this brochure is unnecessary.’
In fact, this last sentence, ‘For them this brochure is unnecessary’, does not appear in the German text at all but is replaced by ‘What does another brochure offer these people?’
This is particularly interesting because the conjunction in the final paragraph of the German text, Allerdings, allows two alternative interpretations in this context:
We hope that this publication serves its purpose,
(i) However (adversative) we know the most effective path…
(ii) In any event (concession: whether it does or not, implying it may do) we know the most effective path…
Deleting ‘For them this brochure is unnecessary’ ties in with the second interpretation.
Germans have a reputation for being highly logical and systematic in their approach to things.
In a way, I suppose, it seems rather illogical to dismiss the value of the brochure altogether, for all types of customer, and at the same time suggest that the best way a customer can get the information s/he needs is to use a list of telephone numbers printed in the very brochure that is being dismissed.
Whether a translation conforms to the source-text patterns of cohesion or tries to approximate to target-language patterns will depend in the final analysis on the purpose of the translation and the amount of freedom the translator feels entitled to in rechunking information and/or altering signals of relations between chunks.
Whatever the translator decides to do, every option will have its advantages and disadvantages.
Following source-language norms may involve minimal change in overall meaning (other factors excluded).
On the  other hand, noticeable deviation from typical target-language patterns of chunking information and signalling relations is likely to result in the sort of text that can easily be identified as a translation because it sounds ‘foreign’.
Apart from questions of naturalness, accuracy, and the ‘logic’ of a text, there are sometimes stylistic considerations which may make the translation of conjunctions particularly difficult.
For instance, Milic (1970) suggests that one of the most striking features of Jonathan Swift's style relates to the way he uses conjunction.
Swift's favourite conjunctions, according to Milic, are and, but, and for.
He apparently makes ‘unusually heavy use’ of these items (Milic; 1970: 246).
Moreover, he does not use them as precise logical connectives but only to indicate that ‘one sentence is connected with another without reference to the nature of the connection’(ibid.: 247).
In other words, Swift's use of conjunction is very similar to that of Arabic (see page 193).
In both cases, two or three ‘favourite’ items are used very frequently in a semantically ‘imprecise’way.
The question then arises as to how one might translate Swift into Arabic when the hallmark of his style is a commonplace feature of Arabic prose.