

THE ASSESSMENT: COMPETITION POLICY
I. INTRODUCTION
A precondition for a successful market economy is the existence of an effective competition policy.
The need for such a policy was recognized by Adam Smith when he wrote in the Wealth of Nations in 1776: ‘People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some instances to raise prices.’
The problem, as many writers since Adam Smith have recognized, is that a market can be manipulated to give some of those involved greater economic power so that competition is distorted and economic efficiency impaired.
There may also be ethical and social objections to the absence of competition: it is simply not fair that large firms or cartels should be able to oppress smaller competitors and/or customers by charging prices that greatly exceed the costs of supply.
It is perhaps notable that a key piece of UK legislation is called the Fair Trading Act and the main UK competition policy institution is the Office of Fair Trading.
Alternatively there may be a commitment to competition as the appropriate form of economic organization, either because competition is a good in itself, or because it delivers the goods.
The objective of this paper is to advance four propositions about the purpose, scope, and implementation of competition policy, to measure existing policies against these theses, and to identify the directions in which reform might go.
Particular attention will be devoted to recent proposals to reform UK competition policy.
The first proposition, that the role of competition policy should be to promote economic efficiency , is  explored in section II.
Alternative views of the matter are that competition policy should be guided by some broader notion of the public interest, including perhaps non-economic social objectives, or that competition,per se , should be promoted.
There is some evidence in the papers on US, EC, and UK competition policy in this issue that despite differing objectives at the origination of policy, the growing consensus is that the focus should be on economic efficiency.
It is notable that all the papers on policy themes in the issue make the assumption that economic efficiency is the goal.
The second proposition, discussed in section III, is that economic analysis is generally ambiguous, a priori, about the efficiency effects of particular market structures and conduct .
This proposition builds on the considerable advances in industrial organization of the past 15 years, which have enabled theorists to identify the policy issues raised by a wide range of market phenomena.
This rich analysis is amply illustrated by the articles by Geroski, Waterson, and Rees in this issue.
However, the problem for competition policy is that trade-offs are more or less ubiquitous, and only in a few cases (price fixing or market sharing are examples) is it possible to reach an unambiguous verdict.
The third proposition, in section IV, builds on the first two.
It is that the appropriate design of policy and policy institutions is crucial to a successful competition policy .
In particular, given the ambiguity of economic analysis, policy has to identify rules or presumptions to indicate the boundaries between acceptable and unacceptable market conduct and structure, but it has to offer at least some scope for the parties involved in such cases to argue countervailing efficiency benefits.
Institutionally, implementation of policy requires a public procedure.
We identify an ideal where there is a public competition policy institution empowered to identify, investigate, and propose remedies for failures of competition, with a competition tribunal to review cases where the institution is proposing fines for abuses, or where the firms are unwilling to accept the initial findings.
The final thesis is that international harmonization of competition policies is essential, and probably a supranational competition authority is needed as well .
This proposition is the subject of section V of the paper, and reflects the growing internationalization of economic activity with multinational enterprises supplying markets that extend beyond the boundaries of particular states (and therefore the jurisdiction of competition authorities).
A particular example is the development of EC competition policy, and its relation to policies of member states.
Another concern is that national governments may use competition policy as an instrument to protect domestic markets against overseas entrants, or to promote the interests of domestic producers in world markets; this suggests the need to harmonize policy in different economies, and to seek international agreements to desist from using policy in a protectionist manner.
The last section of the paper will apply these four propositions to the reform of competition policy in the UK and the EC.
FIRST PROPOSITION
The role of competition policy should be to promote economic efficiency.
There are at least three schools of thought about what competition policy is seeking to achieve.
Mainstream industrial organization argues that the purpose of the policy is to promote economic efficiency.
Competition is not an end in itself.
Rather it is to be encouraged as a means to improving economic efficiency, where ‘efficiency’ is defined in terms of partial equilibrium welfare economics, that is the maximization of the sum of the discounted present value of consumer and producer surpluses (Hay and Morris, 1991, Chs. 16 and 17).
This definition encompasses the trade-off between static and dynamic efficiency: current welfare losses may be acceptable, if the market structure or conduct which gives rise to the losses will also generate efficiencies in the long run, so long as the prospective benefits are not too delayed in realization and the social discount rate is not too high.
It is important to define quite carefully what is meant by ‘competition’.
Traditionally, competition has been understood in terms of price competition, with firms pursuing their own self-interest in the setting of prices, not colluding with each other.
However, it has been shown that, under a variety of assumptions about information conditions, collusive outcomes are supportable as Nash perfect equilibria in repeated games (see Tirole, 1989, ch. 6 for a convenient summary).
Furthermore, price-cutting can in some circumstances be anticompetitive: predatory pricing to drive out a rival or an entrant, or low prices seeking to mislead entrants about the efficiency of the incumbent firms are cases in point (Milgrom and Roberts, 1982).
Competition can, of course, come in other forms.
In differentiated goods markets firms may compete on the number of brands they put on the market, in quality and in marketing (including advertising).
It is not always the case that a partial equilibrium welfare analysis will show unequivocally that more ‘competition’ in this form is better.
For example, brand proliferation may generate a welfare loss through excessive expenditure on fixed costs associated with each brand (Schmalensee, 1978; Salop, 1979).
At least some competitive advertising may be wasteful, as firms seek to duplicate each other 's expenditures in order to avoid market-share losses (Lambin, 1976).
In the long run firms may compete in physical investment or in R&D, leading to duplication of capacity or innovation expenditures.
The outcome of such competition may be that one firm emerges as the ‘winner’, able to dominate the market and earn monopoly rents (Gilbert and Newbury, 1982).
The sunk costs involved in building a strong market position may additionally become a barrier to entry, even if the intention was ‘innocent’ competition rather than a deliberate strategy to exclude potential competitors.
The welfare evaluation of such competition is far from unequivocal.
The conclusion is that ‘promoting competition’ is not sufficient in itself, if the objective of competition policy is to improve economic efficiency.
We need to be clear what is meant by competition, and different kinds of competitive behaviour need to be separately evaluated.
A second, smaller but nevertheless vociferous, school of thought argues that competition, in and of itself, is the appropriate objective: this neo-Austrian approach is more concerned with process than with outcomes, and in its extreme statement is not concerned with evaluation of economic efficiency at all.
A moderate exposition is that of Littlechild (1986) who argues that it is the process of competition which matters, and that the concept of economic efficiency which emerges from static welfare analysis is at best misleading.
The competitive process arises out of disequilibrium in markets giving opportunities for entrepreneurs to exploit their superior information and earn profits.
Equilibrium is never achieved, because the market is always changing due to new information, innovation, and shocks.
Monopoly profits are (or should be) eroded by the entry of new firms and products, which are able to displace the incumbent firms by offering lower prices or a better product.
So monopoly profits are a reward to innovation and entrepreneurship and a signal to competitors rather than a ‘welfare loss’.
For Littlechild, therefore, the objectives of competition policy should be the promotion of competition, by acting against market conduct designed to inhibit it.
Both the economic efficiency and neo-Austrian schools of thought express concern about the views of a third school which either has some fairly broad concept of the public interest as its stated objective, or in practice is motivated by more than a concern for economic efficiency and/or competition.
UK competition policy, for example, does not focus solely on economic efficiency.
Section 84 of the Fair Trading Act 1973 lists five criteria in determining the public interest.
The first refers to effective competition between suppliers, and the third makes reference to long-run competition through new products, processes, and entry to the market.
The second criterion refers to the promotion of the interests of consumers and purchasers of goods and services via quality and variety.
The fourth criterion is ‘maintaining and promoting the balanced distribution of industry and employment in the United Kingdom’.
This last criterion was applied in the Charter Consolidated Ltd/Anderson Strathclyde Ltd Report (1982), where the concern was for the effects of the merger on employment in  an area of Scotland which already had high unemployment.
Similarly, in Swedish Match AB/Alleghany International Inc. (1987) one reason adduced for permitting the merger was that a factory in a high unemployment area of Liverpool would thereby be saved from closure.
It is important to note that these criteria are not intended to be an exhaustive definition of the public interest.
Indeed, the MMC has on numerous occasions addressed other public interest issues.
For example, in Lonrho/House of Fraser (1979), it concerned itself with the managerial capacity of a particular individual.
In a number of cases it has raised a question about a UK company passing into the control of an overseas company.
Thus the issue in Shanghai Banking Corporation/Royal Bank of Scotland (1982) was whether it was acceptable for a major UK clearing bank to be controlled from outside the UK, and the likely consequences for the conduct of UK monetary policy.
In Government of Kuwait/British Petroleum (1988) the MMC concluded that control of BP by the Kuwaiti government would operate against the public interest.
More recently, the question has been raised as to whether it is contrary to the public interest for a private company to be taken over by a foreign state-owned company, given the privatization objectives of the UK government.
In Elders IXL/Allied Lyons (1986) the MMC concerned itself with the method by which Elders' bid was to be financed, but came to the view that the issue of leveraged bids was not one on which it should pronounce.
The other major arm of UK competition policy is the Restrictive Trades Practices Act, 1976.
Agreements between two or more firms that involve certain types of restrictions must be registered with the Director General of Fair Trading, and defended in the Restrictive Trade Practices Court.
The presumption is that such agreements are contrary to the public interest, and the onus is on the parties to the agreement to demonstrate that a particular agreement is not.
The Act lays down criteria, known as ‘gateways’, by which restrictions may be justified.
These include the effect on exports from the UK, and regional unemployment, as well as a ‘catch-all’ gateway (b): restrictions may be permitted which would confer on the public as purchasers, consumers or users of any goods or services, other specific and substantial benefits or advantages enjoyed or likely to be enjoyed by them as such.
This gateway was pleaded successfully in the Net Book Agreement (1957).
The argument was that the agreement kept a larger number of booksellers in business and maintained the number of books published, particularly those of literary and scholarly merit.
(The validity of these assertions has been seriously questioned since.)
In Permanent Magnets (1962), the benefit identified was that the absence of price competition had encouraged technical collaboration between the firms, giving purchasers the benefits of both lower costs and a range of suppliers.
Improved ability to compete with overseas competitors was also claimed.
The regional unemployment gateway was successfully pleaded in Yarn Spinners (1959), the impact on employment in Lancashire being the issue.
(However, the Court concluded that this benefit was outweighed by the detriment of perpetuating excess capacity in a declining industry, and the agreement was therefore struck down under the ‘tailpiece’ which is appended to the gateways.)
By contrast, competition law in the USA and the EC is ostensibly more focused on competition and economic efficiency.
However, historically at least, the origins of US antitrust were somewhat different.
Neale (1970, p. 459), for example, noted that:
the rationale for antitrust is essentially a device to provide legal checks to economic power, and is not a pursuit of economic efficiency as such.
Consequently the question asked is not whether antitrust decisions lead to the greatest economic efficiency but whether it can be said, given the non-economic reasons for antitrust policy, that these decisions do any serious harm.
According to Neale, the origin of US antitrust legislation, beginning with the Sherman Act in 1890, was a desire to limit the power of big business and trusts, and in particular to protect small business and consumers against their predatory behaviour.
George Hay (1987) has shown how this approach to antitrust survived into the post Second World War period with the adverse judgements in the Alcoa and United Shoe Machinery cases, where the companies concerned were condemned for ‘monopolization’ of their respective markets, despite the fact that they had only employed normal competitive means to acquire and maintain their dominant positions.
However, from 1975 economic  efficiency became the primary focus of antitrust cases in parallel with an increasing involvement of professional economists in antitrust institutions, and economists began to be used widely as expert witnesses.
This was particularly evident in the IBM case where several academic economists were drafted in to prepare IBM's defence (Fisher et al .,
1983).
Despite these developments, White (in this issue) still describes US competition policy as ‘sloppy’, referring particularly to American populism that favours small firms against big business, to a contradictory respect for scale economies, and to the capture of governmental processes by rent-seeking special interests.
In his review of the content of US antitrust, he indicates some areas of policy where the decisions are now largely driven by sound economic analysis (horizontal agreements and mergers) and others where the basis for judgements is less satisfactory and the practice sometimes inconsistent (vertical restraints and price discrimination).
White also points to conflicts of antitrust policy with other areas of governmental regulation, notably utilities regulation, health-safety-environmental regulations, and incipient import protectionism.
EC competition law is based on Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty of Rome, which respectively prohibit restrictive agreements between firms, and the abuse of dominant positions.
Until 1990, anticompetitive mergers could only be attacked under Article 86, on the basis of the precedent created by the Continental Can judgment in 1972.
In 1989, after years of discussion within the EC, a specific merger regulation was introduced.
Sapir et al.
(in this issue) note that the context of EC competition policy has always been the promotion of competition within a single European market, despite arguments that have sometimes been expressed in favour of industrial policies designed to improve the competitiveness of European firms in international markets.
The stress on competition has led the competition Directorate of the European Commission (DGIV) to place a particular emphasis on attacking any behaviour which might appear to segment the European market into national markets.
Thus in United Brands Co. v. Commission (1978), the Court held that United Brands had abused its dominant position by charging different prices for bananas according to the member state of their destination, where these prices could not be justified on the basis of transport costs.
The implication was that only the retailers in each destination market would be permitted to vary prices according to local conditions.
It was as if the Commission was seeking to impose a common market with common prices, rather than to ensure that competition prevailed.
The result was that United Brands had to abandon what was generally acknowledged to be a highly efficient distribution system, arguably to the detriment of consumer welfare.
While EC competition law has nothing equivalent to the wide ‘public-interest’ test of UK law, Article 85(3) does permit the granting of exemptions for agreements between firms that can be shown to produce beneficial effects.
Thus exemptions have been made available for R&D agreements, specialization agreements, and other agreements which seek to improve efficiency in production (Sapir et al.
in this issue give recent examples).
There is considerable debate as to whether this category of ‘beneficial effects’ can be extended to take social objectives into account, for example in the treatment of recession cartels.
Article 86, by contrast, has no section 3 to permit exemptions, which has sometimes been thought to be a weakness.
Similarly, as Sapir et al.
note, there is no provision within the 1989 Merger Regulation for the Commission to consider trade-offs between productive efficiency and reduced competition in assessing mergers.
The thinking behind EC competition law has particular significance currently for the UK where there are proposals to reform UK competition law to bring it into line with Articles 85 and 86 (see the article by Williams in this issue).
After consultations with interested parties, the government published a White Paper in 1989,Opening Markets: New Policies on Restrictive Trades Practices , which proposed the replacement of existing legislation on restrictive trades practices with legislation along the lines of Article 85.
Key features of the proposal included:
(a )
an Article 85-type prohibition of anticompetitive agreements, including an illustrative, but not exhaustive, list of banned practices such as price fixing, collusive tendering, resale price maintenance (RPM), market sharing, and collective boycotts: the focus of the prohibition is  to be on the effects of agreements rather than the specific form that they take;
(b )
provision for both block and individual exemptions from the prohibition, following the example of Article 85(3); the test to be applied is that of technical or economic improvement; a general public-interest criterion is specifically excluded, despite being asked for by, among others, the professions which are to be included in the scope of the legislation, unlike the existing Restrictive Trades Practices Act 1976;
(c )
fines of up to 10 per cent of UK turnover for firms found to be in breach of the prohibitions.
In 1992 this White Paper was followed up by a consultation document from the Department of Trade and Industry,Abuse of Market Power , which sets out options for reform in the areas currently covered by the Fair Trading Act 1973 and the Competition Act 1980.
While the document lists a number of legislative options, it makes a powerful case for the introduction of a prohibition system, along the lines of Article 86, to complement the proposals for restrictive trades practices previously put forward, and operating in a broadly similar manner.
It is noted that an Article 86 law, on its own, would not be sufficient: the scope of the legislation would need to be widened to include ‘complex monopolies’, and the remedies available should include structural remedies (e.g. divestment) and regulatory remedies (e.g. price controls).
Williams argues in this issue that there should be scope for a third verdict (in addition to‘guilty’ or ‘not guilty’of abusing market power), where the market situation, though not the firms' conduct, is not conducive to competition or economic efficiency, and on this basis is to be declared to be against the public interest.
But the appropriate remedies might be divestment, regulation, or removal of entry barriers rather than fines.
A key feature of the proposals in the consultation document is, once again, that the main focus of policy would be on the economic effects of market structure and conduct, and not on general public interest considerations.
The comparison of the philosophy of competition policy in the three jurisdictions should serve as a warning against ignoring completely the ‘public-interest’ dimension.
Whatever economists might like to think, economic efficiency is not the only consideration that is motivating policy.
A solution might be to accept that while public policy in general cannot be confined to considerations of economic efficiency, it is inappropriate for competition policy to examine wider social costs and benefits.
First, a wide definition of the public interest leads to policy implementation that is lacking in transparency: a firm and its advisers will be unable to judge whether or not a proposed course of conduct will be acceptable to the authorities.
(This criticism has been particularly levelled at the workings of the MMC in the UK.)
A second reason is that wider economic consequences may be better dealt with by other branches of economic policy: for example, regional policy can be designed specifically to deal with localized unemployment problems, R&D policy to deal with the promotion of R&D and the protection of intellectual property rights.
But this doctrine of matching policy instruments to policy variables is unlikely to be effective in all cases: for example, a desire for strategic reasons to protect a domestic defence industry from foreign takeovers, or a desire to maintain a diversity of ownership in the newspaper industry.
SECOND PROPOSITION
Economic analysis is often ambiguous, a priori, about the efficiency effects of particular market structures and conduct.
Despite major differences of approach in different competition policy jurisdictions, as evidenced in the papers in this volume, the policy agenda is remarkably similar.
Competition policy is concerned with agreements between firms, and with monopoly.
In respect of monopoly, the concern is generally with the abuse of dominant positions in markets, including charging excessive prices, the practice of price discrimination and vertical restraints, and with the means by which dominant positions are acquired (including mergers) and maintained.
The difficulty with all these policy areas is that the effect on economic efficiency is by no means clear cut: there are nearly always benefits and losses that have to be weighed.
In this section we will briefly indicate the nature of the trade-offs  involved before turning, in the next section, to the implications for the design of competition policy.
(i) Agreements between Firms
Competition policy in respect of agreements between firms is based on the standard economic analysis of cartels and other collusive agreements (Jaquemin and Slade, 1989).
The objective of such agreements is to raise prices and reduce output.
How this is achieved by the colluding firms varies depending on the circumstances of the market, and the product.
In fairly simple markets, agreements may focus on the price of a standardized product (including agreement on exactly what constitutes a standard product, e.g. terms and conditions of sale), or on production quotas for the participating firms.
In more complex markets, the agreements may take the form of dividing up the market geographically or according to product type.
Where the market is allocated on the basis of tenders, more intricate measures may be needed to ensure that the contracts are shared out, including perhaps ‘allocation’ of each contract to a particular firm and agreement on how the other firms will rig their bids to ensure that they are not awarded the contract ‘by mistake’.
The static welfare analysis of such practices is straightforward: price is higher and output lower than it would otherwise have been, so there is a welfare triangle loss.
(This, of course, ignores the theory of the second best, where the existence of price distortions in related markets may require a price which exceeds marginal cost in the market under consideration.
A counter to that argument is that an effective competition policy will seek to deal with related market price distortions at the same time.)
Furthermore, there may also be an X-efficiency loss: high prices and the absence of competition may make firms slack in their use of resources, generating higher costs than would otherwise be the case.
Note, however, that if the slack only takes the form of paying out some of the monopoly rents as higher remuneration to factors of production, then there is no efficiency loss implied.
A possible exception to this general conclusion of welfare loss from collusion was provided by Richardson (1965).
He argued that in some markets the lumpy nature of demand made it essential that contracts be shared out, to ensure that the competitors were not exposed to the risk of alternating ‘feast and famine’ in their order books.
A similar argument applies to cases where investment is lumpy (e.g. large processing plants): agreements to take turns in investing may be necessary to avoid excess capacity being built (or to avoid insufficient capacity being built as firms are afraid of excess capacity!).
In sectors that are suffering long-term or cyclical decline, arguments are often made for ‘crisis’ or ‘recession’cartels, to prevent the scrapping of capacity that will remain viable in the longer term, and to ensure that contraction of the industry occurs in an orderly manner.
A sector which faces a monopoly buyer may wish to organize itself to increase its bargaining power, the welfare effects of such a move are ambiguous.
Finally, it should be noted that export cartels (to exploit monopoly rents in overseas markets), and import cartels (to increase bargaining power vis-à-vis overseas suppliers) improve the terms of trade for the domestic economy and can generate (like optimal tariffs) welfare gains.
In practice, export cartels are not pursued by competition authorities in any of three jurisdictions discussed in this issue, though in the UK export agreements are supposed to be notified to the Office of Fair Trading.
If overt collusion is not permitted, then firms may be able to replicate its effect via tacit collusion (Tirole, 1989, ch. 6), which may take the form of ‘conscious parallelism’ with firms making identical price changes more or less at the same time.
This feature of concentrated markets is the subject of the paper by Rees in this issue.
He notes that successful collusion requires communication between the firms and that this is made much easier if they are able to exchange information about prices, outputs, and costs.
Hence, in most competition policy jurisdictions, agreements to exchange information are frowned upon.
Unfortunately, as Phlips (1987) has pointed out, exchange of information may be needed to facilitate the establishment of non-co-operative equilibria, in a situation where demands and costs are changing rapidly.
The alternative may be prices that tend to be sticky, unresponsive to shifts in the market.
Furthermore, certain commercial practices such as‘meeting competition clauses’, ‘most favoured nation’(MFN) clauses, and tie-ins that release the buyer if she can find a lower price supplier elsewhere can serve both to ensure information-sharing  about discounts and price-cutting and to give (in the case of MFN clauses) an incentive not to cut price (see Salop, 1985).
However, Rees also notes that collusion requires a mechanism to enforce agreements.
Without such a mechanism, all communication is just ‘cheap talk’: there is no reason for a firm to believe what the others say.
But theoretical analysis suggests that credible punishment strategies may need to be quite subtle and sophisticated, which leads to the conclusion that so-called ‘tacit’ collusion may in practice turn out to be ‘secret’collusion.
The implication, according to Rees, is that competition policy in this area should focus on outcomes rather than on market conduct.
As soon as the discussion extends to agreements between firms on other aspects of competition, the welfare analysis becomes even more ambiguous.
The seminal analysis of Dixit and Norman (1978) suggested that competitive advertising by oligopolists (which the evidence suggests is mutually cancelling) generates a welfare loss, and that agreements to limit competitive advertising would therefore be beneficial.
The difficulty with this result is that advertising is usually only one part of a marketing strategy, and that agreements on advertising are likely to spill over into other elements of that strategy including prices.
A similar difficulty arises with R&D agreements, discussed in the paper by Geroski (1993) in this issue.
The case for R&D agreements is partly that they avoid wasteful duplication of research, and allow complementary skills and risks to be pooled, but mainly that they internalize the information spillovers which mean that a single firm is unable to appropriate all the returns to its R&D efforts.
Geroski's review of empirical studies suggests that the effectiveness of patents in ensuring appropriability is generally quite weak, that imitation lags are short, and imitation costs low compared to innovation costs.
However, the evidence also suggests that information spillovers are more important in research than in development, and that a firm has to do quite a lot of its own R&D, if it is to be able to absorb information spillovers effectively.
These results suggest that R&D agreements will generate the highest social benefits where they concentrate on R rather than D, which will in addition reduce the perceived risk that competition in the markets created by the innovations will be blunted.
This risk will also be lessened where the firms involved produce complementary products rather than substitutes, where there are several R&D joint ventures in the industry, and where joint marketing arrangements are not part of the agreements (joint production may be required for productive efficiency in exploiting the R&D results).
(ii) Abuse of Dominant Positions
The most obvious abuses of a dominant position are thought to be excessive pricing, price discrimination, predatory pricing, and vertical restraints.
If a firm charges an excessive price, it generates a welfare triangle loss (as in the cartel case).
The difficulty is to identify what might be an ‘excessive price’.
The point is raised most acutely in R&D intensive sectors.
The prices of pharmaceutical products have frequently been reviewed by competition authorities, and at first sight the mark-ups appear to be very large.
The response of the companies is that such prices are necessary to recoup the costs of R&D, and to compensate for risk, since only a small proportion of R&D generates innovations that are commercially viable.
Price discrimination can take a number of forms (Phlips, 1983; Varian, 1989).
First, it may be spatial in that prices are set to reflect demand conditions in different geographical markets, those prices not reflecting different costs of supply.
Second, it may be competitive or ‘predatory ‘—a lower price being charged in markets where actual or potential competition is more active.
Third, price discrimination may appear in the guise of loyalty bonuses, rebates, and discounts.
Fourth, discounts for ‘full line’ ordering and commodity bundling are best interpreted as forms of price discrimination.
Each of these cases merits a separate welfare analysis.
In principle, price discrimination is required for optimal resource allocation: for example, a monopolist practising perfect price discrimination will produce more output than a non-discriminating monopolist.
However, Schmalensee (1981) has shown that discrimination allocates output inefficiently across consumers, which is undesirable unless offset by higher total output, e.g. where the  discrimination permits additional markets to be served.
So-called ‘predatory pricing’ has provided a major conundrum for competition authorities.
The concern of the authorities is that a dominant firm will price aggressively in those markets where it faces actual or potential competition with the intention of seeing off the competition.
There has been much theoretical discussion of this possibility (see Tirole, 1989, ch. 9; Ordover and Saloner, 1989).
The argument has to rely either on imperfect information about the predator's costs, so that price cutting is a means of building a reputation for being efficient, or on a ‘deep pocket’ story where the predator has access to either internal or external funds to finance its activities (Bolton and Scharfstein, 1990).
The defence of a firm accused of predatory pricing is often that it is merely responding to competition: so evidence of its intentions may be quite important in deciding whether a firm's conduct is predatory or not.
Unfortunately for competition policy, such evidence will invariably be lacking, and actual conduct is all that the authorities have to go on.
The welfare analysis of predatory pricing is also generally ambiguous.
It is necessary to weigh the short-run gains from lower prices against the long-run detriment if the predator does succeed in establishing a monopoly position.
Bonuses, rebates, and discounts related to the buyers' past purchases from the supplier have also been frowned upon by the authorities.
These ‘loyalty discounts’ give rise to switching costs, since a consumer who switches to another supplier loses the discount.
Such switching costs can serve to facilitate collusion and to deter competitive entry (Klemperer, 1987).
Once again there is a trade-off between lower effective prices in the short run, against the loss of more active price competition in the long run.
The issue of commodity bundling has been central to a number of celebrated competition policy cases, including those involving IBM in both the United States and Europe.
The argument against commodity bundling is that by offering a bundle of goods at a lower price than the sum of the prices for the components of the bundle the supplier is able to prevent competition from producers of individual goods within the bundle.
(The situation is even more acute if the existence of intellectual property rights or product design by a dominant firm excludes rivals from supplying products that are compatible with its equipment (Whinston, 1990).)
However, Adams and Yellen (1976) have shown that commodity bundling can be a form of price discrimination, which serves to sort consumers into groups with different demand characteristics and thereby to extend the market.
One unresolved issue is the extent to which price discriminatory practices can be taken as evidence of market dominance, since one view is that the authorities should only be concerned about such practices if the firm has a dominant position.
Neven and Phlips (1985) show that price discrimination can occur in oligopoly, but that it disappears as the number of competitors increases.
However, in a differentiated goods market even a small supplier might use price discrimination as a marketing strategy in its niche of the market, though the adverse effects on welfare will probably be slight.
Before leaving the subject of price discrimination, it is worth noting again that actual competition policies on price discrimination are sometimes motivated by a concern to protect small businesses vis-à-vis large ones, even though the competitive effects of price discrimination may be beneficial (lower prices to consumers).
This is certainly the case with the Robinson Patman Act 1936 in the USA.
The same concern was expressed in the investigations of discounts to retailers (MMC Report on Discounts to Retailers, 1981; Office of Fair Trading, 1985) in the UK, though these reports argued against a general prohibition of price discriminatory practices in favour of a case-by-case evaluation, and the focus was as much on the monopsony power of the larger retail chains.
Another area of firm behaviour that has attracted the attention of competition authorities concerned with the abuse of dominant positions is vertical restraints (Katz, 1989), which are the subject of Waterson's paper in this issue.
Examples of such restraints are exclusive distribution agreements, exclusive purchasing agreements, selective distribution systems and exclusive franchises, de-ins and full-line forcing, refusal to supply, and attempts  at resale price maintenance.
As Waterson shows, economic analysis has made considerable advances in the past ten years in developing a framework within which this type of behaviour can be explained.
But he also comments that the welfare analysis of restraints is quite equivocal.
They will often combine both pro-competitive and anticompetitive effects, and the net welfare effect is unclear.
His analysis also shows that Bork's (1978) position, that there is no reason to interfere with contractual relationships since different firms may adopt different marketing strategies, is not sustainable.
He is also critical of UK policy that prohibits one form of vertical restraint, namely resale price maintenance, while taking a more relaxed view of other restraints.
(iii) The Acquisition and Maintenance of Dominant Positions
The acquisition of dominant positions in markets has long been a concern of US antitrust, where section 2 of the Sherman Act 1890 outlaws behaviour to ‘monopolize or attempt to monopolize’ a market.
Article 86 of EC Law is prima facie only concerned with the abuse of a monopoly position, though the Continental Can judgment implied that an attempt by a firm, which was already dominant, to increase its dominance (e.g. by merger) could be interpreted as an abuse.
The UK legislation allows for the scrutiny of mergers, but is generally silent on the acquisition of dominant positions as opposed to the behaviour of firms in maintaining and exploiting these positions once achieved.
These are four means by which firms may achieve dominant positions in markets (Hay and Vickers, 1988):
(i)
The firm is granted market power by a public authority.
This is most common in the utility industries — power, water, and telecommunications.
In the US these have always been private-sector firms, but subject to regulation.
In the UK the process of privatization over the past nine years has moved utilities from public to private ownership, again under a regime of regulation (Vickers and Yarrow, 1988).
The rationale for retaining at least part of these industries as single units is that they are ‘natural monopolies’ with subadditive costs, especially where networks are concerned.
Regulation is an indication that competition policy cannot provide a solution to the monopolistic behaviour of these sectors.
(ii)
Achieving dominance by ‘skill, foresight, and industry’.
The problem for competition policy, as stated by Judge Learned Hand in the Alcoa decision (1945) in the US, is that ‘The successful competitor, having been urged to compete, must not be turned upon when he wins’(quoted in Schmalensee (1987)).
The problem for competition policy is once again a trade-off.
Dynamic competition to establish a dominant position may involve reducing costs, process innovation, and product innovation, which are welfare-enhancing.
The resulting market power will generate static welfare losses.
The problem is particularly acute where the dynamic competition involves investment in risky R&D: the market power it confers is the incentive for undertaking the investment.
(iii)
There is a further problem of distinguishing fair competition (lower prices, better quality) from anticompetitive behaviour, such as predatory pricing, which is the third means by which firms may come to dominate a market (Ordover and Saloner, 1989).
Predatory behaviour was discussed above, in the context of a firm abusing a dominant position.
The same problems of interpretation of market behaviour apply in this case.
(iv)
Acquiring a dominant position by merger has been one of the major routes to achieving dominance in recent experience in the UK and US.
Given that merger is the ultimate form of collusion, it might be asked why policy should not take an equally tough stance (Willig, 1991).
One reason is that there may be efficiency gains from merger, e.g. due to scale economies.
Williamson(1968) showed that quite modest gains in efficiency could offset a substantial increase in monopoly power.
The reason is that efficiency gains accrue across the whole range of a firm's output: the welfare losses only arise from the marginal loss in output as monopoly prices are changed.
A second reason is that the market for corporate control is thought to be an important disciplining device particularly in those circumstances where competition in product markets is absent.
An inefficient management must  either improve its performance, or face the consequences of the shareholders selling out to an alternative managerial team.
The efficiency of this mechanism has been challenged on both theoretical and empirical grounds.
The theoretical argument, stated by Grossman and Hart (1980)(see also Yarrow, 1985), is that shareholders will attempt to free ride on post-merger improvements in performance by not selling their (small) individual holdings.
The consequence is that merger bids aimed at improving performance will tend to fail.
The empirical grounds are that studies of post-merger performance are far from unanimous in identifying improved performance.
For examples, Jensen and Ruback (1983) and Franks and Harris (1989) report substantial gains to shareholders of target firms, but Meeks (1977) and Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987) fail to identify merger gains from accounting data.
Having acquired a dominant position in a market, a firm will presumably seek to exploit that position, unless it is constrained by the threat of potential competition.
The constraint of potential entry on the behaviour of dominant firms lies at the heart of the concept of contestable markets (see Baumol, 1982).
In a contestable market, existing firms are vulnerable to entry if they attempt to exploit their market power, there are no sunk costs, and hence exit is costless; and entrants have access to the same technology and factor prices as incumbents.
While it may be doubted whether contestability theory is an appropriate benchmark for assessing markets, as claimed by its protagonists (for sceptical views see Schwartz, 1986, and Shepherd, 1984), it has performed a useful role by underlining the significance of sunk costs in the analysis of entry.
The literature on strategic entry deterrence has analysed how firms may be able to use sunk costs to maintain dominant positions (Gilbert, 1989; Sutton, 1991).
The basic idea is that sunk costs shift profit outcomes in the post-entry game so that a potential entrant will be deterred.
The costs must be sunk, otherwise the threat would not be credible and, faced with entry, it would be in the incumbent's interest to reverse the decision.
Examples of strategic variables that might be used for entry deterrence include physical capital investment or R&D to reduce costs, pre-emptive patenting, and manipulation of demand conditions by advertising or brand proliferation (for a sceptical analysis see Smiley, 1988).
The analytic problem, for competition policy, is that these strategies involve both welfare gains and losses.
Thus lower costs and prices arising from R&D or physical investment are beneficial: the loss is that prices might have been even lower had entry not been deterred.
Similarly, an increase in the number of brands on offer may be a consumer gain, even though it reduces the probability of new suppliers entering the market in the long run.
If we take the robust view that it is long run competition which is important, and therefore entry-deterring strategies are to be frowned upon, there is the considerable difficulty of distinguishing ‘innocent’ from ‘strategic’behaviour.
A firm which innocently seeks to lower costs and improve product quality may simultaneously be making it harder for entry to occur.
If it passes on lower costs to its customers in the form of lower prices it may be open to the accusation of behaving in a predatory fashion.
There are other means which firms may use to exclude potential rivals from the market.
One literature focuses attention on ‘foreclosure’: an incumbent may seek to bar entry by entering into exclusive contracts with suppliers or customers (Aghion and Bolton, 1987), or by vertical integration upstream or downstream (Ordover et al.,
1990; Hart and Tirole, 1990; Ordover and Saloner, 1989).
A similar strategy, explored by Salop and Scheffman (1987), is where integration or contracts entered into by the incumbent have the effect of raising rivals costs, e.g. where a contract with a supplier specifies that an input will only be supplied to an entrant at a higher price than that enjoyed by the incumbent.
In practice, firms may be protected from entry by regulation, and therefore have no need to take steps to deter potential competitors.
White, in this issue, notes that while much has been achieved by deregulation in the US since the 1970s, regulation with anticompetitive effects remains common in the services sector, and much health-safety-environmental regulation is designed in a manner which gives an advantage to incumbent firms.
Sapir et al.
and Williams, in this issue, also note the adverse  consequences for competition of regulation in the European economies, especially in services.
Finally, there is the possibility of ‘excessive entry’(Mankiw and Whinston, 1986), when firms compete in quantities rather than prices, or where products are differentiated.
If firms incur fixed costs, a free-entry zero-profit equilibrium may result in too many firms operating with high average costs.
Entry deterrence may then be socially optimal, the social costs of higher prices being offset by lower average costs (for an example, see Hay and Morris, 1991, pp. 590–2).
The discussion of this section points to the ubiquity of welfare trade-offs in competition policy issues.
This does, of course, greatly complicate the design of policy — both the substance of competition law, and the institutional framework for implementing that law.
It is to these questions that we turn in the next section.
IV.
THIRD PROPOSITION
The appropriate design of policy and policy institutions is crucial to a successful competition policy.
The design of policy has to take into account the ambiguity of the welfare analysis outlined in the previous section.
However, it is clearly infeasible to treat every market situation or example of firm behaviour as being in principle open to investigation and decision by the competition authorities.
For one thing, it could absorb a lot of expert resources and the policy gains might not outweigh the costs of investigation in many cases: it could also encourage rent-seeking behaviour.
For another, the main virtue of a market economy is that firms are able to pursue their objectives and allocate resources without being constantly subject to scrutiny.
If the advantages of decentralization of decision making are to be preserved, firms must be able to operate within a set of rules for competition that enable them to identify what strategies are likely to attract scrutiny, and what strategies they can pursue without hindrance.
It is, therefore, essential that competition policy provides such a set of rules or guidelines.
Hay and Vickers (1987) identified the following general principles for the design of policy:
(i)
There are two types of error that competition policy might make.
The first is that desirable behaviour may be condemned or discouraged; the second is the risk of promoting or permitting undesirable behaviour.
Policy should, therefore, be framed with a view to minimizing these costs, together with the costs of administering the policy (Hay, 1981).
In practice, this means that rules and guidelines are essential.
Two examples will be briefly reviewed here.
The first example is the EC procedure of providing for block exemptions from Articles 85 and 86 (Whish, 1989, ch. 13).
Thus Regulation 418/85 provides exemption for R&D agreements from the effects of Article 85, making it clear that exemptions only apply to agreements that do not extend to joint marketing and selling.
Article 4 of the Regulation provides a list of permitted restrictions in such agreements.
Similarly, franchise agreements are granted block exemption under Regulation 4087/88.
The 1989 White Paper Opening Markets: New Policy on Restrictive Trade Practices proposed a similar approach in the revision of UK law.
A second example is the US Justice Department Merger Guidelines, the latest version of which was published in 1992 (see White, in this issue, for a description).
One issue is the effect of ‘ease of entry’ in the post-merger situation, where there are potential anticompetitive effects.
Anticipated entry must be probable, rapid, and sufficient to counteract these effects.
A second issue is the increase in concentration anticipated in relevant markets, which may be quite narrowly defined.
The guidelines are delineated in terms of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), which is the sum of the squares of the market shares, where the shares are expressed in percentages.
A merger with a resulting index between 1,000 and 1,800, and an increase in the index of 100 ‘potentially’ will raise competition concerns; a merger with a resulting index which exceeds 1,800, and an increase over 100, will be presumed anticompetitive, though there is an option for the parties to argue otherwise.
The Guidelines also spell out in some detail what anticompetitive effects the Department is concerned about.
While the Guidelines are merely informative of how the Justice Department approaches merger situations, and do not bind the Department, the  Federal Trade Commission, or private litigants, they are helpful to firms and their advisers in assessing whether a particular merger is likely to be acceptable to the competition authorities.
The Justice Department has similar Guidelines setting out the situations in which vertical restraints are likely to attract attention from the authorities.
(ii)
Some rules are likely to generate cases where desirable behaviour is discouraged or condemned.
If this is a difficulty, the solution is to allow firms to present a case for exemption from those rules if they can demonstrate that the public interest will be furthered thereby.
The reason for putting the onus of proof on the firms is that they have both the incentive to make the case, and access to the detailed information on which the case is to be based.
This procedure is quite common in competition policy, but by no means universal.
For example, it is possible for firms to apply for exemption for agreements under Article 85(3), even where the agreement is not covered by the block exemptions described above.
Similarly, it is open to firms to argue for a restrictive agreement before the Restrictive Trade Practices Court, citing one or more of the ‘gateways’ continued in the Act.
This contrasts oddly with the MMC procedure in the case of a merger, where the MMC has to conduct an open inquiry.
Obviously it will be in the interests of the firms involved to present evidence favourable to their case.
But they do not have to demonstrate that there will be gains .
The MMC simply has to be satisfied that the merger is not contrary to the public interest.
(iii)
The competition authorities should concern themselves with firms' conduct only when there is reason to believe that competition is absent (or would be absent were the conduct permitted).
This dictum applies particularly to price discrimination and vertical restraints.
As we saw in section III, in the US and EC jurisdictions price discrimination is more or less per se illegal: resale price maintenance is also per se illegal in all jurisdictions, though it is difficult to justify separating out RPM from other vertical restraints on the basis of economic analysis.
The treatment of other vertical restraints — tie-ins, full-line forcing, and rebates is more variable, though the general drift of policy is antagonistic.
However, it is difficult to see how they might generate significant welfare losses (and, indeed, may involve some welfare gains — see Waterston), unless practised by firms that have significant market power, in which case they may be used to exploit and sustain a dominant position.
There can be no objection in principle to a firm in a competitive environment seeking to differentiate its marketing from its rivals, and this may involve vertical restraints such as exclusive distribution or exclusive purchasing, as well as a package of rebates, loyalty bonuses, and discounts to retailers.
It is this type of thinking that lies behind the US Justice Department's Vertical Restraints Guidelines mentioned above, though White (in this issue) remarks that these 1985 Guidelines have not been particularly successful in clarifying the issues, and vertical restraints remain an unsatisfactory area of US antitrust policy.
In principle, applications of Article 86, and the investigation of ‘anticompetitive practices’ under the Competition Act 1980 in the UK are predicated on the existence of market power.
(iv)
It ought to be obvious, but is far from universally acknowledged in competition law, that where policy towards market dominance is in question, prevention is better than seeking remedies after a dominant position has been achieved.
Short of drastic action, to split up a major firm (as in the AT&T case in the US (Alcoa, United Shoe, AT&T, and IBM) or to order divestment (as in Supply of Beer , 1989), the remedies that can be applied are invariably weak.
A major firm has probably sunk cost in such a way that it is unlikely to be successfully challenged by an entrant.
Attacks on its conduct (e.g. vertical restraints, price discrimination, etc.) may serve only to decrease its efficiency in extracting monopoly rents, rather than to increase economic efficiency or consumer welfare.
Regulation is an option, but creates additional problems of its own, which are unlikely to commend it to the authorities except in exceptional circumstances (e.g. as part of a privatization programme involving natural monopolies).
Given these difficulties in dealing with established monopolies it is surprising that only US antitrust identifies ‘attempts to monopolize’ a market as a breach of the rules (under the Sherman Act).
Article 86 of EC law only deals directly with the abuse of a dominant position, presumably once the firm has achieved that position, and until recently  the scope for dealing with mergers which create dominant positions was severely limited.
In the UK, too, it is conduct to exploit a monopoly position which is attacked under the Fair Trade Act 1973 and the Competition Act 1980, rather than the process of acquiring that position.
Mergers that create dominant positions can be referred to the MMC, but there is no presumption against mergers (if anything, the reverse) and general public-interest criteria are applied in their evaluation.
One reason for this reluctance to take action against the process of monopolization is the difficulty of distinguishing acceptable and unacceptable behaviour.
As we saw in the previous section, there is an understandable reluctance to move against firms that have competed successfully and won market share.
The case history of US antitrust (Alcoa, United Shoe, AT&T, and IBM) in the postwar period is a witness to the difficulties that competition authorities face in this area.
In both Alcoa and United Shoe the courts acknowledged that the defendants had built their market shares by legal means, but none the less found them guilty because their respective dominant positions were due to conscious choice.
In the IBM case, an additional key feature was the question of the relevant market.
The Justice Department, and a number of private litigants, argued that attention should be focused on sub-markets of the computer industry, in many of which IBM did indeed have high market shares.
IBM argued that the market should be analysed as a whole, in which the IBM share was considerably less (Brock, 1975; Fisher et al.,
1983).
(v)
 The competition authorities should have powers to impose punishments on firms that engage in anticompetitive practices (e.g. price fixing, and exclusionary or predatory practices), to require firms to enter into binding commitments to desist from conduct that is demonstrably prejudicial to competition, and to propose structural remedies where firms have established a dominant position in a market.
The lack of ‘teeth’ in UK restrictive trades practices policy is in stark contrast to both the US (where executives of colluding companies have been gaoled for conspiracy, in addition to the levying of substantial fines on companies), and the EC (where a firm can be fined up to 10 per cent of its worldwide turnover).
Thus an agreement to fix prices or share out markets will be declared unlawful by the Restrictive Trades Practices Court, and struck down.
But the Court has no power to impose penalties unless the agreement is a renewing of an agreement that has previously been judged illegal.
In all three jurisdictions the authorities can, and do, seek binding undertakings from firms in respect of their market conduct, and can order structural remedies (either formally or as a result of negotiations with the firms involved).
Examples are the splitting up of AT&T in the US, referred to above, the more stringent conditions put on the BA/BCal merger by the EC authorities, and the MMC recommendation that the major UK brewers should divest themselves of most of their public houses (Supply of Beer , 1989).
A remaining issue is the shape of institutions that should be given the task of enforcing/applying competition law.
First, it clearly requires a public institution that is empowered to seek out and to evaluate possible failures of competition (including powers to collect evidence).
Private actions, even class actions, are unlikely to prove effective on their own, because of the free-rider problem, given the costs involved.
However, White, in this issue, argues that private actions have played an important role in the development of more effective antitrust in the US, and that the recent decline in the number of cases has allayed the fears, expressed in the 1980s, of excessive litigation.
Second, it would be appropriate for this institution to emphasize economic analysis of market dominance and conduct, rather than conformity to legal definitions of anticompetitive market situations and/or conduct.
However, as explained above, too much emphasis on economic analysis of each situation generates an impossible situation for firms who wish to know what is or is not permitted.
Hence it is important for the legislation to spell out the situations and conduct that will be presumed to be anticompetitive, and to provide for the competition policy institution to publish guidelines as to how it proposes to apply the legislation.
Furthermore, the institution should be required to listen to representations from the parties as to why the presumption of the legislation should not apply in a particular case, and to evaluate these representations.
Having completed  its analysis, the institution should then be required to publish a judgment of the matter under consideration, together with a statement of its arguments in arriving at that judgment.
Third, there should be a competition tribunal, which would be brought in in two circumstances.
The first is where the firms are unwilling to accept the judgment of the competition policy institution, and wish to have the case reviewed.
The second is where the institution is proposing the imposition of penalties on the firm for particularly outstanding violations of competition law rules without any mitigating circumstances (e.g. persistent involvement in price-fixing cartels).
Then the institution should be required to present the matter before the tribunal: an important role of the tribunal would be to prevent arbitrary exercise of power by the competition policy institution.
A further right of appeal to higher Courts on interpretation of the law, would also be desirable.
The actual institutions in the UK, USA, and EC are described in some detail in three papers in this issue (Williams, White and Sapir et al.
). The diversity, at first sight, is very great.
In the US there are two agencies entrusted with the enforcement of antitrust legislation — The Antitrust Division of the Justice Department, and the Federal Trade Commission.
The division of labour between them is not entirely clear, but their overall task is to bring actions against infringement of the provisions of the relevant Acts.
There are criminal penalties, including fines and imprisonment, for violations.
There is also provision for private litigation, whereby private parties can sue for three times the damages inflicted upon them by violations of the law.
In the EC responsibility for competition matters rests with Directorate-General IV of the European Commission (DGIV).
They are empowered to investigate breaches of Articles 85 and 86, which deal with competition matters, and where an infringement is identified, to require the parties to desist.
Fines of up to 10 per cent of the worldwide turnover of the guilty parties may be imposed.
The European Court has powers of judicial review over Commission decisions, and there have been many appeals to the Court against the decisions of DGIV.
The Court, therefore, has had a considerable impact on the development of policy.
As in the US, there is scope for private parties to bring actions for damages (though not multiple damages) where their interests have been harmed by violations of Articles 85 and 86.
By comparison with the US and the EC, UK competition-policy institutions are a muddle.
As far as agreements between firms are concerned the Restrictive Trades Practices Act 1976 requires all agreements to be notified to the Director General of Fair Trading who is then required to refer these to the Restrictive Trades Practices Court.
The Court is able to hear arguments from the parties for the exemption of the agreement from the provision of the Act.
The precise form of the agreement is very significant: indeed, careful drafting can take an agreement outside the provisions of the Act even when the economic effects are identical to an agreement which is caught by the Act.
Other competition matters are handled in the first place by the Office of Fair Trading, which can, under the Competition Act, seek undertakings from firms to desist from certain anticompetitive practices.
In merger cases, the Director General of Fair Trading advises the Secretary of State on a reference to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
In monopoly cases, either the Director General or the Secretary of State can make the reference.
In practice it is almost invariably the Director General who acts, though the Secretary of State initiated the reference of British Gas to the MMC in 1992.
The MMC then investigates, and if there is an adverse finding, it makes recommendations to the Secretary of State who is free to accept or reject the recommendations, in whole or in part.
The Secretary of State cannot, however, overrule a finding by the MMC that a merger, for example, is not contrary to the public interest.
The key feature is that the procedure is administrative (and discretionary): there is no concept of a breach or violation of the relevant competition law, and there is no ‘plaintiff or ‘defendant’.
It is evident that US and EC competition policy conform much more closely to the desired shape for competition policy institutions than does current UK policy.
However, in practice, the EC system has attracted considerable criticism from competition lawyers.
One problem is that appeals to the European Court from decisions of DGIV tend to take a very long time, and there is also some doubt  as to whether the Court is an appropriately constituted body to act as a review tribunal in the sense described above.
The criticism is that these problems have left DGIV with far too much power to act as both prosecutor and judge in the cases it has pursued.
An obvious reform would be to institute a competition tribunal.
At least some of these criticisms seem to have been taken on board in the recent proposals for reform of UK competition policy described in section II above.
The proposals would give the Office of Fair Trading extensive powers to investigate market conduct, along the lines of the powers exercised by DGIV, and to reach conclusions about fines or remedies.
However, the parties would have access to a specialized competition policy tribunal (a restructured MMC), if they were unhappy with the conclusions of the Office of Fair Trading, and further rights of appeal to the High Court on points of law, on the interpretation of evidence, and on the level of fines.
V. FOURTH PROPOSITION
International harmonization of competition policies is essential and probably a supranational competition authority as well.
Two further issues for competition policy are becoming increasingly important (see sections IV and V of the paper by Sapir et al.
in this issue).
One concerns the geographical level at which competition policy should operate, an issue that is arising in the context of EC policy in relation to policy of member states of the EC.
The second is the potential for conflict between competition policy and other microeconomic policies, which are often loosely termed ‘industrial policies’.
(i) The Level at which Competition Policy should Operate
The issue to be analysed in this section takes a number of different forms in practice.
The most straightforward example is where a firm has a dominant position in the UK national market, but argues before the competition authorities that the relevant market definition is not national, but, for example, the whole EC.
A more complex case is where the supplier in the UK national market is a branch of a multinational company, which has made an agreement with other multinationals to share out world markets by allocating different economies to different suppliers.
How can the national competition authorities take action against the suppliers?
Similarly, the UK national market may be supplied by a group of firms, say American firms, that have (legally) formed an export cartel.
Alternatively, consider a case where a UK firm merges with an overseas firm, which was not currently serving the UK market, but which had the potential to enter the UK market.
Obviously, potential competition is reduced though current supplies are not affected.
Should the UK competition authorities seek to block the merger?
In principle, once the market has been defined, then it is appropriate to apply competition policy to that market.
A sensible division of labour then suggests itself.
If a particular market is ‘national’ in the sense that the good in question is strictly non-tradable, then it is appropriate for the issue to be considered by a national authority.
If, however, the market is international, and the good in question widely traded, then a higher level authority is required (or full collaboration between the national authorities affected).
The relationship between UK and EC competition policy approximates to this division of labour.
Thus UK competition policy is very clearly directed at market behaviour and conduct that affects the supply of goods and services within the United Kingdom .
So the behaviour of an overseas firm is not investigated unless its actions and the consequent effects are felt in the domestic market.
EC competition policy, by contrast, applies when trade between member states is affected, or potentially affected, by the conduct which is being scrutinized.
The rule is that EC competition law takes precedence over UK law, though this has not prevented merger cases being examined by both jurisdictions (e.g. British Airways/British Caledonian, 1987).
The 1989 EC Regulation on mergers should help to allocate jurisdiction in these cases.
However, this neat division of labour is predicated on being able to distinguish traded and non-traded goods in a precise fashion.
In practice, the problem of market definition remains.
Because of transport costs one might expect heavy building materials, such as cement, to be non-traded.
However, as UK  cement manufacturers discovered to their cost, high prices in the UK market made it worthwhile for low cost EC and third country suppliers, located at deep water ports, to begin supplying the UK market.
The basic point is that, in the absence of major tariff or non-tariff barriers to trade, a good becomes more ‘traded’(i.e. attracting import competition) the higher the domestic price.
Obviously the potential for entry via imports needs to be considered carefully by domestic competition authorities in assessing whether a firm is dominant and whether it is abusing its monopoly position.
This emphasises a further point to which domestic competition authorities need to apply their minds.
It is quite possible that a good is in principle tradable, but that the domestic distribution system has been ‘captured’ by a single supplier in such a way that entry by trade is difficult.
But a national authority may find it (politically) difficult to pursue a domestic firm with a view to enabling foreign firms to achieve a greater market share.
The EC authorities will need to intervene on the grounds that potential trade is being stifled.
However, the EC authorities should not be over zealous in this matter to the extent of arguing that any territorial division of the EC market, especially the charging of different prices in different countries, is a sign of non-competitive behaviour.
Thus in the United Brands (1978) case, the company was not permitted to charge (in Rotterdam/Bremerhaven) different prices for bananas depending on where they were to be sold (lowest price in Eire, highest price in Germany).
As noted above, the welfare effects of price discrimination can be positive, and it should not be treated automatically as an abuse of a dominant position.
There remains the case where a group of films in a third country form an export cartel (e.g. a group of United States firms forming an export cartel as permitted by the Webb-Pomerene Act of 1918).
The UK maintains a strong doctrine of extraterritoriality which means that UK competition policy cannot be applied in such cases, any more than US antitrust policy would be permitted to pursue a cartel of UK firms exporting to the US.
The EC position remains unclear.
In the Wood Pulp case (1985) the Commission held that a concerned practice by non-EC firms fell within the jurisdiction of EC law because of the effects on the EC market.
The Court avoided this doctrine by finding that the agreement had been implemented within the EC, and hence fell within the jurisdiction of EC law.
Such cases do, however, point to the need for international collaboration to promote competition in global markets.
The issue of jurisdiction in competition policy is discussed in the paper by Neven and Siotis in this issue, in the context of an analysis of foreign direct investment (FDI).
They note that some explanations of FDI appeal to the existence of market failures and imperfect competition, and hence imply the need for careful scrutiny by competition authorities.
In particular, a firm undertaking FDI needs a firm-specific advantage (e.g. a brand name of a patent), which it prefers to exploit itself rather than license to an existing domestic producer.
Furthermore, there must be country-specific advantages in producing there rather than exporting.
These advantages may relate to factor supplies, technology spillovers from domestic firms that can only be captured by locating there, the need to jump over trade barriers, or simply the opportunity to exploit a potential monopoly position.
The competition policy issues follow from this analysis.
Intangible assets may give rise to market power rents in addition to pure rents on specific attributes, where the asset is used strategically to prevent entry by a competition.
On the other hand, FDI with superior technology could generate net welfare gains, despite monopoly rents, especially if there are spillovers to host-country producers (e.g. where FDI is subject to local content rules).
But this latter argument can be reversed if the motivation for FDI is to source technology from domestic suppliers.
The issue of jurisdiction is raised most acutely where FDI is by means of acquisition.
As noted above, acquisition may indirectly affect competition in the domestic market by eliminating a potential alternative supplier, even though the market structure is unchanged.
An FDI acquisition may also affect competition in a third market to which both the acquirer and the acquired firms were actual or potential suppliers.
(ii) Competition Policy and Industrial Policies
The discussion of export cartels in the previous section has pointed to the possibility that competition  policy might be designed and applied to protect domestic markets and to promote domestic producers in export markets.
Indeed, it is not unusual for business groups to argue that competition policy should be used in this way.
There are a number of ways in which competition policy might be applied (or fail to be applied!) to protect the domestic market.
One route is to take a hostile view of takeovers involving the absorption of a domestic firm by a foreign buyer, since takeover is often the best method for a potential competitor to get an initial share in the domestic market.
In practice, the MMC has sometimes reported against foreign takeovers as contrary to the public interest, but the reasoning has been other than a desire to stifle competition (e.g. the report on Government of Kuwait/British Petroleum, 1988, which decided that it was contrary to the public interest for the Government of Kuwait to gain a major shareholding in BP).
A second route might be to allow domestic producers to agree on predatory responses to attempts by foreign suppliers to enter the national market.
A third route could be to permit vertical relationships and restraints between domestic producers, or domestic producers and distributors, which made it difficult either for a foreign firm to set up production and gain essential supplies, or for a foreign firm to get access to existing distribution networks.
None of these possibilities is countenanced by competition policy in any of the three jurisdictions previously discussed, though there have been calls for a more protectionist approach in the US.
We should also note that there are some trade measures that are protectionist in effect, and have strong links with competition policy.
A sector which is under pressure from imports may seek voluntary export restraints on the part of the foreign suppliers (a wide range of Japanese exports to the United States have been affected by such agreements).
Alternatively, a hard-pressed sector may seek to persuade its government to invoke anti-dumping measures.
The parallel is with the treatment of predatory pricing in competition policy.
Anti-dumping measures are supposed to be a response to ‘unfair’ competition, but it is difficult to distinguish genuine low-cost entry from predatory entry by foreign suppliers.
If au else fails, a sector which is being undermined by imports may successfully apply for exemption from restrictions on the formation of a cartel to enable the decline of the sector to proceed in an orderly manner.
A number of such cartels have been permitted, indeed promoted, by the EC authorities.
Industrial policy is usually linked to promotion of exports rather than the protection of the domestic market per se .
The key insights were provided by Krugman (1984): protection of a market enables domestic producers to realize economies of scale or learning by doing, and to recoup R&D costs, so that when protection is removed, and the firms begin to export they have cost advantages over foreign producers and can capture larger market shares.
Itoh et al.
(1991) have analysed various industrial policy measures that may achieve these ends, including direct and indirect subsidies to producers as well as standard protectionist measures such as tariffs, quotas, and non-tariff barriers.
Our focus here is on the use of competition policy to achieve the same ends.
There are three ways in which competition policy might be used to promote the interests of domestic producers.
The first is permitting the creation of ‘national champions’.
Thus firms may be allowed to grow to dominate their domestic market, by internal growth or by merger, on the pretext of creating firms that will be able to compete on ‘equal terms’ in world markets.
If these world markets are themselves genuinely competitive, and if the domestic market is open to imports, then there may be little direct harm resulting from the pursuit of large scale (though ideally one would wish there to be some scrutiny of the dominant firm in the context of the world market by a supra-national competition authority).
However, the domestic competition authorities should satisfy themselves that the domestic market is genuinely open.
Arguments for ‘national champions’ have sometimes appeared in MMC reports, notably the B A/B Cal (1987) Report.
Sapir et al.,
in this issue, identify a 1990 decision of the European Commission to permit a co-operation agreement on R&D, production, and marketing of electronic components for satellites, on the grounds that the companies otherwise would find it difficult to compete with non-European suppliers.
A second method of promoting the interests of domestic producers is by permitting them to enter into collaborations of various kinds.
One kind is the establishment of joint ventures for exporting: the justification is that they can share the fixed costs, and pool expertise, in penetrating foreign markets, and that they can avoid competing against each other for foreign orders.
Export cartels are permitted under both UK and US competition law.
The justification is that it is undesirable for domestic firms to compete against each other in overseas markets: national welfare is enhanced if they maximize their joint rents.
As we have seen, this gain is a loss to the welfare of consumers in the country to which they are exporting, and the cartel would, therefore, presumably be disallowed by an international competition authority.
Other joint ventures are in R&D: once again the gain is the sharing of fixed costs and the avoidance of costly duplication of activities.
Another type of collaboration is a specialization agreement where firms agree to specialize in production so that they can achieve scale economies, with commitments to supply each other(on favourable terms) with the products that the other is not producing.
Au these possibilities are recognized in EC competition policy, and are given exemption from Article 85 so long as certain safeguards are in place.
R&D agreements and specialization agreements between UK firms can be drafted in such a way as to fall outside the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976: otherwise firms might be able to appeal to the permissive stance of EC law to override any difficulties with the UK rules.
The Director General of Fair Trading has indicated that joint ventures can be made the subject of a direction (under section 21(2) of the Act) by the Secretary of State to the Director General not to take proceedings before the Court.
(iii) Implications for Competition Policy Jurisdiction
It will be evident that the two issues raised in this section — the appropriate level for competition policy, and the use of competition policy as a tool of industrial policy (whether protectionist or promotional)— are two sides of the same question.
The question is whether competition policy is seeking to raise the welfare of a particular economy, or whether it should be used as an instrument to promote economic efficiency at a supranational (or even international) level.
In respect of UK membership of the EC it should be recalled that Article 3(f) of the Treaty of Rome provides for ‘the institution of a system ensuring that competition in the common market is not distorted’.
In principle that must imply the abandonment of any attempt by member governments to use competition policy to protect or promote their domestic industry (just as other industrial and trade policy measures have had to be progressively abandoned).
It also implies the need to harmonize UK and EC competition policies, and to make clear the division of labour between them: this will almost certainly imply a greater role for EC policy, and a diminution of the authority of UK policy and institutions.
At the international level much will depend on whether the OECD countries continue to pursue free trade, or whether protectionist tendencies proliferate.
If free trade remains the objective then agreements on international aspects of competition policy to collaborate in the implementation of competition policy, where more than one economy is affected, will be required.
Neven and Siotis, in this issue, contrast decentralization of policy to competition authorities in member states with centralization in a strengthened DGIV in Brussels.
In favour of decentralization, they appeal to the doctrine of subsidiarity, and additionally argue that a supranational authority is likely to be unduly prone to capture by interest groups.
But they recognize that decentralization will only work if there is agreement on the fundamental competition rules to be applied (with little or no discretion), and if there are clear rules for allocating cases across jurisdictions (e.g. where a particular merger will have competition implications in several member states of the EC).
There is a particular danger that national competition policies might be used in a protectionist or promotional manner as described above to give advantage to domestic producers.
The experience of the EC with member state aids to attract foreign direct investment should serve as a warning that EC rules are not always sufficient to prevent member states from taking unilateral steps to improve their national economies at the expense of others.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS: WHAT SHOULD BE DONE ABOUT COMPETITION POLICY IN THE UK AND EC?
The paper has argued four propositions concerning competition policy.
The first three relate to the objectives and design of policy and institutions and form a logical sequence; the fourth looks at international aspects of policy, particularly the issue of policy jurisdiction between, for example, the member states of the EC and the European Commission in Brussels.
We began in section II with the proposition that competition policy should seek to promote economic efficiency.
The alternatives are that it should promote competition,per se , or that it should operate with fairly broadly defined public interest criteria.
We rejected the former alternative on the grounds that competition can, paradoxically, sometimes be inimical to economic efficiency.
The public-interest objective is harder to reject, because it is eminently reasonable that public policy should be concerned with more than just economic efficiency, though it clearly generates considerable uncertainty for firms about what they may and may not do.
However, we suggested that this point can be met substantially by the traditional argument about economic policy making, that it is best to assign separate instruments to different targets.
If there is, for example, an active regional policy, then regional issues need not be on the competition policy agenda.
If the first proposition is accepted, it is then necessary to identify market situations and conduct, which are, or are not, conducive to economic efficiency.
In section III of the paper, the common policy agenda across different competition policy jurisdictions was identified as
(i)
agreements between firms,
(ii)
abuse of dominant positions, and
(iii)
the acquisition and maintenance of dominant positions.
Developments in industrial organization theory in the last fifteen years have shown that the effects on economic efficiency in these three areas are seldom entirely clear cut: usually there is a trade-off involved with ambiguous net effects on welfare (price-fixing cartels are one exception, where it is extremely difficult to identify offsetting efficiency gains).
This judgement gives rise to our second proposition: economic analysis is often ambiguous, a priori, about the efficiency effects of particular market structures and conduct.
The second proposition generates a considerable difficulty for the design of competition policy.
A policy which requires a case-by-case approach would not only be extremely expensive, but would also completely fail to provide firms with a well-defined framework within which to pursue their activities.
The third proposition is, therefore, that institutional design is crucial for competition policy.
In particular, policy rules and guidelines are necessary to spell out the presumptions of policy, but there should generally be a procedure by which firms can present a case for exemption if they can demonstrate offsetting efficiency gains (an exception might be price-fixing cartels).
Furthermore, the rules and guidelines should identify situations where there is good reason to believe that competition might be absent, before any investigation of supposed ‘anticompetitive practices’ such as price discrimination or vertical restraints.
The US Justice Department's Merger Guidelines and Vertical Restraints Guidelines are examples of rules designed to give an initial screen, and are obviously extremely helpful to firms and their advisers.
Not least, they serve as a warning to firms that are building dominant positions in markets that their conduct is likely to be scrutinized if their market share crosses a given threshold.
Finally, we have argued that an appropriate institutional design must involve giving the competition authorities real ‘teeth’ to fine firms for abuses of market power, and to order structural remedies or regulation where the circumstances warrant such action.
There remains the question of the optimal shape of the competition policy institutions.
We have argued that such institutions should be public (though not ruling out the possibility of a role, even an important role, for private actions, as an additional deterrent to abuses of market power); that there should be a single investigating institution with powers to identify and to investigate cases, and to propose remedies, within a clearly stated framework of rules and guidelines; that firms should be given an opportunity to make representations as to why the competition policy presumptions should not apply in a particular case; and that there should  be a competition tribunal with the task of reviewing and monitoring the recommendations of the competition policy institution.
By the standards of these three propositions, UK competition policy is in need of a radical reform.
First, it is evident that the broad public interest criteria which are identified in the Fair Trading Act 1973 and the Competition Act 1980, and the existence of the ‘gateways’ in the Restrictive Trades Practices Act 1976, potentially (and in practice) permit issues to be considered that either have little or nothing to do with economic efficiency, or are more properly the concern of other areas of policy.
Second, this lack of focus not only renders policy less effective, but crucially the absence of clearly stated rules and guidelines introduces great uncertainty for firms.
It is notable that in recent years, the ‘Tebbit doctrine’ has sought to narrow the scope of monopoly and merger references to cases that raise clear issues of competition.
It is, however, unsatisfactory to have the general content of policy dependent on the whims of the Secretary of State.
In the area of restrictive trades practices, the problem is not so much the absence of rules, as the form the rules take.
In particular, the focus on the form of restrictive agreements, rather than on their effects, means that careful drafting can take some agreements between firms outside the scope of the legislation.
Third, the institutional arrangements in the UK are a mess.
There is a multiplicity of competition policy institutions — notably the Office of Fair Trading, the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, and the Restrictive Trades Practices Court—which are entrusted with different responsibilities under the relevant legislation.
There is no justification in economic analysis for giving different institutional treatment to different competition policy areas.
Fourth, the absence of penalties for abuses, such as involvement in price-fixing, means that firms have every incentive to engage in anticompetitive behaviour until they are discovered, as Williams points out in this issue.
(The lack of teeth in terms of penalties is compounded by a lack of powers to search for evidence of abuses.)
Much of this critique of current policy has been taken into account in the White Paper outlining new policy on restrictive trades practices (Department of Trade and Industry, 1989) and the consultation document on options to tighten up the legislation and policy implementation in the area of abuse of market power (Department of Trade and Industry, 1992).
As explained above, the main feature of these proposals is that the UK should adopt an Article 85-type law on restrictive trade practices, and an Article 86-type law on abuse of market power (though this is only one of the options put forward), while retaining the present UK arrangements for mergers policy.
There is no doubt that such a reform would represent a decisive shift in the direction of the ‘best practice’ competition policy and institutions outlined previously.
Policy would focus on economic efficiency, there would be explicit rules and guidelines (including exemptions from the rules), there would be a relatively unified set of competition-policy institutions (a strengthened OFT, and a reformed MMC to act as a tribunal to review the analysis and proposals for fines or remedies made by the OFT), and there would be penalties for abuses.
However, although we believe that a reform along these lines does offer the best way forward, it is appropriate to note some of the possible drawbacks.
One is the loss of flexibility: there is a tension between the objective of promoting economic efficiency in different market situations, and the need to provide rules or guidelines to indicate to firms the boundaries between acceptable and unacceptable market structures or conduct.
Rules, and the policy institutions that apply them, are inevitably  less flexible than a discretionary policy.
Another drawback is that a rules-based policy, especially where this is drafted in terms of prohibitions with penalties for non-compliance, may be less than appropriate for dealing with problems of uncompetitive market structures.
For example, as noted previously, a market situation may not be conducive to economic efficiency, but the conduct of the firms that make up the market may be ‘innocent’.
Therefore, we would wish to maintain the scope for competition policy authorities to propose structural remedies, e.g. divestment, or regulation, or to seek undertakings from firms, even where there is no identifiable abuse.
Given our endorsement of an Article 85 and Article 86 reform for UK competition policy, it is unsurprising that our evaluation of EC policy has been positive.
However, there are a number of areas that are a cause for concern.
The first is that while Article 85 has a section 3, which permits both block and individual exemptions to be granted on the basis of beneficial affects of particular agreements, there are no corresponding sections in either Article 86 or the Merger Regulation.
This denies market participants the opportunity to argue that a particular merger or dominant firm practice does offer efficiency gains.
One danger in giving such an opportunity might be that it would give greater scope for industrial policy (‘European champions’) proponents, not least within the European Commission: however, that is not a reason for preventing DGIV from considering the point in a particular case, however sceptically.
There is, however, a second concern, as noted by Sapir et al.
in this issue, that EC merger policy, even since the introduction of the Merger Regulation, has been seen to be ineffective.
Tougher policy rules, and tougher implementation are required.
A third concern, expressed above in relation to the proposals for UK policy, is that Article 86 does not provide for remedies where a market situation is not conducive to economic efficiency but the actual conduct of dominant firms is ‘innocent’.
A fourth concern is that the rules on price discrimination and vertical restraints, for example, do not reflect the ambiguity of economic analysis with respect to the welfare consequences of these practices.
The lists of prohibited practices need revision, and a section 3 procedure for individual exceptions needs to be introduced, as previously argued.
A fifth concern is the absence of a specialized competition tribunal to review the decisions of DGIV.
The European Court procedure is too slow and cumbersome.
The effect has been to leave DGIV acting as both prosecutor and judge in competition cases, which is unacceptable.
Finally, as Sapir et al.
argue in this issue, European policy should give more emphasis to the supply of services, and particularly to the detrimental effects of regulation on competition.
The fourth proposition in the paper is that harmonization of national competition policies, and possibly a supranational competition policy authority, are essential.
The obvious application of this proposition is to relationships between European policy and DGIV on the one hand, and policy and institutions in the UK (or any other member state of the EC) on the other hand.
This is not just for administrative tidiness: lack of co-ordination generates significant problems.
The first is where the relevant market or markets being examined in a competition case are genuinely multinational, and the issue of extraterritoriality is raised.
A particular example is where a merger wholly overseas affects the level of competition, or potential competition, in a domestic market.
The question is whether domestic competition-policy authorities have the capacity to pursue the issue.
Either there have to be bilateral agreements between the competition-policy authorities in different economies, or they have to cede the authority to act to a supranational body.
Obviously there will have to be agreements on the division of labour between national authorities and the supranational agency.
The EC Merger Regulation spells out some rules, mainly relating to the degree to which the parties are operating in more than one member state, and the overall size of the merger.
In other policy areas, as noted previously, all EC policy rules take precedence over national policy, though DGIV is unlikely to get involved with competition in national domestic markets unless trade within the Community is potentially affected.
The second problem is that a lax competition policy might be used by a member state as a substitute for trade policy or industrial policy, to protect domestic producers or to promote export sectors.
The solution here, as in trade policy (the GATT), is for  international agreements to harmonize policies.
It is a moot point whether a supranational authority is also required.
Obviously, consistency in competition policy is going to be easier to achieve with a central authority.
In the EC context, the ability of DGIV to override member-state interests is probably crucial for full integration of the European market.
If this fourth proposition is accepted, it is an additional reason to welcome the proposals for a reform of UK competition policy to bring it into line with European policy.
At the same time, the UK should press for reform of EC policy to deal with the weaknesses identified above.
The major practical difficulty is decisions on whether the EC or UK authorities should handle a particular case.
As in the case of the EC Merger Regulation, published rules for assignment are probably the best method with negotiation between the authorities to decide borderline cases.
To conclude, our analysis suggests that the current proposals for the reform of UK competition policy are broadly consistent with the goal of improving economic efficiency in the market place.
It is to be hoped that the outcome of consultations on policy on the abuse of market power will result in legislative proposals along the lines of Article 86, to join the existing White Paper proposals for an Article 85-type law on restrictive practices, and that the government will see fit to give some priority to legislation.
The UK has had an inadequate competition policy framework for far too long.
POSTSCRIPT
After this paper was completed, the UK government announced its conclusions from the consultation process that had followed publication of the Green Paper on Abuse of Market Power in November 1992.
The Green Paper had asked for comments on three legislative options:
(i)
strengthening existing competition legislation;
(ii)
a prohibition system based on EC Article 86; and
(iii)
a hybrid option combining (i) and (ii).
The decision was to pursue the first option with some changes to current legislation: stronger investigative powers for the Director General of Fair Trading; permitting the Director General to accept enforceable undertakings from companies before an investigation under the Competition Act, or in lieu of a monopoly reference under the Fair Trading Act; and scope for interim orders under the Competition Act to prohibit specific activities by a firm where there is a risk of serious damage to a competitor, supplier, or customer during the period of the MMC's investigation.
While these measures to strengthen existing legislation are generally to be welcomed, the unwillingness of the government to pursue reform along the lines of EC Article 86 is very disappointing, given the case for a more radical reform made in the main text of the paper.
The reasons for not pursuing a more radical course were given by the government as the increased burden of compliance placed on companies, the absence of clear criteria for what constitutes an abuse of market power giving rise to uncertainty for business (and the possible consequent ‘chilling effect’ on competitive behaviour), and the suggestion that a prohibition system would bite on fewer market situations than present legislation.
In response to this first reason, it should be noted that major UK companies with involvement in European markets already have to maintain sophisticated compliance programmes with respect to EC Article 86: parallel UK legislation might, therefore, be expected to reduce the total costs of compliance for these companies as it would cut out some duplication.
Compliance with new legislation might, however, be more costly for firms that are dominant in UK markets alone, and do not currently regard the powers of the OFT and MMC as sufficient of a threat to require them to take competition policy particularly seriously.
The difference, of course, is that under Article 86-type legislation there would be a prospect of fines for abuse of market power, giving rise to potential costs much greater than those incurred by an MMC inquiry.
The second reason given seems a little odd at first: a specific list of prohibited practices can only increase the degree of uncertainty for firms compared to the current arrangements, where nothing is specified.
But the presence or absence of specificity may not matter  much where the most serious penalty is an OFT or MMC inquiry.
Matters are quite different if substantial fines are in prospect.
The argument is that:
It can be very difficult to assess in advance what will be regarded as anticompetitive and what is acceptable business behaviour.
This inherent uncertainty, coupled with the possibility of fines and private actions, could risk inhibiting rather than promoting competition.
(Neil Hamilton, Minister of State for Corporate Affairs, in a statement to the House of Commons, 14 April 1993.)
This concern could, however, be easily met if it were made clear that fines would only be recommended by the OFT as a matter of course where a company had evidently breached one of the prohibitions.
In ‘grey’ areas it would be appropriate for no fines to be levied initially, until some cases had established whether a particular practice was generally an abuse of market power.
Summing up on the first and second reasons, it is evident that the main objection to Article 86 legislation is that business does not relish the prospect of fines for abuse of monopoly power, because it would have to take competition policy more seriously in future.
But that is precisely what is needed, and it is disappointing that for this reason the government has drawn back from attempting reform.
The third reason given for not pursuing a more radical reform is that a prohibition system would bite on fewer market situations than present legislation.
The thought is presumably that, whereas at present any monopoly or complex monopoly situation can in principle be referred to the MMC, under an Article 86-type policy there would have to be prima facie evidence of abuse.
In practice, past references to the MMC have been linked, implicitly at least, to some suspicion that firms have been acting anticompetitively.
In any case, the concern about Article 86 legislation could be met relatively easily by retaining monopoly references to the MMC, with the OFT proposing behavioural or structural remedies where a market situation was not in the public interest, but there was no evidence of abuse by the firms involved.
(See the paper by Williams in this issue.)
Some further consequences of the government's decision should be noted.
The first is that however the decision is presented, one suspects that it represents a reversal of the previous commitment of the government to strengthening competition.
A second consequence is that UK competition law will remain out of line with EC law.
The EC Commission is, therefore, less likely to be willing to leave Article 86-type competition cases to the UK competition authorities, and disputes over jurisdiction are, therefore, more likely.
Third, a soft UK policy on abuse of market power will make it more difficult for the UK to argue that the EC should strengthen its merger policy.
Unless the government can be persuaded to change its mind, this decision represents a disappointing failure to embark on a much needed set of reforms.
TACIT COLLUSION
I. INTRODUCTION
The word collusion describes a type of conduct or form of behaviour whereby decision-takers agree to co-ordinate their actions.
This in general would seem to involve two elements: a process of communication, discussion, and exchange of information with the aim of reaching an agreement; and, where there are gains to reneging on the agreement given that the others comply, some kind of mechanism for punishing such violations and so enforcing the agreement.
In the economics of oligopolistic markets the distinction between ‘explicit’ and ‘tacit’collusion turns on the first of these elements.
It is possible that firms could agree to co-ordinate their actions in some way without explicit communication and discussion.
For example, it may become tacitly accepted practice in a market exactly to match the price changes of the largest firm.
All firms are aware of this ‘tacit agreement’ or ‘conscious parallelism’, and no process for reaching agreement is strictly necessary.
However, the second element must always be present: typically there are at least short-run gains from reneging on an agreement and so tacit collusion requires the perception that to do so would in the end turn out to be unprofitable because of punitive reactions by the other firms.
Indeed, at the extreme, it could be argued that whether or not there is explicit communication is irrelevant: what matters is whether a collusive agreement, however arrived at, can be sustained by the self-interest of the parties involved.
If this is not the case, then explicit communication is simply ‘cheap talk’.
This is most easily seen in the context of a market which takes place only once.
For example, suppose that a government wishes to sell off, once and for all , the mineral rights on a tract of land and invites sealed bids which will specify required acreage and a price per acre.
There are just two firms which will bid, though the minerals  extracted will subsequently be sold on a competitive world market.
Each firm knows that the value of the land is £100 per acre, and knows the other knows this and that the government does not.
The government places a reservation value of £10 an acre on the land.
If the firms bid competitively, they will each bid £100 an acre for the entire acreage.
It would clearly be in their interests for them to agree to bid £10 an acre for one-half the acreage each.
Such an agreement would not, of course, be legally enforceable.
Moreover, it is not sustainable by the self-interest of the firms.
If one firm believed that the other would bid according to the agreement, it is in its interest to bid slightly more than £10 an acre for the entire acreage.
But then it would realize that the other firm would have also worked that out, and it should raise its bid.
But the other firm will also have worked this out…and so on.
Whatever the firms may have discussed and agreed, this is merely cheap talk if the agreement cannot be enforced: under the conditions of this example, the firms will end up making competitive bids.
The enforceability of collusive agreements by some means can, therefore, be taken as a necessary condition for their existence.
We shall consider at some length below circumstances under which this condition is met even when enforcement through the courts is not available.
If the distinction between tacit and explicit collusion is to mean anything, it must also be shown that the ability to communicate in some way affects the likely existence and stability of collusion.
Is collusion indeed ever really ‘tacit’, or is it the case that what may appear to be tacit collusion is actually explicit collusion in which the process of agreement is simply concealed?
The statement by Adam Smith that businessmen's meetings, even for ‘merriment and diversion’, usually end up in connivance to restrict competition, is often quoted, but the sentence which follows it is equally perceptive: ‘It is impossible indeed to prevent such meetings, by any law which either could be executed, or would be consistent with liberty and justice.’
Moreover, short of methods of surveillance which are also not ‘consistent with liberty and justice’ it may be impossible to obtain evidence on what transpired at such meetings.
Turning now to antitrust policy, a major difference among advanced industrial countries in respect of their policy towards collusion lies in whether collusion is in most instances per se illegal, as in the US, or whether attention is directed at appraising the results of collusive behaviour, as for example in the UK.
In the former case there is understandably much more emphasis on deciding whether or not collusion has in fact taken place.
The problem here is that, quite apart from the possibility that collusion might be concealed, the observation that firms communicated and appeared to reach agreement need not imply that the collusive outcome was actually achieved (as in the above bidding example), while if collusion is tacit there will be no evidence of communication and negotiation.
The observation of communication is neither necessary nor sufficient for existence of collusion.
II.
EQUILIBRIUM CONCEPTS
Until relatively recently, oligopoly theory was typically presented as a collection of models each based on a particular ad hoc set of assumptions about firms' perceptions of their rivals' reactions to their own choices of prices or outputs.
The leading models in the literature are:
The Cournot model : in the traditional story firms independently choose outputs on the assumption that their rivals make no response to their choices — even though this assumption may be continually falsified — and market equilibrium is achieved through a sequence of alternating output choices which converges over time.
The Stackelberg model : a leader makes a choice of output, the other firms act as followers and make their profit-maximizing response to this output.
The leader takes account of these responses in choosing its output and is able to do better than it would under Cournot reactions there is a ‘first mover’ or precommitment advantage.
The ‘kinked demand curve’ model : each firm believes that an increase in its output (reduction in its price) will be matched by its rivals, while a reduction in output (increase in price) will not be followed.
This creates a kink in the firm's perceived demand curve at its current price-output pair (the levels of which are, however, unexplained) which  then tends to remain the same despite changes in marginal cost, because of a discontinuity in the firm's marginal revenue at the kink.
The Bertrand model : again in the traditional story firms independently choose prices, on the assumption that their rivals make no response to their choices.
Where firms produce identical outputs and have identical constant marginal costs equilibrium price ends up equal to this common cost.
If the constant marginal costs differ, then only the firm with the lowest marginal cost is left in the market and it sets a price just below the marginal cost of the next-to-lowest cost firm.
If marginal costs are non-constant then no equilibrium price exists unless outputs are non-homogeneous, i.e. there is product differentiation.
The Edgeworth model : firms choose prices as in the Bertrand model, with identical constant marginal costs, but with fixed output capacities.
There is a range of possible types of outcome, including those of the Cournot and Bertrand models, but the novel possibility is that of ‘price cycles’.
There is a range of prices the upper and lower limits of which are determined by demand, cost, and capacity parameters.
As firms set prices alternately over consecutive periods, price falls by small steps from the upper limit of the interval until it reaches the lower limit and then jumps back to the upper limit and the cycle begins again.
Recent developments in game theory have had an important impact on the way we interpret these models.
Game theory forces us to be precise about three sets of assumptions on which a model rests:
(i)
the possibility of binding commitments.
If it is possible for firms to make binding commitments, for example legally enforceable contracts, to carry out certain agreed actions, then this raises a fundamentally different set of issues than if no such commitments are possible.
In the former case the firms are involved in a co-operative game , the problem is to reach agreement on division of the gains from co-operation.
In the latter case, whether or not explicit communication takes place, each firm has to decide on the choice of action which is in its own best interest in the light of the fact that the others are behaving in the same way: we have a non-co-operative game .
All the oligopoly models just discussed are examples of non-co-operative games, and in the light of the antitrust laws in most advanced industrial countries this would seem to be appropriate.
(ii)
The frequency of market interaction.
This is something that is often somewhat ambiguously specified in the traditional economic models.
The models are usually formulated as ‘one-shot games ‘: firms are making their choices relative to market and cost conditions at a given point in time as if there were no past and no future.
Nevertheless, time enters through the back door in the discussion of reaction patterns.
The very concept of ‘action’ and ‘reaction’must presuppose at least two points in time, but the discussions underlying the Cournot and Bertrand models implicitly require much more, possibly an infinity of time periods as the processes of convergence to an equilibrium work themselves out.
Likewise the price cycles in the Edgeworth model take place through real time.
If market interaction takes place repeatedly, however, why is it that firms are assumed to ignore this and treat each decision as if it were a move in a ‘one-shot’ game?
Surely if the market is held repeatedly firms would realize this and formulate strategies that determine their actions overtime.
But then, as we shall see, it may become possible to rationalize the kind of collusive behaviour which is simply not contemplated in the standard models.
(iii)
The way in which firms form their expectations of their rivals' choices.
A rational player in a game cannot be thought of as simply taking his rivals' actions as given by some ad hoc assumption.
The analysis of a game is concerned precisely with the question of the expectations of the behaviour of his rivals it is rational for any one player to form.
The general answer game theory gives to this question is contained in the concept of Nash Equilibrium (NE).
The choices made by players in a game must be mutually consistent in the sense that each player's choice is the best for him given the choices made by the others.
The NE choices have the property that if each player knows the others will make their NE choices, he has no reason to deviate from making his own NE choice.
The argument to suggest that a non-NE set of choices cannot be an equilibrium outcome of the game proceeds as follows.
Suppose player 1 assumes that player 2 will choose action A, and that 1's best (most profitable) response to this is action B. Suppose, further, that 2's best response to B is not A. Should 1 continue to assume that 2 will choose A?
If 2 had been going to choose A, she would work out that 1 would plan to choose B, in which case she would change her planned action to whatever is the best response to B, so falsifying the initial assumption that she would choose A. Thus 1 cannot persist in believing 2 will choose A if he knows that she is as rational and well-informed as he is.
Only the NE choices are immune to this kind of contradiction.
The classic oligopoly models can then be thought of as one-shot, non-co-operative games to which the NE concept can be applied to find a solution.
They differ not in respect of reaction patterns but in the economic characteristics of the market concerned, and it is a matter of fact, not logic, to decide which model is appropriate for any particular market under study.
An interesting point is that in the three leading models, those of Cournot, Bertrand, and Stackelberg, the NE outcomes are identical to those traditionally derived; only the reasoning underlying the derivation of those equilibria changes.
Since the games are played just once, with the firms making output or price choices simultaneously, the equilibria cannot be rationalized by appeal to a process of action and reaction through time.
The explanation of the equilibrium outcomes is that they are the NE outcomes in these games.
It is useful to consider the antitrust implications of the outcomes in these three market games.
First, firms are behaving non-co-operatively and, it seems safe to say, non-collusively.
Communication between firms is unnecessary to achieve the market equilibrium, since this is done by the firms independently thinking through the logic of the situation.
In the absence of the ability to make binding agreements any such communication would in any case be cheap talk—the only outcomes that are sustainable by the self-interest of the firms are the NE outcomes, and any agreement to choose non-NE outcomes would be reneged upon, as in our earlier example.
Thus a charge of collusion could not be made to stick.
At the same time, in two of the three models the equilibrium outcomes could be quite bad from the welfare point of view.
In the Bertrand case with constant identical marginal costs we have, in fact, the perfectly competitive market outcome, with price equal to marginal cost and no excess profit, but in the Cournot and Stackelberg cases prices exceed marginal costs and the firms make excess profit.
Moreover, in these models, if the firms have different and non-constant marginal costs, a further source of inefficiency is that total market output will be produced at more than minimum total cost — the marginal costs of firms are not equalized at the equilibrium.
It is certainly true that the Cournot and Stackelberg equilibria in general involve smaller welfare losses, and lower levels of excess profit, than would be the case if the firms acted as a joint profit-maximizing monopoly or cartel but, none the less, contingent on market parameters, allocative inefficiency could still be quite large.
It seems clear then that an antitrust policy based on the behaviour of firms, in particular on whether or not this is collusive, could come to different conclusions to one which was based upon appraisal of the inefficiency and extent of excess profits associated with the market outcome.
Except in the special Bertrand case, even if the self-interest of the firms does not lead them to collude, it would not lead them to behave as perfectly competitive firms either.
The assumption that the market takes place just once is, of course, patently unrealistic: repeated market interaction among firms would appear to be the rule.
Some care has to be taken, however, in specifying the time horizon in a model of a multi-period market.
To simplify the dynamics of the model, it is usual to assume that the market situation in each period is the same: the same population of firms faces the same market demand with the same cost conditions in each period.
The key distinction is that between the case in which there is a known, finite number of periods in which firms will choose prices or outputs, and those in which either the number of periods, though finite, is not known  with certainty, or the time horizon can be regarded as infinite.
When there is a known, finite number of periods, an argument based on backward induction can be constructed, to the effect that the equilibrium strategies for the multi-period game consist simply of repetitions of the single-period NE, for example the one-period Cournot equilibrium outputs in a market in which firms make output choices.
Nothing of substance, therefore, is added by analysing the market in a multi-period setting.
On the other hand, if there is no known, certain last period from which this backward induction argument can begin, it makes sense to discuss the conditions under which collusive behaviour can be sustained as a non-co-operative equilibrium of the repeated game.
The intuitive argument is straightforward.
If firms agree to set outputs or prices which give them higher profits than those they would earn in a one-shot NE, and one of them reneges on this agreement, then in the following period(s) punitive actions can be undertaken, for example a price war, to wipe out the gains from the deviation.
The threat of this ex ante can then be used to ensure adherence to the agreement.
The existence of a future in which to apply punishment allows current collusion to be sustained by the self-interest of the firms.
There are two respects in which this intuition must be taken more rigorously.
First, it must be established that sufficiently large future losses can be threatened so that, when discounted to a present value, they offset the gain from reneging in the current period.
Second, the threat to inflict these losses must be credible.
We consider each of these points in turn.
The fact that future losses from punishment have to be set against current gains to defection implies that the rate at which a firm discounts the future will be important.
This rate will in general reflect a firm's (marginal) cost of capital.
In an imperfect capital market it need not be the same for all firms, and in an economy subject to cyclical fluctuations in economic activity it need not be the same over time.
In general, the more heavily firms discount the future (i.e. the higher their cost of capital) the smaller will be the present value of future losses of profit caused by punishment, relative to the immediate gains from cheating on an agreement.
In a particular market, given its underlying cost and demand parameters, it will usually be possible to define a range of discount rates over which agreement on some collusive set of outputs or prices can be sustained by some threatened punishment strategy.
In general this range will vary with the set of outputs or prices to be sustained, the punishment strategy and the characteristics of the individual firm.
We shall explore how these factors interact more fully below.
It suffices to note here that the more heavily firms discount the future the less likely is it that collusion among them can be sustained.
The gain to a firm from reneging on the collusive agreement will depend partly on cost, demand, and capacity parameters and partly on the length of time for which a higher profit than that realized under the agreement can be earned before retaliation by the other firms takes place.
For example, if technology is such that production is subject to a fixed maximum rate of capacity output, and for each firm its output under the collusive agreement is just about at capacity, then there would be virtually no short-run gain to reneging on the agreement.
On the other hand, if there is significant excess capacity at the agreed output, and the agreed price is well above marginal cost, then a significant output expansion would be both feasible and profitable and so reneging on the agreement could appear attractive.
The longer the other firms take to detect a deviation and implement a punitive response, the greater will be the duration of the flow of profit from reneging and the further into the future the losses from punishment will be delayed, thus reducing their present value.
The extent of losses from punishment of course depends on the form of punishment adopted (we consider the question of the credibility of this punishment below, here we examine only its extent).
In the literature  three main types of punishment strategy have been analysed.
(i)
Nash reversion .
It is generally expected that the profits firms receive as a result of collusion exceed those they would earn in the one-shot NE, otherwise they might as well not collude.
In that case, one way of inflicting a loss of profit in retaliation for reneging on the agreement would be to revert to the NE of the one-shot game, either permanently or for a number of periods sufficient to wipe out the gains from reneging, if that is possible.
One limitation of this as a punishment is that it may not be very severe — it may imply a moderate loss of profit relative to the collusive agreement — and so may support collusion only for a small set of discount rates.
A second limitation, at least if the joint profit maximizing (cartel) allocation is thought to be a likely objective of the collusion, is that this allocation may not be sustainable by threats of reversion to a Cournot-Nash equilibrium.
It is not difficult to construct cases in which firms have unequal marginal costs and some firms earn higher profits at the Nash equilibrium than at the joint profit-maximizing allocation.
(ii)
Minimax punishment .
For each firm in the market, it is possible to define its profit maximizing action (an output or price) or best response given the actions of all other firms.
We can then find the values of the latter which make the firm's best response profit as small as possible.
This is the firm's minimax profit, and it is also often referred to as its ‘security level’, since the firm cannot be forced to take a lower profit than that.
Clearly the most drastic punishment for a firm that has reneged on the collusive agreement would be for the other firms to force it to its security level, either forever or for some specified number of time periods.
It is straightforward to show that the threat of minimax punishment forever is always capable of enforcing a collusive agreement which gives a firm a higher profit than its security level for some set of interest rates.
Thus denote the firm's security level profit by , the profit level under the agreement by , and the maximum profit the firm can earn when it reneges on the agreement in a single period by .
Then in contemplating reneging the firm must weigh up the one-off gain , against the present value of the infinite future stream of profit it loses as a result of punishment, where r is the per-period interest rate.
The firm will not renege if  or  and since the right-hand side is always positive there must be some set of interest rates for which this will hold.
This proposition goes under the name of the Folk Theorem in the theory of repeated games.
In a given market, the set of profits which can be sustained by minimax punishments could be very large indeed.
(iii)
Simple Penal Codes : Abreu's theory of simple penal codes involves a ‘stick and carrot’ form of punishment.
For each firm that is party to the agreement, a ‘punishment path’ is formulated, which specifies outputs (or prices) for each firm to be adopted if the firm in question deviates from the agreement.
This punishment path involves two phases: a phase of expanded outputs (lower prices) which inflicts loss of profit on the deviant; then the remainder of the path consists of a return to the original collusive outputs.
Thus the path could be thought of as a period of price warfare followed by reversion to collusion.
The loss of profit in the punishment phase must be enough to wipe out the gain from reneging.
If the deviant reneges again in the punishment phase, this is met with a reimposition of the punishment phase from its beginning , thus postponing the date of reversion to the more profitable collusive phase.
This reversion to collusion is the carrot to induce the deviant to accept whatever is meted out to it in the punishment phase.
If one of the non-deviant firms fails to carry out its role in punishing the cheat by producing its punishment output, it in turn is treated as having reneged and the  firms adopt the punishment path for this firm.
It can be shown that again a large set of collusive allocations can be supported by threats of punishment of this kind provided firms do not discount the future ‘too heavily’.
These three types of punishment strategy will sustain different sets of collusive allocations, but the main point of interest in comparing them is that of the credibility of the strategies.
Clearly, if a threat of punishment is to be effective in sustaining collusion the firms must believe that the punishment would actually be carried out if the need arose.
This not only requires the firm reneging on the agreement to ‘accept its punishment’.
Since in general inflicting punishment may be costly to the non-reneging firms, it must be credible that they would in fact do so.
In the case of the first two of the above punishment strategies, Nash reversion and minimax, the acceptance of punishment by the deviant is not an issue.
In each case the punishment profit corresponds to its best response to the actions of the other firms.
In the case of a simple penal code, acceptance of its punishment is the best action by the deviant given that the alternative is reimposition of the punishment path: punishment outputs are so chosen that it is better not to postpone the date of reversion to collusion than to make a short-term gain from deviating from the punishment path.
We shall, therefore, focus on the question of the credibility of the threat that the non-deviating firms will actually carry out the punishment.
Study of the general question of credibility of threats in dynamic games has lead to the formulation of the ‘refinement’ of the Nash equilibrium concept termed ‘subgame perfect equilibrium’.
We can illustrate with the case of minimax punishment and, for simplicity, assume that there are just two firms.
If each firm believes the other's threat to minimax forever following a defection, its best response is not to defect.
Now, consider what would be the situation at the beginning of the period immediately following a defection.
In the game beginning at that time, which is a proper subgame of the original game, it is not in the best interest of the non-deviating firm actually to minimax the other.
For suppose this firm believes that the deviant believes that it will be minimaxed, and so will produce the corresponding output.
Then the punishing firm ‘s best response to this is not to carry out the punishment but to produce its corresponding profit maximizing output.
There is nothing to make it in the firm's best interests actually to follow through with the punishment in the period following a deviation, given the game that then presents itself.
This will then be perceived in the previous period, and so the threat of minimax punishment will not be credible.
To be credible, it must be in a firm ‘s best interest to carry out the threat at the time it is called upon to do so.
This criterion of credibility is more formally embodied in Selten's equilibrium concept of subgame perfection .
According to this, a subgame perfect equilibrium strategy for a game is one which gives a Nash equilibrium strategy for every subgame of the game.
The above example of a minimax punishment strategy was not subgame perfect because, in the subgame beginning in the period just after a defection, the minimax choices did not constitute a Nash equilibrium.
Both Nash reversion and Abreu's simple penal codes are subgame perfect equilibrium strategies and so satisfy this criterion of credibility.
The former does so because a strategy of playing Nash equilibrium in every constituent game is also a Nash equilibrium of an entire repeated game.
In the case of the simple penal code, the essential reason it is in the interest of a firm in this case to carry out the threat of punishment is that it believes that if it does not it itself will be punished.
This in turn is credible because if any other firm does not join in this punishment it will be punished, and so on.
Thus belief in the credibility of punishment is sustained by the expectation that each firm will prefer to be the punisher than the punished.
This can be put in its least intuitively reasonable light if we assume just two firms.
If firm 1 reneges, firm 2 in the next period must punish it.
If firm 2 reneges on punishment, then in the following period firm 1 must punish firm 2 for not having punished it in the previous period, and so on.
This reliance on ‘self-lacerating’ punishment strategies has led a number of authors to propose an alternative criterion of credibility, known as ‘renegotiation proofness’.
Here we shall discuss that formulation due to Farrell and Maskin(1989).
They begin by asking the question: in the period immediately following a defection, what would stop the  firms getting together and, instead of actually carrying out the punishment, agreeing to reinstitute the collusive agreement?
The game from that period looks just as it did when the original agreement was concluded — because of the infinite horizon assumption every subgame is identical to the original game — and so if it was in the firms' interests to negotiate that agreement initially it will be in their interests now to renegotiate that agreement.
But if firms perceive that a deviation will be followed by renegotiation rather than punishment this means that punishment would never be carried out, and so agreement to collude could not be reached in the first place.
Abreu's strategies appear to rule out such renegotiation possibilities — an agreement is made once and for all and can never be reopened.
This argument leads to the renegotiation proofness criterion of credibility of threats.
Punishment strategies are credible only if they are not only subgame perfect but also not capable of being pre-empted by renegotiation of the agreement if the occasion arises that they must be implemented.
Informally put, in the case of an oligopolistic market this can be achieved by an agreement which specifies that the punishing firms choose outputs or prices which yield them higher profit than at the collusive allocation, so that they would actually gain in the punishment phase.
This ensures that they would not be prepared to renegotiate back to the original agreement.
These theories suggest that collusion may or may not be successful in a particular market: that depends on the values taken by a set of market or firm-specific parameters.
The assumption that the same constituent game is repeated period after period also implies that collusion, if achieved, is perfectly stable and never breaks down.
Although the non-co-operative collusive equilibrium is sustained by threats, those threats never have to be implemented because they are successful.
Thus we would never observe price wars.
Given that price wars are observed, the question arises of how to explain them within this type of approach.
A great insight of George J. Stigler provides one basis for an answer, which has been further developed by Green and Porter (1984), Rotemberg and Saloner (1986), and Rees (1985), among others.
Here we focus on the first of these.
Stigler's insight was that randomness in demand provides scope for cheating on a collusive agreement, and creates a problem of statistical inference in enforcing that agreement.
In Green and Porter's model it is assumed that a firm's choice of output cannot be observed by another firm, and the sum of all outputs determines market price according to a demand function which is subject to unobservable random shocks.
Then, when price is low firms do not know for sure whether it was because someone cheated (produced a larger than agreed output), or because demand was low.
The strategy for maintaining collusion consists of choosing a critical level of price such that, if market price falls below that level, firms infer cheating and enter a punishment phase, a price war.
It is always possible (for some set of discount rates) to find a critical price level that will fully enforce adherence to the agreement — no one cheats.
There is now, however, a non-zero probability that in any time period a price war will break out, and in an infinitely repeated market it is virtually certain that one will be observed.
The interesting, though not necessarily plausible, feature of this result is that firms know that when the price falls below the critical level this is due to a random shock, because they know it pays no one to cheat, but nevertheless they must still go into the punishment phase to enforce the collusive agreement.
This is clearly very much open to the critique based upon renegotiation-proofness, even more so than in the case without uncertainty.
From the point of view of this paper, an important aspect of the model is that it shows the costs that can be imposed (in the form of probable price wars) when firms' outputs are unknown to each other and demand is stochastic.
We return to this point when we consider the subject of information agreements later.
This concludes our brief survey of equilibrium concepts and the models in which they are embedded.
We now consider what they imply for the analysis of tacit collusion.
III.
FACILITATING TACIT COLLUSION
Many theorists see the models surveyed in the previous section as giving analytical precision to the idea of tacit collusion.
For example, Fudenberg and Tirole (1989) take a simple example of homogeneous output-setting duopoly with identical (non-decreasing) costs, and note that:
patient, identical Cournot duopolists can implicitly collude by each producing one-half the monopoly output, with any deviation triggering a switch to the Cournot outcome.
This would be ‘collusive’ in yielding the monopoly price.
The collusion is ‘implicit’(or ‘tacit’) in that the firms would not need to enter into binding contracts to enforce their co-operation (p. 280)
In this quotation, however, both the words ‘collusion’ and ‘tacit’are being interpreted in a different sense to that adopted in this paper.
‘Collusion’ should, certainly for antitrust purposes, refer to a form of conduct, not the value of an outcome: collusive behaviour might well result in less than monopoly profits.
It is tacit not simply because of the absence of a binding (legally enforceable) agreement, but because of the absence of any explicit agreement whatsoever.
Explicit collusion would involve the firms in talking to each other, explicitly agreeing to produce half the monopoly output each, and, quite possibly, agreeing also that deviation by one would be punished by a price war.
The fact that the agreement is sustained by threats of market sanctions rather than a binding contract makes it no less explicit, at least in the eyes of antitrust law.
Tacit collusion, on the other hand, would involve no explicit agreement but simply the unspoken acceptance by the two firms that it was in their best interests each to produce half the monopoly output on the understanding that failure to do so would provoke a price war.
As with non-co-operative playing of the one-shot game, the tacitly collusive equilibrium still requires information.
In the simple model above each firm must know that the other's costs are identical to its own, and must know that they have the same beliefs about the market demand function as well as in the credibility of the punishment that would result from a deviation.
It is easy to see that these information requirements expand considerably with the number of firms, product heterogeneity, spatial dispersion of markets, uncertainty about future demands and costs, rate of technological change, and the extent of threats from entry of new firms.
If firms are to collude tacitly, they must somehow choose prices and outputs which are sustainable by a credible punishment strategy that also has to be tacitly agreed upon.
We have seen that there may be many punishment strategies, and relative to anyone of them there may be a very large set of sustainable price-output configurations.
The firms must somehow define the set of feasible agreements, reach a point within it, preserve stability of the agreement, and make the threat of punishment as effective and credible as possible.
It is, therefore, natural that in real-world markets many so-called ‘facilitating devices’ would have been developed.
These are arrangements or practices which can be construed as helping firms in at least one of the four steps to stable, successful tacit collusion: defining the possible agreements; focusing upon one; preserving it; and providing for credible effective punishment.
It should also be noted that in many cases they would also facilitate explicit collusion, and so their use does not rule out the (possibly concealed) existence of this.
We shall consider them in order of increasing specificity.
Information exchange : a flow of information among firms is clearly essential for all four aspects of successful collusion.
Firms may enter into formal information agreements, under which they undertake to exchange information on costs, outputs, prices, and discounts.
Exchange of cost information is clearly important in defining the set of possible agreements and arriving at one.
Exchange of price and output data is important in detecting deviation: the shorter the lag between cheating and detection, the smaller the incentive to cheat.
Such exchange of information is, of course, possible in the absence of a formal information agreement.
Trade associations : many industries have a central organization which may function fairly innocuously, handling public relations at the industry-wide level and organizing conventions, trade fairs, etc.
However, they may also act as facilitating devices, collecting and disseminating information  on costs, outputs, and prices, suggesting price lists (for example, the professional associations for lawyers, doctors, and architects publish ‘recommended fee scales’) and policing the (tacit) agreement.
For example, the trade association in the nut and bolt industry actually employed individuals who posed as buyers and tried to obtain discounts on prices from sellers suspected of cheating.
Trade associations may also carry out services such as demand forecasting and capacity planning for the market as a whole.
This can be important both in achieving agreement on prices in the short run, and in preventing the development of excess capacity, which can pose a serious threat to collusion in the long run.
At the very least, trade associations often provide the opportunities for the ‘meetings of merriment and diversion’ mentioned in Adam Smith's famous remark.
Price leadership : it is usual to distinguish between ‘dominant firm’ and ‘barometric’price leadership.
In the former, the largest firm first announces price changes and the other firms then follow within a short space of time; in the latter, some non-dominant firm, which presumably is considered the best at judging the market conditions, plays this role.
In many markets, however, the identity of the firm initiating a price change may vary over time, possibly to avoid the impression that there is a price leader, or to spread more equitably the unpopularity of being the first firm to raise prices.
Clearly, the practice of price leadership is a way of solving the problem of choosing one price agreement in the set of possible agreements.
If the leader is good at finding mutually acceptable prices, or has the market power to punish deviants from its prices sufficiently, agreement can be entirely tacit.
For many writers the ‘conscious parallelism’ in prices associated with price leadership is the very essence of tacit collusion.
Collaborative research and cross-licensing of patents : for sound reasons — high fixed costs, economies of scale, and risk-sharing —firms may pool research and development (R&D) resources and set up a common R&D agency.
This obviously limits competition in product design and innovation and facilitates uniform pricing of the resulting products.
In the case of cross-licensing on the other hand, firms license use of the results of their own research out to their competitors.
It is legal under the terms of these licenses to specify selling prices and to place other restrictions on sale, for example geographical area.
Thus what may at first sight appear to be something that facilitates competition can actually be a form of legal collusion.
MFN and MC clauses in buyer-seller contracts : Salop (1986) pointed out that ‘most favoured nation’(MFN) and ‘meeting competition’(MC) clauses in contracts between buyers and sellers can act to facilitate collusion among sellers.
A MFN clause guarantees to a buyer that if, when the contract is concluded or within some specified time period later, the seller makes a sale to another buyer at a lower price, then the buyer in question will also receive that lower price.
A MC clause guarantees that if the buyer can find another seller offering a lower price, then the seller in question will match that price upon presentation of appropriate evidence.
Salop argues convincingly that both these types of clauses help sustain collusion.
Note first that since they form part of a contract between buyer and seller they are legally enforceable and that in itself is an important advantage because it reduces the cost of enforcing collusion.
Moreover, the buyer has an incentive to detect and report deviations from the price agreement, either by the seller in question (under MFN) or by other sellers (under MC).
A MFN clause sustains collusion because it makes it costly for a seller to reduce price in a discriminatory way, which is how secret cheating on a price agreement often takes place.
If price cuts have to be paid to all buyers this reduces their profitability as well as increasing their detectability.
A MC clause obviously sustains collusion by creating an incentive for a buyer to report to a seller keeping to the agreement prices of a seller who may be cheating on the agreement, at the same time nullifying the effect of the latter.
Resale price maintenance : this is a system under which manufacturers contractually control the minimum level of prices charged by retailers.
This  obviously stops collusion at the manufacturing stage being undone by price competition at the point of sale to the ultimate buyer.
Basing point pricing : this is a pricing system often encountered in industries, such as steel and cement, where transport costs are high relative to production costs and buyers and sellers are spatially dispersed.
In one variant, manufacturing plants of each seller are designated as bases, and a ‘base price’ is set at each of them.
There is also a standard table of transport charges.
Then, a buyer at any given location will be quoted a price by each seller, equal to the base price at the nearest base plus the standard charge for transporting the product from the base to the buyer's location.
The result is then that delivered prices to any buyer are always uniform across sellers, and there is no price competition.
Clearly sellers must exchange information — the list of bases and base prices, the standard transport charges — but no explicit agreement to collude on prices need be made.
Common costing books : in some industries where there may be variation in the form of the finished product because of variation in the buyer's specifications (for example, industrial engines, building services) a book may be circulated by a trade association which shows how the overall cost of the specific product variant can be calculated.
This encourages price uniformity among sellers and makes it less easy to label price-cutting a computational mistake.
This list covers the most generally encountered facilitating devices.
Particular markets may provide examples of practices specific to them.
For example, if airlines share a computerized reservation system this makes it easy to monitor and collude on prices.
Insurance companies may collaborate in working out loss probabilities and this leads to uniformity in premium rates.
It should also be noted that there are many opportunities for company representatives to make their views known to each other on the state of the market and the direction prices should take, for example, in after-dinner speeches, newspaper interviews, articles in trade publications as well as while doing lunch.
IV.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
We now turn to the relation between tacit collusion and antitrust policy in the US, UK, and the EC.
In all three jurisdictions explicit collusion is clearly dealt with.
In respect of tacit collusion there is far less clarity.
In the US explicit collusion is, with a few exceptions,per se illegal, and so it is simply necessary in a given case to establish whether or not collusion has existed.
In the UK the Restrictive Trade Practices Court and the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) exist to investigate whether collusive agreements exist or collusive conduct has taken place and, if so, whether they have operated against the public interest.
For the EC, Article 85 of the Treaty of Rome prohibits agreements designed to prevent, restrict, or distort competition within the common market, though specific agreements may be exempted by the European Commission if they are found to have overall net benefits.
In a 1989 White Paper and 1992 Green Paper (DTI, 1989, 1992) the UK government declared an intention to revise UK law in the direction of consistency with Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty of Rome.
That implies moving towards prohibitions with penalties for conduct in breach of them, rather than appraisal of the outcomes of the conduct against some yardstick of the public interest.
In relation to tacit collusion the US legislation is, to use White's term, ‘sloppy’.
Price leadership is not illegal, and ‘conscious parallelism’ does not amount to collusion.
Thus, to quote Scherer:
Oligopolists refraining from price competition merely because they recognize the likelihood of rival retaliation do not violate the law as long as their decisions are taken independently.
And by avoiding any suggestion of encouraging or compelling rivals to co-operate, they  may also facilitate uniform and non-aggressive pricing through such devices as price leadership and open price-reporting systems.
At the same time, there have been cases  in which ‘the inference of illegal conspiracy’ has been drawn from ‘detailed similarity of behaviour’.
From the economic point of view, the problem is that in most cases the US antitrust process is concerned with deciding whether conduct has been illegal, rather than with the appraisal of the economic consequences of whatever conduct may have taken place.
In this respect the UK system, though it also has substantial defects, is superior, as I shall now try to establish.
In theoretical language, we could state the core of the problem as being that tacit collusion is a form of non-co-operative equilibrium, just as is Nash equilibrium in a one-shot oligopoly game (which, as we argued earlier, would never be regarded as collusive).
The equilibrium results from rational pursuit of individual self-interest in a situation of perceived mutual interdependence.
The behaviour of firms need not be conspiratorial in the legal sense.
Therefore a conduct-based approach such as that underlying US antitrust law inevitably encounters difficulties.
To bring out the contrast with UK policy, we can consider a specific case, that of the MMC inquiry into the White Salt Market.; Two firms supplied virtually the entire UK salt market and, over the 13 year period taken by the MMC, their prices had been identical and had changed identically within a few weeks of each other.
The identity of the price leader had changed from time to time with no obvious pattern.
One firm would inform the other of its proposed price increases by letter, usually a month before they came into effect, and the other would usually respond within that period.
The firms argued that this was because they bought quantities of salt from each other(usually small), and it was usual to notify important buyers in advance of price changes.
They also pointed out that in a competitive market for a homogeneous product it was to be expected that prices would be identical and follow each other closely.
The firms denied collusion.
It is also clear that they understood the logic of tacit collusion, put very clearly by one firm:
if [we]raised prices to a lesser amount than [our competitor]and [it]failed to lower its own prices to the same level, there would be an immediate transfer of business [to us]…
This would lead to a long-term retaliation by [our competitor].
I would contend that it is a major strength of the British legislation that the MMC did not have to decide whether the firms had ‘really colluded’.
By examining the costs, prices, and profits of the two firms they were able to conclude that the outcome of the conduct of the firms, however that conduct may be described, was against the public interest or, in economic terms, highly distortive of economic efficiency.
It is hard to disagree with that decision.
Under a prohibition system such as that of the EEC, it would have to be established that the firms had colluded.
In the absence of any concrete evidence of an agreement it is unlikely that this could have been done.
In fact, the 1992 Green Paper explicitly recognizes (p. 27) that under a prohibition system in the case of price leadership or parallel pricing it is ‘unlikely that breach of the prohibition would be established in the absence of anti-competitive behaviour’.
I take this to mean that price leadership or parallel pricing are not in themselves regarded as anti-competitive: the firms would have to have followed some specifically anti-competitive course of conduct, for example exclusive dealing or discriminatory discounting, to fall foul of the law.
It would appear, then, that since many of the facilitating devices listed in the previous section are not subject to prohibition (information agreements are the only type of device that are), a move to a purely prohibition system would make the British system as helpless in the face of tacit collusion as the American.
Given that there are advantages in other aspects to be derived from introducing a  prohibition system (especially with the attendant threats of fines and private action for damages and injunctive relief), this argues for adopting the Green Paper's proposal for a dual system (option 3).
Under this, prohibition replaces the Competition Act 1980 provisions on anti-competitive practices, but the provisions of the Fair Trading Act 1973 remain in force, thus allowing tacit collusion to be dealt with by the MMC.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this concluding section I shall try to pull together the preceding discussions of the theory, practice, and policy relating to tacit collusion.
The theoretical models reflect the strengths and weaknesses of modern game theory: they provide a rigorous characterization of what ‘credible punishment’ might mean, and a formal analysis of the way in which discount rates and demand, capacity, and cost parameters interact to determine the sustainability of tacit collusion.
At the same time nothing is said about the way in which firms will converge on one of the large set of possible equilibrium agreements (given that collusion is sustainable).
Firms are assumed to have unbounded capacity for working out strategies and payoffs, and for working through the abstract chains of reasoning which lead them to non-co-operative equilibrium strategies.
Do firms ‘really do’ all that?
In practice it is very probable that they do not.
Firms clearly do share the intuition underlying the idea of collusion sustained by punishment threats (recall the quotation given above from the White Salt report) and it seems very obvious to them.
Moreover, numerical examples, experimental games, and such empirical case studies as have been carried out (see, for example, Rees, 1993) seem to suggest that typically punishments far outweigh the gains to short-run deviation for empirically reasonable discount rates and so it is really not hard to explain collusion.
Not only may firms be unable, for reasons of bounded rationality, to work through the complex mathematics of these models, they may not have to because the answer is to them so obvious.
It has been shown in the experimental literature on the prisoners' dilemma game that the strategy of ‘tit for tat’ is a very effective and frequently chosen way of sustaining co-operation even though it is far simpler than Abreu's strategies (and neither subgame perfect nor renegotiation-proof).
Moreover, as we have seen, firms have developed facilitating devices such as information agreements, trade associations, and price leadership to help them solve the problem of achieving and maintaining agreements.
These can be seen as practical methods of resolving the kinds of problems identified by the theory.
Turning now to policy, it seems clear that a prohibitions-based or per se illegality form of legislation cannot effectively deal with tacit collusion.
This is because that kind of approach is aimed at conduct which is explicitly conspiratorial.
Tacit collusion is a form of non-co-operative equilibrium: it results from the rational, independent pursuit of self-interest, which courts tend to find not nearly as reprehensible, to say the least, as conspiratorial conduct.
Further complications are created by the fact that secret explicit collusion may be observationally equivalent to tacit collusion given surveillance methods constrained by considerations of ‘liberty and justice’.
There will always be the problem of trying to infer whether apparently tacit collusion really was well-concealed explicit collusion.
These problems are avoided by an effects-based approach such as that underlying the UK legislation.
Whether firms ‘really’ colluded is not a central issue.
What matters is the appraisal of the outcomes of their behaviour from the point of view of economic efficiency.
To eliminate the possibility of this would seem to be a retrograde step.
Indeed, there is every argument for strengthening it by introducing penalties and allowing MMC findings on the outcomes of firms' behaviour to form the basis for private actions for damages.
This is all the more necessary because, although some facilitating devices such as information agreements may be made the subject of prohibitions, the majority of them appear to escape these.
At the same time the prohibitions-based approach does seem a useful one to adopt in relation to explicit collusion and specific non-co-operative practices.
These arguments then lead us to support the third of the options for change set out in the 1992 Green Paper.
VERTICAL INTEGRATION AND VERTICAL RESTRAINTS
I. INTRODUCTION
‘Cut out middleman's profits — buy direct from the manufacturer’ is a phrase often seen in newspaper advertisements, implying that the retailing and wholesaling functions are otiose, or at least inefficient.
On the other hand, certain of our major retailers (e.g. Marks and Spencer) are commonly thought of as models of efficiency, and their ‘own brands’ command widespread respect — the typical consumer does not think twice about which factory or by whom they are made.
Manufacturers of complex products such as cars seldom make a feature of the source of their inputs — whose brake system, whose gearbox (perhaps a competitor's), or whatever (‘Intel inside' computers is a striking exception here).
There is also a certain amount of secrecy, or lack of communication, about vertical arrangements more generally.
Is Specsavers a chain of opticians or not?
Is MacDonalds a vertically integrated firm?
Why do tyre retailers not say they are (on the whole) owned by tyre manufacturers, and why then do they sell competitors' products?
Why will aluminium producers agree to pay for electricity even if they do not use it?
How ‘free’ is a free public house?
Clearly, vertical arrangements take a variety of forms, and they are an important feature of industrial society, indeed have been so since the Industrial Revolution.
Two quite directly opposing views on their policy significance prevail.
One views unusual vertical arrangements with suspicion, presuming that they are made so as to prevent others entering the industry, to raise margins and thereby increase profits at the expense of consumers.
The alternative benign view is that all contracts are made, broadly speaking, to ease the flow of product.
Thus, according to Bork (1978, p. 245)‘in the absence of a most unlikely proved predatory power and purpose, antitrust should never object to the verticality of any merger’ and, much more straightforward, ‘every vertical restraint should be completely lawful’(p. 288).
As we shall see, the hostile view is linked to some extent with strategic theories about the existence of vertical links, whereas the benign view relates to a contractarian approach.
Unusually, explanations from more than one school of thought constitute the mainstream view here.
However, the match between theoretical school and policy implication is by no means exact.
In later sections, the major theoretical contributions aimed at understanding vertical linkages will be outlined, and subsequently policy implications will be drawn from them.
Before that, the legal position in the UK will be outlined in brief, and issues raised by recent investigations will be considered.
Definitions : For simplicity, throughout the theoretical and policy section the world will be taken to have only two vertical stages below final consumers — called manufacturers and retailers — rather than many.
Vertical integration will be taken to mean the complete interlinkage of a manufacturer and a retailer under one owner or organizer.
Conceptually at least, this is reasonably straightforward.
Vertical restraints come under a number of guises.
There is retail price maintenance by the manufacturer, both maximum price and minimum price.
Or a manufacturer could specify minimum quantity (quantity forcing), or details of service and demonstration facilities, or quality criteria (e.g. no hamburger to be sold more than two minutes after being cooked).
The manufacturer could impose full-line forcing, obliging the retailer to take a whole range of its products if it takes one, or tie-in sales, no X sold without Y. It could impose exclusive purchasing (no products of a certain description to be bought from anywhere but itself), and may offer selective and exclusive distribution agreements (suppliers have to meet certain criteria in order to be selected to distribute a product, and may be offered an exclusive territory or even absolute territorial protection).
It may package a number of these restraints as a business format franchise, and charge a fee or a royalty, or some combination.
Retailers with power will, perhaps less commonly, use it to invoke restraints such as slotting allowances for the right of a manufacturer's product to be on the shelves of a supermarket.
II.
THE POLICY FRAMEWORK
(i) The Law
This short section does not purport to be a complete statement of the legal position regarding vertical activity.
It is at best an outline of the main points in a rather complex field.
For a more authoritative view, a book such as Whish (1989) is helpful.
Vertical mergers are treated little differently from horizontal mergers by the law.
They are covered by the Fair Trading Act 1973 (FTA), under which mergers involving the takeover of assets worth (currently) £30m or more may be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
However, it is widely known that only a small proportion of such qualifying mergers are referred, and further that vertical mergers are a small proportion of the total.
Moreover, the current rules or guidelines focus on the impact on competition as the ground for referral by the Secretary of State.
Hence few vertical mergers are investigated.
Vertical mergers having a Community dimension can be investigated under the various provisions in EC law.
Vertical integration which does not come about through merger but which has anticompetitive consequences is a potential concern of the FTA if it involves a monopoly situation.
Thus the MMC could produce a monopoly report.
But the main use of this act in relation to present concerns is regarding exploitation of monopoly situations.
Similarly, ‘abuse of a dominant position’ in Article 86 of EC law is likely to relate to advantage taken of monopolistic power in imposing terms.
Hence we turn to such matters and therefore to the question of vertical restraints.
A vertical restraint may take one of two forms: one is unilateral imposition of substantive conditions for supply, for example a manufacturer saying ‘you may not take my product X unless you also take my product Y’.
The second is a mutual agreement that substantive conditions of supply will hold, for example‘in exchange for you granting me an exclusive territory, I promise to sell only your products in that territory’.
At first sight, the latter would seem to come under the framework of the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976 (RTP).
However, for a variety of reasons such agreements are unlikely to require registration, as matters stand.
First, schedule 3 to the Act exempts some exclusive dealing arrangements.
Second, it is usually not difficult to write an agreement in such a manner that it does not take a form which is registrable.
For example, only one party may accept restrictions of the designated form.
A series of bipartite agreements, each allocating a particular territory to a retailer would be treated entirely differently from a (registrable) multipartite agreement regarding exclusivity, though it may have the same effect.
Neither will most mutual agreements of the second type be caught by EC law under Article 85(1), because they can commonly benefit either from block exemption or individual exemption under 85(3).
Thus, there are block exemptions for exclusive distribution, exclusive purchasing including special provisions for beer and petrol, motor vehicle distribution arrangements, and franchise agreements, also concerning intellectual property matters.
This does not mean that all such arrangements are exempted (particularly in service industries), for they have to satisfy various conditions.
The block exemptions are subject to review, since they have expiry dates written in, but no substantial change is imminent.
Reviews are planned for 1995.
The imposition of vertical resale price maintenance (RPM) is in almost all cases illegal, in the UK through the Resale Prices Act 1976, and through Article 85(1) concerning cross-border trades.
This contrasts fairly sharply with other vertical restraints either unilaterally imposed or, as we have seen, mutually agreed.
In addition to exclusive purchasing, distribution, and franchise arrangements, selective distribution may be held not to infringe Article 85 (1).
It is unlikely to be caught by the RTP Act either.
Franchising can be, but is commonly allowed on registration.
Thus the applicable legal framework on such vertical restraints in the UK comes essentially from the FTA and the Competition Act 1980.
The same goes for tie-in sales and full-line forcing, and for refusal to supply.
But these Acts do not proscribe activities, they simply provide for investigation in appropriate cases.
Hence the UK framework is far more lenient with regard to non-price than price restraints.
(Tie-in sales and full-line forcing could be caught by Article 85(1) but there have been few cases; Article 86 is the more likely to be relevant.)
It is worth mentioning that the anticompetitive practice provisions of the Competition Act 1980, which enable the Office of Fair Trading (OFT to investigate particular practices and produce a report which may then lead to an MMC reference, have often involved vertical restraints.
These include selective distribution and exclusionary tactics.
For example, exclusive dealing has been condemned in anticompetitive practice reports on several occasions.
But these have mostly been of rather limited significance (one concerned the supply of taxi cabs at Brighton station); see Utton (1992) for a review.
Much more important are the monopoly investigations under the FTA, like those discussed below.
Lastly, it should not be forgotten that the common law, through the restraint of trade doctrine, has a potential role to play.
Some vertical agreements, such as exclusive distribution and exclusive purchasing, have been examined under this framework.
(ii) Some Recent Cases
In a remarkable series of investigations over the past four years, the MMC has examined the practices in beer, petroleum, and motor vehicle supply.
These are the three main areas in which the relationship between manufacturer and final consumer is affected by vertical restraints, covering perhaps 30 per cent of UK retail trade by value.
Thus together they amount to a concerted attempt to investigate whether or not any form of vertical behaviour is to be allowed.
Because of the high profile of the industries, the reports have aroused considerable interest.
The Supply of Beer (MMC, 1989), the first of these reports, is in some ways also the most noteworthy.
It set the tone for the others by being massive — 500 pages in A4 format.
Included are appendices containing a certain amount of relatively sophisticated economic analysis — diagrams and algebra.
The  Commission found that the various vertical practices, including brewers' imposition of exclusive purchase obligations for a range of products including beer (the ‘tied house’), and connected with this, the use of loans at preferential rates of interest, ‘prevent, restrict and distort competition from the point of view of both suppliers and consumers’(p. 250, para 11.21).
As a result of these and other factors, a number of detriments to the public interest resulted, including
(a)
real increases in beer prices of 15 per cent in the six years ending December 1986;
(b)
raised margins on lager above cost compared with beer,
(c)
a restricted choice of beers and other drinks;
(d)
limited independence of tenants, and
(e)
a restricted role for independent wholesalers.
Unusually the MMC (or rather a majority of its serving members) proposed a structural remedy.
Only on a few occasions have they gone this far, where they suggest changes they will often be limited to ‘undertakings’ or promises.
(This was the case for example with the report (MMC, 1986) into the vertical merger of BT with Mitel, an equipment maker.)
The major recommendation was that brewers be prevented from owning or leasing, or having an interest in, or an exclusive relationship with any more than 2,000 on-licensed outlets in the UK.
This implied structural changes for all the big brewers.
In addition there were behavioural remedies proposed in order to reduce the extent of the product tie.
Following the report, although the then Secretary of State at first indicated he would implement its recommendations in full, they were subsequently modified to make them less swingeing.
The brewers' various structural responses, which have included vertical disintegration as well as sales of tied estate, were due to be completed by November 1992.
Another feature of interest in this report concerns the relationship between UK and EC law.
The Brewers' Society contended that arrangements with their outlets fell within the block exemption of exclusive purchasing agreements 1984/83, and therefore that the UK would be in breach of its obligations under the Treaty of Rome if it prohibited such arrangements.
The MMC pointed out that the block exemption only applied if there were no effective competition, no refusal to supply, or if it were not true that less favourable conditions were imposed on those with an exclusive purchasing obligation.
They argued that these conditions were not satisfied and, therefore, that there was no legal difficulty in remedying adverse effects in the UK.
The Supply of Petrol (MMC, 1990) came to quite different conclusions regarding the superficially similar vertical arrangements in that industry.
The MMC found no grounds to suggest that the pattern of ownership, ‘solus’ ties or pricing arrangements in the industry, operated against the public interest.
They therefore recommended no structural or behavioural changes, though they did feel that continued monitoring of the industry by the OFT was necessary.
New Motor Cars (MMC, 1992 a ) is the longest of all, and almost certainly the longest MMC report ever, at nearly 850 pages including appendices.
Again, there are complex vertical linkages in the industry and, again, there is a block exemption which covers distribution arrangements within the industry, provided they remain within certain parameters (which the European Community's DGIV believe they do not in some respects).
The MMC found that restrictions in the selective and exclusive distribution agreements prevent efficient dealers from growing strong, promoting outside their territory, obtaining competing franchises and gaining bargaining power, thereby bargaining for better terms and obtaining more customers by passing some of these benefits on to final consumers.
Therefore these features operate against the public interest.
The MMC proposed a behavioural remedy, that in their agreements with manufacturers, franchised dealers be allowed to advertise outside their designated territories and to acquire dealerships outside that territory, and not be limited as to the number of cars they may sell.
They also proposed that dealers may hold competing dealerships in an area and provide other services outside their territories.
Accompanying this report was a related, less extensive inquiry into motor car parts (MMC, 1992 b ), in which industry there are also substantial vertical interlinkages.
However, the MMC, although finding areas of potential concern, did not propose any remedies.
There are cases in quite different spheres which suggest a perceived considerable importance in vertical arrangements.
Prime amongst these is the electricity industry in England and Wales.
In 1990 the industry, which was both vertically and horizontally integrated, became separated into different units (for fuller details, see e.g. Vickers and Yarrow, 1991).
Generation is handled by two main concerns, National Power and PowerGen, together with input from Nuclear Electric, imports from Scotland and France, and, in due course, from some independent producers.
The generators have to bid for the right to supply electricity to the National Grid, the central player in the system.
It operates on behalf of the regional electricity companies (RECs) in buying and transmitting power to them.
They then distribute (and supply) electricity to final consumers, except the largest ones.
The RECs can generate electricity on their own account but are strictly limited in the extent to which they can do so.
One major concern in creating this structure seems to have been the recognition that competition in generation was feasible and capable in principle of producing cost reductions, but that the structure of the interrelationship between generation and distribution had to be carefully designed.
Electricity is essentially non-storable, so total generated supply has to equal total demand at every point in time.
Hence there is a regulated market system organized by the Grid interposed between the two, determining prices and supply for each half-hour period.
(Previously there had been a shadow market, based upon operating-cost information.)
The system as a whole is overseen by the Director General of Electricity Supply, who has a duty to promote competition in generation and supply.
Currently moves seem to be afoot to reduce the extent of vertical integration in gas supply, also with the aim of aiding the development of competition.
Finally, in devising structures for essentially new but potentially problematic industries (problematic as a result of natural monopoly issues) such as cable TV and cordless telephone communication, the government has experimented with a variety of vertical systems and restraints.
Clearly, vertical arrangements are not matters which can be left to chance in all circumstances.
III.
THEORETICAL ANALYSES OF VERTICAL LINKAGES
(i) Technological Economies
The first set of factors leading to close vertical linkages is fairly straightforward-technological interdependence.
The classic example concerns various stages of the steelmaking process, where unnecessary cooling and reheating is avoided by siting these activities in close proximity to each other, usually under common ownership.
However, there are certainly other industries where it is normal to group activities in this way.
A rather different example is newspapers, where typesetting, printing, and publishing are all commonly carried out on the same premises by one company.
This is quite different from the case with books where the activities are very often carried out in different locations.
But with newspapers, speed is essential for economic production, hence the proximity to minimize delay.
The example also illustrates the influence of technology — now that data is easily transferred electronically, typesetting and printing of newspapers is often carried out in different places, with printing taking place at several locations.
Nor need the activities necessarily be performed by the same firm.
Electricity generation is quite often carried out at coal-mine mouths, but (as Joskow, 1985, has documented) under a variety of contractual relationships.
Vertical linkages can be used rather than vertical integration.
The same is true of relationships between aluminium smelters and electricity suppliers.
Contractual arrangements between the parties can lead to disputes, but it is not clear that these are the concern of competition policy authorities.
(ii) The Transactions Cost Approach
From one point of view, the theory of vertical integration and vertical restraints is but a special case of the theory of the firm.
The employment relation or contract, which characterizes all firms larger than sole proprietorships and certain partnerships, is a form of vertical integration.
Thus a  second approach is to look at vertical linkages as a way of minimizing transaction costs, or reducing them below market transaction levels.
The approach originates from the insights of Coase (1937) but has largely been developed by Williamson (e.g. 1971,1975, and 1985).
For reasons which will become apparent, I will not provide more than a brief overview of this approach.
A major element in this analysis is the concept of asset specificity.
Assets are specific to a transaction to the extent to which their costs are sunk.
If I, a plastics factory owner, decide to make a rear-lamp cluster for a particular car, either I or the car assembler will have to invest in the specific mould to produce it.
The subsequent bargaining position between me and the assembler will depend a great deal on the nature of the ownership structure regarding this asset, and may be subject to dispute, especially if I acquire some knowledge as a result of using it.
This first element interacts with the second, uncertainty.
If we knew what the future would bring, our contract regarding the specific asset (and other matters) could be well and completely thought out.
But what if demand is lower than expected — must I keep to my quoted price?
If demand is higher than expected, can I object if the manufacturer asks another producer also to make the same product?
If there was no asset specificity, then there would be no commitment on either side, and hence no problem.
Frequency of exchange is also important.
Suppose the same sort of bargain will have to be concluded quite often, then it may make sense to devise a framework, or ‘governance structure’ or protocol, to facilitate it.
Thus market exchange has its weaknesses, as well as its strengths (competition, anonymity, flexibility).
It is noteworthy that General Motors and Toyota developed quite different responses to the problem exemplified, the former specializing in vertical integration, the latter in vertical linkages well short of that, but both some distance from anonymous market exchange.
(iii) A Contractual Rights Approach
A more recent outgrowth of the transactions cost approach stems from the work of Grossman, Hart, and Moore (GHM)(Grossman and Hart, 1986; Hart and Moore, e.g. 1990).
This accepts that integration provides benefits identified by Coase, Williamson, and others, but is critical of their analysis of the costs.
In caricatures of the Coase-Williamson view, one might expect the firm to grow without limit, in the absence of the costs of overburdening bureaucracy.
But what, more precisely, are these costs?
To answer this question, GHM define ownership as control over the (residual rights in the) firm's assets, the firm itself being viewed as a collection of assets.
Naturally, the firm has employees but, in the absence of slavery, the workers have inalienable rights.
A manager can order an employee to carry out a specific task.
If the employee refuses then, in an extreme case, he or she will be fired.
The manager is no better off, seemingly, than if the employee were a sub-contractor, whose contract could be rescinded for poor performance.
Thus control over employees, and the incentives of employees, come indirectly through management's ownership of assets, which in turn defines the status quo, within this framework.
An example from Hart (1989) will illustrate the costs as well as benefits of ownership of two successive stages of production.
The example involves a car assembler and a car-body manufacturer.
Suppose the two are separate.
Then if the assembler wants to make changes to the contract, the body-maker is in a strong position because it can threaten to keep both employees and assets working to the original contracts.
However, if the two are integrated, those running the body-making division are in a weaker position if asked to make changes, since they have no independent control rights over the assets they manage.
This is a benefit of integration.
On the other hand, those running the body-making division of an integrated firm would have a dulled incentive to come up with cost-saving or quality-enhancing innovations for producing bodies than would an independent body-maker.
Management in the latter would appropriate a surplus created by the innovation to a far greater extent than  in the integrated firm, assuming that the innovation is asset-specific.
This dulled incentive to enhance productivity is a cost of integration that must be borne in mind when amalgamation is contemplated.
Integration does not yield the outcome which would arise under complete contracts.
The example sketched out above concerns those relatively high up in the hierarchy, but it can be extended to cover other employees of the body-maker.
These ideas can be developed into a theory of the boundaries of the firm.
The first result is that complementary assets should be owned by a single firm.
If a product may only be realized by the use of two sets of assets, and each set has no alternative use, then when both sets are under common control, fewer parties can hold up any non-contracted changes to the production process.
On the other hand, when assets are economically independent, integration would bring in outside control which would dilute incentives in the division being controlled.
Hence the second result, that independent assets should be separately owned.
Less polar cases will depend upon a balance of forces.
Thus there are, in principle, limits to the scope of a firm based upon the technology and transactions involved in its production and output processes.
This theory builds upon transactions cost theory but, its proponents would argue, provides clearer predictions.
In both frameworks, firms are in a second-best world; first-best contractual arrangements are not available ex ante (and the Coase theorem, therefore, does not apply).
Firms have an incentive to opt for particular levels or types of integration.
Whether in practice they act in this way has not been established convincingly.
The main gap in the theoretical analysis in both cases is any consideration of whether or when there is likely to be a divergence between the private and socially desirable directions of vertical integration for contractual reasons.
The fact that firms find it in their mutual interests to combine, or to develop lasting links, does not mean that such links are socially desirable in the wider sense (as Williamson, for example, would agree).
Thus whilst transactions cost and contractual rights approaches are capable of considerable insights, and have strong links with delegation and strategic issues which will be discussed later, they do not yet lend themselves very readily to propositions in welfare economics.
This is the reason for comparative neglect in the material that follows.
(iv) Monopolistic Motives for Integration
The third main set of arguments will be the most extensively covered, under a number of sub-headings.
First, there are a number of standard arguments regarding integration which, although widely available in texts, should be briefly reviewed.
Following Vernon and Graham (1971), if variable proportions may be used in production, but one input is monopolized and priced above marginal cost whereas the other is not, then merger between the upstream monopolized input supplier and the final producer(s) can remove the inefficiency caused by the factor distortion in production.
However, it simultaneously increases the monopolist's market, since possibilities of substitution away from the monopolized input are eliminated.
Hence final price may rise (particularly if the downstream stage was competitive) and social welfare could fall — see Schmalensee (1973).
The possibility is illustrated in Figure 1.
If (with Greenhut and Ohta, 1976) the upstream and downstream stages were connected by fixed proportions, with upstream being a monopoly and downstream an oligopoly, then integration would remove successive mark-ups at different stages in favour of a single mark-up.
Monopoly power would not increase, but price would fall and a welfare gain would ensue.
Clearly these two effects can be combined (Waterson, 1982).
Thus, if the elasticity of substitution is fairly low (high), and numbers at the downstream stage prior to integration are low (high), social welfare is likely to rise (fall) on integration.
This modelling framework can also be extended to include oligopoly at each level and firm by firm integration, at the cost of some complexity.
Two comments on this analysis are in order.
First, it assumes there are no contractual means to eliminate the problems of successive mark-ups/input  pricing distortions in the absence of complete integration despite potential benefits to the parties involved.
Second, it is sometimes said that the pure vertical effects of integration are always positive in a welfare sense — they only become negative because of associated horizontal effects, for example as a result of a reduction in the number of downstream firms.
But this is of little comfort, since the two are commonly inextricably intertwined.
Figure 1 Cost and Price Changes on Vertical Integration
From the point of view of policy, there is a substantial difference between horizontal mergers and vertical mergers, based upon this analysis.
In the absence of scale economy benefits, horizontal mergers are likely to be socially undesirable.
The presumption with a vertical merger is that unless a substantial horizontal impact is involved, it will be socially beneficial on balance.
Of course some parties will be adversely affected, but the overall effect takes this into account.
One particular element of concern here is what is known as the foreclosure issue.
If one of the few upstream firms integrates with a downstream firm, then its previous customers may find their supply of input dries up, or is subject to onerous terms.
This was a factor in the merger between BMC and Pressed Steel Fisher some years ago (Monopolies Commission, 1966).
In this particular case, there seems to have been no question of halting supply, but undertakings were sought that, in times of high demand, outside customers (, etc.) would receive fair attention to their orders.
More recently, the question has been raised analytically by Salinger (1988).
He argues that in the absence of diminishing returns to production of the intermediate or final good, or some element of product differentiation at intermediate or final levels, or the need for a firm's intermediate product division to be held to being competitive, then vertically integrated firms will not participate in the intermediate good market.
Thus, under certain circumstances intermediate good prices in the unintegrated sector can rise as a result of integration, and vertical merger can thereby cause a rise in final good prices.
However, it will be noted that the list of qualifications under which participation in the intermediate market will not take place is extensive.
As a matter of fact, such participation often takes place.
And recent work (Abiru et al.,
1992) questions this analysis in any case.
Therefore the importance of the foreclosure issue as regards overall welfare is rather unclear.
A further element may enter here to complicate the picture.
Suppose upstream scale economies are extensive.
A downstream firm may wish to integrate  grate backwards despite the scale economies in order to value (shadow price) additional units of input at marginal cost.
But this will have adverse effects on remaining upstream firms, who will be faced with a thinner market over which to cover their costs, and may harm overall welfare.
Again this assumes there is no contractual means, for example a two-part tariff, by which to enable the intending integrator to obtain additional units at or near marginal cost.
Finally, suppose that the upstream firm's product has two uses with very different elasticities of demand.
In order to sustain price discrimination between the two sets of purchasers, it may decide to integrate into the area of relatively elastic demand and charge a high price to the other.
Of course we must remember that the welfare implications of price discrimination are not clear-cut.
(v) Vertical Restraints and the ‘Externality Problem’
At first sight, it might be thought that a manufacturer would be keen on retailing being as competitive as possible.
This argument goes as follows: There is a demand by consumers for the product of manufacturer X. But the manufacturer faces a derived demand from dealers/retailers in the product.
If the retail sector is competitive, the derived demand curve will be the same shape as the final demand curve, and below it by a distance representing the marginal cost of retailing.
If the retail sector were imperfectly competitive, the derived demand curve would be steeper in slope, and if it were inefficient the derived demand curve would be a greater distance below.
Neither possibility would be in the manufacturer's interest.
All other things being equal, the smaller the retailing mark-up, the greater the profit share for the manufacturer.
So what is wrong with this argument?
In essence, the complication is that retailers provide ‘much more than mere warehousing’(Marvel and McCafferty, 1984, p. 348).
They provide both specific and general services to customers and potential customers — demonstration facilities, information, stocks, and so on.
But these do not come free.
Retailers incur fixed costs, many of which contain a sunk element, for example fixtures and fittings.
Manufacturers gain through having their product demonstrated, or even through having it present in a store (or else they would be unwilling to pay ‘slotting allowances’ to supermarkets), so that demand is not exogenous to retailing.
The fact that there are fixed costs means perfect competition is an unattainable ideal framework for retailing.
Moreover, for many goods, competition is localized due to the spatial nature of retailing.
When modelling vertical restraints, it becomes important to incorporate these features (see e.g. Dixit, 1983; Mathewson and Winter, 1984).
Once a model incorporating a manufacturer with some monopoly power and (say) a monopolistically competitive retail sector has been set up, it becomes apparent that manufacturer and retailer interests diverge; the retailers may want more or less margin than the manufacturer would like to impose.
For example, Gallini and Winter (1983) show that a typical retailer would want a margin [(price -input cost) /price]of l/£r, whereas the manufacturer would want the retail margin to be £n/£R, £r being the elasticity of demand when one retailer changes price, £R the elasticity when all retailers do likewise and £n, the elasticity of demand with respect to changes in the number of retailers.
Moreover, the numbers entering retailing may be sub-optimal from the manufacturer's point of view.
This divergence of views can be seen (following Mathewson and Winter, 1984) as arising out of a set of externalities.
(i)
Retailers do not gain all the benefits of action taken to improve sales; some goes to manufacturers.
For every extra unit a retailer sells by modifying pricing or advertising strategies, the manufacturer gains an amount given by the difference between the wholesale price and marginal production costs.
Thus, there is a positive externality bestowed on the manufacturer by such retailers' actions, which in turn means that retailers will tend to set prices too high and advertising too low from the manufacturer's point of view (i.e. high prices are a negative vertical externality).
(ii)
On the other hand, retailers when raising price confer benefits on neighbouring retailers, by increasing demand for their products.
This is a positive horizontal externality created by one retailer on  others; in attempting to gain a greater margin for itself, it drives some custom away.
It will tend to mean retailers will keep prices lower than they would be in the absence of rivals.
Clearly, these two opposing effects imply that it is unlikely there will be a dominant direction to the outcome over all modelling variants.
(iii)
Each retailer confers a positive externality on other retailers and on the manufacturer by engaging in advertising of the product, unless the advertising is very specifically targeted.
There is a similar effect regarding other services — demonstration facilities and so on.
Because the horizontal and vertical externalities here operate in the same direction, the clear prediction is that, in the absence of any agreements, too little promotional and demonstration activity will take place.
Some retailers will attempt to ‘free ride’ on others, perhaps offering low prices and a warehouse-type ambiance , once customers have had a product demonstrated elsewhere.
(iv)
Retailers left to themselves would be likely to set location sufficiently distant from rivals to permit supernormal returns to their location but not sufficient to make entry worthwhile.
This assumes an element of sunkness about location (which Mathewson and Winter did not), so that potential entrants believe they are unlikely to be able to push established firms out of current locations.
In this case, the retailers' locational choices confer a negative externality on the manufacturer leading to a suboptimal density of suppliers from the manufacturer's point of view.
Vertical restraints imposed by the manufacturer can in principle control all these problems or deal with the externalities involved.
Resale price maintenance, quantity forcing, specification of demonstration service and promotional facilities, franchise fees, allocation of territories, and so on, can all be used to this end, assuming the manufacturer has sufficient information regarding the underlying cost and demand parameters, and assuming all are legal.
To call something an externality is potentially emotive.
In welfare economics we are taught that to internalize externalities by appropriate contracts is socially desirable.
But that should not lead us to assume that the same holds for the externalities identified here.
Internalization will be in the manufacturer's interest, but the manufacturer and society do not have the same set of preferences.
The manufacturer's interest in a high price, for example, may be in opposition to the social desirability of a low price.
The positive analysis of vertical restraints within this framework can be taken a little further, with implications for normative issues.
Still assuming a deterministic setting, and given sufficient mathematical regularity in the underlying functions, the number of instruments needed might be expected to equal the number of variables to be controlled.
(Uncertainty will be introduced later.)
Thus in the absence of the fourth externality discussed above, it is price and advertising levels (and thereby quantity, as well) set by retailers which the manufacturer wishes to control.
Two instruments are sufficient.
Depending on the framework, it can be shown that alternative pairs of instruments can be used.
Moving to policy issues, if two alternative pairs with the same properties exist, then if one set is deemed socially (un) desirable, so should the other set be.
Mathewson and Winter note an asymmetry between the treatment of RPM and various territorial and franchise restrictions in the law of the US (and the same is true of the UK).
Pricing restraints are treated much more harshly than non-price restraints.
If it is true that they are simply used as substitutes, the law is making an economically illegitimate distinction.
In fact, I have argued (Waterson, 1988) that things are not as straightforward as this.
Cases are documented where what are seen in Mathewson and Winter as potential substitutes (territory distribution and RPM) were used together.
There are, I believe, two reasons, first that closed territory distribution (sales outside an area being prohibited) is normally infeasible and second that the fourth externality may be of importance.
Hence to ban one but not the other may not be as ridiculous as a simple interpretation of their model would suggest.
Moreover, there are circumstances under which simple vertical restraints do not perform as  Mathewson and Winter suggest (see Bolton and Bonanno, 1988; O'Brien and Shaffer, 1992).
There is also the question of the relationship between maximum and minimum RPM (see Perry and Besanko, 1991).
But there is one important general point which holds regardless of these specific criticisms.
For economists, a focus on the effects of a set of practices is what matters.
Whether they take one particular legal form or another, whether they involve particular instruments or another set, is not of first importance.
Thus the idea that instruments are substitutes at all is rather damning for a restrictive practices policy which, like that currently in operation in the UK, is based upon form rather than effect.
Finally, one general feature of the framework of this subsection is worthy of note, in order to facilitate comparisons between models.
The manufacturer's ideal would be complete vertical control—vertical integration.
The restraints are imposed in an attempt to mimic this.
But then there is no rationale within the model for restraints per se .
Perhaps restraints are imposed because the history of the industry precludes vertical integration.
Perhaps the manufacturer lacks sufficient capital to build the network.
It cannot be a lack of expertise, given the framework.
Other models soon to be discussed have more fundamental reasons for vertical restraints, as opposed to vertical integration.
(vi) Interbrand v. Intrabrand Competition
In almost every purchase one makes, from a butter substitute to a bathroom suite, there are two forms of competition.
Do I want Flora or St Ivel Gold, is one form; do I buy from Tesco or Sainsbury is the other.
(With some products, like the bathroom suite, there is a further question — within the Armitage Shanks range, do I want the Sandringham-Envoy with Silverspa taps, or some higher specification?
I will not consider this issue any further in the present context.)
The models of the previous section, by assuming a monopoly manufacturer, neglected interbrand competition and the role of exclusive purchasing agreements.
An exclusive purchasing agreement obliges a retailer to purchase its supply of a particular good or set of goods solely from one manufacturer.
In Figure 2, R 2 must buy from M 1  not M 2  , but M 1  is unconstrained.
This gives the manufacturer some immunity from interbrand competition and, as a first-order effect, increases the manufacturer's margin, which is privately but not socially desirable.
Figure 2 Exclusive Purchasing and Exclusive Distribution
In practice (as, for , in car retailing, and commonly in franchising) it is often coupled with an exclusive distribution agreement.Again in Figure 2,M 1  says it will sell to R 2  but not to R 3  , a neighbour of R 2  .
R 2  will often be given a ‘territory’, although this will not normally mean that R 2  makes all sales of M 1  's product inside the territory.
However, other retailers of the product will normally be under some obligation not to seek customers actively in R 2  's industry.
Thus it gives the retailer some immunity from intrabrand competition, as discussed above, and as a first-order effect increases the retailer's margin.
There will be additional effects as a result of these marketing agreements.
For example, the exclusive purchasing agreement by itself raises the manufacturer's margin, but may lower the retail margin.
If retailers are spread around the country, in some places it will transpire that there is room for only one seller of both manufacturer M 1  ‘s and manufacturer M 2  ‘s product.
If exclusive purchasing is then instituted, there may be enough custom for one retailer of each product.
This increases competition at the retail level, all other things being equal, compared with the no-restraint position, and so reduces retail margins (see Waterson, 1990).
Therefore the effects of exclusive purchasing agreements on social welfare are not clear, sometimes restrictions will be desirable, sometimes not, dependent upon particular parameters of the model.
For example, the higher the cross-elasticity of demand between rival goods or brands, the more likely are exclusive purchasing agreements to be socially desirable, and vice versa .
There are similar potential benefits associated with exclusive distribution, as the preamble to the legislation on the block exemption suggests.
(vii) Strategic Effects and Vertical Separation
So far, the thrust of the analysis has been that firms are likely to want vertical integration and that, though in many cases it would be socially desirable, in some it may not be.
A rather different type of argument suggests there may be strategic advantages in manufacturers remaining separate from retailers, whilst having distinct linkages.
Suppose two manufacturers produce goods which are partial substitutes, and (for whatever reason) competition in the market is through price.
Suppose they are each integrated with their retailing operation.
If the goods are close substitutes, competition between them will drive price down near to marginal cost.
Now let the retailing operations be separate.
In order to avoid successive mark-up problems, the manufacturers may each decide to charge input at marginal cost, but gain benefits by imposing a positive franchise fee.
However, if the products are very close, the price mark-up retailers can charge above marginal cost will be low, so the level at which the franchise fee can be set will not prove very rewarding to the manufacturers.
Therefore, let us consider an alternative scenario, in which one manufacturer decides to raise its input price (possibly at the same time reducing the franchise fee).
This will raise its retailer's costs, so causing an increase in price and reduction in output.
Provided the manufacturer can claw back the benefits, this will increase its profitability.
In fact, Bonanno and Vickers (1988, p. 260) show the following proposition: ‘if franchise fees can be used to extract the retailers' profits, it is in the individual interest of each manufacturer to choose vertical separation and charge his retailer a wholesale price in excess of unit production cost’ whether the other is integrated or separated.
The point may be illustrated in a reaction function diagram.
Because the products' prices are strategic complements (in the Bulow et al., 1985 sense) their reaction functions will be upward sloping — see Figure 3.
The line  (0) is the reaction function of manufacturer 1 whilst  is the reaction function of the retailer of 2's product when charged an input price  (costs are assumed here to equal zero).
When charged an input price of 0,(0) is also the reaction function of the retailer of good 1.
The franchise fee will determine the point D, below which the retailer would make losses.
When the manufacturer charges a unit price  somewhat above zero, the retailer sets a higher price for any given price of retailer 2, leading to the reaction function  and equilibrium at B. The same argument can be made for manufacturer 2.
Hence the eventual position will be at a point like C.
Intuitively, what is happening here is that the force which argues for an increase in output (fall in prices) from the double marginalization position in  monopoly is being outweighed by a force which argues for a decrease in output (increase in price) from the duopoly position.
This increases manufacturer profits, as long as the surplus can be captured.
But notice that position A is socially preferred to B or C, involving as it does lower prices and greater output for both products.
Therefore, from the social point of view, vertical integration would be preferable to vertical separation.
Figure 3 Reaction Functions with Vertical Integration
This model can be extended to compare vertical separation with the complete absence of vertical linkages, through an adaptation of the model of Ordover et al.
(1990); see also Rey and Stiglitz (1988).
Here there are two manufacturers and two retailers.
The manufacturers produce identical products (say, for simplicity).
Therefore price competition between them for the right to sell to the retailers would drive price to marginal cost.
The retailers' products are somewhat differentiated, so that price competition would still leave a mark-up above costs.
Suppose now that manufacturer 1 signs a selective and exclusive distribution agreement with retailer 1, promising not to supply retailer 2.
Manufacturer 2 can then raise its price to retailer 2 above cost, because there is no alternative source of supply.
Hence, by signing the agreement, retailer 1 has raised rival's costs in the manner suggested by Salop and Scheffman (1987).
In terms of the figure, shifts up to, so that if the original outcome was point A it now moves to E (or if the original outcome were B, it moves to C).
Thus manufacturer 1 and retailer 1 have some surplus to share.
Once manufacturer 1 and retailer 1 have signed their agreement, it may pay manufacturer 2 and retailer 2 to sign a similar agreement.
Again it appears that vertical separation (here vertical restraints, of the exclusive distribution kind) are socially less desirable than the alternative, in this case complete absence of vertical links.
Obviously the result is dependent on there being not too much differentiation at the upstream stage, or the double marginalization effect of no linkage would dominate.
Also important is the limited availability of alternative sources for retailer 2 once the first agreement is signed.
This harks back to the foreclosure issue.
But the general point is that vertical restraints should not be thought of, in social welfare terms, as intermediate between no linkage and complete integration.
(viii) Risk, Uncertainty, and Agency
Discussion of the benefits to the manufacturer of vertical separation and of imposing restraints on  downstream firms reminds us that one way the whole issue can be thought of is as a principal-agent problem of delegation.
The manufacturer delegates to the agent the task of setting final price (usually), output, pre-sale services, and so on, but is rather careful about the construction of the award schedule.
Still in this vein, one element not so far introduced is risk and uncertainty and its impact on the modelling of frameworks and outcomes.
It is once these are introduced that traditional agency factors come into play.
Rey and Tirole (1986) have a model in which a manufacturer supplies a number of retailers, but cannot observe a retailer's profit or quantity sold.
There is the possibility of demand uncertainty and cost uncertainty in the retail markets.
Also retailers may be risk averse.
They show that in general RPM and exclusive territories are not equivalent (they would be in their model without uncertainty).
The manufacturer is likely to prefer one or the other depending upon the nature of uncertainty and the risk preferences of retailers.
Gal Or (1991b) in a development of this model, finds some relative strengths of RPM.
Social and private preferences may also diverge.
Moreover, agency considerations may conflict with strategic considerations.
The following example developed from Slade (1992) will illustrate the point.
Suppose some retailers are more risk-averse than others.
Traditional agency theory then suggests that the more risk-averse be given contracts which force them to bear less of the risk involved in the venture.
The outcome will be influenced by their effort, but they need to be heavily compensated for bearing risks.
This may be tackled for example by paying them a relatively higher fixed salary with less dependent upon the outcome.
In other words, they are more vertically integrated.
Thereby, they work hard.
In the context of a petrol station, the risk-averse are offered a salary plus a small performance bonus for running the station, whereas the less risk-averse are offered petrol at wholesale price and are free to decide how to behave.
Suppose also that there are two groups of petrol stations.
Those which offer petrol alone have relatively higher cross elasticities of demand between them than those which have additional facilities (carwash, repairs, retailing, and so on).
In other words, in the former price and profits are more likely to be affected by price wars.
Thus it is in the former that the manufacturer has the greater strategic motive for vertical separation, setting wholesale prices and charging franchise fees.
However, if the typical person running the latter group of stations (those with additional facilities) is also less risk-averse than the typical person running the former, then there is a conflict.
Strategic motives would imply vertical separation for the petrol only stations; agency motives would imply the opposite (see also Gal Or, 1991a).
Clearly, whether this is an important issue or conflict can only be answered empirically.
In her paper, Slade finds that strategic motives are important in determining contract choice.
This is comforting for applications to policy questions of previously discussed results of the vertical separation literature.
IV.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
A nihilistic view about the policy implications of recent theoretical work in the area of vertical restraints would be that, since almost anything can happen, nothing can be said about policy.
In fact, although there is an element of truth to this position, the previous theoretical analysis is arguably of substantial assistance in commenting upon the current framework of the law.
A number of points may be made.
(i)
The element of truth certainly resides in the point that there is no link between competition and social welfare in the area of vertical relationships.
One arrangement (e.g. vertical integration) may involve less competition in some sense but may be socially more desirable than another.
This is rather unlike horizontal competition.
But this point is already clearly recognized in the legal framework through such elements as the block exemptions.
Thus the general lessons are that a concentrated vertical market structure is not necessarily undesirable, and that freely negotiated contractual relationships are not necessarily benign.
The theory gives little sup port  to Bork's (1978) position.
Moreover, combinations of factors can conspire to turn vertical effects into horizontal effects, for example the combination of vertical linkages and the necessity for licences at the retail stage (as in the supply of beer).
(ii)
Moving on to more specific issues, theory gives comparatively little support to the legal position that resale price maintenance should be treated differently from other vertical restraints.
There is some justification, in that RPM may be the most direct method of maintaining high prices.
But combinations of other controls which are viewed benignly may very easily lead to similar effects.
Indeed, some people would argue they are worse, if anything.
What is, unfortunately, not clear as a general proposition is whether the controls on RPM should be relaxed, or whether exclusive dealing and so on should be viewed with greater suspicion.
(iii)
There is another factor which arises in this connection.
If one set of instruments can substitute for another, policy is in any case badly served by a legal framework which focuses on form rather than effect, as the UK restrictive practice legislation does.
(Kay, 1990, extends this argument to say that effect should be valued over intent as well.)
Two sets of words may amount to the same thing, but one set may be caught by the Act and another set not.
Those formulating agreements are obviously better advised to avoid the particular frameworks captured by the Act.
But then the Act loses its utility.
This lesson appears to have been accepted in principle (Department of Trade and Industry, 1988, 1989) but has yet to be implemented.
(iv)
The case for block exemption of franchising does not appear clear in economic theory.
It is perhaps implicitly assumed that each franchise chain has little market power.
Otherwise the fact that RPM is disallowed but that franchisors can ‘recommend’ selling prices to franchisees would be quite remarkable.
Alternatively, it is perhaps assumed that without franchises there would be a vertically integrated chain, which would be less socially desirable.
But neither is this necessarily the case.
This leads to a more general point.
(v)
The law appears so far to have almost entirely failed to rise to the challenge of the vertical separation literature.
Vertical integration is not strongly controlled, but vertical (non-price) restraints are actively smiled upon.
Clearly this is likely to encourage development of the latter, including franchising.
But we have seen that vertical separation with restraints may well be more socially undesirable than vertical integration.
This is not a curiosum: the types of arrangements in the beer and petrol industries in which tied retailers face a higher unit price and possibly subsidised fixed costs (i.e. a negative franchise fee) seem to accord quite closely with the predictions of some theoretical models.
Admittedly in the beer industry the MMC took the position that, although there were block exemptions, they could be negated under certain circumstances if the agreements were detrimental.
But the point was not very forcefully made.
In making these remarks, I do not mean to argue that the decisions made in cases discussed in section II are necessarily wrong.
However, I am suggesting that an opportunity was lost to incorporate recent economic analysis to any substantial extent into the evaluation of the various industry studies, in particular to provide an element of comparison and consistency between them.
ANTITRUST POLICY TOWARDS CO-OPERATIVE R&D VENTURES
I. INTRODUCTION
In July 1992 IBM, Siemens, and Toshiba announced a $1 billion joint venture to share the costs of developing a 256 megabit DRAM chip.
The project is likely to involve more than 200 researchers, and work is scheduled to start almost immediately at IBM's Advanced Semi-Conductor Technology Centre.
Aside from the pooling of costs, analysts see this project as combining Toshiba's manufacturing abilities, IBM's design edge in DRAMs, and Siemens' money and access to the European market.
The project also enables the three firms to share what seem to be considerable risks: the 64 megabit DRAM is still not in commercial production, and many of the firms operating in the DRAM market are having trouble turning in a profit.
While many users have developed joyous fantasies about what a 256 megabit DRAM will do for them, others are somewhat concerned about whether an alliance between these three giants will adversely affect the performance of the DRAM market.
Indeed, more than a dozen joint ventures of various types have been announced in the semi-conductor industry during the past year or so (many between Japanese and US firms), raising questions about whether ‘too much’ co-operation will diminish the competitive drive of leading firms in this sector 
The 256 megabit DRAM project is by no means the first co-operative R&D venture to be organized by firms facing rising R&D costs and increased uncertainty, and it is a type of initiative which public policy-makers have generally welcomed.
Indeed, in Europe, the 1992 programme has tried to eliminate obstacles to certain types of collaborative  agreements between firms, and official EC rhetoric has frequently dwelt on the many potential advantages that collaborative ventures between European firms may bring.
More generally, governments in Japan, the US, and Europe have promoted and lavishly funded a number of large-scale pre-competitive research consortia (such as the VSLI consortium, SEMATECH, MCC, ESPRIT, and others), and antitrust law and practice in both the US and Europe have become noticeably more lenient with the passage of the National Co-operative Research Act in 1984 and the announcement of the block exemption from Article 85 in the EEC for certain categories of R&D agreements in 1985.
At the bottom of all of these developments is a small body of theory and empirical evidence on the nature of R&D competition in markets and the market failures which are associated with it.
My goal in this paper is to examine this literature critically, and then use it to ascertain what the appropriate antitrust treatment of research joint ventures should be.
The plan of operations is as follows.
In section II, I will review the a priori arguments favouring co-operative R&D ventures, identifying three types of externalities which affect the production and timing of R&D.
Technological externalities are the main justification for R&D joint ventures, and, in section III, I will summarize the evidence which has been generated on the existence of technological spillovers and imitation costs.
In section IV, I will examine the 1984 US National Co-operative Research Act and the block exemption system introduced in 1985 in the EEC, asking whether these antitrust policies are likely to match their promise and whether further action is needed.
II.
THE CASE FOR CO-OPERATIVE
R&D
Co-operative R&D ventures take many forms, ranging from R&D joint ventures (which we shall focus on here) to cross-licensing agreements and various informal types of technology trading or information-sharing agreements.
Co-operation can focus mainly on the R, the D, or it can couple joint R&D with the joint production and marketing of the output of that R&D, and it can be structured around sharing costs, restrictions put on the other R&D activities of participants, and rules which govern the production and marketing of the output affected by the joint R&D project.
Evaluating the benefits of co-operative R&D ventures is difficult because they can have effects both on the amount of R&D spent on particular projects and on the state of competition in relevant output markets.
In this section, I shall survey the large and growing theoretical literature on this subject.
My goal is to identify the types of agreement which are most likely to yield positive net social benefits.
Since the arguments for and against co-operative R&D ventures turn on the existence of externalities, it is useful to organize the discussion around the three of these which have featured prominently in the literature:technological spillovers, pecuniary externalities,and environmental externalities (for other taxonomies, see Spence, 1984, Dasgupta, 1 98 8, and the excellent survey by Katz and Ordover, 1990; on co-operation in R&D more generally, see Teece, 1992, and Baumol, 1992).
Technological spillovers arise whenever information produced by some firm i becomes available to some other firm j without j having to pay for it.
They occur because information is costless to transmit, and the public policy problem that they create involves trading-off the full disclosure of new information (which is optimal whenever the marginal costs of information transmission are zero) with the need to preserve incentives to generate it (i.e. to cover the costs of producing that information).
Pecuniary externalities arise when the actions of some firm i directly affect the competitive position or profits of one of its rivals, j.
They occur when an action by i directly affects j 's costs or the demand which it faces, or when R&D undertaken by firm i retards or blocks the innovative efforts of j .
Some pecuniary externalities are positive (e.g. those arising from risk-sharing), while others are negative (pre-emptive R&D can prevent rivals from realizing a positive return on their R&D).
Finally, environmental externalities occur when the actions of firm i affects the attitudes or expectations of j in a way which affects how it reacts to i 's actions.
A classic example of this type of externality arises when cooperation between firms in one line of activity (say, in R&D) affects their willingness and ability to cooperate in other lines of activity (say, in pricing).
When technological spillovers exist, firms find it difficult to appropriate the full benefits of their research activities.
Technological knowledge created by R&D is the classic example of a public good, meaning that it is non-rival in use (its use by one firm does not limit its use by others) and non-excludable (the owner cannot prevent others from using it).
As a consequence, social rates of return are likely to exceed private rates of return to R&D if agents operate independently, and too little R&D will be undertaken.
Co-operative R&D ventures are a way of internalizing these spillovers (eliminating the ability of rival firms to free ride on each other 's R&D), and can, therefore, be expected to increase total R&D activity.
Indeed, they may even increase the diffusion of technological information within the co-operating group.
R&D consortia which include films that produce different products using the same basic technological knowledge may also be able to segment user markets, price discriminating more effectively as a group than they are able to do when they act independently and earning a higher return on their R&D activities.
In short, cooperative R&D ventures are likely to increase total R&D spending in sectors where spillovers are large.
Co-operative R&D ventures which enable participants to share fixed and sunk costs, share risks, pool different complementary assets or benefit from other positive pecuniary externalities will almost certainly raise incentives to do R&D.
What is more, the ability to share risks may enable the collective to contemplate more risky types of projects than individual firms would have, while pooling different types of skill may expand the set of projects which can feasibly be done.
Co-operative R&D may also reduce the costs of doing research if it eliminates wasteful duplication of R&D projects, and, to the extent that co-operating firms apply their research in a wider range of output markets, cooperative R&D ventures may undertake more productive research.
Of course, these considerations may lead firms collectively to undertake absurdly ambitious, big science projects when more modest research programmes would be optimal, and it is possible that research conducted collectively will be less well managed than a series of smaller scale independent projects (the incentive to control costs may be weakened when costs are shared, and centralizing research efforts can often narrow their scope considerably).
Nevertheless, co-operative R&D ventures are likely to stimulate innovativeness when the minimum efficient size of an innovation project is large.
The real problem is that there are situations where negative pecuniary externalities exist, and this means that co-operative R&D ventures may end up doing less R&D than independent firms would have done in the same setting.
To the extent that R&D is undertaken by independent firms merely in order to ensure that they innovate before their rivals or to prevent rivals from producing new products which displace those that currently generate rents, then firms who make R&D decisions co-operatively may do less R&D than they would if they were independent.
The negative externality in this case arises either because the market rewards only those who are first (rather than rewarding films on the basis of their R&D inputs), or because the market rewards product innovations which cannibalize existing products (rewarding the innovator at the expense of rivals rather than because the innovator's efforts have expanded the market).
One way or the other, market competition between firms doing independent R&D may result in excessive R&D, and co-operating rivals will have an incentive to cut back on their total R&D.
It follows that co-operative R&D is likely to raise total R&D spending if participants produce complementary products, and it may lower it if they produce substitute products.
There is a common presumption amongst economists that co-operative R&D ventures are likely to be more desirable for firms operating in competitive markets.
Competitive firms are often thought to lack the resources to do effective R&D, and vigorous price competition means that all of the gains to innovation are passed on to consumers, making it difficult for firms to generate the profits necessary to finance R&D.
Further, problems of  appropriability may be particularly acute in competitive markets, where numerous rivals are ready (and able) to exploit any technological spillovers that occur.
However, the effect which co-operative R&D has on R&D spending can actually be larger in less competitive output markets because firms with market power are able to earn supernormal profits, and this increases their incentive to innovate (see Ordover and Willig, 1985; Katz, 1986; D'Aspremont and Jacquemin, 1988; Kamien et al.,
1992; Suzumura, 1992; and, for an overview, de Bondt et al., 1992).
Thus, there is no presumption that R&D ventures will stimulate innovation only in competitive output markets or only for firms lacking market power.
The positive and negative externalities which have been identified thus far are likely to be rather different for research activities (i.e. those concerned with the production of new information) than they are for development activities (i.e. those concerned with embodying new information into particular products), and they may change systematically over the life of any given collaborative programme.
Knowledge embodied in specific products is often too use-specific to spill over, development costs are often extremely large relative to the costs of basic research, and competitive feedback from output markets to research decisions is much weaker than the feedback to development decisions (not least because it is frequently unclear which output markets a piece of new information is likely to affect).
That is, technological spillovers are likely to be large relative to negative pecuniary externalities arising from output markets in the case of research activities and relatively small in the case of development activities, suggesting that co-operative R ventures are more likely to increase innovation than co-operative D ventures are.
However, what is usually of most concern in practical discussions of the effects of co-operative R&D ventures is whether co-operation in R&D affects the nature of competition in output markets, giving rise to an environmental externality .
Since decisions about how much R&D ought to be done turn on conjectures about the outcomes of competition in final product markets, co-operative R&D ventures will certainly involve at least some sharing of information on product market conditions.
What is more, co-operative R&D ventures may provide a forum in which firms learn to co-operate and collude with each on a wider basis, particularly if they create well-defined strategic groups that bring peer-group pressure to bear on each other whenever incentives to cheat appear.
Co-operative R&D ventures are also likely to affect competition in output markets.
Whenever participants are able to limit the spillover of new information to rivals, they can put new entrants and existing firms who are not participants at a competitive disadvantage.
If, in addition, participants in a co-operative R&D venture reduce their own independent R&D efforts in the area covered by the co-operative venture, then the threat of potential competition through new products produced by participants is reduced.
Cooperative R&D ventures may also allow dominant firms to control (and, therefore, slow down) the innovative efforts of their more talented and ambitious rivals.
In sum, whatever the effects that cooperative R&D ventures have on incentives to do R&D, their effects on competition in output markets may not always be beneficial.
The existence of technological spillovers and positive pecuniary externalities create incentives to make such ventures as inclusive as possible.
However, anti-competitive effects are likely to be less severe the smaller is the subset of competing firms who join the collaborative programme.
It is hard to resolve this trade-off a priori, but one possibility is to allow all firms to participate in a co-operative project, but not necessarily in the same project, using competition between co-operative R&D projects to inhibit the generation of some of the negative externalities discussed above.
That is, it is probably undesirable for co-operative R&D ventures to include all producers of a competing range of products, and two or more co-operative projects serving the same downstream industry are likely to be preferable to a single, all-inclusive project.
Virtually all the arguments discussed above implicitly compare what is likely to occur under a cooperative R&D venture with what might occur if R&D were undertaken independently by firms.
This is not always an appealing counterfactual comparison, not least because merger might be a more attractive alternative for firms than both independent and co-operative R&D.
It may, however, be much less attractive from a public-policy point of view.
Co-operative R&D ventures are more flexible than full integration and can be realigned more easily to meet changing circumstances.
Further, firms can create networks of joint ventures which will provide them with much richer learning opportunities than a long-term marriage to a single partner might.
Mergers between potential rivals, on the other hand, will almost certainly have adverse effects on market performance to set against any gains accruing from co-operative R&D.
These observations suggest that however attractive co-operative R&D ventures are relative to independent R&D projects conducted by the same set of firms, they are likely to be more attractive than the alternative of a merger designed to facilitate co-operative R&D.
Finally, not all feedbacks from output markets have a deleterious effect on innovative activity.
Successful new products combine new technological information with other types of information to create products which are both economic to manufacture and distribute, and are attractive to consumers.
In order to ensure that R&D activities result in successful new products, innovators must ensure that they have access to all of the relevant information.
However, this means that there must be feedback from output markets to R&D laboratories, since output markets are the main source of information about costs and demand.
There are a number of reasons for thinking that such information transmission may be easier to manage if it occurs within firms than if it is subject to market transactions, and this means that there is a case for thinking that R&D activities (particularly the D) may have to be part of a vertically related structure that extends back into important input markets, and forward into downstream consumer markets (see Teece, 1986, Geroski, 1992, and Jorde and Teece, 1990, who apply these arguments to the antitrust treatment of co-operative R&D ventures).
It follows that if adverse competitive feedback from output markets is weak, then cooperative joint ventures which include provisions for joint production and marketing may stimulate more successful innovations than those which are restricted to co-operative R&D alone.
In sum, a plausible case can be made for cooperative R&D ventures whenever technological spillovers or potential positive pecuniary externalities exist.
Further, non-exclusive consortia which are composed of firms with different skills producing complementary products or multi-product firms undertaking pro-competitive research projects whose effects are likely to be felt in many output markets are likely to be more attractive than those which are narrowly focused on particular output markets, competitive or not.
Although all of this adds up to a fairly persuasive case in favour of certain types of co-operative R&D in certain circumstances, the case is not strong enough to suggest that all types of ventures will have positive (or even benign) effects on social welfare.
The right way forward seems to be that of evaluating each case on its merits using the rule of reason.
III.
DO SPILLOVERS UNDERMINE INCENTIVES TO INNOVATE?
What really drives the case for co-operative R&D ventures is the existence of technological spillovers, and it is, therefore, worth looking at the empirical literature on different methods of appropriation, the determinants of imitation costs and imitation times, and estimates of the size of spillovers.
All of the work that I shall discuss suggests that spillovers are important in many sectors, but my view is that it is very easy to exaggerate their size.
My doubts have been fuelled by some interesting (but fragmentary) empirical work on the costs of transmitting information, how spillovers are transmitted between firms, and, finally, the phenomena of technology trading and other forms of managed technology flows.
The main methods of appropriability used by firms include patents, secrecy, lead time, learning curve advantages, and marketing efforts.
A mid-1980s' survey of 650 firms in 130 US industries found that for new processes, lead time and learning curve advantages were rated as being the most important methods of protecting new innovations, while secrecy and marketing-related advantages were generally regarded as being more important than patents.
Patents protecting new products appeared to be more important than patents protecting processes, but, nevertheless, did not seem to be as effective as lead time, learning curve advantages, and marketing advantages.
New product-protecting patents were more effective than all other methods of appropriability only in drugs, while in organic chemicals, plastics, and steel-mill products, they were no less effective than alternate methods of appropriability (see Levin et al.,
1987, and similar evidence in Taylor and Silberston, 1973, and Mansfield, 1986).
The limitations on the effectiveness of patents in protecting new knowledge arise from the fact that patents disclose information which can enable imitators to invent around them.
Further, some innovations are inherently difficult to patent.
Patents do, however, have some value in securing royalty income, and they are often used to trade for access to other technologies developed by other firms.
Further, the evidence suggests that imitation costs are not high and that imitation times are often very short.
A study of forty-eight major new product innovations in four-US sectors suggested that the ratio of imitation costs to innovation costs averaged about 65 per cent on average, while imitation times averaged some 70 per cent of innovation times.
Sixty per cent of the patented innovations in the sample were imitated within 4 years, and patents caused a median rise of some 11 per cent in the ratio of imitation to innovation costs.
For about half of the innovations in the sample, patents delayed imitation by less than a few months.
A second US study of 100 large R&D spending US firms in thirteen major industries found that rivals generally learned about decisions to develop major new products and processes within 12 to 18 months.
Since many development processes take only two to three years to complete, these estimates imply that there is a good chance that rivals will be informed about a new development project well before it is completed.
Information leakages were found to be smaller in chemicals than in other sectors, and for new process development decisions in virtually all of the industries in the sample (see Mansfield et al.,
1981, Mansfield, 1985, and Levin et al.,
1987).
Perhaps the most direct way to establish the extent of the appropriability problem faced by R&D active firms is to measure the size of spillovers between ‘adjacent’ users or producers of an innovation (for complementary evidence on the divergence between private and social rates of return to innovation, see Mansfield et al.,
1977, and the survey in Stoneman, 1983).
As it turns out, a variety of studies that have identified adjacent users or producers in different ways suggest that spillovers associated with R&D expenditures can be fairly large.
One US study found that spillovers lead to average cost reductions of between 5 and 13 per cent in the short run and 10–20 per cent in the long run, creating a divergence between private and social rates of return of 67 per cent in chemicals, 123 percent in petroleum, 30 percent in machinery, and 90 percent in instrument engineering (Bernstein and Nadiri, 1989).
Another US study found that firms averaged 2 patents per $1m of own R&D, and  0.6 patents per$1m of rivals' R&D, suggesting that own and rivals' R&D are complementary (Jaffe, 1986).
However, studies which try to measure the spillovers associated with specific innovations (rather than those associated with R&D expenditures) have found only very modest effects on the productivity growth and profitability of adjacent innovation users and producers (Geroski, 1991).
Together, the two sets of results suggest that knowledge embodied in particular new products or processes (i.e. specific innovations) may be too use-specific to spill over, while disembodied knowledge (proxied by measures of R&D expenditure) can be useful to a wide range of firms in a range of other sectors.
Put another way, appropriability problems created by spillovers may affect R activities more than D activities, and they may lessen in importance the closer R&D output gets to a specific product market.
Perhaps the oddest feature of evidence on spillovers is that they seem to be particularly prevalent in high R&D sectors, and this raises the question of whether they actually do undermine incentives to do R&D (see Levin, 1988).
Spillovers seem to be large in computers, communications equipment, electronic components, and aircraft, industries that do an extensive amount of R&D.
One obvious explanation of this puzzle is that high R&D spending occurs in these sectors despite spillovers because the productivity of R&D is high (say, because technological opportunities are particularly rich).
A second is that whenever technological advance is cumulative (innovations this year build on innovations made last year, and both lay the groundwork for the innovations which will be made next year), then own R&D and R&D spillovers complement each other.
That is, R&D done by rivals adds to information generated by a firm's own R&D activities, and both are useful, non-competing inputs which expand the knowledge base from which the future innovations of all firms emerge.
In this case, spillovers will stimulate R&D.
By contrast, when innovation is discrete and there can be only one winner of an R&D race, own and rivals' R&D substitute for each other, meaning that spillovers from firm i to firm j reduce i 's chances of winning the current R&D race without giving it any compensating advantages in the future.
In this case, firms will wish to cut back their own R&D for fear of generating spillovers that will benefit their rivals.
Third and finally, spillovers may be most extensive in high R&D sectors simply because firms may have to do extensive R&D on their own in order to benefit from the knowledge which spills over from rivals' efforts.
This last observation suggests that popular discussions of technological spillovers and ‘the appropriability problem’ may have exaggerated the ease with which information generated from a firm's innovative activities spills over to other firms.
Three further bodies of evidence reinforce this view.
Although economists generally presume that information is costless to transmit, receive, digest, and use, the evidence suggests that this is not always the case.
The study of forty-eight US product innovations discussed above also found that imitation costs (and times) vary with the amount of basic research done by the imitator, and other work has found that high R&D spenders adopt new technologies faster than less R&D intensive firms.
Similarly, studies of the international transfer of technology by multinational firms find that transfer costs (and times) vary inversely with the amount of host country R&D, its manufacturing experience, and with the number of projects already transferred to the host country (see Mansfield et al.,1982, and Teece, 1977).
Finally, firms that do extensive R&D seem to be better able to take advantage of the experience generated by travelling down the learning curve (see Lieberman, 1984).
It seems clear, then, that the costs of transmitting new technology depend on the basic capabilities of the parties involved.
The important capabilities are those associated with the ability to recognize, assimilate, and then exploit new information, and the development of these capabilities depends on the amount and type of R&D done by the firm in areas related to that new information (see Cohen and Levinthal, 1989; Mowery and Rosenberg, 1989; Malerba, 1992; and others).
Put another way, spillovers may benefit only those firms who already invest heavily in R&D and are, therefore, capable of exploiting them.
There are numerous ways that information about new technology may spread between firms.
Sometimes information flows can be observed in print or  in public presentations; in other cases, they can be traced by tracking the movement of personnel.
However, since the same idea can occur simultaneously to people in different firms who have common interests, it follows that not all apparent spillovers really reflect a flow of information between films.
Much of the systematic information that we have on this subject comes from the survey of 650 US firms discussed at the beginning of this section.
Surprisingly, the respondents believed that independent R&D efforts were the most effective means of learning about rival firms' technology (although licensing was also regarded as an effective learning mechanism).
If own R&D is indeed an effective way of uncovering the fruits of rival films' R&D, then many spillovers between firms may be more apparent than real: rival firms may be making simultaneous but independent drawings from the same common pool of scientific knowledge or technical knowhow.
Similarly, it is often the case that knowledge-flows between the users and the producers of an innovation are particularly rich, and, consequently, if particular users interact with several suppliers, then these suppliers are bound to share an enormous amount of common information even in the absence of spillovers between them (see von Hippel, 1988).
Of course, not all information-flows are involuntary.
Although it is almost certainly the case that most firms are not able to appropriate all the returns to innovation via licensing, this does not imply that many firms cannot generate a satisfactory stream of returns in this manner (particularly if they are not well placed to exploit the new knowledge themselves).
A second and rather more surprising method of managed information-flows is knowhow trading.
Informal knowhow trading has been observed between engineers in competing steel mini-mill producers in the US, an exchange that often went well beyond simple exchanges of data to include free training and the exchange of personnel.
Further, the firms involved in such trading outperformed their non-trading rivals, something that would be unlikely to occur if spillovers were common (see von Hippel, 1988; Carter, 1989; and Schrader, 1991).
Finally, it is worth dwelling briefly on the role that users play in the innovation process, and on the factors which seem to be associated with successful innovation, since these are considerations which help to determine whether joint R&D activities need to be coupled with joint marketing to be successful.
A recent examination of over a hundred major and minor innovations in scientific instruments revealed that users dominated the innovation process in about 80 per cent of the cases.
They perceived the need for a new instrument, invented it, built and applied the prototype, and spread knowledge about it.
Manufacturers mainly performed product engineering work to improve manufacturability.
Users also seem to play an important role in silicon based semi-conductors and electronic sub-assemblies on printed circuits.
Although this is consistent with a considerable body of evidence suggesting that successful innovations couple technological expertise with a range of marketing skills (see the overview in Freeman, 1982), it is important because it shows that this coupling process can be market mediated.
Users are likely to be able to lead the process of innovation whenever they perceive their own needs more clearly than other firms do, and whenever they can appropriate most of the benefits from innovation.
Since users' ability to appropriate most of the benefits of innovations is likely to be particularly evident in industries where spillovers or positive pecuniary externalities inhibit independent R&D by suppliers, it follows that co-operative R&D ventures amongst suppliers and user-led innovation programmes may be alternative methods of reaching the same goal.
In sum, there is no doubt that the information generated by basic research does spill over extensively.
However, as knowledge becomes increasingly use-specific, its portability declines, perhaps so much so that by the time it is embodied in a specific new product it can only spill over to producers of very similar substitute products.
Even then, it seems reasonable to believe that the number of beneficiaries of such spillovers is limited.
The set of favoured firms is likely to be composed mainly of research-intensive firms or firms with enormous manufacturing expertise, and the odds are that such firms may have discovered the information for themselves through their own R&D before it spills over to them from rivals.
Finally, although it seems clear that many methods of  appropriability are far from perfect (patents, for example, offer only limited protection in most sectors), firms can exert at least some control over their knowhow.
What seems to make this possible is the fact that information is not costless to receive or exploit, and the expertise necessary to take full advantage of spillovers can provide the wedge that innovating firms need to appropriate at least some benefits from their innovative activities.
IV.
ANTITRUST AND CO-OPERATIVE R&D VENTURES
The case for co-operative R&D ventures that emerges from our survey of the theoretical literature in section II above suggests that they are most desirable where technological spillovers and pecuniary externalities are large, where participating firms produce complementary products, when they are focused on the R rather than the D, and when they do not enhance downstream product market power.
Of course, what really drives the case for co-operative R&D ventures is technological spillovers, and, as we saw in our survey of the empirical literature on technological spillovers in section III, these can be easy to exaggerate.
It follows, then, that since there is no presumption that the benefits of co-operative R&D ventures will be large or easily realized in every case, the design of policy is likely to be critical (see Baumol and Ordover, 1988, for a broad overview of policies towards licensing, merger, and co-operative R&D ventures in high-tech sectors).
How well have policy-makers done in this respect?
The public- and private-sector interest in co-operative R&D ventures in the 1970s and 1980s led to two notable developments in antitrust policy: the National Co-operative Research Act of 1984 in the US, and the block exemption system developed in the EC a year later.
The National Co-operative Research Act (NCRA) was designed to alleviate concerns that the threat of antitrust action was discouraging desirable R&D joint ventures (see Scott, 1989; Katz and Ordover, 1990; Scott, 1988; Link and Bauer, 1987; Evan and Olk, 1990; and others).
Its two main features are that it lifts cooperative R&D ventures from the suspicion that they are illegal per se and puts them under the rule of reason, and it provides a registration system which protects firms from treble damages in the event that they are subsequently deemed to have violated the antitrust statutes.
A description of all ventures that take advantage of the registration system is published, but there is nothing in the registration system which guarantees immunity from antitrust prosecution for any particular venture.
Since 1984 a number of further legislative proposals have been tabled in an attempt to reduce the antitrust threat to R&D joint ventures even more.
These include proposals to codify in detail the criteria for applying the rule of reason, to reduce antitrust penalties for ventures that include cooperating in the production and marketing of the fruits of R&D, to establish a ‘safe harbour’ for collaborating firms that lack market power, and to establish an administrative review process that would clear proposals which might otherwise risk antitrust penalties (for further details, see Brodley, 1990; Shapiro and Willig, 1990; Jorde and Teece, 1990; and others).
The EEC block exemption is rather more elaborate.
Article 85(1) of the EC treaty prohibits undertakings between firms and restrictive practices which may affect trade between member states, or which have as their object or effect the restriction of competition within the EC.
Article 85(3) allows the EC Commission to exempt a particular agreement from Article 85(1) on the basis of the rule of reason and, in 1985, the Commission granted a thirteen-year block exemption under Article 85 (3) to certain categories of R&D agreements (see the 14th Report on Competition Policy published by the EC in 1985; Jacquemin and Spinoit, 1986; Whish, 1985, Ch. 13; and others).
The regulation contains a fairly comprehensive list of permitted and proscribed practices (the so-called white and black lists), and it also exempts the joint exploitation of the results of that R&D (in particular, the manufacture of the joint-venture product and its licensing, but not joint marketing activities) from Article 85 in certain circumstances.
The exemption applies if work is carried out within a well-defined programme, and if all participating parties have access to the results and are free to exploit the results independently (when there is no joint-exploitation arrangement).
If the joint venture is between firms that do not compete directly in the relevant product market, the exemption applies for five years (from when the product is first put on the EC market) regardless of market share; it also applies if the participants are rivals but their collective share does not exceed 20 per cent of the relevant market.
Certain restrictions on competition are allowed in co-operative R&D ventures, including an obligation not to carry on independent R&D in the same field as the cooperative venture (or to enter into R&D agreements with third parties in the R&D field assigned to the joint venture), and the inclusion of limited territorial protection clauses restricting some of the production and marketing activities of other participants.
The black list of proscribed restrictions includes restrictions on the freedom of participants to conduct R&D in other areas, to challenge each other 's patents and to restrict the manufacturing or pricing policies of participants.
My view is that there are at least five issues of importance in the design of antitrust policies towards co-operative R&D ventures which arise from comparing these two different initiatives.
In what follows, I propose to identify each, and then offer my own reflections on their importance for policy design.
First, the two initiatives do not try to restrict cooperative R&D ventures to sectors where spillovers are large .
The NCRA provides very little guidance at all on applying the rule of reason, while the block exemption applies only if ‘the knowhow and the patents which result from the research contribute substantially to technical and economic progress’.
It is not, of course, easy to identify areas where spillovers are likely to be large a priori , but neither initiative calls for participants to make the case that the potential gains from their particular venture are likely to be large.
Second, a striking difference between the NCRA and the block exemption is that the former provides no immunity from prosecution , while the latter rules out prosecution (at least for certain types of agreements) for a limited period of time.
The virtues of granting immunity from prosecution for substantial periods of time are questionable.
Since there is no guarantee that the behaviour of participants during the life of a co-operative R&D venture will mesh with their initial goals, or that new, anticompetitive restrictions will not be added to what started out as a pro-competitive co-operative R&D agreement, it is hard to believe that immunity from prosecution is an attractive policy option in the absence of continuous monitoring by the antitrust authorities.
Further, while continuous monitoring may ensure that participants in co-operative R&D ventures do not distort competition, it substitutes administrative action for the public and/or privately initiated judicial-review process which characterizes most antitrust policies.
This may or may not be desirable: administrators sometimes act more quickly than lawyers and judges (they are certainly a lot less expensive), but they are always vulnerable to regulatory capture and they can make bad decisions if they are poorly funded and undermanned (for some observations on this issue, see Areeda, 1992.)
Third, while both initiatives have been designed to facilitate the application of the rule of reason to cooperative R&D ventures, the guidelines for applying the rule of reason are far more explicit in the block exemption initiative.
The main attraction of this proposal is, of course, that reducing the discretion of antitrust agencies may make their behaviour less arbitrary and unpredictable.
However, partly by design and partly as a consequence of this difference in the degree of explicitness, the block exemption system has (arguably) reduced the incentives of firms to notify the authorities of agreements  which contain clauses which might be anticompetitive.
The black and white lists provide fairly clear guidance to the kinds of clauses which are and are not deemed to violate Article 85(1), and firms interested in co-operating with each other need only build in an R&D element to their agreement and consult the white and black lists to remove the threat of antitrust action (‘grey clauses’ require notification, but will be deemed as exempted if the Commission does not reply within six months).
Prior to the block exemption, such agreements would have had to be cleared individually by the Commission, a practice which effectively amounts to notification.
Although there is a certain administrative convenience and a clear saving in costs from trying to make policy rules explicit enough to enable firms to proceed without formal clearance, notification systems are an effective information-gathering process and they do enable policy-makers to respond flexibly to new developments in business practice.
Fourth, a further difference between the NCRA and the block exemption is that the latter offers a safe harbour for firms that do not compete directly with each other in relevant output markets, or for rivals whose collective market share is less than 20 per cent There are two issues of interest here.
First, there is a safe harbour which is typically available for firms contemplating merger, and it is unclear why a more generous harbour ought to be offered to certain types of corporate activity, such as merger, than others, such as joint ventures (see Brodley, 1990).
Second, if the R&D supported by an R&D co-operative agreement really is fundamental, then it is unlikely that its fruits will be applicable to only one particular product market.
This makes it hard to see why a 20 per cent rule has much appeal, and a more attractive rule might ensure that the activities of participants do not overlap by more than some specific amount.
Alternatively, Grossman and Shapiro, 1986, suggest a two-step procedure that first ascertains whether participants in a co-operative R&D venture have significant market power, and then, if they do, tries to determine the extent to which R&D would be inhibited by banning the co-operative venture.
Amongst other things, this ought to help to ensure that co-operative R ventures are favoured relative to co-operative D ventures.
Fifth and finally, the NCRA and the block exemption differ in the range of activities which cooperating firms are allowed to undertake , the latter being rather more inclusive than the former while not, however, allowing firms to undertake joint marketing of the product of co-operative R&D projects.
Restricting co-operative ventures to R&D alone, or to R&D and joint production but not joint marketing, makes sense whenever these different activities can be carried out independently without much loss of efficiency.
Although it is widely agreed that successful innovations need to couple R&D, manufacturing, and marketing activities to ensure that new products can be manufactured at reasonable cost and are attractive to consumers, it is not completely obvious that this means that all three activities always need to be conducted under the same roof.
While there is plenty of evidence (as we have seen) which suggests that users can often play a major role in the innovative process, almost all of that evidence involves situations in which innovation users (and not innovation producers) take the initiative, effectively usurping the marketing role that producers might ordinarily play.
Similarly, the existence of technology-trading networks indicates that R&D and production do not necessarily need to be integrated under one roof to ensure that new products are efficiently produced (although this is often a sensible course to follow).
What all of this adds up to is the conclusion that drawing the line between activities that firms can and cannot undertake co-operatively is almost impossible to do in the abstract.
It seems much more sensible to let the issue be settled by the facts in each particular case.
However, since joint production and (more clearly) joint marketing is much more likely to create the undesirable anticompetitive effects which cause concern than joint R&D is, it seems reasonable to insist that firms which propose extending joint activities beyond R&D must bear the burden of proving that such extensions are in the public interest.
V. CONCLUSION
Economists often think about policies towards R&D and innovation in terms of conflicts between static and dynamic efficiency (for a critical overview of this debate set in the context of antitrust, see Baumol and Ordover, 1988 and 1992).
Static welfare losses that arise from departures from competition in output markets are set against longer-run, dynamic gains which may arise from an increase in the supply of innovations that come about in less than perfectly competitive markets.
Many economists are inclined to think that static welfare losses are outweighed by dynamic welfare gains from technological progress, and policy-makers generally seem to share this presumption.
However, all of those concerned with public-policy formulation agree that the right way forward is to encourage business practices which minimize these conflicts.
Co-operative R&D ventures are interesting in this respect because they are a way of organizing the process of innovation which promises to minimize static inefficiencies without sacrificing dynamic efficiency.
In fact, there are grounds for suspecting that the conflict between static inefficiency and dynamic progressiveness is often more apparent than real, and, as we have seen, it is not entirely clear that cooperative R&D ventures significantly weaken those conflicts which do exist.
In particular, co-operative R&D ventures set the potential gains from internalizing technological spillovers and positive pecuniary externalities against the potential costs of a reduction in competition.
The evidence on problems of appropriability and the extent of spillovers suggests that such problems exist, but that they may be easy to exaggerate.
Further, there is very little evidence to suggest that R&D spillovers seriously undermine incentives to invest in R&D, partly because own and rivals' R&D is often complementary and partly because many firms must invest in R&D in order to be able to benefit from spillovers.
All of this means that the case for actively encouraging co-operative R&D is strong but not exactly overpowering.
Whether tinkering with antitrust regulations is the right way forward for those inclined to encourage co-operative R&D is even less clear.
Although the National Co-operative Research Act in the US and the block exemption in Europe have a number of attractive and sensible features, there exists little hard evidence to suggest that they will actually have much of an effect on the rate of innovation in the US or in Europe.