

Chapter Six
Paul Richardson had received a dawn summons from Stephen and arrived at Crystal Springs fifteen minutes later.
One of the facts of Caribbean life that suited Stephen was the early hour at which people rose to start the day.
Unfortunately an island working day needed to be swiftly curtailed once it grew hot.
Stephen's never were.
He had asked Christina to attend this meeting too, saying he'd value her opinion on the revised pool plans which Paul was bringing in.
She found herself praying that this batch would be more to his liking than the last.
Paul looked surprised to receive a wide smile of welcome from Stephen when he entered the office.
Recovering quickly, he smiled in return and extended his hand.
Stephen took it, saying, ‘Don't look so astonished, Paul.
I can smile — when people give me something to smile about.’
Paul shrugged.
Caught off-guard, he blushed slightly, blinked his hazy blue eyes, and looked away in embarrassment.
Christina felt sorry for him.
Stephen liked to be able to wrong-foot the people who worked for him and was a master at taking them off-guard.
‘You look tired, Paul.’
It was a statement, nothing more.
Stephen's voice held no concern, she noted.
‘I am.
I've been up all night working on these.’
Paul pulled out a roll of plans from the black plastic tube he was carrying.
He laid them out on Stephen's desk and did his best to smooth them flat.
Christina found herself remembering the way the promising young architect had first come into their lives.
After paying fruitless calls on the local architects whom George Garcia had recommended, Stephen had suggested they all go for a drink at the Reef Bar.
He needed to let off steam, and it was impossible for the other people in the bar not to overhear.
‘Do you know how many firms of bloody architects I've traipsed round to in the past two months?
It's amazing.
How the hell do such totally unimaginative, unoriginal idiots get to become architects in the first place?
I don't know.
I threw the last one's sketches across his office and told him: shoddy, unexciting, no thanks.
I mean, I'm trying to build the kind of hotel people only dream about, and all those idiots can come up with are boring, square boxes!’
He slammed his drink onto the bar top, slopping the rum sour across the grubby pine surface.
He didn't seem to notice, and continued, his voice rising even more: ‘I believe when people come here on vacation they come to escape the perpetual grey in their lives for a short space of time.
I want to offer them light, colour, romance, and to stimulate their imaginations.
I want to capture a little bit of their hearts with the kind of simple pleasure and beauty this island has to offer…’
He paused and took another shot of his drink.
‘So that when they return to their mundane, repetitive jobs and stress-filled existences they retain an image of Crystal Springs and long to return.
I bloody well can't achieve that by sticking them in dull concrete abortions!
I mean, is it too much to ask?
Eh, George?
Is it too much?
Well, what do you think?’
‘No, it's not too much to ask,’ a young man said from behind Garcia.
He looked over the estate agent's shoulder at the surprised face of the Englishman.
‘Excuse me for interrupting, but I couldn't help overhearing your conversation.
My name's Paul Richardson, and I believe I'm just the man you're looking for.’
He was very young — only newly qualified in Britain before he'd decided he'd had enough of the climate, grey and defeatist, and come to the West Indies to try his luck — but Stephen had admired his chutzpah and Christina the laid-back island style he'd adopted.
He dressed in baggy shorts and Hawaiian print shirts, but there was nothing relaxed about his working methods.
Paul Richardson was the first person they'd met on the island who was prepared to work as long and as hard as they did.
Stephen had first asked for a design for an open-air bar.
Paul delighted them with plans and perspectives for an irregularly shaped weatherboard construction cleverly built around a venerable tamarind tree, using its branches as an informal canopy to shade the seats below.
Since then, Stephen and Paul had discussed, argued, and occasionally fought their way through plans, revised plans and revisions of revisions until a design for the accommodation and service blocks had finally been agreed.
Most of the coconut palms had been cleared from the twenty-acre site, and the dense vegetation had been cut back to deepen the crescent-shaped beach where the six low-level Mediterranean accommodation blocks were to be built, each housing twenty rooms, varying in size and design but all with huge covered terraces overhanging the beach with uninterrupted sea views.
A pathway led from the rooms through the gardens and past a hand-carved stone fountain to the reception and administration building, built around a central courtyard of white marble and hand-painted tiles.
Stephen had suggested a lily pond and miniature fountain in the centre of the courtyard, and they had copied the one from Crystal Springs House on a grander scale.
Clustered around the courtyard were the four boutiques, hospitality desk and concierge.
High, curved, hand-carved doors led from the reception  area to the conference room and residents' sitting-room, where afternoon tea would be served looking down across the gardens to the accompaniment of a grand piano.
A long covered walkway from the other side of the pool led to the fine dining restaurant and smaller, less formal coffee shop, both restaurants overlooking the sea.
Located behind these buildings were the vast kitchen, store-rooms, housekeeping, laundry, staff rooms and car parking.
Stephen wanted the hotel to look as if it had always been there, part of the landscape, and Paul suggested a South American landscape architect, whom he had heard of.
Apparently, Roberto Sabortini could transform a desert into a lush tropical garden.
Finally it was time to tackle the design of the hotel's talking-point — the vast fresh-water swimming-pool Stephen planned to construct to cater for guests who, having come thousands of miles to see the Caribbean, decided they didn't actually want to swim in it.
Stephen had turned down the first set of plans out of hand.
Christina hoped they could be more encouraging about this version.
Paul had been a real find so far, and she knew it would do his professional standing a lot of good if he could design the whole hotel complex.
‘I've been looking forward to this,’ Stephen announced with a kind of childish glee.
Taking his magnifying glass from a desk drawer, he fell upon the plans and scrutinized each one intently without speaking.
Paul watched him carefully, trying to read his expression, but it was guarded, non-committal.
Eventually he looked up and, when he spoke, his voice betrayed a mixture of disappointment and impatience.
‘I don't like them, Paul.
In fact, I positively hate the shape of the pool.
I'd envisioned more movement, excitement — fantasy, even.’
He tossed the plans to one side.
‘This pool looks like a  thousand others I've seen.
I want Crystal Springs to be different — unusual, magnificent.
Like nothing anyone has seen before.’
Paul sighed and shook his head.
‘I don't think it looks like a million other pools at all,’ he stated, an edge of impatience to his voice.
He placed one of the plans in front of Stephen, who bluntly refused to look at it.
Paul ignored the rebuff and turned to Christina instead, pointing to his drawing and explaining: ‘I drew the pool as an oasis, surrounded by traveller's palms for maximum shade, and I thought the waterfall cascading through the coral-stone rock formation balanced it perfectly.’
Stephen paid little attention — he had already dismissed the plans and his only response was a shrug.
‘I want more waterfalls and perhaps a bridge.’
Paul thought the concept too messy and said so.
‘I really think if you make it too busy it becomes like Disneyland, and I'm sure that's not what you want for Crystal Springs.’
Christina waited for the explosion.
Stephen never lost his temper with her, but with others…
When he spoke again, his tone was clipped.
‘I want to create fantasy and originality, and to my mind that pool of yours conveys nothing but boredom.
So it's back to the drawing-board, Paul, and I need those drawings like yesterday.’
Paul tried one last shot.
‘You realize, of course, what you want is going to cost a hell of a lot more money…
Stephen didn't let him continue.
‘Let me worry about the dollars.
You concentrate on interpreting my ideas, putting them onto paper and making them work.’
Not bothering to put the designs back into the black plastic cylinder, Paul stuffed them under his arm.
Christina noticed that he looked grey with tiredness and handed him a plan he had missed.
She didn't offer her own opinion, not because she  thought Paul's design was necessarily as bad as Stephen claimed, but because she had a hunch that, in time, he could come up with something really sensational instead of merely pedestrian.
Unlike Stephen, however, she felt that support and encouragement were the most effective methods of getting the best from people.
‘They're putting down the foundations for the bar today, Paul,’ she told him.
‘The arboriculturalist is here to supervise and check that the tree's roots aren't damaged.
It's going to be fantastic, really individual.
Stephen thinks so too, don't you, darling?’
Stephen was already mentally tackling the next task in a crowded schedule, riffling through the papers on his desk.
‘What?
Oh, yeah, the bar.
Great,’ he agreed.
‘So see you tomorrow, Paul.
Same time, same place — with the pool of my dreams, I hope.’
Christina found herself devoutly hoping so too, for Paul's sake.
When things were not going the way Stephen wanted them to, he could be very hard on people, she had learned.
The strident ringing of the telephone broke in on them.
Stephen dismissed Paul with a wave and picked up the receiver.
There was the familiar, discordant sound of the long-distance satellite and then Robert Leyton's voice, speaking from England.
‘Stephen!
At last.
I think it would be easier to get an audience with the pope than to speak to you these days.’
Stephen was about to answer when Robert went on: ‘I've had a very agitated Michael Davis on the phone.
It's urgent he speaks to you.’
Stephen rolled his eyes at Christina.
‘Okay, Robert, I know exactly what it's all about.
I'll speak to him and sort things out.
By the way, how's the Manchester deal?’
They were both so caught up in developments at Crystal  Springs that it was sometimes hard for Christina to recall that Stephen still had a stake in a totally separate business empire in England — one that Robert seemed to be finding increasingly hard to administer in his partner's prolonged absence, though Stephen still kept a very firm grip on English events from Barbados.
‘And how's the hotel progressing?’
Robert enquired.
‘Fine, just fine.
Don't you worry about this side of things; just keep the home fires burning.’
‘You know I'll always do that, Stephen — you can rely on me.’
This last was said with a kind of passionate zeal that was typical of Robert, and which sometimes grated on Stephen's nerves.
Irritated, he cut him short.
‘Got to rush now, Bob; want to catch the bank before they close.
Speak to you soon.
Bye.’
‘Michael Davis is from the bank, isn't he?’
Christina queried.
‘Mmm, and a bit of a pain in the arse.’
Stephen knew what the bank wanted, and for once he was a bit short on answers.
How could a typically British and pedantic banker even begin to understand what he was trying to achieve on a tiny Third World island, known only as a sugar-producer and an enclave for the very rich?
To his delight, Davis's secretary informed him in clipped tones that: ‘Mr Davis has been called out urgently and will not be back in the office until Friday.’
Stephen left a message, grateful for two days' grace.
‘God save me from bank managers and accountants!’ he said to Christina.
‘If we'd listened to them do you think for one minute we'd have got this far by now?’
They stood at the long sash windows of his office and looked out across the building-site.
There was little left that bore any resemblance to the original landscape in which Stephen and Christina had first holidayed.
The dense palm grove had been cleared and hundreds of casuarina trees chopped down and grubbed out.
Sand had been shipped in to form a deeper and wider beach, to accommodate up to two hundred people.
To Christina's thinking it was a mess, but seeing the faraway look in Stephen's eyes she knew he viewed it differently.
He did not see the tons of scaffolding or concrete blocks, but instead manicured lawns interspersed with narrow paths winding through lush tropical planting.
He heard a fountain play, and marvelled at white stucco terraces ablaze with a riot of assorted bougainvillaea whilst smartly uniformed staff served a wealthy and sophisticated clientèle.
She felt a surge of strength and optimism run through her.
Thank goodness she had married a visionary like Stephen.
Whatever it took, and however long, nothing and nobody was going to stop them making Crystal Springs Hotel a reality.
Of course, she hadn't bargained for a hurricane.
‘Ah tell you, mistress, got to take it easy.
A big storm be coming.’
Celia's big eyes nearly popped out of their sockets.
‘Ol' man Gordy tol' me,’ the maid imparted gravely.
‘How does he know?’
Christina asked, sounding dubious.
She had heard nothing on the radio.
‘He jus’ knows; he have special power.’
The maid looked over her shoulder then hissed into Christina's ear, ‘Black magic power.’
‘Don't be ridiculous, Celia.
I hope you don't believe in stupid nonsense like that?’
They were standing on the front steps of Crystal Springs House.
‘No, not me, mistress.’
She shook her head vigorously.
‘Hope he wrong.
Las’ time there was a big storm, we lost our house and six chickens so we have no fresh eggs.’
The girl seemed to be more concerned at the loss of the eggs than her home, Christina noticed.
‘There's nothing to worry about, Celia, there isn't going to be a storm.
Look at the sky.’
It was a clear, bright blue without a cloud in sight.
Celia looked unconvinced as Christina left the house and got into her car to drive to Bridgetown.
Stephen had given her the task of co-ordinating the interiors for the hotel, following the design schemes he had commissioned from a well-known Paris-based designer.
They had decided that they would save a lot of money doing their own purchasing and importing, and Christina wanted to make her own contribution to all the work on the hotel.
She had her first meeting this morning with a textiles importer called Colin Weatherhead, who had promised to show her a range of fabrics he was positive she was going to love.
The journey into town took twice as long as it should.
Christina crawled behind one of the gaudily painted island buses for most of the journey, waving at several giggling little girls, their pig-tailed hair bouncing on pristine white uniform blouses.
Why were the schoolchildren here always so much smarter than in England? she wondered.
She was late for her appointment, and parked her car on double yellow lines in a narrow lane, hoping she would not get a ticket.
She walked briskly through the teeming streets and alleyways which lay behind the main thoroughfares of Bridgetown.
Ancient women sat in darkened eighteenth- and nineteenth-century doorways, heads covered in kerchiefs or round-brimmed hats like up-ended pudding basins.
Skinny old men stood around talking in groups, or counted up their change for a visit to the rum shop.
Busy young mothers chivvied and scolded their children, balancing huge bags of shopping on their heads.
So busy was she observing the hustle and bustle of West Indian street life that Christina almost missed the small, pink-painted sign swinging above a shabby fretwork façade.
A dark interior greeted her and she blinked, trying hard to focus on a handsome young brown-skinned man coming towards her.
‘Good morning.
You must be Christina Reece-Carlton.
Welcome to Tropical Island Interiors.’
He was very tall.
She had to stretch her neck to speak to him.
‘And you must be Colin Weatherhead,’
‘The one and only.’
His dark-brown eyes twinkled.
‘Coffee?’ he offered, and pointed to a rickety cane chair.
She accepted the coffee but refused the chair.
‘So you're building a hotel down there at Crystal Springs?
Lovely site for it, I must say.
You new to the island?’
‘Yes, we came here on honeymoon, and fell in love with Barbados and Crystal Springs.
I thought it was going to be a holiday home, but my husband had different ideas.’
‘Sometimes husbands have a bad habit of doing things like that,’ he chuckled.
‘I agree with you, Colin.
Anyway, we're here for the indefinite future and I've been given the job of furnishing the hotel.
It's a little daunting, to say the least.’
The coffee arrived.
It tasted very black and bitter.
Christina sweetened it with two spoonfuls of golden local cane sugar.
‘Don't worry.’
His voice was languid and carefree.
‘I'm sure we can take all the worry out of furnishing the hotel for you.
We have done several hotels all over the Caribbean and have a very good reputation.’
‘Yes, I was recommended to you by our architect, Paul Richardson.’
Colin picked up his coffee and drank it at a gulp.
‘I have worked with Paul a few times.
You can rest assured, Mrs Reece-Carlton, I will do everything.’
‘Please call me Christina.’
‘As I was saying, Christina, I can assure you that Tropical Island Interiors will take all the worry and stress out of furnishing Crystal Springs Hotel.’
He sounded so convincing that Christina was reassured, and spent the next two hours sorting through hundreds of fabric samples, eventually choosing two co-ordinating Caribbean prints — a bold poinsettia pattern and a smaller toning design featuring hibiscus and humming-birds.
She left Colin's office promising to meet him again later that week and clutching her chosen samples.
She started down the street, and noticed that there was some sort of commotion.
People were frantically packing up fruit and vegetable stalls, pushing carts and animals into their homes; shutters were being banged tightly shut and everyone was shouting in loud, clattering voices.
Christina approached a young lad unloading crates of Cockspur golden rum on to the veranda of a tiny bar.
‘What's going on?
Why is everyone panicking?’
‘Bad nasty storm coming, mistress, real bad nasty.’
Christina looked up at the sky which was an ominous navy blue.
She ran, fighting her way through the packed lanes and not slowing up until she reached Fever Alley, where she had parked her car.
Driving out of Bridgetown in congested traffic, she prayed she would get back to Crystal Springs before the storm broke.
Stephen was busy battening down all the shutters and doors with planks of wood and eight-inch nails when she arrived at Crystal Springs.
‘I'm afraid it's on its way,’ he shouted above the hammering as she jumped out of the car.
‘What is?’
‘A bloody hurricane!
The worst they've had for years, apparently.’
‘When?’
Christina was ashen.
‘Within the next eight hours, but the speed it's travelling it could be sooner.’
Suddenly she noticed an unusual calm.
There was no movement at all: no stirring of leaves in the breeze, no fluttering of birds.
A frightening stillness had descended before the storm.
Stephen hammered the final nail into a plank which criss-crossed the front door and held out his hand to her to step through.
Celia's frightened face greeted her as Christina stepped inside.
‘Ah tol’ you, mistress, ol' Gordy right.
Bad nasty storm coming.’
The killer hurricane hit Barbados at 145 miles per hour six hours later.
Christina, Stephen and Celia huddled together in the master bedroom on the first floor, listening to the whirlwind hell-bent on destruction.
‘It sounds like a wild animal.’
Christina's hand shook as she sipped golden rum from the bottle and passed it to Stephen.
‘I only hope and pray it doesn't do too much damage,’ he said, and jumped as they all heard a high-pitched, deafening roar which shook the house, followed by the sound of wood splitting as the wind tore at the planks and ripped the front door off its hinges.
The screaming tempest whipped into the house, hurling furniture twenty feet into the air.
He put his arms around Christina, who was trembling.
‘I'm scared, Stephen.’
He held her very close.
‘So am I.’
They stayed like that for hours, hardly daring to move until the noise subsided and the hurricane passed, leaving a trail of devastation in its wake.
Stephen, Christina and Celia left the bedroom and walked cautiously downstairs in single file, horrified by the sight that greeted them.
Two uprooted palm trees blocked their way at the foot of the stairs.
Stephen stood on the top trunk to help Christina and Celia climb down.
They picked their way through broken pieces of furniture, their feet crunching across splintered glass and wood.
Electrical wires hung limply from gaping holes in the walls where light-fittings had been.
Christina kneeled down to pick up the handle of a cup.
It was all that remained of a new bone-china tea set she had bought only last week.
‘Oh, no!’
Stephen shouted when they stepped outside onto the terrace.
He dropped his head into his hands.
Torrential rain was quickly turning the building-site into a quagmire.
Christina counted at least six golden palms and four royals uprooted on the ravaged site.
She looked through a steely sheet of rain to where Stephen was pointing.
‘All the coral-stone is ruined,’ he said in despair.
Christina looked at tons of coral-stone blocks smashed to smithereens.
‘Can't you get any more?’
‘Yes, but when?
I've waited weeks for this load.
And at what cost?’
He stepped down from the terrace and walked against the driving rain towards the footings.
‘Don’ go out, mistress, it's not safe,’Celia called from the safety of the house as Christina ran after him.
‘Come inside, Stephen, you'll get soaked!’
Her voice was lost on the wind.
He was shouting at the storm, his voice choked and barely audible through the battering rain.
‘I'll get the money from somewhere, and I'll get more coral-stone.
This has set me back a few weeks, that's all.
It will take more than a bloody hurricane to stop me.’
The wind and rain ceased over the next two days, but giant waves of up to fifteen feet continued to batter the shoreline, flooding and wrecking many homes.
It was a week after the hurricane, and Stephen had been working non-stop, salvaging coral-stone and tiles from the debris.
They had also lost part of the roof of the house, which he was trying to replace himself, as it was impossible to get anyone to do any work.
All the construction workers were busy repairing their own properties.
It was almost dark when Christina walked to the centre of the building-site, where Stephen was sorting through piles of broken terracotta roof-tiles with sore and bleeding hands.
‘Stephen, you really must rest or you'll kill yourself.
It's ridiculous.
Come into the house.
Celia has managed to get fresh fish today and she's cooked it in spices, just how you like it.’
‘I'll finish this and be right with you.’
He didn't look up.
She sighed.
It had been the same every day since the storm.
He had worked from dawn until dusk without a break.
His face and neck were burnt a dark-scarlet colour and patches had peeled, exposing bright pink lesions underneath, but he seemed not to notice.
‘Good news,’ she said.
He looked up expectantly.
‘We're getting the telephone back on today.’
‘Great!
I must call Robert and order some more hand-painted tiles from Spain.
Most of that crate was destroyed.’
‘While you're speaking to him, I suggest you ask him if he knows anyone in the building trade who would like to come out here to help you.
It's far too much to handle on your own.’
‘I can handle it, Christina.
Don't worry.’
She glanced at his tired, drawn face.
‘I'm sure you can, Stephen, but I can't.
Promise me you'll think about getting some help, someone with experience who could organize all the day-to-day menial stuff that you're forced to do?
It would take a lot of pressure off you, and free you up to do more important things.’
Christina knew she had struck the right businesslike chord as his expression changed from preoccupied to thoughtful.
‘I'll think about it,’ was all he said.
She wasn't at all surprised, though, when Stephen spoke to her after a long telephone conversation with Robert Leyton, later that evening.
‘Remember what you said to me, Christina, about getting some help over here?’
She nodded and he went on, ‘Well, chance would have it that a man called James Morris called Robert this morning.
He's been made redundant and is desperate for work.’
‘What does he do?’
‘That's the whole point!’
Stephen seemed pleased.
‘He's a projects co-ordinator; been working for a big building company for years.
We've used him in the past on a few projects.
He's a good man and knows his stuff.’
‘That's great.
Have you offered him a job?’
‘Not yet, but I've got Robert sounding him out.
I don't want to appear too keen — his price might go up.’
Christina encouraged him.
‘He could be a great asset to you, Stephen.
Don't miss the chance.’
‘I know.’
Stephen touched the side of his nose with his index finger, a shrewd light entering his eyes.
‘But I want him on my terms.’
Chapter Seven
‘That's them.’
Stephen nudged Christina, pointing to a couple walking out of the customs hall at Grantley Adams Airport.
Any preconceived image she had of James and Elaine Morris was instantly forgotten when they walked towards her.
James was much shorter than she had imagined, with thinning, poker-straight brown hair and a paunch.
Elaine, his wife, was much taller than him, with shoulder-length blonde hair and long legs carrying a well-rounded body.
They were both pale-faced, hot and dishevelled, and dressed in loose-fitting crumpled clothes.
James held out his hand to Stephen and said in a deep, confident voice, ‘Good to see you, Stephen; you look well.’
‘You look well yourself.’
In fact James Morris looked very different from the last time he had seen him, two years previously.
‘Good flight?’
Stephen asked pleasantly, turning his head slightly to smile at Elaine, who was standing awkwardly next to her husband, gripping a scuffed vanity case.
‘As good as could be expected.
Too long, too cramped, but we're here safe and sound, that's the main thing.’
‘And this must be Christina?’
James's eyes lingered on her low T-shirt, the tanned bare legs beneath her white shorts.
She took his hand.
It was soft and clammy, and she was acutely aware of his dark, intent scrutiny.
‘Pleased to meet you, Christina.
Robert Leyton told me you were attractive but he understated.’
She blushed.
‘I'm pleased to meet you, James.
Welcome to Barbados.’
Elaine gave Stephen a tentative kiss on the cheek, leaving a red lipstick mark which he quickly rubbed off.
‘The last time I saw you was at a launch party in 1979,’ she giggled.
‘I think I was a little bit tiddly.’
‘I think we all were, Elaine.’
He touched Christina's arm.
‘Meet my wife.’
Elaine patted her straight blonde hair into place, wiping fuchsia lipstick off her teeth with her tongue before turning to Christina.
Stephen made the introduction, and the two very different women weighed each other up, exchanging hellos and forced smiles.
‘Okay, let's go.’
Stephen clapped his hands and picked up Elaine's grip, whilst a porter took the trolley loaded with three large suitcases and two carrier bags packed full of magazines, newspapers and duty-free goods.
Stephen strode ahead with the porter towards the car park, the others a few feet behind.
James chatted to Christina.
‘Is it always this hot?’
He opened another button on his shirt, and she could see his thick, matted chest hair.
‘It is very humid today, and no, it's not always this hot.
When we came here on our honeymoon in the winter it was quite cool.
Cool enough to wear a jacket at night.’
‘I love the heat,’ Elaine announced.
‘I can't wait to bake in the sun.’
Christina looked at her pink-toned skin and said, ‘You'll have to be very careful.
The sun here is very strong — you can burn in an hour.’
‘I never burn.’
She turned to James.
‘Do I?’
He didn't reply.
They reached Stephen's jeep, where the porter was piling the bags into the back.
Stephen drove out of the airport, taking the south coast-road for a couple of miles before turning inland to cross the island heading west.
Elaine Morris stared out of the window in astonishment.
‘Do people actually live in those huts?’
Her incredulous tone amused Christina, who remembered her own first impression of the local Bajan dwellings.
‘Large families often live in just one room.
As they get more money, or a new baby is born, they add what is called another roof, which basically means another room.
Some of them are very pretty and cosy, and the majority have TV and a stereo system,’ she explained.
‘Watch out!’
James shouted to Stephen, as an old man driving a decrepit mule and cart erupted from a narrow lane into the path of the jeep.
‘Silly old fool!
Why don't you watch where you're going?
You could have killed us all,’ James shouted out of the window.
The old man replied with a toothless grin, yelling in thickly accented Bajan: ‘You man, back back.’
He lashed his mule, which refused to move.
He lashed it again violently until the animal stirred into an indolent amble.
‘Is it always like this?’
James asked ruefully, already regretting his decision to come to what appeared to him to be a backward, run-down, poverty-stricken island.
‘Just wait until you try getting into Bridgetown for an early-morning appointment!’
Stephen laughed.
Christina joined in whilst James and Elaine looked helplessly at each other.
‘Crystal Springs — A New Hotel Development’.
The bold black lettering on the construction board shone in the car headlights when Stephen turned into the wide, potholed drive up to Crystal Springs House.
Clyde, the night watchman, stood to attention as they  alighted.
Two big gold caps shone brightly in his wide, gap-toothed grin.
‘Evenin', boss man.
Evenin', mistress.’
He touched his woolly hat.
‘Celia say she jus’ stepped out to step back.’
Christina raised her eyes to heaven.
‘I told her to be here when we arrived.
Where on earth has she gone, Clyde?’
‘Don’ know, mistress.
She jus' said to tell you she jus' stepped out to step back.’
Both Elaine and James wondered what the old man, dressed in an assortment of ill-fitting clothes, was talking about.
‘Can I help you with that, mistress?’
Clyde held out a gnarled old hand to Elaine, who handed him her bag with a timid smile.
Clyde struggled with one heavy suitcase whilst James and Stephen carried the other two.
‘Put Mr and Mrs Morris's bags in the guest room, please, Clyde,’ Christina said.
‘And since Celia is stepping out as usual, could you fix us drinks, Stephen?
I'm sure Elaine and James could do with one.’
The men went into the kitchen to fix the drinks, and Christina led Elaine out onto the terrace.
They both sat down in the deeply cushioned cane chairs and looked out over what was left of the original coconut grove, now a building-site.
A few remaining palm trees clad in white coral dust looked ghostly in the moonlight.
Elaine turned to Christina.
‘Do you enjoy living here?’
She considered the question for a few minutes before she replied, ‘Barbados takes a bit of getting used to, but its good points far outweigh the bad.
Yes, I do enjoy living here, but it's very different from England and, I must admit, there are times when I miss things back home so much I could literally grab the first plane out of here.’
‘What is it you miss so much?’
Elaine wanted to know.
‘Oh, you know, just ordinary stuff like roast beef and Yorkshire pudding on Sundays, going to the local pub for a quick drink, wonderful shopping sprees in London…’
Her voice trailed off and she looked wistful.
Elaine thought how pretty she was.
‘Well, I'm certainly not going to miss racing around Tesco on Friday nights and struggling to my car laden with bags.
Nor will I miss that filthy pub at the end of our road where James insists on going most nights.
They don't wash the glasses there; they blow on them.
We lived in a high-rise apartment, so I won't miss that, and the only garden I ever get to see is my mum's when we go down there on Sundays sometimes.
And we rarely have roast beef.’
Elaine laughed, a merry tinkling sound.
‘And I certainly won't miss the miserable weather!’
Christina agreed.
‘I lived in Manchester, and I must admit I don't miss the terminally grey days or the long winter nights.’
‘I can't wait to see the house you've rented for us.
Is it far from here?’
Excitement lit Elaine's face.
It had looked pale and puffy after her journey.
Now, in the soft light from the house, it had a piquant quality.
Christina warmed to her and was glad for the trouble she'd taken on the Morris's account.
‘It's about two miles away.
I chose it, so I hope you like it.
It's a small cottage and I think it's very pretty.
I'm really sorry you couldn't move in there tonight, but as usual everything here is delivered in what they charmingly refer to as Eastern Caribbean time — which means late!’
She sighed.
‘I ordered beds for you weeks ago, and the company promised faithfully they'll be delivered tomorrow morning, but that doesn't mean a thing.
It simply means they promise anything to get you off the phone, so keep your fingers crossed or you may be staying here more than one night.’
‘I don't mind where I stay to be honest with you, Christina.
I'm so pleased just to be here, I would sleep on a tent on the beach.
In fact, forget the tent!’
Christina felt herself relaxing with Elaine, and was enjoying the company of another female for the first time in weeks.
They stopped chatting as Stephen and James came out onto the terrace, Stephen carrying a tray of drinks and James two bowls of nuts and crisps.
‘Your usual, Elaine.’
James handed his wife a large gin and tonic, while Stephen handed Christina a glass of champagne.
James raised his glass and looked at Stephen.
‘I want to thank you for this opportunity and tell you I will do my very best for you.’
‘You come highly recommended, James.
I have no doubt you will do a good job, but things are run a little differently out here.
I'll need to show you the ropes.’
‘I learn fast.’
He winked at Stephen.
‘I'm sure you do,’ Stephen said, and a look passed between the two men which Christina did not understand.
‘Welcome to Barbados; I hope you'll be very happy here,’ she said.
Stephen and James had left the house when Christina woke the following morning.
She pulled on a plain black swimsuit and headed for the sea.
She was surprised to see Elaine's head bobbing above the surface of the water when she reached the beach.
Elaine waved.
‘Good morning.’
Christina waded out to join her.
‘I can't believe how wonderful this water is.’
Elaine lay on her back, kicking her white legs.
‘So clear and warm.
You must live in the water here, it's-so fantastic.’
‘We do.’
Christina floated alongside her.
‘Are there any sharks?’
Elaine asked, her eyes  widening.
Christina shook her head.
‘Never been any sign of them, but I never swim far out anyway.’
She ducked under the water and emerged, pushing her long hair away from her face.
‘Come on, swim with me,’ she offered.
Elaine refused.
‘No, I'm fine here, really.’
‘Okay, see you later.’
Christina struck out across the aquamarine water and swam quickly out to sea.
Elaine watched her for a few minutes before paddling further into the shore, lying on the soft, creamy sand, letting the shallow water caress her feet and legs.
Christina joined her ten minutes later, and they both walked back up to the house, on a path overgrown with headily fragrant mimosa and low, sweeping bamboo.
The early-morning sun dappled their exposed shoulders through swaying fish-tail palms.
Showered and dressed in long, loose-fitting cotton T-shirts, Elaine and Christina walked out onto the shaded terrace where Celia had laid a breakfast of freshly squeezed mango juice, cereals, sweet, doughy local bread rolls, banana bread, and coconut chopped into big, thick slices.
‘Where is Mr Reece-Carlton?’
Christina asked Celia as she appeared on the terrace carrying a tray of fresh tropical fruit and a teapot.
‘He gone with de other man.
He axed me to tell you not to wait.’
‘Where did he go, Celia?’
‘He don’ say, mistress.’
She set down the tray and scampered off.
‘Well, we might as well eat.
I don't know about you but I'm starving,’ Christina said, moving towards the table.
Elaine followed her.
‘Me too.
I've been up since the crack of dawn.’
Christina and Elaine sat opposite each other across the circular marble-topped table.
‘I think Stephen wanted James to see the site first thing  this morning before you took us down to the house,’ Elaine said, and helped herself to a warm bun which she tore open, spreading it thickly with butter and lime jelly.
Two tiny yellow birds landed on the table and hopped towards the open sugar-bowl.
Christina shooed them away with her hand.
‘I'm really excited about seeing the house,’ Elaine said in her fast, bubbly voice, periwinkle-blue eyes sparkling in anticipation.
‘In fact, I'm so excited about everything, I think I only slept for a couple of hours.’
Christina ate cereal and drank three cups of tea.
She helped herself to a slice of banana bread, which she was about to eat as Stephen and James wandered onto the terrace.
‘Mmm, that looks good.’
Stephen pinched half the slice from her plate.
‘Stephen, you pig!’
She tried to slap his hand and missed.
Both men sat down at the table.
Christina turned her attention to James, whose face was flushed from heat and exertion.
‘Well, James, what do you think?’
He helped himself to a glass of mango juice before he replied.
‘There's one hell of a lot of work to be done, but I'm sure we'll make it if we give those niggers a kick up the backside.’
Stephen cleared his throat.
‘If I were you, James, I wouldn't call these people niggers — unless, of course, you want to end up in the Queen Elizabeth Hospital.’
Elaine blushed.
‘I did tell you, James…’
‘Well, what the hell else do you call them, for Christ's sake?’
He looked directly at Stephen, who lowered his voice and in a quiet but firm tone said, ‘Barbadians are a proud and self-respecting people, and they deserve your respect  too.
You call them by their names as you would anyone else.
Is that clear?’
James dropped his eyes.
‘Okay, Stephen, I understand.
We're new boys in town, don't want to upset the locals, now, do we.’
He poured himself a cup of tea.
‘It's not quite like that either, James.
‘Nigger’ is a despicable word.’
James held up his hand.
‘It shall never cross my lips again.’
He changed the subject.
‘So when do we move into our new home?
The sooner I get settled, the sooner I get to work.’
‘If you've got beds, you can move in this morning,’ Christina said, and glanced at her watch.
It was almost nine o'clock.
She finished her tea and stood up.
‘I'll call the factory now to check.’
She came back out onto the terrace a few minutes later.
‘You will have two single beds delivered at 10.30 this morning, and a king-sized in four days’ time.’
‘They should all have been delivered a week ago,’ Stephen commented, shrugging his shoulders and adding with a wry smile, ‘Welcome to de West Indies, man.’
After breakfast Stephen had work to do, so Christina took James and Elaine to the small rented cottage on Sunset Ridge.
‘It's so pretty!’
Elaine exclaimed, her delight evident as she entered the open-plan living- and dining-room decorated in a fresh lemon and blue fabric which Christina had chosen.
They dropped their suitcases and Christina opened the shutters.
Sunlight flooded the room.
She led them onto a small covered terrace running the full width of the house.
Brilliant pink bougainvillaea covered the old stone walls of the cottage, and lemon and white hibiscus stirred in a soft, warm breeze.
Elaine closed her eyes and breathed deeply, holding in the sweet scent of blossoming magnolia.
‘I'm in heaven,’ she murmured.
‘I'm so pleased you like the cottage.
I've been worried it would be too small for you.’
‘It's perfect, and thank you so much for decorating.’
Elaine clasped Christina's hands.
‘I really appreciate it.’
Christina was delighted.
‘Don't you think it's wonderful, James?’
Elaine turned to her husband, who was lighting a cigarette, letting the smoke curl from his thick lips.
‘It's somewhere to hang my hat.
You know how I feel about houses, Elaine.
Bricks and mortar so far as I'm concerned.
No point in getting attached.’
Christina thought how ungrateful he was, and turned her attention to Elaine, who was calling, ‘I can see the sea, James, look!’
She was on tiptoe, pointing in the direction of the coast.
‘I've seen sea before.’
James looked uninterested,
‘Not the Caribbean,’ she retorted.
‘It's all the bloody same to me, so when you've finished acting like a six-year-old will you come and help me unpack?’
Christina was tempted to snap back at him in Elaine's defence, but bit her tongue.
Stephen was constantly telling her to think before she spoke, particularly when it was none of her business.
‘Ignore him.’
Elaine dismissed her husband with a wave of her hand.
‘He never enthuses about anything.’
‘I'm sorry,’ Christina said.
‘Don't be.
I'm used to it.
Anyway, I know how to enjoy myself without old grumpy-boots.’
Elaine giggled, and her face lit up with a glorious smile.
‘I love the cottage, I love the climate, and I think I'm going to love Barbados.’
Her infectious enthusiasm was such a contrast to James's indifference, Christina wondered what they could have in common.
‘I'd better go and help him unpack or he'll bite my head off.’
Elaine turned to walk into the house.
Christina followed and stopped at the front door.
‘I'll call for you after lunch, and we can go shopping for all the things I thought you'd like to choose for yourself.’
‘Like what?’
Elaine queried.
‘You know, towels and bed-linen, personal stuff.’
‘That's great, Christina.
About two o'clock okay with you?’
‘That's fine.
See you then.’
She began to walk down the path, turning to wave as Elaine shouted, ‘Thanks for everything.’
Christina and Elaine went shopping in Bridgetown that afternoon.
They bought white cotton sheets with lace borders and matching pillow-cases, blue towels with white alamandas appliquéd on one corner, a collection of decorative shells for Elaine's bathroom, and an assortment of locally made wicker baskets.
Elaine also insisted on buying herself a brightly patterned sarong and a hand-crafted chunky necklace to match.
‘I think I'll die if I don't have a drink soon,’ Elaine panted like a thirsty dog as they stepped out of Cave Shepard department store and began walking down Broad Street towards the car parked in Trafalgar Square.
Several young men hissed and whistled, much to Elaine's delight.
She hissed and whistled back.
‘Don't encourage them,’ Christina warned.
‘They'll follow us and we'll never get rid of them.’
Elaine chuckled.
‘I wouldn't mind!
Some of them are very good-looking.’
‘Come on.’
Christina dragged her across the road away from a group of lecherous young men who leered and shouted: ‘Cheese on!
Woman, you got great botsy.
Come chat down here, sis.’
Elaine waved.
‘What are they talking about?
Sounds like a foreign language to me.’
‘They've just said you've got a great backside — and from a West Indian that's the highest compliment you can have.’
Elaine yelled in surprise.
‘My fat bum?’
‘The bigger the better for West Indian men.’
‘Well, I'd better start feeding myself up.
When in Rome, as they say.’
She turned round, checked that the men were still watching her and, sticking her bottom out, sashayed to the car, chuckling at the chorus of loud wolf-whistles.
Christina was pleased to get her into the car without being mobbed, and drove quickly out of town and on to the coast-road.
Long shadows of dusk slid across the darkening sky.
A lone horse and rider were visible on the shore of Carlisle Bay, starkly silhouetted against the sun, a bright orange globe slowly descending into the calm, silver sea.
‘It's so beautiful, just like in the travel brochures.’
Elaine stared out of the car window, captivated by the peaceful scene.
They drove on in silence, both wrapped in their own thoughts, until Christina pulled the car into the car park of the Reef Bar and jumped out.
‘Come on, Elaine, happy hour.
A rum sour before dinner?’
‘I'm not sure about the rum sour, whatever that is, but a gin and tonic would go down very well.’
The two women walked into the busy beach bar, ordered drinks, and sat at a table overlooking the sea.
‘Doesn't it get dark quickly?’
Elaine looked up at the black, velvety sky studded with tiny, twinkling stars.
‘Yes, very quickly in the Caribbean.
One minute it's light, the next it's dark.
It's the same with the rain.
It can  be torrential one moment and the sun shining brilliantly the next.’
The drinks arrived and Christina paid.
‘I've got a strong feeling I'm going to be very happy here,’ said Elaine, sipping her gin and tonic.
‘I already feel as if I've lived here for months.
I don't think I'm ever going back.’
‘I really hope you will be, and that we can become friends.’
Christina missed the friendship she had shared with Susie, her flatmate.
In some ways, Elaine reminded her of Susie: vivacious, funny, and easy-going.
‘Become friends?’
Elaine's smile was warm.
‘We already are.’
Chapter Eight
The road across-country to Crane Beach wound through a sea of sugar cane in undulating waves ten foot high; passed old stone churches filled to capacity for Sunday-morning worship, the doors and windows wide open to emit the sounds of loud, harmonious rejoicing.
Elaine chatted incessantly on the journey, oblivious to James's entreaties to shut up, and Stephen's impatience when she insisted on stopping at every plantation house —‘Just to have a peek.’
Christina was interested too, and the two of them were in good spirits when Stephen drove into the dry, scrubby car park in front of the Crane Beach Hotel, which from that aspect seemed an unremarkable low-level with thirties undertones to the architecture.
It would have been at home in Bournemouth or Scarborough or any one of a dozen British seaside resorts, Christina thought.
Stephen opened the back of the jeep and everyone was given something to carry.
Christina took a picnic basket Celia had prepared that morning, containing bread rolls, fresh fruit, napkins, tablecloth, plastic cups and cutlery.
Elaine was loaded down with towels, and bags full of swimwear and sun creams.
Stephen carried the small portable barbecue and coals, whilst James brought up the rear with the ice-box full of food, wine and local Banks' beer.
Though the front aspect of the hotel was unremarkable, passing through it and along one of the glassed-in corridors, Christina was amazed by the sight she saw.
The hotel  was in fact situated on a rugged windswept bluff, 250 feet above the ferocious southern Atlantic.
In the fierce noon-day sun the water stretched as far as the eye could see, in every shade of blue from palest turquoise to the deepest indigo of the horizon.
The wind was fierce when they left the hotel by a side door, whipping their clothes and snatching at their hair.
Christina could taste its salty tang and feel it settle stickily on her skin.
The path down to the beach was a precarious one, tiny steps hewn out of the sheer rock face.
A dizzyingly long way below lay a long, deep arc of white-powder sand.
They stood on the observation point to the right of the path.
‘Look at that, James,’ Elaine yelled like an excited little girl, pointing to where several young boys surfed the high, rolling waves, struggling to balance their wavering boards on the crest of translucent walls of fast-moving water.
‘I'd rather not.’
James looked paler than usual.
He was terrified of heights.
‘I think I'll put up here if you don't mind.
Have a drink.
I'll join you later for the barbecue.’
‘Don't be such a spoilsport,’ pouted Elaine.
‘I'll hold your hand down the path.’
‘Push me down it, more like,’ he grunted, and turned away from the spectacular aerial view, feeling dizzy.
‘I'll have a couple of drinks to give me Dutch courage, then I'll join you.
Go on, I'll be fine.’
Stephen had already set off down the path.
‘See you later, then,’ Christina said.
‘The bar is right behind you; I suggest a planter's punch.
Ask for it with a kick and you'll fly down to the beach.’
He made a pathetic attempt at a smile.
While Elaine took the path ahead, singing ‘Beautiful, beautiful Barbados, gem in de Caribbean sea’, Christina followed her, noticing the changes in her friend since her arrival.
Though still far from slender, her figure now looked pleasantly voluptuous rather than overblown.
With  a golden tan and her hair sun-bleached rather than bottle-blonde, she looked thoroughly acclimatized, and today had dressed island-style in a bright multi-coloured sarong hand-printed with tropical flowers.
‘I can't wait to get into those waves,’ she shouted over her shoulder as they made their way carefully down.
Christina had to yell at the top of her voice to be heard above the wind, her long hair whipping across her face.
‘I hope you've got a swimsuit with strong straps — the sea sometimes takes bikini tops.’
‘I haven't, but who cares?’
Elaine chuckled as she reached the bottom of the cliff and jumped from a smooth, rounded boulder into the shallow water.
‘Wow, it's really warm,’ she said, and turned to help Christina with the picnic basket.
‘What did you expect?
The North Sea?’
Elaine laughed.
‘Hardly, but not this warm.’
She paddled in the shallow water for a few moments before joining Stephen where he was setting up the barbecue in a shaded spot.
Christina struggled with the picnic basket, which now seemed very heavy.
‘Oh, damn, James has the ice-box with all the drinks.’
Elaine pulled a face.
‘Stephen, darling…’
Christina adopted her most coaxing tone of voice.
He ignored her pleading.
‘James is coming down in a little while, Christina.
Give me a break; those steps are very steep.’
‘Not for a big, strong boy like you,’ she beseeched him.
‘Go and have fun in the sea with Elaine for a while.
If James hasn't come down by the time you get back, I promise to go and get you a drink, my darling, dearest, demanding wife.’
She pulled her long, plain white T-shirt over her head.
Underneath she was wearing a simple black swimsuit with a high neck and wide shoulder-straps.
Stephen wrinkled his nose in disapproval.
He liked her in minuscule bikinis or high-cut swimming costumes.
‘Sexy it may not be, but safe it is,’ she told him.
‘I don't see why I should put on a show for the whole of Crane Beach.’
‘Well, Elaine is.’
Stephen glanced at the skimpy string bikini digging into Elaine's pink flesh.
She didn't hear him.
She was already running down the beach, calling: ‘Come on, Christina’, her voice all but drowned by the crashing waves.
Christina followed her eagerly, laughing as she showed her friend how to body-surf on the smaller waves, and then how to dive and tread water waiting for a really big wave.
When Christina gave the signal, they both body-surfed for a few minutes before tumbling over and over as the strong current literally threw them onto the shore.
Christina heard Elaine's screams and laughs even above the deafening roar of the sea.
She finally emerged from the water to see her friend with her bikini-top around her neck and the bottom dangling from one ankle.
Elaine scrambled to recover her bikini and fell over, laughing as the relentless waves pulled her under the water, time and time again.
Christina helped her, and eventually they managed to get the tiny bikini back into place.
‘Want another go?’
Christina pushed her sand-filled hair out of her eyes.
‘I think I could use a drink after that.’
‘Come on, then.
If lazy-bones Stephen can't be bothered to go and get the ice-box, I will.’
Elaine ran up the beach, Christina sauntering slowly behind.
It was then that she noticed a tall blond man busy coaching some young local boys in football.
Two makeshift goal-posts had been erected using assorted  lengths of strapped sugar cane, and she could hear a lively dispute about the penalty rules.
She stood nearby and watched, bemused by the sight of Barbadians playing anything but their beloved cricket.
There was something familiar about the way the man's long hair fell at the nape of his neck, and his posture as he knelt in front of a small hoy who was stamping his foot and refusing to kick the ball.
Christina edged closer to get a better look, and instantly recognized his voice.
‘Martin, is that you?’
He turned abruptly, almost losing his balance.
‘Christina, I can't believe it.’
Martin Ward got to his feet, dusting off sand, and they held each others' eyes for a few moments without speaking.
Then Christina laughed nervously.
‘Fancy seeing you here.’
‘I could say exactly the same.
After all, it's a long way from Manchester.’
He stood up, sunlight glinting in his sun-bleached hair.
Soft golden hairs glistened on his tall, strong body, which was tanned to a deep honey colour.
‘Yes, it's a small world all right.’
She held up her hand to shade her eyes against the fierce sun.
‘So what brings you to Barbados?’
Christina glanced at the young boys squabbling over the ball.
‘Setting up a Barbados football team?’ she laughed.
‘I wish it was as simple as that.
No, I'm here for a late convalescence.
A very fortunate one.’
His hazel eyes dropped, and he pushed forward his right leg awkwardly.
‘I had a slight accident a few months ago, wrote off my car and almost myself.’
‘Oh, Martin, I'm so sorry.’
Christina stared at the ugly, twisted scar running from his thigh to his kneecap, and the gnarled tangle of flesh and sinew where the surgeons had tried to rebuild his shattered kneecap.
‘Not a pretty sight, is it?’
He grimaced.
She lifted her eyes, which were full of unspoken sympathy.
‘Like I said, I'm fortunate to be here, standing on this beautiful beach talking to you.
It's taken me months of physio to learn to walk properly again, and I'm very grateful to all the people who helped me.
When you've stared death in the face, everything after that is a bonus.’
She nodded silently.
‘And how about you, Christina?
How come you're in Barbados?
We lost touch after I moved down South.
I've always regretted it.’
She glanced up the beach and saw Stephen and Elaine unpacking the hamper.
‘Long story.
I'm not sure we've got time.’
‘I've got all the time in the world.’
‘The brief version is, I live here,’ she announced.
‘You what?’
He was incredulous.
‘To cut a long story short, I married Stephen.’
‘I see.’
She pretended not to see the look of dismay on Martin's face and continued with her explanation.
‘We came here on honeymoon, fell in love with the island.
We bought a house, but Stephen being Stephen…’
She looked heavenward at this point, and Martin wondered what she meant.
‘He's very entrepreneurial, and wasn't satisfied with just a holiday home, so we're now developing a new hotel which promises to be — and I quote Stephen now —‘the best in the Caribbean’.’
Martin, you're supposed to be coaching the boys, not chatting up Mrs Reece-Carlton.’
The voice came from behind Martin.
It was light and teasing but the message was clear.
A freckle-faced brunette with a lush figure pressed herself very close to him, and placed one arm around his narrow waist.
‘You know each other?’
Martin looked from one woman to the other.
The newcomer spoke.
‘No, not officially, but I believe you know my father, Roger Dyson?
He's done some surveying work for your husband at Crystal Springs.
Daddy is over there.’
She pointed up the beach to a man and a woman barely visible under a big beach umbrella.
‘I'm Louise Dyson.’
She made no move to extend her hand but instead cast assessing eyes over Christina.
‘Christina Reece-Carlton; pleased to meet you.
Sorry I've kept Martin, but we're old friends from Manchester.
It was such a surprise to see him on the beach like this.’
‘A nice surprise, I hope?’ he asked, apparently oblivious to Louise's pique.
‘I am sorry to interrupt your cosy chat, Martin, but Daddy's dying to go up to the bar for a drink and we've promised to stop by Carolyn Roach's house later on.’
‘Okay, Louise, I'll be right with you.
By the way, the last thing Carolyn said to me last night was that her party was open-house and we could go any time.’
A vexed expression crossed Louise's pretty face.
Christina turned round, feeling uncomfortable.
She could see Stephen, his back to her, placing food on the barbecue, and smoke curling into the clear air.
Elaine waved and shouted something Christina didn't catch.
‘I've got to go, anyway; I think I'm probably holding up our barbecue.’
Louise slipped her hand into Martin's.
‘He's made a marvellous recovery since he's been with us in Barbados.
I've been looking after him, haven't I, Martin?’
The possessive way she looked and spoke was not wasted on Christina.
‘This holiday has been a godsend and couldn't have come at a better time.
I have Louise to thank for that.’
He squeezed her hand then let it drop.
‘We're old friends as well; did Martin not tell you?’ the girl pressed.
Christina shook her head.
‘We go back to when I was a silly little girl of eleven with a schoolgirl crush on Martin.
Our families have been friends for years.’
He looked slightly embarrassed and made no answering comment.
‘It's really good to see you, Christina,’ he said warmly.
‘perhaps we can get together sometime?
Catch up on all your news.’
‘And yours.’
She glanced at his leg again.
‘I'm so sorry about that.’
‘Don't be; it's not that bad.
I can't play football again but at least I'm alive.’
‘I'd love to see you again, Martin.
How long are you going to be in Barbados?’
‘For a very long time, if I get my way,’ Louise interrupted.
Christina thought it was time to go.
Louise was obviously infatuated with Martin and resented the intrusion of an old girlfriend from England.
‘Listen, call me at Crystal Springs, Martin, and we can catch a quick drink sometime.
Roger Dyson has the number.’
Louise looked peeved and dragged at his arm.
‘Come on, we really do have to go.’
He extracted his arm gently and stepped towards Christina.
‘I'll call you.’
It was a promise rather than the usual social pleasantry.
He'd always had the nicest smile, open and boyish, but she'd forgotten the way his hazel eyes sparkled with greenish lights, perhaps because she'd never seen him so tanned before.
‘Bye, Martin.
See you soon, I hope,’ she called, and began to run up the beach.
‘Come on, Christina.
I've burnt half the food waiting for you,’ Stephen snapped impatiently as she joined him by the smoking barbecue.
‘Who was the hunk you were talking to?’ asked Elaine.
‘An old friend from Manchester, would you believe?
His name's Martin Ward.’
Stephen's back stiffened.
He handed her a hamburger but made no indication that he had ever met Martin.
‘I went out with him a couple of times.
He was a footballer, a fantastic player.
He was transferred to London, I got married to Stephen, and we lost touch.’
Christina noticed the ice-box standing next to Elaine's feet.
‘You got the drinks, then?’
‘Yes, James brought them down, had a hot dog, and went back to the bar.
He hates sitting on the beach; does nothing but moan.’
Elaine opened the lid of the box.
‘What would you like to drink?’
‘A beer, thanks.’
Elaine handed her friend a bottle of Banks' and helped herself to a glass of wine.
‘Quite a dish, your footballer.
I wouldn't mind a bit of coaching from him!’
‘I'm afraid coaching is all he can do these days.
He had a very bad car accident a few months ago and shattered his kneecap.
He's staying with the Dysons — they're old friends, apparently.
Stephen knows Roger Dyson, don't you, Stephen?’
He grunted something unintelligible and poked a sausage savagely.
It hissed and spat a spray of hot fat onto his bare stomach.
‘Ouch!’ he yelled, and rubbed his burning flesh.
Christina appeared oblivious as she continued to talk about Martin.
‘Anyway, he's here to recuperate, a long holiday from what I can gather.
I was really pleased to see him.
He was always a lot of fun and made me laugh.’
‘I bet he's having a lot of fun with Roger Dyson's daughter.
Can't remember her name, I only met her once, but she's an attractive girl.’
Stephen ate a hot dog in three big bites.
‘Her name's Louise,’ Christina volunteered, ‘and from what I can gather she's madly in love with him.’
‘Who wouldn't be?’
Elaine sighed, and picked up a handful of sand, letting it pour slowly through her fingers.
Stephen glared at her.
It was wasted — Elaine was busy watching Martin and Louise walk along the beach towards the steps back up to the hotel.
Martin waved but Louise averted her face, pretending not to see them.
Elaine and Christina both waved back.
‘I think we should befriend Martin,’ Elaine said, winking.
‘I'm sure he could do with some fun female company.’
‘I'm positive he has enough of that on this island,’ Stephen bristled.
‘A little more won't harm him,’ Elaine persisted.
‘For Christ's sake, Elaine, don't you think of anything else?’
Stephen snapped angrily.
Christina turned on him.
‘That's not fair, Stephen.
Elaine was only being friendly.
Anyway, I agree.
Martin is a great guy and a lot of fun.
Why can't we invite him out?
What harm is there in that?’
Her eyes met his unflinchingly.
‘Nothing whatsoever, Christina; you do whatever you wish.’
Stephen's controlled voice disguised his true feelings, but Christina sensed his jealousy and changed the subject.
‘Why don't we drag your errant husband out of the bar, Elaine, and go to the Kingsley Club for a drink?’
‘Sounds like a great idea to me,’ she agreed, glancing dubiously at Stephen who was throwing water onto the dying embers.
‘Stephen, fancy the Kingsley Club?’
Christina asked in a bubbly voice.
He nodded without looking up.
‘I assume that's a yes,’ she commented, and began to pile used plates and napkins into the picnic basket, saying, ‘Come on, then.
Let's pack up and head for Bathsheba, to drink the best rum punch in the Caribbean.’
The Kingsley Club overlooked the wild and rugged Bathsheba beach, where huge boulders rose majestically from the thundering Atlantic surf.
Stephen parked in front of the old white-painted building, its starkness relieved by bright-green shutters.
He led the way, followed by an ebullient Christina and Elaine, with James sullenly bringing up the rear.
They walked up the wide stone steps and into a small reception area.
Local art was displayed on the walls, and fans swished overhead.
A few late-Sunday diners were finishing their lime pie and coconut ice-cream as the small party walked past the vast open dining-room and onto the deep enclosed veranda which was used as a bar.
Christina's feet slipped on the highly polished wooden floor as she flopped into an antique mahogany rocking-chair positioned in front of a big open window, affording uninterrupted views of the ocean and a cooling breeze from off the sea.
An old waitress, wearing a tattered turban and starched white apron, shuffled towards them.
‘Yous all too late fer lunch, dat finished gone an hour ago,’ she informed them in no uncertain terms.
‘We've not come for lunch today.
We're here to have your famous rum punch, and I could definitely use a portion of that fantastic coconut ice-cream, if there's any left?’
Stephen asked hopefully.
‘Me too,’ Christina agreed.
Before Elaine could add that she would like some as well, the waitress shook her head.
‘Dat all gone.’
She looked cross.
‘I'll be gettin' de rum punch.’
She left them, muttering under her breath about coming in here and expecting ice-cream when lunch was over.
It was ten minutes before she returned at a snail's pace with four rum punches.
Stephen engaged James in construction talk while Christina and Elaine plotted a night out on Baxter's Row, exploring the late-night bars and restaurants where all the best calypsos were sung.
‘Perhaps we could invite your friend Martin?’
Elaine nudged Christina, who agreed.
‘He's calling me soon, so I'll invite him along.
I'm sure it's something he'd enjoy.’
Christina gave her husband a sidelong glance.
He seemed intent on what James was saying, and was obviously not going to rise to her remark.
The drinks arrived.
Elaine drained hers thirstily and made a loud sucking noise with her straw.
‘What a racket!’
James commented, and looked at her with disapproval.
He then did exactly the same thing, spluttering and spraying the remains of his drink down his shirt.
They all laughed.
Even James joined in, much to everyone's surprise.
Christina could feel her head spinning after only one drink, and refused a second.
Stephen declined also as he was driving, but James and Elaine put away two more and left the Kingsley Club staggering and in high spirits.
On the way home, Elaine sang some old favourites out of tune, and James insisted on a loud rendition of crude rugby songs.
Christina was pleased when the jeep pulled into Sunset Ridge and Elaine and James got out, waving and shouting  ‘thank you’ as, arm in arm, they helped each other up the path and into Magnolia Cottage.
Stephen was very quiet for the remainder of the journey back to Crystal Springs.
‘Are you okay?’
Christina asked eventually.
‘Yes, I'm fine.
Why?’
‘You're very quiet, that's all.’
‘It's Elaine,’ Stephen lied.
‘She irritates me.
When you two are together you act like schoolchildren.’
Christina rose to her friend's defence.
‘She's fun and warm and amusing — in direct contrast to James.
He's so boring.’
‘Just because he's not frivolous and making jokes every five minutes doesn't make him boring!’
‘Jokes?
Does he even know what they are?
I don't think the man has a sense of humour — how she lives with him is beyond me.
Anyway, I really like Elaine and enjoy her company.
I haven't many friends here.
‘That's why I want to invite Martin Ward out with us.
Not because I fancy him or anything like that, but because he's a friend from way back.
I know you'll really like him when you get to know him.’
But Stephen made no reply, and it was impossible for her to tell what he was thinking behind his impassive face.
He parked the car at the back of the house.
They unloaded the picnic things together.
While Christina helped Celia empty the basket in the kitchen, Stephen put the barbecue in the store-room at the back of the house.
Christina went upstairs to her bedroom, peeled off her sticky, crumpled clothes, and jumped into a tepid shower.
After a few minutes she padded back into the bedroom wrapped in a big fluffy towel.
It was late afternoon and the intense heat of the day was dying.
As she wandered out onto the balcony there was very little breeze, and she looked over the tops of the royal palms towards a calm, softly undulating sea.
She flinched as Stephen laid his hands on her naked shoulders and planted a hungry kiss on the side of her neck his fingers fumbling in the thick folds of the towel, seeking her breasts.
‘Come on, Christina,’ he whispered urgently.
He tugged at one end of the towel, but she held on tight, her body stiffening.
‘I'm not in the mood, Stephen,’ she said.
He stepped away from her, and walked out of the room without another word.
Christina watched him leave the house and walk towards the beach before she went inside and dressed slowly, thinking about his reaction to her refusal to make love.
It was only the second time since they had been married that she had rebuffed him.
He was in a strange mood and, rather than provoke him further, she decided to forget about it, determined not to mention it again.
Christina arranged dinner with Celia, then picked some mimosa and bright-lavender periwinkle flowers for the dining-table, which she was arranging when Stephen appeared at the french windows of the dining-room, looming out of the lengthening shadows as dusk turned quickly into night.
‘Where have you been?’
She was holding a delicate spray of mimosa to her face, inhaling the heady scent.
‘I went for a walk down the beach.
It was deserted and peaceful; I wanted to be alone.’
‘Oh.’
And she continued to adjust the flower arrangement.
‘Dinner will be at eight o'clock if that's okay?’
She waited for his reply, but Stephen had left the room and was going upstairs.
Celia served the cold cucumber soup hot, and burnt the steak even though Christina had told her numerous times that Stephen liked his steak rare.
He left most of his meal, and seemed uninterested in  any of the conversation she attempted, answering in monosyllables most of the time.
Christina gave up and was relieved when he announced that he was going to bed.
She followed him half an hour later, pleased to find him already asleep when she crept into the bedroom.
That night she lay awake for a long time, thinking first of her father, recalling many happy childhood memories and wishing fervently, as she had so many times before, that he had not left her so soon.
Then her thoughts drifted to Stephen, the stubborn, unpredictable, complex man she had married.
A shaft of moonlight slanted through the shutters, revealing his face looking oddly defenceless in sleep.
Poor Stephen — she shouldn't have teased him by exaggerating her friendship with Martin the way she had.
Martin was a warm, attractive man, but Stephen was her husband, the man to whom she intended to stay married.
It had taken Christina a long time to grow accustomed to the nocturnal sounds of the tropics, but she loved them now, and finally fell into a deep sleep, lulled by the incessant chirping of crickets, wind rustling the huge traveller's palm outside the bedroom window, and the Caribbean sea breaking gently on the shore.
Chapter Nine
Christina disliked Michael Stein on sight.
It was one of her immediate, intuitive reactions which were rarely wrong.
Stephen had asked her to join him and the new general manager in his office that morning, and she had been eager to meet the young hotelier who came so highly qualified.
On the face of it he was just what they needed: minor-public-school background, not over-academic but Lausanne-trained and with experience of the top hotel groups in England, Europe and the Far East.
She saw that Stein exuded confidence; it dripped from him like honey.
With his thick, smoothly brushed wheaten-coloured hair and slate-grey eyes he was handsome too — and knew it.
‘Mrs Reece-Carlton — delighted to make your acquaintance.’
His voice had the rounded vowels of a public-school education, and his well-cut, tropical-weight putty-coloured suit was worn with a Sea Island cotton shirt and an Hermès tie.
It was all in startling contrast to Stephen in his mud-caked shorts, T-shirt and docksiders.
Christina found she was still staring as if mesmerized at Stein's confident smile.
It was practised, wide and welcoming, consummately professional, revealing perfectly capped teeth and concealing everything about the man behind.
‘Pleased to meet you,’ she said, trying to sound sincere.
Stephen quickly put in, ‘Yes, Michael, delighted to have you on board.’
‘And I'm delighted to be here.
I've always wanted to work in the Caribbean.’
Michael Stein examined his well-manicured fingernails.
‘I know it will be a challenge but new beginnings are so exciting, I always think.’
He looked at Christina from under thick, curly lashes.
‘Building a new luxury hotel in Barbados is a risk, no doubt of that, but if anyone can pull if off, I'm sure Stephen can.’
‘Well, thank you, that's what we think too.’
She caught Stephen's eye and held it for a second.
What exactly did he see in this patronizing little squirt?
Oblivious, Michael Stein continued, obviously seeking to impress.
‘I've opened several hotels worldwide.
Bali was a nightmare.
We had no furniture two days before we were due to open.
Maui was a little better — at least the interior decorator finished, even if it was in the worst possible taste, but the Seychelles took the cake.!.’
He chuckled at the recollection.
‘We had a riot and the bloody natives burned part of the place down a week before it was due to open.
Myself and half the management team piled into a speedboat and had literally to flee for our lives.’
He lit up a Gitane without pausing to ask if they objected, letting the smoke drift slowly from his wide mouth.
‘How inconvenient,’ Christina commented dryly.
‘Oh, all in a day's work, but I must add that after that little fiasco I decided to join a more conventional hotel group and enjoyed the civilized calm of the Savoy for a while.
But I soon grew bored.
Two years of pandering to bloated businessmen and the nouveau riche did begin to pall on me.’
He flicked his cigarette ash rather messily towards the waste bin, there being no ashtray evident.
Christina knew  that this was because Stephen usually objected strongly to anyone smoking in his vicinity.
Obviously he'd decided it was worth putting up with the foul-smelling smoke for the sake of picking Michael's experienced brain.
‘So you decided to pioneer again?’
Stephen prompted.
‘Yes, the Far East beckoned.
How could I resist the call of the Orient?
The Mandarin Group offered me a package I couldn't refuse.’
‘And while you were there, someone else offered you a ‘package’ you couldn't refuse, I believe?’
Michael Stein looked into Stephen's blandly smiling face.
If he was taken aback, he didn't show it.
‘You do your research very thoroughly, Mr Reece-Carlton.
I admire that, so I'll be straight with you.
There was a period in my life when I enjoyed’— he paused —‘shall we say, chemical diversions?
It's over now, and I give you my word it won't happen again.’
‘If the Mandarin Group didn't believe that, why should I?’
‘Ah, but if you didn't, why bother to confirm my appointment in writing and fly me out first-class?
It was their loss, believe me, and they were the first to admit my work was never affected.
They gave me a reference, after all.
I put more bums in beds for them than any other general manager they've had.’
‘Bums in beds?
What a dreadful expression.’
Christina screwed up her face in distaste.
‘It's used all over the world — hotel trade jargon.
How's occupancy?
How many bums in beds?’
Michael shrugged nonchalantly.
‘As I was saying, I'd pushed their occupancy rates up by 40 per cent by the time I left, and headed up a worldwide promotional campaign that got Mandarin more free press exposure than ever before.
The marketing budget was halved in the eighteen months I was there.’
Stephen looked impressed.
‘I need lots of bums in beds here at Crystal Springs, Michael, so the sooner we get moving on sales and promotion, the better.’
‘Leave all that to me.
I have a great friend and former colleague in New York who heads a chain of major travel operators, both trade and retail.
If we link in with Gary and his organization we'll have no problem selling Crystal Springs.’
‘Can we get him down here?’
Stephen asked.
‘I think he should see the property and the island.’
‘I'll call and set up a visit a.s.a.p.
He can advise us on the best brochure layouts, promotional photography, video or slide presentation — the whole package.
Later, when we're nearer completion, you might like to offer a free trip to the agents he recommends — get them to pass on the news to their customers.
‘And then of course you need the same set-up in Europe.
As it happens I know a man in London who can handle the operation there for you.’
‘Sounds great, Michael.’
Stephen was looking pleased.
‘You obviously know a lot of people in the trade.’
I've made it my business to.
And I've forgotten more about the hotel industry than most people learn in a lifetime.
I'm sure I can be a great asset to you, Stephen.
You won't regret employing me.’
‘I'm sure I won't,’ Stephen was saying.
‘Now, is there anything we can do about airline tie-ins?
I heard that…’
At that moment James Morris barged into the office without knocking, looking flustered.
‘Immigration are outside, Stephen.
They want to see you urgently.
A man called Elvin Braithwaite — says it's important.’
‘Oh, Jesus, that's all we need,’ Stephen groaned.
Michael looked surprised.
‘It's not about me, is it?
I thought you said there'd be no problem if I came in on a six-month permit?’
‘There shouldn't be — but this is the Caribbean,’ Christina told him.
‘Don't worry.
We've had this all before.
Stephen can sort it out.’
He had picked up the phone and was asking Celia to show their visitor up, James Morris glanced disdainfully at the new manager.
Obviously eager to show how indispensable he himself was, James offered: ‘Why don't you let me deal with this, Stephen?
I can see you're busy.
So long as you okay the pay-off, of course.
What's a work permit worth here — a few hundred Eastern Caribbean and a bunch of bananas?’
He laughed at his own wit.
No one else did.
Stephen looked white-lipped.
‘James, I won't tell you again — this is not our country, we are merely permitted to be here by its citizens.
So why don't you use your common sense and show them some respect?
If you can't do that you're no good to me, okay?’
James's pudgy face turned a dull red.
He looked down, embarrassed.
‘Sure, Stephen.
I just thought…’
‘Well, do me a favour, James, and don't!
It's not your strong point.
Why don't you go and chase up those roofers for me?
Oh, and James?’
‘Yes?’
‘Don't come in here again without knocking.
Next time you might not find me in such a good temper.’
‘Yes, sure, Stephen.
I mean, no…right.’
Michael Stein's lip curled contemptuously at the undignified retreat.
He stubbed out his cigarette, smoothed his already immaculate hair.
He seemed quite content to sit back and let Stephen do the talking when Elvin Braithwaite, the island's Immigration chief, knocked and entered.
Braithwaite was at least six foot five, and broomstick-thin — all long, bony legs and arms in his immaculately starched shirt and knife-edged trousers.
‘Well, Mr Carlton — ma'am,’ he drawled with a nod to  Christina, ‘it seems we got a lickle problem here.
Mr Stein got de wrong sort of permit.
He got de temp'ry permit which clears him to work for up to six month, but I hear you makin' him your general manager which got to last more than that, isn't it?’
Not necessarily, thought Christina.
Stephen had a way of getting what he wanted from people and then moving rapidly on.
Sometimes his single-minded ruthlessness upset her.
In connection with Michael Stein she suspected it would not.
‘Please, Mr Braithwaite, have a seat.
Why don't we all move over here where we'll be more comfortable?’
Stephen manoeuvred them away from the formal office seating around his desk towards some more relaxed sofas and chairs grouped around a low table.
‘It's a hot one, Mr Braithwaite,’ he said.
‘Can we offer you some refreshment?
Chrissy, perhaps you could…’
He gestured towards the small wet bar installed in a corner of the room.
Braithwaite looked disapprovingly at the rows of bottles.
‘I never touch liquor on duty.
But perhaps something soft, Mrs Carlton?’
Christina smiled.
‘What about a lime squash?’
Braithwaite nodded regally.
‘Great.
Why don't you make us all one?’
Stephen encouraged.
While she busied herself squeezing fresh limes and adding local cane sugar and iced water, he began his pitch.
‘We hope Mr Stein will be working for us long into the future and obviously in that case we would need to apply for another permit for him.
But you and I both know that applying for a stay of more than six months takes time.
Hence the initial short-stay application.’
Braithwaite accepted his glass of lime squash from Christina and waited until the others were served.
‘I hear what you sayin', Mr Carlton, but regulations is  regulations.
It seems we got a irregularity here — Mr Stein knows he goin' to be workin' here long-term but he apply for short-term only.’
Braithwaite shook his head sadly.
‘Is a serious matter.
Very, very serious.’
‘Couldn't we just apply for a long-term permit for him now?’
Christina suggested.
‘Oh, no, ma'am.
Then Mr Stein would have two permits and regulations don't like that.
Don't like that at all.’
Stephen frowned at her.
‘I'm sure there has to be some way round this, Mr Braithwaite.
I remember how helpful you were in our own cases.’
‘Helpful’ was not the word Christina would have used, but Mr Braithwaite had grudgingly reached an accommodation with a local lawyer whom Stephen had retained to act for them.
Danny Bascombe had done a got job for them, and Stephen had been impressed by his ability, she remembered.
The Immigration officer was looking gloomier by the minute.
‘It pains me to say it, Mr Carlton, but I think Mr Stein is going to have to return to England and make a long-stay application through the ‘propriate channels.’
Stephen's eyes flared angrily.
Any moment now he would lose his temper.
‘Well, that's up to you, Mr Braithwaite,’ Christina intervened.
‘But it's going to put an awful lot of island people to a lot of trouble, and it will mean many hundreds of them will have to wait even longer for jobs now.’
Braithwaite looked at her.
‘How so?’
Christina crossed her fingers behind her back.
‘Well, one of Mr Stein's first duties as general manager is to recruit the rest of the staff, and he's already set up some interviews locally.
I'm sure you don't need me to explain the scale of our requirements here.’
Stephen caught the ball and started to run with it.
‘Of course he's not the only one who could recruit staff.
I suppose I could get around to it myself in time.
But at the moment I'm so caught up with our construction problems I don't see myself having the time for months ahead.
After all, we're talking literally hundreds of jobs here, most for people living on the island.
Mr Stein would have been looking for chefs, receptionists, back-room staff, chambermaids, gardeners, laundry workers, bar staff, waiters…’
‘Hol’ it there.’
Elvin Braithwaite fingered his chin thoughtfully.
‘My sister's boy, Alfa, he workin' as a bus-boy at Sandy Lane.
Why for he don’ join the police don't axe me, but Alfa know better — he wan' a be a waiter.’
Michael Stein looked regretful.
‘He sounds just the sort of keen, experienced youngster I would have been looking for.
But as I shall be on the evening flight home…’
Mr Braithwaite held up his hand.
‘Hol’ strain, Mr Stein.
Take it easy now.
Who sayin' anythin' about England?’
It didn't seem the moment to remind him that he had.
Stephen asked Christina for a splash of rum in his lime squash and Michael Stein followed suit.
Christina left the open bottle on the table.
Mr Braithwaite drained off his lime squash and added a couple of jiggers of rum to his empty glass.
Another quarter of an hour or so and he was solving Michael's recruitment problems across the board, recommending a dozen good, reliable workers.
Stephen and he agreed that in view of the value to the island of Crystal Springs' recruitment plans, the regulations would be waived this time and Michael Stein's long-term permit would be processed as quickly as possible.
‘So long as you don’ give me no trouble in the interim, Mr Stein,’said Braithwaite, getting to his feet.
‘No fear of that.
I shall be far too busy.’
Christina saw Elvin Braithwaite back to his car.
She returned to the office in time to hear Michael drawl, ‘Well, I'm impressed.
That could have been nasty.
You know your stuff, Stephen.’
‘Thanks,’ her husband replied.
‘Construction, property development, diplomacy…
Hotel-keeping's double Dutch to me at the moment — but I catch on fast, Michael.
You'd better remember that.’
There was no mention of the part she'd paid in talking Braithwaite round, Christina noticed.
And she saw something else: Michael Stein's easy, laid-back manner had subtly altered.
He looked different somehow, more alert and on guard.
‘Thanks, Stephen.
I'll bear that in mind,’ he promised.
The following months were all too often a case of one step forward, two steps back.
The delays and frustrating disappointments of trying to keep to an eighteen-month construction schedule in the Caribbean were beginning to tell on them all.
Stephen had ordered some sophisticated German industrial kitchen fittings from a supplier based in Venezuela, on the basis that it would be quicker to import from there than to have them shipped direct.
Perhaps it would have been had the South American dealer not ignored his every letter, fax and telephone call requesting confirmation of delivery date.
As Stephen had already laid out a substantial sum on placing the order, he was damned if he was going to write it off.
James Morris was sent to settle the problem from the Venezuelan end — which left the rest of the site problems on Stephen's shoulders.
Christina was determined not to add to them, but was beginning to experience grave doubts of her own about Colin Weatherhead's reliability.
She'd been back to the shop twice hoping to chase the progress of her textiles order.
The small factory she'd approached to undertake the making of the curtains, cushions and loose covers told her they'd be ready to start in a few weeks' time, and even  allowing for this wildly optimistic schedule, she felt she ought to know when to expect delivery of the fabrics.
But the first time she'd spoken to Colin he'd told her there was a hi-tech at the manufacturer's end, and the second time the shop had been closed.
Despite leaving numerous messages with his assistant and wife, she still had not heard from him.
She approached Paul Richardson one day — after all, it was he who had recommended Colin.
Paul was having a tough time himself supervising the contouring of the land around the three-tier pool Stephen had eventually commissioned.
He seemed distracted when she asked him about Island Trading's reliability.
‘Yeah, go to Colin, great guy,’ he mumbled absently.
‘No, goddammit!
I said a gentle slope, not the north bloody face of the Eiger!’
Christina pulled at his arm to divert his attention.
‘But that's what I'm saying.
I've already been to Colin, placed my order, given him a deposit — and nothing's happening.
You don't think he'd try and do a runner like the kitchen man, do you?’
Paul looked at her ruefully.
‘Oh, God, Chrissy — sorry.
I didn't realize you were so far along.
There's something I should have said.
Strictly no cash to Colin personally till the job's completed.
Any deposit, pay it direct to the manufacturer concerned.’
Christina clutched the sides of her head.
‘Oh, no, I can't bear it.
I don't want to let Stephen down.’
‘Easy, easy.
It's not that bad.
Colin's not a crook — just a bit too fond of the ganja, that's all.
He's probably smoking his way through your deposit.
When it's gone, he'll be back to work.’
‘Well, thank you, Paul.
Thanks a lot!
That really puts my mind at rest,’ she flashed angrily.
‘This is the last time I employ someone on your recommendation.’
He looked pained.
‘Christina, I know I've been here a  year longer than you but I'm sure you've worked these things out for yourself by now.
If you want anything done around here, you have to do it yourself.’
‘But, damn it, I'm paying Colin to do it!’
‘No.
You're paying him for knowing how to do it.
He has the contacts — it's up to you to make sure he gets in touch with them.
Look, here's his home address.
My advice to you is to get yourself over there and kick ass.
Stand over him while he makes those calls.’
Which was pretty well what she had to do.
She found Colin asleep on a rattan lounger on the veranda of his cottage in Holetown.
He hadn't shaved for a few days and a sickly smell clung to his clothes and hair.
She resisted the temptation to do as Paul suggested and instead made him pot after pot of black coffee and then drove him to his shop in Bridgetown.
After he'd placed the order, she then braved the dusty unmade roads to St Philip to deliver a second deposit, this time to the factory-owner personally.
She had already told Colin very firmly that she did not expect to be billed for any handling charge from him in view of the money he had already had — which was in fact a smaller sum.
To her amazement he took this like a lamb, and then had the effrontery to say that it had been a pleasure working with a businesswoman like her, and if there was anything else he could help her with, she only had to ask!
She decided to give him another chance, this time on her own terms.
She put him on to researching the availability of marble vanity-unit tops and free-standing occasional tables.
This time she insisted on negotiating direct with the manufacturer, but agreed to pay Colin a finder's fee of 5 per cent if the order came up to scratch.
To her surprise and relief he came up trumps, and the next time Stephen checked her progress she was able to report that the furnishings were to standard and on time.
Someone else who seemed to have no difficulties keeping to schedule was Michael Stein — but then, as Stephen had begun to remark rather acidly, a major part of his job involved sitting on his arse under a convenient fan listening to the sound of his own voice.
Michael had been hitting the phone, recruiting some key staff from hotels he'd worked in in the past.
Others were hired locally.
A core staff of assistant manager, guest services director, food and beverages manager, head chef and housekeeper had already been appointed and were on the payroll, helping with preparations for the hotel's opening.
Stein and his staff had also filled, in principle, the several hundred other posts, but most of these members of staff would not take up their positions until three weeks before the hotel's grand opening, timed to tie in with a huge party which Stephen was throwing for island dignitaries and specially invited celebrities, Michael Stein had proved his worth yet again in sending off invitations to the party, offering a free week's holiday to various A-list showbiz and society figures.
The outlay would be well worth while in terms of the publicity featuring all the hotel's celebrity guests.
Whenever Stephen asked him a question, he seemed to have the answer at his fingertips.
Instead of reassuring Stephen, now working himself up to a fever pitch of nervous excitement with the launch date in view, Michael's superior manner had begun to grate.
Today Stephen was worried about the reception staff.
They would be the paying customers' first impression of Crystal Springs.
It was vital that they should be prompt and professional as well as easy on the eye.
Michael told him not to worry, it was all taken care of.
The off-hand answer irritated Stephen.
‘What do you mean, don't worry?’ he stormed when Michael appeared to dismiss him.
‘Can you tell me when we can begin to teach the totally inexperienced, gauche young ladies you've employed as receptionists, or  do we just let them loose on our unsuspecting clients?’
Michael ignored Stephen's heavy sarcasm, a smug expression on his face.
He blew Gitane smoke in his employer's direction.
Stephen coughed irritably and wafted his hands.
‘Do you have to?’
He pointed at the cigarette.
Michael looked from him to the offending cigarette and back again, then reluctantly stubbed it out.
‘As you are fully aware, we have been promised delivery of all the office equipment on the fifth, two days from now.
I have personally been down to the suppliers several times and checked, and there is no doubt we will have delivery.
As for my bevy of beauties…’
He glanced at his gold Rolex watch.
‘At this present moment they are engaged in a fully comprehensive training course using the systems run by the local college, on which I took the liberty of enrolling them.
I had no choice under the circumstances, and the fees won't exactly break the bank.
Does that answer you?’
Stein's grey eyes mocked Stephen, who had enormous difficulty in controlling his desire to wipe the look of triumph from the manager's arrogant face.
But control was one of Stephen's strong points.
Instead, he smiled.
‘Well done, Michael, but in future I would appreciate being informed of your decisions.
It might avoid wasting precious time.’
Christina foresaw further difficulties ahead between her mercurial husband and the languid but oh-so-efficient general manager.
But at least they didn't need to worry about any area that came under Michael Stein's remit.
Which was more than could be said for Mr Gittings, the decorator.
With only two weeks to go they were down to the cosmetic touches.
Andrew Hall, the head gardener, was supervising the planting of hundreds of flowering tropical shrubs, and a skilled island craftsman was painstakingly  carving intricate flowers onto the coral-stone fountain which was the garden's focal point.
Christina had just received the last consignment of furniture, arriving in the nick of time to prevent it being dumped higgledy-piggledy in the reception hall.
She had coaxed, cajoled and bribed the delivery boys to do what they had already been told to do — carry it to the relevant floor of the hotel.
She was feeling pleased with her progress when she walked in on a typical scene on the terrace of room 216.
Paul Richardson had assured Stephen that Percy Gittings was the best painter and decorator the island had to offer.
All three men were looking up at a newly stained wallaba beam which supported the terrace room.
‘Well, what do you think?’
Paul asked Stephen, pointing up at the beam.
Stephen looked at the insipid light-beige stain and said what he thought.
‘It looks bloody terrible.’
‘What did you say?’
Paul asked in astonishment.
He couldn't believe his ears.
‘You heard, and I have no intention of repeating myself.’
‘But we agreed the colour of the stain weeks ago, don't you remember?’
Paul's tone and expression showed his puzzlement.
‘I even had a piece of the same wood specially stained for you.’
Stephen simply stood, hands on hips, looking up at the offending beam.
‘Well,’ he said tersely, ‘I don't like it now I see it up there.
I think it should be dark brown.’
‘We don't have any dark-brown stain and there's no means of getting any.
We've less than two weeks to do all the beams — there just isn't time to chop and change now!’
‘Okay, Paul.
Okay,’ Stephen interjected, raising his hand.
‘Calm down, for God's sake.
We do it that colour for now, and after we get open and organized, we change to the colour of my choice.’
Christina could see that Paul wanted to scream that this colour had been his choice, but he bit back his retort, clenching his fists.
Meanwhile Mr Gittings' head was obviously beginning to spin from all this toing and froing.
He dearly wished they would hurry up and tell him what to do.
Stephen gave an absent-minded nod and hurried off to solve the next problem.
Paul unclenched his fists and addressed the Barbadian.
‘Okay, Gittings, carry on with this stain — and no slacking, mind.
You've 180 of these buggers to do.’
‘Yessir, Mr Richardson, sir!’
He wielded his brush vigorously and continued to do so until Christina and Paul left.
They waited ten minutes, Paul timing it exactly on his wristwatch, then crept back to find Gittings comfortably installed on a newly delivered double bed, beginning his lunch of two fresh fish cutters and half a bottle of five-star rum.
‘I start on dat pole tomorrow,’ he promised airily.
Two minutes later, after Paul had threatened the loss of the contract, he had picked up his brush again and, grumbling, got down to work.
But at least Gittings, though slow and inclined to lengthy siestas, knew how to do his job.
Some of the unskilled youngsters drafted in to help with the decorating did not.
One morning they spotted a young apprentice singing loudly while cheerfully splashing paint liberally over himself and six freshly planted ceramic jardinières.
He was in full melodic voice, singing the latest calypso, and did not hear Stephen's shouts of outrage.
At last there were just the external walls to be given a final coat of white paint.
Stephen left Percy Gittings to supervise, and he and Christina walked down the drive towards the ocean-front rooms which were now ready for occupation.
They climbed the red clay-tiled steps, enjoying the panoramic sea views from each landing.
The heavy pine door  of room 301 stood ajar, numerals depicted in hand-painted tiles set flush with the white-stucco wall.
Christina entered the hallway and switched on the ceiling fan.
The teak paddles began to rotate, making little more than a whisper of sound as they gently scythed the warm air.
‘Well, what do you think?’ she asked proudly.
The large room, a deluxe double, was decorated in pale-pink fabrics that blended in with the white rattan furniture.
Low travertine-marble occasional tables held specially logoed ashtrays and vases of fresh flowers picked from the garden.
Cream-coloured stationery embossed with the hotel's name was provided in a dove-grey leather folder on top of a carved pine desk.
The pristine white walls were relieved every few feet with original prints of tropical flowers, their colours toning perfectly with the Mexican rug and quilted comforter tucked over coral-coloured bed-linen.
‘I was right about you,’ Stephen said slowly.
‘You've done a bloody good job on the interiors — and right on schedule too.
I'm proud of you.’
Christina flushed with pleasure.
Wife or not, she knew that Stephen never gave praise unless he thought it was due.
‘Well, Colin was a terrific help once we'd thrashed out a few problems,’ she said modestly.
‘You worked hard, Christina.
No need to pretend.
Not too tired, I hope?’
She was exhausted but, buoyed up by his praise, replied, ‘I feel marvellous.’
‘That's good.’
He strode over to the door and stood looking down at the handle, shaking his head sadly.
‘Uh, oh.
Your first mistake, Chrissy.
You've forgotten the ‘Do Not Disturb’ signs.’
‘I have not!’ she replied angrily.
‘They're due to-morrow.’
‘Well, today we'll just have to rely on a good old-fashioned lock,’ he said, beginning to take off his clothes.
‘Have you ever heard of in-depth market research?
In the interests of our future guests we're going to put this room's mattress to the test.
Come on, you gorgeous creature.’
Later, lying in his arms, she said drowsily, ‘Stephen, we're never going to make it.’
‘What do you mean?
This hotel's going to be…’
‘No, not the hotel, stupid.
The market research.
Another 199 rooms to go and we open on Thursday!’
Chapter 10
Christina heard Stephen get out of bed and creep into the bathroom, trying not to make a sound.
‘I've been awake for over an hour,’ she said, sitting on the edge of the bed, when he came back into the bedroom.
‘I don't think I've even slept.
My stomach feels like it's been kicked by hundreds of yobs wearing hob-nailed boots.’
He was dressed in old shorts and a baggy shirt.
He sat down next to her and took her hand.
‘Well, Chrissy, we made it.’
‘I never had any doubts.’
She squeezed his hand.
It was very warm and clammy.
‘Not even for one split second?’
He smiled and she touched his cheek.
‘Not once.’
Stephen stood up and flung open the shutters, stepping out onto the balcony.
It was still dark.
He looked across the sea: a faint glimmer of pale light was rising in the midnight-blue sky.
Dawn would soon break.
He thought about the long hours, the continuous toil, the mistakes, the mishaps, the inefficiency and the constant battle to build what he now saw before him.
He knew he would do it all again, because as he looked across the manicured lawns, the buildings shrouded now in darkness but soon to be brilliant in the blazing sunlight, the scene embodied all his dreams.
It had been worth every minute of the effort they had put into it.
Christina was dressed in shorts and a loose cotton shirt when he came back into the room.
‘Fancy a last walk on the beach alone?
Because from now on we'll be sharing it with our guests.’
She nodded and they left the house hand in hand and walked across the springy turf.
They slipped through the restaurant, shrouded now in darkness, and picked their way through new tables and chairs, empty but soon to be packed with people.
They could almost hear the chink of glasses mixed with chatter and laughter.
A tiny patch of blue punctured the dark blanket of sky, and the sun peeped out from a corner of the horizon as they headed down the beach, not stopping until they reached a small rocky promontory shaded by bushy casuarinas.
The dawn light flooded the sky, now clear and translucent, broken by one long finger of the brightest orange Christina had ever seen.
She felt certain that if she reached out she could touch it.
Stephen watched two fishermen, father and son he guessed, gathering their nets.
‘Morning,’ he greeted them.
The older man smiled, showing crooked brown teeth, and said, ‘Going to be a good day.’
‘I hope so,’ Stephen replied.
‘I prayed last night it wouldn't rain.
I think He may have heard me.’
He raised his eyes towards the clear sky.
There wasn't a cloud in sight.
‘I'm christening my grandson today.’
The older man pointed to the younger who was loading tangled nets into the small, brightly painted fishing boat,Island Spirit .
‘My first grandson.
Lots of girls but this is the first boy.’
He beamed and chuckled.
‘Now the good Lord knows better than to rain on the new Sandiford baby's head.’
Stephen smiled at him and nodded his head slowly.
‘We  too are having a christening today.’
He put his arm around Christina's waist, and pulled her close to him.
‘So perhaps we'll both be lucky.’
Robert and Jane Leyton and Stephen's mother were waiting impatiently in reception when Christina dashed in.
The women were seated straight-backed on the edge of two big cane armchairs, and Robert, his back turned, was looking out of a high arched window.
He touched his wife's arm and pointed down the lawn beyond a stone fountain to the six low-level stucco buildings radiant in their pristine whiteness.
‘It's incredible, Robert; I had no idea it would be this beautiful.’
Jane clutched her beige cardigan tightly in one hand while she searched for a tissue in her handbag with the other.
Robert turned at the sound of Christina's voice.
‘Oh, there you are.
Sorry to keep you waiting but the bellman said he thought you'd all gone to your rooms.’
Christina's face was flushed from running, and her hair was tied back in a thick, glossy plait.
She wore a short white cotton dress and flat sandals, her long legs tanned to a rich golden-brown.
Robert thought she looked about sixteen.
Jane eyed her slim figure enviously, dreading the evening ahead, certain now that the old Frank Usher dress she had decided to squeeze herself into was going to look absurd.
‘Jean, you look well.’
Christina smiled at Stephen's mother.
‘Well, I certainly don't feel it.
I've had a horrible journey, squashed next to a big fat woman and her squabbling children.
She insisted on telling me her entire life story, regardless of whether I wanted to listen or not.’
pulling a disgruntled face, Jean Reece-Carlton wiped her brow with a delicate embroidered handkerchief.
‘Why I ever allowed  Stephen to talk me into coming here is beyond me.
He knows I hate the heat.’
Christina looked around the white-marble reception hall.
‘Where's Victoria?
I thought she was coming with you.
‘She did, but raced off ages ago in search of Stephen.
I assume she found him.
You know how she is with her father.’
Christina caught Robert's sympathetic look.
‘You don't have to tell me.’
‘Victoria hasn't seen her father for months.
She's talked about nothing else.
Naturally she wants to see him.’
Jean's small, deep-set eyes glittered coldly.
‘Christina, instead of just standing there, could you please show us to our rooms?
I for one am dying of thirst and hot enough to boil over.
Christina blushed, angry at being spoken to like a member of staff.
‘You and me both,’ Jane grumbled, standing up and smoothing her hands down the front of her creased navy and white pleated skirt.
Robert picked up the overflowing hand grip lying next to his feet.
‘What shall we do with the luggage?’
He glanced in the direction of the reception desk where four suitcases stood.
‘I'll take care of it, don't worry,’ Christina assured them, before leading them down four deep stone steps and along a pathway, past a bright wall of alamanda and hibiscus bushes camouflaging the car park.
They skirted the palm-fringed swimming-pool which appeared to have been hewn out of solid coral-stone, and crossed it by means of a wooden bridge suspended above two huge boulders.
Jane stared around her, incredulous.
Flower-lined terraces descended in tiers to the three miles of white sand beach.
‘It's amazing,’ she said, as much to herself as anyone else, marvelling at the beauty surrounding her.
With every step she seemed to be going deeper into another world.
Christina led them under an arched stone portico and through a labyrinth of white-stucco passageways opening onto vine-covered courtyards where tiny humming-birds fluttered through tall bamboo, and antique urns overflowed with red and pink angelica.
‘Suite 106 for Mr and Mrs Leyton, the best in the house,’ she announced, and turned the key in an intricate brass lock.
She flung open the solid pine door, standing aside for Jane and Robert to enter.
They entered the elegant suite and Jane gasped, her mouth dropping open.
‘It's beautiful, Christina.
You've done a great job on the interiors.’
She was visibly pleased.
‘Thanks a lot.
It wasn't easy.’
Robert had seen the development in varying stages, and had assisted in shipping out tons of building materials, but it was four months since he had been to Barbados and a lot of progress had been made since then.
He sat down heavily on a two-seater sofa upholstered in the palest of pinks, and pulled off his shoes.
Wriggling his toes with a sigh of relief, he looked out through the tall louvred doors to the deep marble terrace stretching the full length of the suite.
Jean Reece-Carlton strolled out onto the terrace to inspect it.
Jane and Christina followed.
‘Bobby, come out here,’ Jane shouted to her husband, who reluctantly joined them.
She was hanging over the wrought-iron balcony above the gardens, pointing to the pink and white marquees flapping gently in the breeze like grounded hot-air balloons.
There were dozens of staff milling about, laden with trays of crisp white and pink table-linen and embossed silver-plated cutlery.
Jane turned to her husband, her plain face animated.
‘The sweet smell of success, eh, Bobby?’
‘We've done it.’
Robert's smile was triumphant.
Christina wanted to remind him that he had only helped with the backing and that the real work had been done by Stephen and her, but she kept quiet and instead watched Jean Reece-Carlton as she turned away from a gloating Robert in disgust, muttering something under her breath.
It sounded like, ‘Done something good in his life for once.’
Christina was amazed.
It seemed an extraordinary attitude for the mother of someone as successful as Stephen.
‘I'll take you to your room, Jean,’ she offered.
Christina offered to carry her small bag but Jean refused.
‘I'm quite capable.
Go on, you lead the way.’
She pushed Christina none too gently towards the door.
‘I'll see you two at the party, no doubt?’ she said to Robert and Jane.
She made it sound like a public execution, Christina thought.
Stephen had allotted a corner suite to his mother.
It consisted of a bedroom with en suite bathroom, balcony, small sitting-room with breakfast bar, compact kitchen in pickled pine, and a large square terrace which served as an outdoor dining area, complete with round marble table and four chairs.
Jean Reece-Carlton made no comment when Christina showed her the suite.
She was more interested in getting a glass of water from the mini-bar and enquiring if she could have a cup of tea.
‘I thought perhaps Stephen's brother might have come to the party with you?’
Christina commented.
She had asked Stephen a couple of weeks ago if Edward was coming and he had replied: ‘Over my dead body.’
Jean stared at Christina without really seeing her.
It was obvious that her mind was elsewhere.
‘I think under the circumstances that would have been very unwise.’
‘What circumstances?’ she asked.
The older woman stood straight-backed and fixed Christina with a hard gaze, her face suddenly charged with barely suppressed anger.
‘Edward is Stephen's half-brother; they've never been close.
As different as chalk and cheese — and equally as disappointing to me,’ she snapped.
‘Stephen never talks about his family or his past.’
Christina searched her mother-in-law's face for answers to all the unanswered questions.
Jean laughed, a cold and hollow sound.
‘There are lots of things Stephen will never tell you, my dear.
Believe me when I say that he has an unexpected side to him.
I'm his mother, I should know.’
‘I hate it, I hate it, I hate it!’
Victoria's glossy black hair swung wildly about her shoulders as she stamped her feet in front of the mirror.
‘This is just the most hateful dress I've ever seen,’ she said to Christina.
‘Well, it's the only one you've got, Victoria, so it will have to do.’
Christina sighed.
She needed one of Victoria's spiteful tirades about as much as she needed the pain in the head which she already had, thundering relentlessly at her temples.
‘You liked the dress in England; you wouldn't have bought it otherwise.’
‘I didn't buy it!’
Victoria screamed.
‘That horrible Virginia Colton bought it, or should I say made me buy it?
When I tried it on in Harvey Nichols it looked all right, but now I see it out here I realize how stupid and childish it looks.’
She pouted.
‘I wanted something more grown-up.’
Christina didn't dare risk mentioning that at thirteen she was not yet grown-up.
That would have sent her into another tantrum.
‘The one I wanted was too expensive and unsuitable  according to bloody Virginia.
I only wish Daddy could have seen me in the black lace dress.
He'd have bought it at any cost.’
Christina was sure she was right, and had sent a cheque to Caroline's mother to safeguard against such an event.
The last thing she needed tonight was Victoria swanning around looking like a juvenile femme fatale .
Victoria ripped the pale-blue cotton dress from her slim body and flung it and herself onto the ruffled bed.
‘I'm not going to the opening.
I'm not going.
I look dreadful and I really wanted to look beautiful for Daddy, especially tonight.’
Christina felt like telling her she would look beautiful in a torn sack, but decided she was going to hear comments like that all her life.
Instead she said quietly, and with more patience than she felt, ‘Victoria, your father will not only be annoyed if you don't go to the party tonight, he'll also be extremely upset.
And in his present state of mind, I for one would not enjoy being on the receiving end of his temper.
If you want to be, go ahead, but don't expect any sympathy or back-up from me.’
She pressed her forefinger into her left temple to ease the escalating migraine that threatened.
Vicky's dark head rose from the bedspread.
She didn't face Christina when she said through clenched teeth, ‘I've never expected or received any help from you anyway, Christina.’
Bending down, she retrieved the discarded dress from where it lay crumpled on the floor on the other side of the bed.
‘I'm going to get dressed now.
I just want you to know that not only do I hate this dress, I hate you even more.’
Her vituperative comments fell on deaf ears.
Christina turned and left the room without another word.
It was six o'clock, only one hour to go.
She actually  wished it was six tomorrow morning and the party was over.
She walked slowly back to her room and looked at the dress lying ready across the bed.
She had been lucky to see it in Vogue and to find it available in Harrods.
She had sent a cheque, and Harrods had despatched it by courier.
It was a gown for a fairy princess.
Yards and yards of fine cream chantilly lace draped over ivory silk cascaded in layers to her feet, sprinkled with dozens of tiny white pearls.
Stephen was late.
She had expected him back before now.
He ran into the room a few minutes later and began to tear off his crumpled clothes.
‘Calm down,’ she said, looking at his angry face.
‘Calm down?
How the hell can I calm down when that fucking idiot of a chef has got the entire kitchen staff making canapés when they should be preparing the buffet?
The man's mad.’
Stephen stopped to breathe.
‘No, on second thoughts, he's not — he's West Indian.’
He jumped into the shower and felt a little better when he got out a few seconds later.
He walked into the bedroom and began to dress.
Fumbling with his black tie, he swore in frustration.
‘Christina, help.’
She came into the bedroom on his third plea.
‘I can't tie the damn thing; I'm all fingers and thumbs.
I can't find my cuff-links either, and we've less than twenty minutes to go.
‘I know where your cuff-links are; I've got them in my jewellery box.
Come on, let's do this bow-tie first.’
She stepped forward, and Stephen stood impatiently shifting his weight from one foot to the other whilst she struggled to fasten his bow-tie.
She managed eventually and patted it in place.
‘There you are; you look great.’
She stepped back and waited for him to comment on her dress.
He didn't.
Instead, he looked deep into her amber eyes and squeezed her hand far too tightly, saying, ‘We did it, Chrissy.
We did it.’
His voice shook with emotion.
He led her out of the bedroom and onto the terrace where Victoria was waiting.
She had piled her long hair into a sleek chignon, and tiny wisps escaped across her brow and to the nape of her neck.
A wonderful smile lit her entire face as her father approached.
It was a smile for him alone.
Eyes the colour of gathering storm-clouds did not leave his face.
Christina stood back, feeling isolated and excluded, as Stephen planted a kiss on his daughter's forehead.
‘You look lovely,’ he said.
‘Young, fresh, and very beautiful.’
Christina noticed the triumphant look on Victoria's face as he stepped back.
‘One glass of champagne, and then we must get down there.’
He took a bottle from the ice-bucket.
For once he allowed the cork to fly high into the air.
Victoria squealed in delight as Stephen caught the erupting bubbles in three tall tulip glasses.
He held his aloft.
His other hand he held out to Christina.
The cream lace of her dress rustled softly as she moved towards him, the pearl and diamond earrings he had bought her gleaming against the dark honey tone of her neck.
‘Here's to Crystal Springs, the most beautiful hotel I have ever seen.
And here's to my wife who looks more stunning tonight than ever before.’
He smiled lovingly at Victoria.
‘And to you, Vicky.
It's so good to have you here at last.
Never forget, darling, this is your home too, just as much as Purley Hall.
‘Come on, drink up!
We've 600 guests to greet tonight.’
The black Daimler stopped under a brilliantly lit porte cochère , and Jonathon Alleyne, the prime Minister, stepped out, closely followed by his wife Susan.
They stood together and posed for the pass, Alleyne relaxed and smiling, a tall, angular man who carried himself with natural elegance.
Christina noticed his unusual dark-green eyes and smooth café au lait skin.
His wife Susan was as short as he was tall, and looked uncomfortable in an emerald-green satin dress held on both shoulders by huge satin bows which flapped like startled birds in the breeze.
Stephen greeted his guest of honour.
‘Good evening, Mr prime Minister.
May I introduce my wife Christina, and my daughter Victoria?’
Christina shook the prime Minister's hand.
He held her eyes for a split second, and she found his gaze disconcerting.
Their guests were assembling in the open-air piazza below.
Alleyne stepped onto a specially constructed rostrum and cut a pink and white ribbon to release a profusion of pink and white fresh hibiscus petals onto the crowd who exclaimed and applauded.
‘I declare Crystal Springs Hotel officially open — and wish her every success,’ the prime Minister announced loudly.
There was a burst of cheering, and black-coated waiters surged forward bearing trays of champagne.
Everywhere glasses were raised and toasts were drunk: ‘To Crystal Springs.’
Stephen and Christina led the PM and his wife down a flight of white marble steps and across the piazza to the marquee on the lawn.
Their path was lit by concealed footlights.
They passed the fountain, which still lay in darkness, having beaten Stephen and the team of electricians he had had working until minutes before the guests'  arrival — the one and only thing that was not finished.
Susan Alleyne stopped on the narrow wooden bridge that spanned the swimming-pool.
‘I've never seen anything so magnificent,’ she said, and stared at the water cascading down the three-tier construction.
The Crystal Springs logo in mosaic was illuminated beneath the water.
Christina had seen it every day for the past few months, but had to admit that tonight it looked especially magical.
‘Did you design it, Stephen?’ asked the PM.
‘I'm afraid I can't take all the credit.
It was a joint effort between Paul Richardson the architect and myself.’
They carried on into the marquee, where eight ten-foot-long buffet tables decorated with pale pink and white angelicas held dozens of silver tureens, filled to capacity with imported smoked salmon, lobster, and finely sliced fillet of beef in aspic.
Huge honey-roasted hams and game-hens were displayed on stands and silver platters.
There were six-foot ice carvings depicting a Caribbean artefact or symbol at the head of every table.
Christina grabbed a passing glass of champagne, knocking one of Susan Alleyne's enormous satin bows.
She didn't appear to notice.
Christina hoped it wouldn't be too long before she could make her escape.
She was eager to mingle with the other guests, but had been carefully primed by Stephen that morning to wait until they could politely leave the prime Minister and his wife.
Stephen steered Jonathon Alleyne to his place, answering his probing questions as succinctly as possible.
The guests of honour were to be seated next to the Minister of Tourism and his wife, who were already there, and a man called Sebastian Aguilar and his stunning-looking Trinidadian girlfriend.
Stephen had told Christina that Aguilar was the offspring of a white Barbadian mother and a black Trinidadian.
He  had inherited an oil company in port of Spain from his father, and had also branched out into the airline business, owning and operating several profitable inter-island routes.
He and Jonathon Alleyne were close friends — some said business associates, though technically Alleyne could not be tied to any commercial ventures.
They had attended Oxford together and frequently mixed socially.
Christina forced herself to compliment Rachael Mottely on her heavily pleated canary-yellow dress.
‘You look lovely; what a beautiful dress.’
‘I bought it in London especially for this evening.’
She leaned forward, planting a sour-smelling kiss on Christina's cheek.
Sebastian Aguilar congratulated Stephen.
‘You've done a fine job here.
Wonderful place.
It will bring lots of new faces to Barbados and hopefully set new standards.’
‘I agree,’ Jonathon Alleyne said.
‘Barbados has been waiting for a hotel of this calibre for a very long time.’
‘Thank you both.
I think we're all working towards the same goal.
We have to attract more people to the island, and I'm sure Crystal Springs is going to put Barbados right up there on top of the tourist destination list.’
Stephen signalled to Orson, the head waiter, who almost fell over himself to get to the Prime Minister.
Stephen excused himself and Christina.
‘I'm afraid I'll have to leave you now in Orson's very capable hands.
We have to greet our other guests, so if you would please excuse us?’
‘Thank you, Mr Reece-Carlton, for building such a beautiful hotel in my country.
It's a credit to you and the island.’
Jonathon Alleyne's voice held only a trace of a Bajan lilt.
It was more redolent of English public school and Oxford, where he had studied law.
‘I would very much like to have a meeting with you in the New Year, Stephen.
Once you get sorted out down here, call my secretary and he'll set one up.’
‘I'll do that,’ Stephen said, pleased, and added, ‘Thank you for coming.’
‘Believe me, it's my pleasure.’
Sebastian Aguilar shook Stephen's hand, then took one of Christina's.
‘It was wonderful meeting you,’ he said, and she found herself staring into his mesmeric blue-eyed gaze.
His good looks were almost sinister, she decided, and she shook hands formally before pulling away.
‘I need a drink,’ Stephen said when they were out of earshot.
He ordered a large vodka and tonic from a passing waiter.
At the door to the marquee they exchanged greetings with scores of other guests, gradually making their way inside.
There were congratulations and awed exclamations on every side.
Christina saw her husband gradually relax and begin to enjoy himself, tapping his foot to the strains of a calypso floating towards them from the dance-floor on the piazza outside.
‘Where's Victoria?’ he asked.
‘I don't know; I haven't seen her since the prime Minister arrived.’
They didn't have to wait long to find out where she was.
A few minutes later she appeared on the swimming-pool bridge, chatting coquettishly to a tall blond man.
Clearly visible as an up-lighter caught it was the strong profile of Martin Ward, with the Dyson family a few steps behind.
Victoria came up to her father, clutched his arm, and looked up at him excitedly.
Daddy, let me introduce you to my new friend, Martin.
‘And this is the owner of Crystal Springs — my father,’ she announced with childish pomp.
‘I believe we've already met.’
Stephen held out his hand — rather slowly, Christina thought.
‘Yes, Midland Hotel, Manchester,’ Martin reminded him, and shook hands firmly.
‘I must compliment you on your hotel, Mr Reece-Carlton.
You certainly know what you're doing.’
‘That's why I married Christina.’
Stephen turned his attention abruptly to Roger and Amy Dyson, hovering behind Martin's broad back.
‘Martin, how are you?’
Christina flung her arms around him and kissed him on the cheek.
‘I'm fine, and you look beautiful,’ he whispered in her ear, ignoring Stephen's irritated voice as he interrupted.
‘Christina, Roger's speaking to you.’
She left Martin, promising to catch up with him later.
He was immediately joined by Louise who pulled him towards the marquee.
Christina knew it was none of her business — Martin was a free agent — but it disturbed her somehow to see him being so hotly pursued by a determined young woman.
She made small-talk with Amy and Roger Dyson and greeted about fifty more guests before excusing herself to go to the ladies' room where she met Elaine powdering her nose.
‘You look lovely tonight,’ she told her friend.
‘Thanks to you.’
Elaine adjusted a shoe-string strap on her shoulder and surveyed the long, loosely draped black jersey-dress in the mirror.
‘Thanks for lending me this, Christina.
Loads of people have complimented me, including one very important person.’
Christina raised her eyebrows.
‘And who might that be?’
Elaine applied a layer of lip-gloss and replaced the tube in her matching clutch-bag.
‘Only the prime Minister's friend, the divine Sebastian Aguilar!’
Christina pulled a face.
‘Not my type.
Too full of himself.’
‘Good-looking though don't you think?’
Elaine patted her hair into place.
‘The things I could do for him,’ she sighed.
‘Maybe I'll get the chance.
He's asked me out.’
Christina looked shocked.
‘When?’
‘A few minutes ago.
Oh, I see what you mean.
His secretary's going to call with the arrangements, would you believe?’
‘Well, I wouldn't get mixed up with him if I were you.’
Christina looked concerned.
‘Listen, don't worry about me, I'm a big girl now and can look after myself.’
A hint of mischief came into her violet eyes.
‘And let's face it, James is never going to know.
He's far fonder of the bottle than he ever was of me.’
Christina watched her go, a worried frown knitting her brows.
On her return to the party a few minutes later, she almost bumped into James, who placed his clammy hands on her bare shoulders and squeezed them.
‘You look lovely tonight, as always.’
‘Thanks.’
She smiled and gently eased herself free.
James didn't seem disposed to take the hint.
He continued to stare at her, his fleshy face filmed with perspiration, neck bulging above his tight collar.
Christina detested what she saw in his expression.
She ignored his lecherous gaze and scanned the sea of faces for Stephen.
Her eyes caught Martin Ward's, and she waved animatedly.
‘Would you excuse me, please, James?’ she said, and made her way over to Martin without looking back.
She didn't see the grimace of annoyance cross his face at her desertion, but Martin did.
‘Who's that ugly-looking customer?’ he said when  Christina reached him.
‘Didn't seem too pleased about something.’
‘Didn't he?’ she said, too glad to see that Louise was not in evidence to think about what Martin was saying.
‘That's James Morris, Stephen's project liaison man.’
‘You mean that's Elaine's husband — a bright, bubbly girl like her is married to him ?’
He'd met Elaine on several trips around the island which Christina had arranged, including a hilarious afternoon when the three of them decided to try out the hotel's water sports and attempted to learn to water-ski after too many rum sours at the Reef Bar.
‘Well, loosely speaking he is,’ she said.
‘And what about you, Martin?
I've seen the way Louise looks at you, and Roger and Amy obviously approve.
Could it be wedding-bells for you soon?’
‘No way,’ he said emphatically, and she could not deny the jolt of relief she felt on heating this.
‘Louise is keen, like you say, but I've always been completely honest with her.
Marriage isn't on the cards.’
He paused for a moment and frowned when he spoke again.
The words came out awkwardly.
‘There was only ever one girl I seriously thought about asking — and someone else beat me to it.’
Christina looked down, her heart pounding nervously.
She twisted her diamond solitaire engagement ring as she replied.
‘We hardly knew one another, Martin.
We'd only had a few dates.
You can't really mean that.’
He put his hand on her arm.
‘But I do.
I asked you to come to London with me, didn't I?’
She thought back.
It had been such a confusing time for her — the quarrel with Stephen and her mother's death following so closely.
But yes…
‘I remember,’ she said softly.
‘It wasn't meant to be, Martin.
I married Stephen and we're very happy together.’
‘Are you?
I wonder.’
He searched her eyes for a moment, then sighed and held up his hands in surrender.
‘Okay, Mrs Happily Married Reece-Carlton.
But you can't refuse me the pleasure of a dance — just one, for old times’ sake?’
‘I'd love to dance with you, Martin.’
He took her hand and led her to the open-air dance-floor just as the band slipped into the first of their slow numbers.
Martin slid his arms around her and they danced without speaking, swaying together to the sweet, sad strains of ‘Island Woman’.
As the song was ending, Christina raised her head from his shoulder where she had rested it while they danced — and found herself looking straight into the hard, intimidating gaze of Jean Reece-Carlton, who was being escorted around the floor by a martyred-looking Robert Leyton.
‘Glad to see you're able to forget all your duties and enjoy yourself, dear,’ she said.
‘Don't worry about Victoria, will you?
My granddaughter is safe at our table with Jane, and in a moment we're all going to watch the firework display.’
Her gaze shifted to Martin, then back again.
‘Perhaps you'd better find Stephen — unless you want to see some fireworks, that is?’
Christina turned her back on her mother-in-law as the music ended.
‘Thanks for the dance, Martin, but I'd better go.
Stephen expects me to do the rounds tonight.’
‘I understand.
And I'm looking forward to Thursday, by the way.’
For a moment she couldn't think what he meant, then she remembered with dismay that she'd already asked him to join her and Elaine and a few of the island friends  they'd made on the new power-boat Stephen had treated them to as the hotel neared completion.
Louise, who worked as a nurse, was not able to come that afternoon, she remembered.
She took her leave and went in search of Stephen, preoccupied by her thoughts.
She hadn't realized that Martin's feelings ran so deep.
So far as she'd been concerned they had been just friends.
He'd helped her through a bad patch and she'd been grateful, but she'd never really considered him in any other light.
There'd been Stephen.
And there still was, she told herself firmly.
He would always come first.
She'd have to show Martin that though they would always be friends, her first loyalty lay with her husband.
With a feeling of relief, she spotted him talking to a distinguished-looking Barbadian and his exotic female companion.
She hurried over to join them.
‘Christina, there you are.
I've been looking everywhere for you.
I want you to meet Danny Bascombe, able lawyer and aspiring politician.
It was Danny who sorted out our Immigration, remember?’
Stephen asked.
Christina liked Danny at once.
His warm, dark-brown eyes twinkled in a square, handsome face, and he had what his father had always referred to as an honest demeanour.
The touches of silver at his temples added to the impression of experience and trustworthiness.
‘I'm really pleased to meet you.
Stephen has talked about you a lot in the last few months,’ she said.
‘My reputation precedes me.’
His voice was deep and melodic.
‘And you, my dear, are every bit as attractive as Stephen described.’
Christina blushed.
Danny laughed, and put his arm around the beautiful young woman standing by his side.
‘Meet Pauline, my wife.’
Christina could hardly recall meeting anyone as naturally beautiful as Pauline Bascombe.
She was swathed in a red silk dress that fitted where it touched.
The narrow straps seemed barely able to hold her full bosom, which threatened to spill out of the boned bodice with every movement she made.
Christina was tall at five foot eight.
Pauline towered above her, a statuesque six foot in her high ankle-strapped gold sandals.
Her long, braided hair was pulled off her exquisite heart-shaped face.
Christina stared, transfixed by her huge almond-shaped black eyes and long, thick lashes.
‘Glad to meet you, Christina, and I want to say what a marvellous job you have done down here.
Stephen has been telling us how much you have helped him.’
‘Yes, you've worked miracles,’ Danny cut in before Christina could reply.
‘I am Barbadian, and I know how difficult it is to get anything done here.’
He examined his hands for a moment as if embarrassed.
‘My mother was a maid in Crystal Springs House for many years, and I used to come here sometimes as a child.
I have lots of happy memories of the place and wish you every success with it.’
‘Thank you,’ she said, and looked over his shoulder to see the Leytons approach.
Evidently they had escaped Jean and Victoria.
Stephen called Robert over to meet Danny.
Their conversation ceased as the eloquent tones of Michael Stein carried towards them on the public address system.
‘Welcome, Mr prime Minister, Mrs Alleyne, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, to Crystal Springs Hotel.
‘I would like to thank Mr Alleyne, our guest of honour, for performing the opening ceremony, and thank you all for your presence here tonight, sharing the opening of this wonderful new resort.
‘Now, would you please welcome your host and the driving force behind Crystal Springs — Mr Stephen Reece-Carlton.’
Stephen stepped up onto the rostrum vacated by Michael Stein.
He looked nervous.
Normally he hated making speeches, and liked to prepare one week in advance so that nothing could go wrong.
Tonight he had dispensed with his usual practice.
Tonight he was speaking from the heart.
‘Almost two years ago I came here with my then very new wife on honeymoon.
After only a few days we were both madly in love, not just with each other, but with this beautiful island in the sun and with Crystal Springs, which we found by accident.
‘The day we saw the outstanding location of Crystal Springs House was the day I decided to develop my first hotel.
‘I know it may sound corny, but it happens to be true.
As we drove through the gates, and into a then crumbling, tired and faded property, I had the strongest sensation — call it a vision, call it what you like.
I was smitten.
‘I decided to build a major development.
Not just a hotel.
My vision was nothing so commonplace.
I wanted a resort of beauty, charm and tranquillity; a haven to enchant all who stayed there.
‘I believe at that time my wife Christina privately thought I was mad.
Tonight I want to take the opportunity to thank her for her patience and support.
I haven't been an easy man to live with for the past year.
Thanks, Chrissy.
‘I also want to thank all of my management team for their devotion and all the unpaid overtime.
‘Last but by no means least I want to thank Paul Richardson, my architect.
Come up here, Paul.’
Stephen put out his hand and a reluctant Paul Richardson, egged on by several friends, walked slowly forward.
As he did so, Stephen made a further announcement.
‘Crystal Springs, as all of you here tonight can testify, is a triumph.
I would like to add that it is only the first of many Platinum Hotels I intend to open throughout the world.’
Christina heard Robert Leyton's angry murmur: ‘That's the first I've bloody heard about expanding the resorts!’
‘Since when has Stephen ever consulted you about anything?’ hissed Jane.
‘You know he's a law unto himself.
I warn you, Robert, put your foot down this time.’
Applause drowned out their voices, and Christina was unable to hear any more as Stephen dragged a protesting Paul Richardson up onto the narrow stage next to him.
‘Paul and I have had our ups and downs, good days and bad in the last year, but I feel I must share tonight with him.
‘I want to thank him for his patience, foresight, and ability to interpret my ideas, incorporate his own with them, and achieve what you see here tonight.
‘I believe my dream has been realized.
Ladies and gentlemen, I give you: Crystal Springs.’
Chapter Eleven
Christina heard the commotion as she walked up the steps from Crystal Springs House and into reception.
Michael Stein was trying unsuccessfully to calm an irate customer who was arguing about his bill.
‘I refuse to pay for shoddy service!
My wife and I waited over an hour for our meal last night and it's been the same throughout our stay.’
The guest had a shock of wiry white hair and a fleshy, sun-scorched face.
He was wearing a pale-blue safari-style jacket, belted at the last hole, short-sleeved to display the diamond-faced gold Rolex worn on one beefy wrist.
‘I checked with Orson our head waiter, Mr Banville, and he swears you were served after fifteen minutes.’
Michael Stein was adamant.
‘He's lying!’ the man shouted.
‘All your staff are bloody liars.’
Guests passing by on their way to the boutiques were finding excuses to hang about and listen to the heated exchange.
Christina did not like them to receive such a bad impression of Crystal Springs.
Nor did she like hearing her staff referred to as liars.
‘I am Mrs Reece-Carlton.
I wonder if I could help?’
She held out her hand politely.
In the two years they had been operating, Stephen had taught her never to lose her temper with the guests, however unreasonable, but to try to win them over.
Mr Banville looked surly and refused to shake her hand.
‘This arrogant upstart here is accusing me of lying.’
Michael Stein opened his mouth to reply but at the last minute, ever the professional, bit back a pithy retort.
‘I don't think he is, Mr Banville,’ Christina said soothingly.
‘That is exactly what he's doing.
I've spent a fortune in this place and all I'm asking for is a reduction in the service charge.’
He glared at Michael, defying him to defend the hotel once more.
Christina walked behind the reception desk and asked for a copy of Mr Banville's account.
She picked up a pen and drew a line through the service charge, then handed the bill to the indignant guest.
He glanced at it, then at Michael, with a gloating expression.
For Christina he was all smiles.
‘Thank you for being so understanding, Mrs Reece-Carlton.’
‘I'm only sorry you were not happy with our service.
Hopefully when you return it will be much improved.’
‘Don't worry, we'll be back.’
He handed over a credit card to pay his bill.
Christina walked away, closely followed by Michael Stein.
‘Before you go, would you step into my office?’ he asked.
Not until the door was firmly closed behind them did Michael speak again.
‘Why on earth did you do that, Christina?
The man has been a thorn in our side since the day he arrived three weeks ago.
He's a professional complainer — I've encountered hundreds of them in my time.
They deliberately pick fault with everything in order to get a reduction on their bill.
I've had Banville thoroughly checked out, and I know he's stayed at two other hotels on the island and done the same thing.’
Michael sank into his chair, scowling.
‘He'll  be running back to his cow of a wife now and laughing about the way he conned the owner's wife.’
Christina paled.
‘I had no idea…’
‘That's obvious!’
He paused and chose his words more carefully, conscious of her influence with Stephen.
‘Look, Christina.
I'm the general manager, your husband employed me, and because I have had enormous experience in running hotels, I would appreciate it if you would leave me to get on with my job.’
‘I'm sorry, Michael.
I didn't mean to undermine you.
I was only doing what I thought was best for the hotel.
Stephen's told me, if it comes to the crunch, the customer is always right.’
She managed a wan smile.
‘It seemed the only way to avoid a huge argument.’
Michael sighed.
‘It's done now.
But in future, Christina, before you make managerial decisions, would you check with me first, please?’
The phone rang, and she was grateful for the intrusion, leaving Michael deep in conversation with his travel-operator friend from New York who was organizing a big conference reservation.
She went on to her meeting with a young local artist who showed her his portfolio.
She was impressed, and agreed to let him exhibit some work in one of the long corridors leading from reception to the dining-room.
She also commissioned him to paint Crystal Springs as a present for Stephen's birthday in six weeks' time.
Stephen was talking to a tall, elegantly dressed woman, who looked younger than she actually was, and her much older husband when she joined him for lunch in the beach bar.
It was obvious that the woman was very drunk.
She was slurring her words and holding on to the bar-top for support.
The old man gripped a walking-stick with one twisted, arthritic hand.
His face held the grey tinge of the terminally sick.
‘Christina, meet Mr and Mrs Hamilton.
They're in the hotel business in America and love Crystal Springs so much they want to buy it.’
The woman barely acknowledged Christina, and continued talking to Stephen, thrusting her abundant cleavage closer to him with every word.
‘I would jus, love to own a hotel in the Caribbean.
Isn't that right, Joe?’
He grunted.
‘There's something about the place, so — so…’
She groped for the right word.
‘So charismatic,’ she slurred finally.
‘Think about what I've said, Stephen.
Perhaps if you don't want to sell we could take on a joint venture.’
Mrs Hamilton wobbled precariously on her high heels, almost losing her balance.
Instinctively Stephen held out his arms to catch her, and she fell into them with a ridiculous girlish giggle.
‘If she wants the hotel she can have it,’ Joe piped up suddenly.
‘Name your price, Steve.
I'll have the money transferred within twenty-four hours.’
‘The hotel's not for sale, Mr Hamilton, I've already told your wife that.
‘Everything's for sale,’ said Joe Hamilton with a dismissive wave of his hand.
‘Whatever she wants she gets.’
The old man took his wife's arm.
‘Come on, honey, I'm hungry.
Let's eat.’
‘I'll see you later.’
Mrs Hamilton directed a deliberate, lascivious wink at Stephen then, trying to support her ailing husband, moved away, bumping into several tables before reaching her own.
‘Amazing,’ Christina said when they were out of earshot.
‘I've heard of men buying their wives jewellery, cars, houses even — but a hotel, just because she happens to like it?’
‘He's a billionaire, about to croak it.
What else can he do with his money?’
‘I could think of a million things.
Whatever she's doing, she's doing it right.’
‘Christina!’
Stephen pretended to look shocked.
They sat at their favourite table overlooking a pond to one side, covered with clusters of red and white water-lilies in full bloom, and the sea on the other.
Today it was rough and noisy.
The plat du jour of cream of  okra soup followed by fresh snapper served in a spicy sauce with christophene salad came highly recommended by Orson, who took their order.
The food followed quickly, and they both ate the delicious fresh fish with relish, and were enjoying coffee and coconut-cream pie when Stephen was called to the telephone.
His face was paper-white when he came back to the table.
‘Michael Stein has been attacked by a guest.’
‘What happened?’
‘I don't have all the details, but apparently he argued with a chap this morning about his bill and went along to his room later.
The man threatened to kill him and pushed him off the balcony.’
‘That's terrible.’
Christina didn't need to ask the guest's name.
She already knew.
‘It's the Banvilles.
They've been nothing but trouble since they arrived here.
I must go and sort it out.
Catch up with you later.’
He rushed out of the restaurant.
Christina finished her coffee, then walked back to the house.
She rang James Morris as soon as she was in, pleased to locate him in his office.
Since Stephen had appointed him to the permanent position of maintenance manager, he was often out on the property.
She was convinced he would have the latest news on Michael.
James made it his personal business to know everyone else's.
‘It's Christina, James.
I thought you might know what's happened to Michael?’
He sounded pleased to tell her.
‘They've taken him to Queen Elizabeth Hospital with a suspected broken leg and a few cuts and bruises.
Serves him right for biting off more than he could chew…but then, he's always doing that.’
‘How did it happen, James?’
‘Well, from what I can gather, Mr Banville checked into the hotel three weeks ago and gave a Visa card for a credit reference.
When he paid his bill after the argument this morning it was with Amex and authorization didn't come through.
‘Michael went down to his room to sort it out, they argued, and Banville went berserk and pushed him off the balcony.
Shame it wasn't the top floor.’
‘I know you don't mean that, James.’
‘Don't you believe it!
Stein and I have a mutual loathing.
The man's a smart-arse, too clever by bloody half!’
‘So what's happened to Mr and Mrs Banville?’
‘They've hot-footed it to the airport.
Stephen's informed both the police and Immigration.
They won't get off the island.
Exciting stuff, eh?
Never a dull moment running a hotel in the Caribbean.’
‘I hope Michael will be okay.’
‘I shouldn't worry about him, Christina.
The Michael Steins of this world have nine lives.
They always bounce back.’
‘Thanks, James.
See you soon.’
‘Oh, before you go, can you call Elaine?
She's been trying to get in touch with you for ages.
She's at home all day.’
‘Okay, James.
I'll call her now.
Bye.’
Christina dialled Elaine's number.
It rang unanswered.
She tried several times during the course of the afternoon, but received no reply.
She eventually got through to her in the early evening.
‘I've been trying to contact you all day.
James gave me a message to say you'd be at home.’
Elaine dropped her voice to a whisper.
‘I had intended to be, but I got a call from my special friend and spent the afternoon with him.’
‘Is James there?’ asked Christina.
‘No, he's not home yet.’
‘Well, why are you whispering?’
‘I always feel sort of furtive and illicit after I've been with Sebastian.’
‘That figures,’ Christina retorted.
‘It's been going on a long time, Elaine.
It must be quite a strain.’
‘It's worth every minute — though a little rough sometimes, if you know what I mean?’
‘I don't, so spare me the details.’
Christina changed the subject.
‘How do you fancy playing tennis on Thursday?
I've invited Martin Ward and another guy he's met who's here on holiday.’
‘Well, with Martin's dodgy leg, and my backhand, we're sure to have an exciting game!’
Elaine laughed.
‘Okay, you're on, but do you think you could do something about Martin mooning all over you?
I really thought I was going to throw up last week at Maximillian's.
He stares at you in raptures.
How Stephen doesn't lose his temper is beyond me.’
‘I don't think Stephen's even noticed.’
‘Don't underestimate him.’
‘I don't, Elaine.
He is my husband — something Martin is fully aware of too.
We're just friends.
Though the only thing Stephen seems to be interested in these days is Crystal Springs.
I sometimes wonder if all this wifely loyalty's misplaced.’
‘You must be joking!
Stephen's mad about you.’
‘Maybe you're right; I just wish he'd show it a bit more.
Anyway, I've got to go now.
I can hear him coming in.
See you Thursday; be good until then.’
‘I'll try,’ her friend said.
Christina knew she wouldn't try too hard.
She replaced the receiver and joined Stephen, who was sitting on the terrace looking at the sea.
Sitting down next to him, she asked, ‘How's Michael?’
‘His leg's broken in two places and he's badly bruised, but he'll be all right.
It could have been worse — that maniac might have killed him.
‘Have they caught Mr Banville?’
‘Yes, he's in custody now.
We're pressing charges for grievous bodily harm.’
Celia arrived with a tray of tea and placed it on the table.
‘A Mr Ward rang earlier, Mrs Carlton.
Said it was all right for tennis on Thursday.’
Christina blushed and lowered her eyes.
‘Thanks, Celia,’ she mumbled, and began to pour the tea.
Stephen was angry; she knew the signs.
He always clenched his jaw and a nerve jumped to the side of his left eye.
‘I really think you're seeing too much of Martin Ward.
This is a small island and tongues are beginning to wag.
Remember, I have a certain position…’
Christina cut in, her eyes flashing: ‘Is that all you're worried about — what the local establishment thinks?
You know as well as I do, they only stop talking about you when you're six foot under.’
‘That's not the point, Christina, and you know it.’
He had difficulty controlling his voice, and his face and neck reddened with anger.
‘We have a status on the island which must be maintained.’
‘Oh, come on, Stephen.
Don't give me all that crap.
You're jealous, admit it.
And with absolutely no cause.’
He was about to deny her accusation when James Morris appeared in the garden beneath the balcony.
‘Thank God you're here, Stephen.
I thought you might still be down-town.
That militant Forbes — you know, the one I warned you about last week — has called all the food and beverage staff out on strike!’
Stephen was on his feet instantly.
‘Where are they now, James?’
‘All in the staff-room.
They haven't walked out yet; I begged them to stay put until you got there.’
‘Come on, then, let's sort this out.’
Christina sighed and watched him go.
Yet again the business of running the hotel had come between them when they had something important to sort out.
So far as she was concerned, the friendship with Martin Ward was just that — a friendship.
But she was guiltily aware that at least part of his reason for staying on the island so long and not returning to England was his hope of one day furthering their relationship.
She'd given him no encouragement — their encounters had been on a light, friendly basis only — but she knew that he'd long since stopped seeing Louise, and there'd been only a couple of short-term girlfriends since.
But Christina's hands were tied.
She was not only married but trying to conceive a child by Stephen — though as yet she hadn't sat down with him and discussed her worries about her failure to become pregnant.
Every time she mentioned babies and what it would be like to have their own one day, Stephen changed the subject or yet another crisis loomed which he had to dash off and deal with.
Sometimes she wondered why they hired a general manager at all.
‘That fucking militant bastard.
Aston Forbes has got the staff so riled up they've walked out!’
Stephen announced on his return two hours later.
‘Oh no!’
Christina was horrified.
‘How many covers have we reserved for tonight?’
‘About forty-six.’
‘How about we do it?’ she suggested.
‘You, me, Elaine and Celia.
All the preparations will have been made; I'm sure we could get by.’
‘It might come to that.
I've got James ringing around all the private houses on the island to rope in a few cooks who aren't working tonight.
I've told him to offer them anything, so we might just manage for tonight.’
The phone rang and Stephen took it.
James had managed to locate four local cooks and one unemployed chef.
Ten minutes before the first orders went into the kitchen the island had one of its frequent power cuts.
Candles were brought to the tables and any mishaps in the food or service were blamed on the lack of power, which lasted for three hours.
The guests thought it was romantic and had great fun picking their way through the candlelit restaurant.
For once Stephen and Christina thanked God for the inefficient island infrastructure.
Stephen had a meeting with the shop steward the following morning at 8.30, and came back to the house afterwards shouting to Victor the butler for strong black coffee.
Christina was swimming in the pool.
He sat on the edge talking to her.
‘I've threatened to shut the hotel down before I'll give them the 12 per cent they're asking for.
It's ludicrous.
I think they'll settle for five eventually, but you never know with these situations — they may call my bluff.’
‘When will you know?’
Christina climbed the pool steps and he handed her a towel.
‘I've given Forbes a deadline of two this afternoon.’
‘I heard a rumour that James has been arguing with Aston Forbes a lot lately and generally getting everyone's back up.
Apparently James has no idea how to handle staff and they all resent him,’ she said, wrapping the towel around her shoulders.
‘Who told you that?’
Stephen wanted to know.
‘It came from Michael Stein's secretary, Donna; you know how they all gossip.’
‘Michael Stein hates James and I wouldn't be at all surprised if he hadn't started a rumour like that himself.
I don't trust the man.’
‘You trust James, then?’
‘Yes, I do.
He may not have Michael's sophistication and finesse, but I know exactly how to handle James.
Michael's an entirely different animal.
I'm not happy about the way Banville beat him up, but at least in his absence we'll be able to see how we manage without him around.’
Christina suspected that Michael had challenged Stephen's authority once too often.
He would have to watch his step on his return.
Stephen and he had worked closely for two years now, but there was no question of the men sharing a social relationship, as she and Stephen did with James and Elaine.
Stephen gave her a quick peck on the cheek and said, ‘Must dash.
I'll see you this evening for dinner.’
‘What about lunch?’
‘No time today — emergency management meeting.’
She watched him go, realizing it was weeks since they had sat down for dinner together without an interruption, and over a week since they had made love.
She vowed to herself that tonight, strike or no strike, she would make him forget about Crystal Springs.
Stephen looked exhausted when he returned home at seven that evening and tossed the local newspaper and a back edition of an American gossip magazine into her lap.
Christina recognized film star Ross Milton and his mistress immediately, even though the photographs were very blurred.
There was one of them caressing on the beach at Crystal Springs, and another of the glamorous couple wrapped around each other in the crystal-clear water of the hotel beach.
The article began: ‘Sun, sand and sex  for Ross Milton on vacation at Crystal Springs Resort, Barbados.
Deena Milton has left their Beverly Hills home and has started divorce proceedings.’
‘The  paparazzi must have taken shots from a boat,’ Stephen commented.
‘I can't say I blame them.
She's a beautiful girl.’
‘And his wife looks a real dragon.’
Christina studied the photograph of Deena Milton leaving her house while glaring into the cameras.
‘I liked him a lot.
He wasn't a bit precious and starry like so many of them who come to stay at the hotel.’
‘He'll no doubt be hit with a crippling alimony suit,’ Stephen said.
‘Apparently his wife has some hot-shot L.A. lawyer who intends to go for the jugular.
I just hope the lovely Claudia was worth it.’
Christina picked up the local National newspaper and read an account of their labour-relations problems.
The article went on to say that staff employed in the tourist industry were getting a raw deal, and that the government should take a hard line and introduce new legislation on taxation for the hotel industry.
There were quotes from the Minister of Tourism and the prime Minister.
‘Forbes has stirred up a hornet's nest.
He intends to get other unions to lobby the government for some sort of taxation to be levied on the hotel industry, which is all we need.’
Stephen raked his fingers through his hair in agitation.
‘This government can't see the wood for the trees.
They don't understand that tourism is the only way forward.
Without it they're dead.
Barbados can't survive on the sugar market alone, but try convincing them of that.
It's like banging your head against a brick wall.
I had this conversation with Danny Bascombe the other day.
He understands and would be totally committed to tourism if he got into office.’
‘Do you think he stands a chance, Stephen?’
‘He does if he has the right people and financial backing behind him.
The electorate will buy what they're shown is right, though persuading them costs a lot of bucks.
But I like Danny Bascombe, and I believe he's right for the changing face of Barbados.
I'm prepared to put my money where my mouth is.’
There was a strange look in Stephen's narrowed eyes.
Christina had only encountered it once before when he was hell-bent on buying Crystal Springs.
Now she was positive that if Stephen had anything to do with it, Danny Bascombe would become the next prime Minister.
Stephen suggested a quiet dinner at the Lobster pot, a small restaurant located on Gibbs Beach.
It was casual and served freshly caught lobster shipped in from St Vincent.
They went, but neither of them was particularly hungry.
They left most of their lobster and salad, returning home shortly after nine.
Victor handed Stephen a note from James on their return home.
He opened it with trepidation, bursting into relieved laughter after he had read it.
‘Lady Nugent-Scott has been up to her tricks again.
The duty manager had to drag her off the dance-floor during the cabaret show.
She was trying to limbo under a flaming pole stark naked — encouraged by that crazy drunken husband of hers as usual.
‘James says the guests loved it and applauded her, whooping and whistling.’
Christina grinned.
‘Just another day in paradise.
That woman's seventy if she's a day.
I wonder if she carries on like that in London?’
‘I doubt it.
She's probably lived such a repressed life she goes berserk when she comes out to the West Indies.
You know as well as I do, Christina, Barbados has a way of doing strange things to people.’
‘I remember when we first came here on honeymoon it  did wonderful things to you, Stephen.
You couldn't keep your hands off me then.’
Candlelight flickered through the clear glass of a hurricane lamp, softly illuminating her face.
He saw the naked longing in her amber eyes and realized for the first time how much he had been neglecting her.
He cupped her face in his hands.
‘How could I forget?’
He kissed her, and she thrilled to the familiar hunger in his embrace.
He loosened two buttons on the shoulders of her fine cotton-shift dress, which fluttered to the floor.
She stepped out of it, naked save for a tiny pair of white lace panties so small that they exposed white patches of skin, luminous against her golden tan.
‘Let's go down to the sea,’ he urged.
They walked to the edge of the tranquil water where Christina wrapped her long, slim legs around him, and they made love with the warm Caribbean lapping over them.
Afterwards he chased her back to the house, her screams of delighted laughter filling his ears.
Once there, still damp from the sea and glistening in the moonlight, she offered herself to him again.
They made love on the cool marble floor of the terrace, and much later went to bed and slept in each other 's arms for the first time in months.
‘There's definitely something wrong.
I can smell a rat.’
Christina looked over Stephen's shoulder at the accounts, spread across his desk.
‘I don't understand.
You say there are discrepancies in the reservations and room rates.
How come?’
‘Let me explain.
At the beginning of last season we prepared our profit and loss accounts.
I did the entire spread with Michael and the accountants.
It was based on achieving a realistic occupancy target at rates that vary according to season.
But according to these figures there's  been some jiggery-pokery with the room rates.
We've been selling our wholesaler shoulder rates when we could easily have achieved high-season.
The same applies here — look.’
He indicated a period at the end of April, beginning of May.
‘For some reason rooms were discounted from low-season rate to the point where we were virtually giving them away in a definite shoulder season.
We had 80 per cent occupancy over the entire year, yet we're about 25 per cent down on budget for those occupancy figures.’
He studied the list of figures, highlighting one in particular.
‘You see this entry for $800,000 US?
That's the gross amount received from Travel Enterprise in New York who operated all the conference reservations last year.
It's at least 30 per cent down on anticipated revenue from conference lettings.’
Christina handed him a cup of coffee and sat down opposite.
His face was a mask of concentration.
‘I intend to find out just why we're selling room rates to Travel Enterprise for less than they are worth,’ he said slowly.
‘Michael will no doubt say he had to discount them out to achieve the occupancy in the shoulder period, but I don't know how he can explain doing the same in high season.’
Stephen pressed the intercom switch.
‘Michael, can you come to my office immediately.’
He paused.
‘I don't care if the prince of Wales is coming to see you!
I want you here, right now.’
He spoke to the financial controller too.
‘Theo, can you come to my office straight away?
Thanks.
‘This may go on for some time, Christina, and could get very complicated.
I'm sorry, I'll have to go through the refurbishing budgets with you later.’
Christina stood up.
She was wearing a long white cotton skirt, flat shoes, and hand-knit cotton top in pale pink.
He thought how fresh she looked.
‘See you later, then.
Call me when you get through; I'll be in my office.’
She met Michael outside Stephen's office.
Six months after his leg had been broken, he still walked with a perceptible limp, and this morning he looked harassed.
‘What can be so important that it couldn't wait?
I've the head of the Board of Tourism coming to see me in five minutes.’
Christina shrugged.
‘He's de boss man.’
Michael scowled and burst into Stephen's office without knocking.
Christina went to her own office, which was located on the first floor of the reception building.
Though small, it had wonderful views across the gardens and fountain from a tall sash window which took up most of one wall.
The day was extremely hot with no breeze, and she was grateful for the air-conditioning.
She had bought a pretty pine desk, and had scoured the antique shops until she found the perfect eighteenth-century light-mahogany chair to go with it.
The walls were covered in original pictures by several well-known Caribbean artists.
She insisted on fresh flowers every day placed next to a photograph of Stephen and herself at the opening night of Crystal Springs.
She stared at it now, hardly able to believe that it was two and a half years since it had been taken.
So much had happened since then.
The hotel was now firmly established as a first-class resort destination.
Fashion editors had used it as an exotic background to collections of fabulous clothes.
Travel and feature writers from all over the world had stayed in Crystal Springs, going back to their desks to write for the Most part glowing reports.
It had been described as an exclusive enclave for the rich and privileged, an escapist's paradise, a tropical slice of heaven on earth…and so the praise went on.
Christina sighed, thinking of all the hard work and commitment, and the toll that building and operating Crystal Springs had taken on their marriage.
A knock on the door broke her reverie.
It was Todney, Stephen's secretary, in her new uniform — a pale-blue sleeveless cotton seersucker dress with a wide, scooped neckline and crisp white collar.
Stephen liked even the back-room staff to wear uniform, believing it gave them a more professional look and approach.
‘You look lovely, Todney.
I like the new uniform.’
The girl blushed and adjusted the collar of the dress slightly.
‘I'm not sure about this.’
‘It looks fine to me,’ Christina said, dismissing the subject instantly.
She knew from experience that if she started a conversation with the girls about anything other than business, it could go on for ever, and Christina did not have time to listen to Todney's domestic problems this morning.
‘I'm busy making reservations for Mr Reece-Carlton's trip to Anguilla and St Maarten.
I wondered if you could tell me how many nights he'll be staying in Anguilla?
I've tried to speak to him but he's left strict instructions not to be disturbed.’
Christina flicked through her diary.
‘He's going to Anguilla first.
On the 18th, I believe.
I know he has a meeting scheduled in St Maarten for the 20th, so I assume two nights will be fine.
Make the reservation, Todney, and check back with him when he comes out of his meeting.’
‘Thanks, Mrs Carlton.
You know how Mr C. is.
If I don't get it right.’
The girl smiled nervously.
‘I know, Todney, but you can always check with me first, and then you won't get it wrong,’ Christina said, and smiled pleasantly, putting the young girl instantly at ease.
‘I'll do that, Mrs C, I really will.’
When she had gone Christina thumbed through her diary, glancing at cancelled events and big gaps where Stephen had been away.
So many nights when she had been left alone.
Too many, she thought.
A pile of mail sat on her desk waiting to be opened.
There were a couple of invoices for fabric, a request from a boutique in Bridgetown to stage a fashion show at the hotel, and an invitation from Martin Ward and his business partner, Bobby Stoute, to a cocktail party to launch their new sports superstore in Christchurch.
The invitation was for the 19th.
She was pleased that Martin was doing so well.
When he had decided to stay in Barbados he had bought a tiny but pretty house in St Philip with his insurance money and savings, and opened a small shop selling surf-boards and scuba gear.
He had rapidly expanded into importing sportswear and equipment from all over the world, and he and Bobby Stoute had enterprisingly approached several hotels on the island for sales outlets on their premises.
They had not contacted Crystal Springs.
Christina hadn't seen Martin for about six months, since Stephen had made it plain how much he objected even to a friendship between them.
It wasn't worth the arguments with her husband, she'd reasoned.
But this was different — a public event that would be attended by all the island big-wigs.
It was perfectly natural that the Reece-Carltons, owners of the island's premier resort, should be invited to attend.
And it was just bad luck that Stephen was scheduled to be away that night.
Christina pencilled the party into her diary.
She was looking forward to it — and to seeing Martin again.
Chapter Twelve
A persistent ringing roused Christina from a pleasant dream.
Half asleep, she fumbled for the instrument and dropped the receiver.
A voice was speaking urgently:.
‘Hello?
Hello, Christina?’ as she retrieved it.
‘Hello,’ she said sleepily.
‘Christina, this is Danny Bascombe.
I need to speak to Stephen urgently.’
‘I'm sorry, Danny, Stephen and James left very early this morning for Antigua to look at a site there.
They'll be back late this evening.
Anything I can do to help?’
She sat up, suppressing a yawn and rubbing her eyes.
‘Is there any way I can contact Stephen?’
He sounded worried.
‘Is there something wrong, Danny?’
‘I'm afraid so.
Michael Stein has been arrested for possession of drugs.
He's to appear before the magistrates today.’
Christina sat bolt upright, fully awake now.
‘When did this happen?’
‘In the early hours of this morning.
Apparently they found cocaine hidden in his mattress.’
She gasped and slid out of bed.
‘Where is he now?’
‘In custody, in Glendairy prison.’
‘Oh, shit, Danny.
Have you any idea what will happen to him?’
‘In the worst scenario, he'll be sentenced to stand trial  and could go to jail.
If he pleads guilty and begs for the mercy of the court, he may get off with a fine and deportation.
I intend to advise him to plead guilty, yet he swears he's innocent.’
Christina was already thinking about who she could ring who could contact Stephen.
They knew several people who lived in Antigua.
‘I'll try and get a message to him, Danny; leave it with me.
I'll get back to you as soon as I can.’
‘I'm in court this morning, so leave a message with my secretary.
Also, I'd make arrangements with your assistant manager to cover for Michael long-term.
One thing's certain; he won't be returning to Crystal Springs.
Ever.’
Christina replaced the telephone, deep in thought.
She recalled her first meeting with Michael Stein, when he had admitted to possessing drugs in the Far East.
How stupid to jeopardize his career again.
The next hour was taken up with rearranging assistant and duty managers' rotas and trying without success to locate Stephen, who was looking at a remote beach-front site miles from English Harbour, where the estate agents were located.
Danny called her at two that afternoon.
‘Michael Stein pleaded guilty and has been fined 2000 Barbados dollars.
He's to be deported tonight on the British Airways flight to London.
He's asked if you could pack some things from his house and bring the suitcase down to Immigration at Grantley Adams Airport at 7.30 this evening.
‘Of course.
Tell him I'll be there.’
‘Thanks, Christina.
Sorry to be the bearer of such bad tidings, but these things happen.
There are other managers.
I'm sure Stephen will find someone very quickly.’
‘Yes, I'm sure he will.’
‘Oh, by the way, tell him I'll be free for the meeting on Tuesday of next week and that I'm looking forward to it.’
‘Will do, Danny.
Thanks for all your help.’
Christina located Norica Cummings, the housekeeper, who let her into the house within the hotel grounds that Michael Stein had occupied.
Together they packed his clothes and personal belongings into one large suitcase and a leather grip.
Christina left Stephen a message before driving out to the airport to make her delivery.
The roads were busy.
The journey took her over an hour, and it was another fifteen minutes before she found where Michael was being held.
No one seemed to have any idea.
She eventually located an Immigration officer who led her through several corridors until they reached a locked red-painted door at the back of the airport building.
The hollow sounds of doors banging and footsteps receding echoed in her ears as she stepped inside the sparsely furnished room.
There was one chair and a narrow desk riddled with graffiti and burn marks.
A dishevelled Michael Stein was leaning against a faded sign scribbled on the peeling wall.
It read:
Never trouble trouble till trouble trouble you Trouble tree don't bear no blossom
Christina smiled at the irony of the old West Indian proverb.
‘I'm glad to see someone's happy.’
He was unshaven, and dark shadows ringed his eyes.
‘I'm really sorry about what's happened, Michael.’
Christina kept her voice low, glancing at the glass partition to the right of where he stood.
There was supposed to be someone guarding the prisoner, but she couldn't see anyone.
‘Your husband wanted rid of me — it's that simple, Christina.
My time here was up, so he made sure I got a one-way ticket out.’
She looked shocked and opened her mouth to protest.
‘Stephen would never…’
He held up his hand, his grey eyes full of contempt.
‘please, Christina, spare me the innocent, unsuspecting wife act.
I really don't have the stomach for it.
You must know you're married to a crook.’
‘I think I'd better go, Michael.’
‘I think so too.’
He lit a cigarette and blew smoke in her direction.
Her throat dried.
Suddenly gripped by a feeling of panic, she wanted to run out of the small room.
‘Will you give Stephen a message from me?’
She nodded silently.
‘Tell him to go fuck himself!’
The vituperative tone of voice was like a whiplash.
Christina backed away from Michael, whose handsome face was twisted and distorted by hatred.
He didn't move.
He dragged on his cigarette in a languid fashion, letting the smoke curl slowly from his mouth as he added slowly, ‘Tell Stephen I'm a patient man with a long memory.
You see, revenge, dearest Christina, is the sweetest taste of all.’
She rang a bell to be let out again and left him without a backward glance.
When she reached the car, she realized she was shaking.
She had barely recognized their cool, urbane general manager in the seedy, vengeful man who had made such wild accusations.
There couldn't be any truth in them, she told herself.
Stephen would never do anything mean or underhand.
‘Mr Reece-Carlton is home, mistress,’ Victor told her when she reached Crystal Springs House.
She breathed a sigh of relief, and ran through to the living-room where she could hear Stephen's voice.
He was talking to James, and stopped abruptly when she came into the room.
He jumped up and kissed her on the cheek.
Holding her at arm's length, he said, ‘You look terrible, Christina.
Whatever is the matter?’
‘I've just been with Michael Stein in Immigration.
You know he's been deported, I suppose?’
‘Yes, Danny just called me.
I'm not too surprised.
After all, Michael has been involved with drugs before.’
Stephen seemed unperturbed, and she felt stupid for allowing the scene at the airport to upset her so much.
‘A brandy for my wife,’ Stephen called to Victor.
‘Come and sit down, Christina.
You're shaking.
Tell me what's wrong.’
He led her gently to the sofa and sat down with her, holding her hand.
‘I had to take Michael's stuff out to the airport.
It upset me, that's all.
Forget it, I'm all right now.’
The butler came in and handed her a glass of cognac.
She took a couple of sips.
‘What did he say, Chrissy?
If that bastard upset you, I'll go after him personally!’
‘I don't want to talk about it at the moment, Stephen, if you don't mind.’
She gave James a sidelong glance.
Stephen got the message and indicated with his eyes for James to leave.
‘I think we can finish this tomorrow in the office.’
Both men stood up.
‘That's fine with me, Stephen.
I'm dog-tired.’
‘You did a good job today.
Nice work, James.’
‘No problem, Stephen.
I can quite honestly say it was a pleasure.’
Both men smiled and said their goodbyes.
Stephen rejoined Christina on the sofa.
She was already feeling the restorative effects of the brandy.
He put his arm around her shoulders affectionately and stroked the back of her neck, running his fingers through her long hair.
‘Feeling better, baby?’
‘A little.’
‘Why don't I take you out for a nice dinner this evening?
How about your favourite, Mario's?’
‘I'm not hungry, Stephen.’
She leaned back in the sofa, studying his face.
‘You seem very unconcerned about losing Michael.
Aren't you worried the press will have a field-day with this one?’
‘The press will never know; James is sorting that out.
Several people have been whispering in my ear lately about Michael's drug-taking; I knew it would come to a head sooner or later.’
‘Would James have been one of those people, by any chance?’
Christina watched him closely.
‘I rely on him for information.
I'd never find out about a lot of things that go on at the hotel without him around.
I know you don't like him, but he has his uses.’
‘I can't stand him!
He's always sneaking around, just where you least expect to find him.’
‘We re not running a kiddies’ tea party here, Christina.
There are always enemies in the camp, and by sheer luck we've managed to get rid of one.’
‘What do you mean, enemies?’
‘Michael was cooking the books.
He was selling Gary Druer from Travel Enterprise rooms at rock-bottom rates, and Gary was retailing them to the client for top whack, trading on our reputation.
He and Michael were splitting the profits.’
‘Did he admit that?’
Stephen shook his head.
‘No, he hotly denied it, but he would, wouldn't he?
It was all there in black and white.
Michael had a nice fiddle going, and he's been at it for over a year now.
He'll have a healthy bank account somewhere, full of our money.’
Christina suddenly felt very tired and completely disillusioned.
It had been a long day.
‘Michael was in a vicious mood at the airport.
He intimated that You had him framed.’
‘You don't honestly believe I'd do anything like that, do you, Chrissy?’
She shook her head, as if to shake away the doubts.
‘No, it was just something Michael said…’
‘What?’
‘He said to tell you he was a patient man with a long memory, and that revenge is the sweetest taste of all.’
Stephen laughed.
‘Well, I hope it sustains him on his long journey into obscurity, because I intend to make sure Michael Stein never works in the travel industry again.’
Stephen called all the heads of departments to a meeting the following morning, informing them of Michael's departure and the appointment of James Morris as acting general manager.
He stressed that this would be temporary whilst he looked for a replacement.
Christina knew nothing of this decision until she over-heard peter Thomas, the duty manager, chatting to the food and beverage executive later that morning.
‘I don't know how long I'll last here with Mr Morris as general manager.’
She thought she was hearing things, and was about to track down Stephen to confirm the appointment when Edward Harrington, his half-brother, walked into reception.
She was stunned.
Stephen had not mentioned he was coming to Barbados.
Christina approached him at the reception desk where he stood.
‘Mr Edward Harrington, I believe?’
‘Yes, I am, and to what do I owe this pleasure?’
He was wearing a floral shirt, tucked into tight jeans.
The zip gaped open an inch at his waist, which was cinched in far too tightly by a fake crocodile belt.
He carried a man's handbag in burgundy leather, and wore flat slip-on sandals with no socks.
‘I'm Christina Reece-Carlton, Stephen's wife.’
She smiled at him.
‘Welcome to Crystal Springs.
Stephen didn't tell me you were coming.’
‘No, darling, he has no idea.
I didn't know myself until yesterday.
There was no time to contact him, so I came on the off-chance.
I'm so pleased he's here.’
‘You're lucky to catch him.
He's away such a lot these days, trying to develop more hotels.’
‘He's a little beaver is our Stephen.
Always was, always will be.’
She noticed the way he looked constantly about him, observing the marble-floored entrance hall, the smartly uniformed staff, and the guests in their casual resort-wear and serious jewellery.
Christina asked the receptionist to ring upstairs to Stephen's office.
Edward placed a hand on her arm.
‘Don't tell him I'm here.
It will be a wonderful surprise.’
Christina wasn't sure her husband would agree.
Edward grinned, showing lots of gum and small, slanting teeth.
The receptionist informed them that Mr Reece-Carlton was in his office on the telephone.
‘Come on then, Edward, I'll show you the way.
Then I can share the wonderful surprise as well.’
‘I'm in your hands, Christina.
What a surprise he's going to get.’
The sunlight from an open window shone into his eyes, and she noticed that they were exactly the same shade of green as Stephen's, and just as opaque.
She burst into her husband's office saying: ‘Surprise, surprise.
Look who's come to see you.’
Edward was standing behind her.
As he stepped to one side, Christina had a clear view of Stephen's face in an unguarded moment.
A look of complete shock registered first, closely followed by raw anger.
‘Stephen, don't tell me you're not pleased to see your big brother.
Shame on you.’
Edward chuckled.
He didn't seem in the least put-out by the hostile reception.
Stephen ignored him and turned to Christina.
She felt suddenly uncomfortable, unsure of what she should do or say next.
‘Would you mind leaving us, Christina?
I have some family matters I'd like to discuss with Edward alone.’
‘Of course, Stephen.’
She took a step back and said, ‘I'll see you later, Edward.’
‘If I have anything to do with it, fair lady, you most certainly will.’
He lifted her hand and kissed it.
‘Au revoir .’
She grinned and left the two men alone.
James came running up the stairs as she came out of the office.
He leaned against the wall, his doughy face sweating profusely.
‘Where to in such a hurry, Mr Morris, our new general manager?’
‘A temporary position, Christina.’
He flicked a tiny piece of cotton off the sleeve of her dress.
She recoiled.
She could see by his self-satisfied expression that he intended to make himself a fixture, and somehow, despite her friendship with Elaine, the thought of having to work closely with James on a day-to-day basis made Christina's flesh crawl.
‘I must see Stephen.
It's urgent,’ he said.
‘Everybody's always racing around this hotel wanting to see Stephen urgently!
He's with his half-brother Edward, and I don't think he wants to be disturbed.’
She automatically crossed her arms across her chest, a habit she had adopted whenever she spoke to James.
Too often she had caught him looking at her breasts.
‘I didn't know he had a half-brother.’
‘Well, between you and me, I think he'd rather forget about Edward.
I think he's a bit of an embarrassment to the family.’
James poked his head around the door of the office adjacent to Stephen's.
‘Where's Todney?’
Christina looked at her watch.
‘I think she's usually at lunch from twelve till one.
‘Well, I've a few notes to make.
I'll sit in her office and maybe catch Stephen when he finishes.’
Christina left him in Todney's office with a gnawing suspicion that he was up to something.
He was obviously curious to see Stephen's relative, and she mentally chided herself for revealing the state of things between Stephen and his half-brother.
It really was none of James Morris's business.
That evening she expected Edward to join them for dinner at the house.
Stephen made lame excuses, saying Edward was jet-lagged and preferred to stay in his room.
Christina saw Edward about the hotel for the next few days.
He was always friendly enough, but seemed fully occupied with the bevy of young beach-boys who seemed to swarm around him.
Christina decided he looked happy enough and left him to enjoy himself.
It was not until she noticed a bill on Todney's desk, to be authorized by Stephen as complimentary, that she knew his half-brother had checked out of the hotel without so much as saying goodbye to her.
When she thought about it later, something about the visit left her feeling uneasy.
Why did Stephen have to be so secretive and aloof in his dealings with all his family, with the exception of Victoria?
Christina recognized the American couple taking photographs next to the fountain as she and Stephen walked back to their offices after lunch.
She had seen them around the hotel for the last five days.
The blonde woman was always elegantly dressed and absolutely immaculate, even when she came off the beach, her hair neatly pinned up in a French pleat or out of sight under a chic floppy straw hat.
The man was tall and thick-set, with swarthy skin tanned to a deep brown.
He had thick black hair and clear, penetrating navy-blue eyes.
Today he wore fashionable baggy Italian shorts in a khaki colour and a white short-sleeved cotton shirt.
Christina thought he had attractive Latin looks.
He was obviously besotted with his wife and was constantly photographing her.
Christina guessed they were on honeymoon.
The blonde struck a pose and fixed a tight smile on her immaculately made-up face.
The man continued clicking his camera.
Stephen looked at him to see if it was convenient to pass.
‘We don't want to spoil your picture,’ he joked.
The man smiled, revealing perfect white teeth.
‘If you don't mind, I'm sure Susanna would love a shot with the owner of the hotel.’
She patted the place next to her on the lip of the stone fountain.
‘That would please me very much.’
It was said in such a way that it was difficult to refuse, and Stephen felt obliged to sit next to her, smiling awkwardly into the camera, whilst Christina looked on, unable to prevent a suspicion that the whole scene had been orchestrated by the two Americans.
‘Hold it right there — that's great.’
The camera clicked several times.
‘Thank you so much, Mr Reece-Carlton.’
He held out his hand.
‘Antonio Lorenzo Cellini.’
Again the brilliant smile.
His wife held out her own slim, manicured hand.
‘Susanna Cellini — so pleased to meet you.
I must say your hotel is wonderful.
I can't remember ever feeling so relaxed.’
‘You're on honeymoon, baby.
You're supposed to feel relaxed.’
Susanna's thin mouth parted slightly, and she ran her tongue over glossy red lips.
‘I really didn't want to come here; I've had some awful experiences in the Caribbean.’
Christina cringed as Susanna pronounced it the American way.
‘You know — bad service, animosity.’
She lowered her voice.
‘In Jamaica once I really feared for my life.’
‘We have very little trouble like that here.
Barbadians are a warm, hospitable people,’ Christina said.
‘My wife, Christina.’
Stephen introduced her.
The Cellinis both nodded and smiled.
‘I persuaded Susanna to come here.
It was the best wedding present I could have given her.’
Antonio slipped a muscular arm around his wife's waist.
Christina saw her stiffen and after a moment step away.
‘I'm delighted you're enjoying Crystal Springs.
We're always pleased to hear good reports.’
Antonio said quickly: ‘Are there any bad ones?’
‘Well, you know the saying: ‘You can't please all of the people all of the time, just some of the people some of the time.’
We strive to please some of the people all of the time.’
Stephen bestowed on them his best hospitality smile.
Desperate to escape the clientspeak, Christina said, ‘I've a meeting in ten minutes, so I must dash.’
Thankfully, Stephen took her cue.
‘Yes, we must get back to the office.
Nice to have met you both.’
‘Before you dash off, we'd love to invite you both out to dinner.’
Christina groaned inwardly, dreading another boring evening with people they had nothing in common with.
She hoped Stephen would refuse.
‘We're really very busy at the moment, but give me a  ring tomorrow in my office and we'll try and make a date’ he said feebly, hoping his lack of enthusiasm might act as a deterrent.
Antonio Cellini would not be put off so easily.
He seemed determined to ingratiate himself with Stephen.
‘I'm sure you can manage one evening; if not for dinner, then drinks.
Or lunch even.’
He raised his eyebrows.
‘You can't tell me you're constantly busy?’
‘Well, not exactly.’
Stephen hesitated, and Christina thought how pushy Cellini was.
‘I'll call you tomorrow and hopefully get to see you in your office.
If that's okay with you, Stephen?
I have a very exciting proposition that might be of interest to you.’
Stephen's ears pricked at the mention of business.
Antonio fished in his back pocket and handed him a card.
Stephen read it, noticing the address in midtown Manhattan.
‘Do you ever get up to New York?’ asked Antonio.
‘Occasionally, but every time I go it's either too hot or too bloody cold.’
Susanna adjusted her tortoiseshell-framed sunglasses.
‘You must come up in the fall; it's beautiful.
I lived in New England before we were married, and in September and October it's just divine.’
Christina disliked her nasal drawl, and said for the final time, ‘Well, nice to have met you both.
I really must go now.’
‘Me too,’ Stephen added.
Antonio held out his hand.
‘I think you've done a great job here.
And don't forget — I'd like to come and talk to you soon.’
Stephen shook the strong, powerful hand which gripped his firmly.
‘Call me tomorrow, okay?’
‘You're on, Steve,’ said Antonio, and turned back to Susanna, a satisfied smile on his handsome face.
‘Don't invite them to dinner Stephen’ said Christina when he caught up with her.
‘I warn you, if you do I'll never forgive you.’
The butler walked into the garden where Christina was reading in the shade of a white tulip tree.
‘Mistress, sorry to disturb you, but Mr C. is on the phone for you.’
She didn't look up from her book.
‘Ask him if I can call him back.
This is a really exciting bit.’
‘He say it important, mistress.’
Victor had no intention of telling the boss-man his wife wouldn't speak to him.
She sighed and dropped her book, exasperated.
It was cool in the circular coral-stone study overlooking the courtyard.
She idly watched a tame yellow warbler hopping back and forth across the window sill as Victor put the call through.
She heard the excitement in Stephen's voice as soon as he began to speak.
‘I can't believe it, Chrissy!
You know that American guy Antonio we met yesterday?
He's just left my office after discussing investing in the Bahamas site.
I've given him all the figures.
He's taken them away, promising to get back to me in a couple of days.
You realize what this means?
If I can get this equity investment, I'm on my way to my next hotel.
And I can buy back Robert's 25 per cent of this place — you know I don't like him having a foot in the door here.’
‘That's fantastic.’
She tried to sound enthusiastic.
‘You don't sound very excited, Chrissy?’
‘It's just that you've been close so many times in the past and the deal has fallen through.
And Robert isn't so bad, is he?
He's looking after the UK end and there are worse people to be in partnership with.’
‘Yeah, you're right, I suppose.
Cellini may not be able to come up with the goods.
Who knows?
No deal is certain until the signatures are on the dotted line and the money  comes through.
Anyway, I've invited them for dinner this evening, if that's okay?’
She groaned.
‘Stephen, we promised to go to Danny and Pauline's for drinks and then on to the Bagatelle.’
‘I know, but I've called Danny and he understands.
Come on, Christina, this is very important to me.’
She ached to remind him of all the wasted evenings with prospective investors: the long, boring meals with pompous bankers and their dull, provincial wives.
‘It always important to you, Stephen.
All you think about is bloody business and I'm sick of it.’
Silence followed.
She could hear him take a deep breath.
‘I'm not in business for the good of my health.
You knew how I was when you married me, and everything I do is as much for you as for me.
Come on, Chrissy, we're a team.’
‘Are we, Stephen?
I used to believe that, but I'm not so sure any more.’
She bit the side of her lip, something she did unconsciously when she was upset or nervous.
‘I don't know how you can say that, Christina.
I share everything with you.’
‘Do you?
I wonder sometimes.
Anyway, this is neither the time nor the place to discuss it.
What time for dinner?’
‘That's my girl.
About seven for drinks, and 7.30 for dinner.
Apparently Susanna likes to eat early.’
‘That's fine.
I'll organize it now.
Anything you fancy in particular?’
‘I'll leave it to you.’
‘Okay, Stephen.
See you later.’
Her voice was flat.
‘Chrissy, I do love you, you must never doubt that.’
‘I love you too, Stephen,’ she said, tempted to add: But I need more of you.
I'm sick to death of sharing you with your business.
It would have to wait for a more opportune time, she  decided, and replaced the receiver.
A cool breeze drifted through the open window, carrying with it the sound of water trickling softly from the old stone fountain they'd painstakingly renovated in the inner courtyard.
Her mind drifted back to the first day they'd seen Crystal Springs.
It seemed a lifetime away.
The dinner table was laden with Baccarat crystal and freshly polished silver.
In the centre of the table a huge Lalique vase held Christina's favourite flowers, the pale-lemon cup of gold.
She watched Victor place two tall, white, tapered candles under delicate, hand-cut, antique glass hurricane covers, and carefully fold starched Irish linen napkins monogrammed with the initials C.S.
It was 6.30, and Christina was putting tiny pink and white sugared almonds into a glass bowl when Stephen walked along the covered terrace from the dining pagoda.
He didn't even say hello, merely demanded, ‘Give Victor a shout, Christina.
I could use a strong vodka and tonic.’
‘Yessir.’
Standing to attention, she gave him a mock salute.
It was done to antagonize, not to amuse.
He frowned.
‘What's wrong with you these days, Chrissy?’
‘So you've noticed, at long last?’
Stephen looked mystified as she went on, ‘When was the last time you really listened to anything I had to say unless it was about business?
When, Stephen?’
‘I try to make time, Chrissy, I really do, but there's never enough.’
‘That's the trouble.
You don't have enough time for me any more.
You can't fit me into your busy schedule.
I've forgotten the last time we really enjoyed ourselves together and sat down to a meal uninterrupted by telephone calls.’
She looked away, afraid she was going to break down.
‘Come on, Christina, it's not that bad.’
Stephen reached out to touch her, a question in his eyes.
‘Is it?’
She turned away as Victor announced the arrival of their guests.
They both greeted the Cellinis with practised charm and ease.
Antonio looked fit and handsome.
He had acquired a deep mahogany tan which accentuated his deep-blue eyes.
Susanna wore a black silk strapless dress.
Her narrow shoulders and long, slim neck had barely seen the sun, and gleamed white and translucent against the dark fabric; her small-featured, impassive face was made up to salon standard.
Antonio smelt of lemons mixed with spice when he leaned forward and kissed Christina's cheek.
Susanna held out a thin, freckled hand, and parted heavily glossed lips in what Christina assumed to be a smile.
‘You've got a real nice place here,’ Antonio commented appreciatively, nodding his head in approval.
‘Mmmm, real nice.’
‘Thank you.’
Stephen accepted the compliment and led them out onto the terrace, asking as he did so, ‘What would you like to drink?’
‘I'll have champagne.
That's if you've got Premier Jouet pink or Cristal?’
Susanna was quietly assertive.
‘Otherwise I'm happy with dry white wine.’
‘Any preference in that direction?’
Christina asked pointedly.
They were entertaining in their own home, not a restaurant.
‘Only the best for the little lady.’
Antonio glanced with pride at his wife, who was flicking her long, straight blonde hair over her shoulder.
Victor served ice-cold Cristal from a silver Georgian cooler, and for once Christina felt a thrill of pride in her possessions.
Not that Susanna Cellini — or Belford-Cellini as she apparently preferred to be known — would be impressed, but neither could she be disparaging.
They sat in high-backed cane chairs on the terrace overlooking  the sea.
The horizon was a dark terracotta colour, the top of the dying sun just visible for a few seconds before it dropped out of sight and the sky doused the remaining light like a heavy black blanket.
‘This is the most amazing place,’ Susanna said, accepting her glass of champagne from Victor's outstretched hand.
‘Just the most wonderful hotel I've ever stayed in.’
‘And she's been to the best,’ Antonio chipped in.
‘In fact, I can't wait to return.’
This produced an answering smile from her husband.
‘Whenever you want, honey, just say the word.’
Antonio winked in Stephen's direction.
‘Do you mind if I look over the place?
I'm fascinated by the architecture.’
His ebullient enthusiasm won Stephen over.
‘I'd be delighted to show you around.’
‘Susanna, want a peek?’
Antonio asked.
‘I'm fine, Toni.’
She gestured for him to go with an indifferent wave of her hand.
She had seen and lived in lots of houses far superior to this one, it implied.
‘I'll stay and chat to Christina.’
‘So when do you go back to New York?’
Christina feigned interest.
‘Oh, don't remind me.’
Susanna pulled a long face.
‘Four days’ time, and I've got a big charity function to attend the night I get back.
It's going to be such a rush, I can't tell you.
I'll have to get Roberto, my hairdresser, and his manicurist to virtually meet me off the plane.’
She laughed, a tinny, hollow sound.
Christina took a big gulp of champagne, and wondered what on earth she was going to find to talk about all evening with this woman.
She needn't have worried.
Antonio and Stephen dominated the conversation while they all ate delicious avocado and salmon mousse, fresh dolphin in lime sauce, and mango crêpes.
‘What kind of fish is this?’
Susanna examined the moist white fish with her fork.
‘It's dolphin, but not of the flipper variety,’ Christina replied.
‘It looks exactly like a dolphin, with a flat head and smooth black skin — hence the name.’
Christina noticed that Susanna played with her food, moving it around the plate before leaving most of it.
Afterwards they drank coffee on the terrace, Antonio admiring the garden and pointing out to Susanna a cannonball tree, its cream- and pink-coloured blossoms softly illuminated in the light from a carefully concealed spotlight.
Christina was tired, and felt relieved when at 10.30 the Cellinis decided to leave.
‘We get so very tired here in the islands.’
Susanna faked a yawn.
‘She gets tired.
I'm raring to go as soon as we get to bed.’
Antonio pinched Susanna on her bony backside.
She grimaced.
‘It's the island air, Toni, it exhausts me.’
‘Well, exhausted or not, you won't be getting much sleep for the next four days.
Come on, baby, like I keep telling you, it's our honeymoon.
She squealed, protesting as he bear-hugged her, ruffling the perfectly set hair and smudging her red lipstick.
‘Antonio, for goodness’ sake, control yourself.
You've obviously had too much to drink again.’
She pushed him away, smoothing her dress with short, irritated movements.
‘She loves it, really,’ Antonio hissed behind his hand.
Christina suspected he was a little drunk.
‘We've had a great evening.
Thanks very much, both of you.
Great food, Chrissy, you really can cook.’
‘I doubt whether Christina did the cooking, darling,’ Susanna drawled.
‘As a matter of fact, I did do some.
Stephen prefers my  cooking, so for dinner parties I always go to the kitchen and help.
It's not a chore, I really enjoy it.’
She smiled as sweetly as she could.
‘The only thing Susanna can make for dinner is a reservation!’
Antonio roared at his own humour, joined by Christina and Stephen, while his wife stood silent.
Christina noticed her face, and thought it was time for goodnights, before Antonio added something he might really be sorry for.
She secretly nudged Stephen, who said, ‘Well, I'm dead beat.
Bed beckons.
It was our pleasure seeing you this evening.’
‘Yes, lovely to have met you both.
Enjoy the rest of your stay,’ Christina added.
‘Thank you for a wonderful evening.
I'm sorry about Antonio's behaviour, but he's always like this when he's had a couple of drinks.’
‘Don't apologize; he's only having fun.’
Christina winked at him.
Antonio returned it with a broad smile.
‘Goodnight, and thanks again.’
He took his wife's hand, and they walked off, lost within seconds in the velvet darkness.
Propped up in bed ten minutes later, Stephen said, ‘So what do you think of Antonio?’
Christina had anticipated this question.
The Cellinis had been invited partly for her scrutiny.
Stephen had often told her he respected her judgement.
‘I think he's a tough, shrewd character who desperately wants to buy prestige.
He's married to someone so socially and culturally removed from him she might as well be a foreigner.’
‘You're right, Christina.
They're from totally opposite sides of the tracks.
She's old money and as snooty as they come, while he's the typical self-made second-generation Italian who wants to buy himself a piece of class.’
Christina wriggled her toes and found Stephen's feet with her own.
‘He appears to have lots of money — probably why Susanna married him.
I think he sees in you and the hotel industry the opportunity to be part of a glamorous, high-profile business, and one his hard-faced wife would approve of.
I'd imagine his taste and originality are in his backside.’
‘Who cares?
I need his money, nothing more.’
‘Now it's my turn for question-time.’
Christina looked straight ahead.
‘What do you think of a man who neglects his wife?’
Stephen had drunk a lot of champagne, and red wine.
He felt expansive and full of well-being.
The last thing he wanted was an argument.
‘I think a man who neglects his wife should be given lots of lashes, man.’
‘I'm not joking, Stephen.’
‘Okay, Chrissy, I'm sorry.’
He stroked her arm.
‘I know I don't give you enough of my time, but you get all I've got to give, if that's any consolation.’
Her voice was shaking a little as she put the important question to him.
‘And what if it's not enough?’
Stephen broke the silence after minutes that felt like an hour.
‘Okay, Chrissy, you asked for it.’
He grabbed her and pulled her close.
‘I love my business, I love the hotel, and I love you.
That's it.
There's no more.’
‘In that order?’ she challenged.
He didn't rise to it; simply carried on with what he had to say.
‘If you think I'm going to make huge sacrifices for you, forget it, Christina.
I married you thinking you were like me.
I can't stand the demands you make on me sometimes.’
His words stung.
She pushed him away from her.
‘I'm sorry, Christina, but that's the way it is.’
She wanted to say that she was sorry too, but tears choked her and she was unable to speak.
Chapter Thirteen
The following morning, Stephen awoke with Antonio Cellini on his mind.
He couldn't ignore his gut instinct, which had never failed him yet.
He felt sure he could sweet-talk Antonio and get the 25 per cent equity he needed to put the new deal to bed.
It was the biggest of his life.
Just thinking about it aroused such passion in him it was scary: $75 million from the bank, $25 million from Antonio, and he, Stephen Reece-Carlton, could develop his own small island in the Bahamas, with a marina, golf course and casino.
As he showered and got dressed, he wondered what Antonio Cellini would want in return for his equity investment.
Somehow Stephen had a sneaking suspicion that the American would be no pushover.
Susanna Cellini was looking in the window of the ladies' boutique when Stephen and Christina walked through the lobby just after noon.
She waved to them, and they strolled across the white marble floor to join her.
Antonio appeared from the shop a moment later, carrying a small package which he presented to his wife.
Susanna thanked him sweetly, standing on tiptoe to plant a kiss on his forehead.
‘You deserve it.
You've put up with me for the last ten days.’
Antonio turned his attention to Stephen and Christina.
‘So glad you could make lunch today.’
‘We're on the pan Am flight this afternoon,’ Susanna explained, and pulled a long face.
‘All good things have got to come to an end,’ said Stephen.
‘But why, that's what I want to know,’ Susanna wailed.
She was dressed in navy and white, her ivory skin slightly tanned and for once minus make-up.
Her long, straight hair was tied back in a bow, and she looked younger and more approachable.
‘You look great, Susanna.’
Stephen's compliment was genuine.
She thanked him and smiled, delighted.
‘It's this place.
I've had the vacation of a lifetime.
Crystal Springs is going to be the resort name on the tip of every socialite tongue from Boston to New York this winter, I'll make sure of that.’
‘Want a job in PR, Mrs Cellini?’
Christina joked, before Stephen guided them out of the lobby and down a path past a row of mahogany trees separated by bright thickets of hibiscus.
‘Your gardens are stunning, Stephen.
You could charge to come round here,’ Antonio commented.
‘I've got a man called Roberto Sabortini to thank for that.
He's a Brazilian, and designs landscape with such an eye you'd swear Mother Nature was his partner.’
The Golden palm restaurant was quiet, and they were shown to Stephen's own table.
This particular part of the hotel never failed to delight him.
It was in his opinion a piece of architectural magic, suspended twenty feet above sea level.
Clusters of tall, willowy bamboos rose out of ten pale-pink marble planters and almost touched the high triple-domed ceiling.
Six wide archways opened on to the sea, affording all diners uninterrupted views of the shimmering Caribbean and the powder beach below.
‘Oh, look at that beautiful bird!’
Susanna pointed to their left, and they all watched a humming-bird perform  fluttering water sports in the spray from a sixteenth-century fountain almost hidden in a discreet courtyard setting of creeping plants and old hand-painted tiles — the kind of secret place usually found behind old stone walls in Florence or Seville.
Stephen and Susanna ordered lobster salad, Christina a club sandwich, and Antonio his last cheeseburger.
‘I reckon it's the best burger I've ever had outside the US.’
‘You shouldn't be eating them at all.
You've put weight on in the last ten days.’
Susanna nipped the side of his stomach.
Antonio chuckled and addressed Stephen.
‘We've had an amazing vacation.
I won't bore you with all the usual shit that you must hear every day of the week…how absolutely wonderful it all is, blah blah blah, and the clichéd ‘Any time you're in New York’ line.’
The food arrived, halting the conversation.
Antonio devoured half of his burger in one bite, whilst Susanna took a tiny morsel of lobster.
‘This is delicious.’
She chewed slowly.
‘Are the lobsters local?’
‘We import them from St Vincent,’ Stephen said.
‘They're good, but not quite up to Maine standard.
‘Well, Antonio, have you thought any more about the deal I've offered?’
The American tried hard to look non-committal, but Stephen could detect the thread of eagerness underlying his words.
‘Well, I'm interested…’
Antonio laced more ketchup onto the remaining burger and picked up a French fry.
‘I want to talk, money talk, and I'd like you to come up to New York next week to meet with my financial boys, if that's okay with you?’
It was in the bag.
He had his finance, he could feel it.
‘That's great, just great.’
Stephen beamed, unable to disguise his own delight.
Antonio put out his hand, ‘My town, next week it is, then…
Partner.’
Christina felt guilty.
It was weeks since she'd seen Elaine, and she hadn't even asked her how she felt about James being given the general managership, albeit only temporarily as yet.
She knew it would keep him away from home even more than usual, and wondered what Elaine thought about that.
If her affair with Sebastian Aguilar was still going on, presumably she'd be delighted.
She rang her friend and arranged to meet her early that evening.
The Reef Bar was packed when Christina arrived at ten past six.
She saw Elaine as soon as she walked up the planked wooden steps to the bar, and noticed as she drew closer that her friend was already tipsy.
She had an unkempt air about her, too.
Her blonde hair looked unbrushed, and she was wearing a scruffy old T-shirt and a sarong skirt patterned with an hibiscus print.
‘Hi, Chris,’ Elaine slurred, and patted a bar stool next to hers.
‘What do you want to drink?’
She gave an unfocused grin.
‘I'll have a lime-squash sour — no syrup, thanks,’ Christina ordered, and climbed onto the stool.
She turned to her friend.
‘So how are you?
Haven't seen you around for a while.’
Elaine looked down at her glass of rum and ginger, frowning.
Something serious was coming, Christina could sense it.
‘I'm pregnant, Chrissy — about two months.’
Christina took Elaine's hand in hers.
She ignored the curious stares directed at them.
‘Is that all?
Having a baby isn't so bad, you know.’
Elaine seized her wrist.
‘You've got to help me, Christina.
I'm desperate.’
Her eyes were wide and panic-stricken.
It was obvious she'd reached breaking-point.
Christina ordered two more rums — she could see they were going to need them — and asked the bartender if they could go somewhere quieter.
He carried two chairs and a table over to a dark corner where they could talk more freely.
‘I'm in a bit of a mess,’ Elaine sighed, calmer now.
‘I'm sorry to dump all this on you, Chris, but there was no one else I could turn to.
I had the result this afternoon, but I've known for a few weeks, really.
Oh, God, how bloody stupid can you get?’
‘Calm down,’ Christina told her, trying to disguise her own shock and concern.
‘I take it all this is because James is not the father?’
‘Him?’
Elaine's pretty face twisted in contempt.
‘He hasn't been near me in months.
It's not me he's interested in.
‘On the rare occasion he bothers to leave that damn hotel — sorry, but you know what I mean — he just wants to drink himself into a stupor.
If he hadn't been such a lousy husband I might not have got myself in so deep…’
‘Deep into what?’
Christina probed, certain now that Elaine was worried about more than just impending motherhood.
She looked down at the table-top, her expression a curious mixture of pride and shame.
‘You know about Sebastian, and you must have guessed it was pretty serious between us to have lasted more than two years.
To begin with I got such a kick from it all.
I never knew in advance when the next meeting would be.
He always says he's a busy man, unable to predict his schedule, but really it's all part of the game.’
She twisted her hands fiercely.
‘All part of what game?’
Christina looked puzzled.
‘Oh, Chris, you're such an innocent.
Married to the first man who asked you, and I bet you've never even thought  of being unfaithful, even with that hunk Martin hanging around.’
‘I couldn't do that to Stephen,’ she said, uneasily conscious that Elaine had too high an opinion of her.
She'd definitely thought about Martin, wondered what it would be like…
She forced her thoughts back to Elaine, who was carrying on with her story.
‘…and it was so exciting , like something you read about, you know, but you never dream it could happen to you.
I'd get a phone call from his secretary and then a limousine would be waiting for me down the lane.
Sebastian's driver would deliver me to him.
At first we'd meet in hotels.
All sorts of people owe him favours, you'd be surprised.
But it all got too public.
There were times when we needed more privacy…’
‘I should think there were!
You're a married woman, Elaine, and Sebastian's very well known — a friend of the PM's.
It all sounds pretty dangerous to me.’
Elaine lowered her eyes.
‘I don't mean just covering our tracks, though we have to do that of course.
It was what he was doing to me — what we were doing together.’
Christina's mouth felt dry.
She remembered her friend saying something on the phone: ‘It gets a bit rough’…something like that.
‘Go on.’
‘Sebastian believes in living life to the full.
Just having sex isn't enough for him.
He thinks you can only appreciate its full pleasure after feeling pain.’
Christina felt more and more uncomfortable.
What Elaine was saying was bizarre, out of her experience.
‘He sounds a real bully to me,’ she said.
‘You still don't understand,’ her friend replied sadly.
‘Oh, sometimes it goes too far — although I've always said he mustn't leave any marks that are too obvious.
James  may be a drunken sod, but he's not a stupid one!
‘But Sebastian isn't a monster, please don't think that.
He hasn't done anything to me that I didn't agree to…want.
Enjoy, even.’
‘I don't believe it,’ Christina said faintly.
‘You can't enjoy having pain inflicted on you.
No one would.’
Elaine's face, which had pleaded for her understanding, became closed and withdrawn.
‘Like I said, it goes too far sometimes,’ she said brusquely.
‘In fact, the last few times, if I'm honest.
I've been covering myself up and praying James wouldn't notice.
But you'll just have to take my word for it.
When we first got together it was so good between us.
James never did anything for me that way, Chrissy, never once.
Sebastian was the best lover I've ever had, and when he wanted to start this stuff — well, I thought, what the hell?
‘I know I've shocked you — I've shocked myself, over and over again.
But I thought it was worth it, until this happened.
I can't have the baby, you do see that, don't you?
I'll have to have an abortion.’
‘Yes, I see,’ Christina said, stunned.
How ironic that while she dreamed of becoming pregnant and bearing a child, her friend could think only of getting rid of hers.
‘Will you lend me the money?’ asked Elaine, shame-faced.
‘I could ask Sebastian but I'd rather he didn't know.
I'm not sure how he'd take it.’
It was amazing the way she seemed to put his thoughts and feelings above her own, Christina reflected.
‘If you're sure, Elaine?’
‘I am.
I'll tell James I'm going back home to see my mother.
Say she had a win on the bingo and sent me my fare — God knows she'd never have the money else.
There's any number of private places in London.
I can be in and out the same day.’
Christina suppressed a shudder.
It was a child's life they were talking about, after all.
Elaine seemed to know  instinctively what she was thinking.
Her voice was unsteady, but she tried to smile.
‘It's the only way, believe me.
And it won't happen again, Chris.
I'm going to tell Sebastian before I leave that we'll have to cool things.
He didn't do anything I didn't agree to, but we were getting into deep water, I see that now.
I think it would be best all round to end it.’
That was something, at least, Christina thought.
‘Don't worry, Elaine.
You've got your money.
I can get you a couple of thousand, no trouble.
You'll want cash, I presume?
Give me a few days and I'll do it when Stephen goes to New York.’
A look of relief transformed her friend's worn face.
‘Oh, Chrissy, thank you.
I don't know what I'd have done without you.’
The pan Am flight to New York was scheduled to leave at 11.30 a.m.
Christina had offered to drive Stephen to the airport, but he had refused her offer in favour of James Morris's, saying they had a lot to talk about.
The day was heavily overcast, with drizzle threatening, as Stephen and Christina stepped out of Crystal Springs House.
James was waiting in the parked car.
He looked away as Stephen slid his arms around Christina, pulling her against him as they said goodbye.
‘Take care, Stephen, safe flight.’
Her upturned face was close to his.
He could see the fine sprinkling of golden freckles on her nose and cheekbones.
‘You could have come with me, you know,’ he reminded her.
‘I know that, but when we go away I don't want it to be for business — I want to have you all to myself.’
She slapped him gently on his flat stomach, thinking how attractive he looked in the pure-white cotton shirt and khaki cotton slacks he wore for the flight.
His hair had grown long and curled attractively at the nape of his neck.
He must have read her thoughts.
‘I'll try and grab a haircut while I'm up in civilization.’
‘No, don't you dare, I like it like that.’
‘Well, just a bit.’
He held up his forefinger and thumb.
She nodded doubtfully, and he leaned closer to kiss her.
Her full mouth quivered slightly at his touch.
‘You take care, Chrissy.
Be good,’ he whispered in her ear, and added, ‘Remember, I love you.’
‘I love you too, Stephen.’
He released her and walked to the parked car.
‘Bye, baby, see you next week — I'll ring you tomorrow,’ he called.
Christina waved and waited on the step until the car was out of sight, then turned back to the house.
She felt strange, elated, set free almost.
She felt rather guilty at the thought, then told herself she was being ridiculous.
Stephen didn't expect her to mope around while he was away on business.
There was nothing wrong with enjoying her own interests and social activities — including Martin Ward's party in a few days' time.
Christina had arranged to meet Pauline Bascombe for lunch to discuss a forthcoming charity event for children in need which Crystal Springs had agreed to sponsor.
Pauline had made a reservation at the Waterside Café in Bridgetown for 12.30.
Christina did her daily fifty lengths of the swimming-pool, showered, and called in at her office to check her mail before leaving the hotel at ten minutes to twelve to drive to Bridgetown.
She turned up the volume of the calypso tape Elaine had given her and sang at the top of her voice, thinking about whether to have a formal dinner party for the charity night, as Pauline suggested, or a more casual fancy-dress party on Halloween, which was what she would prefer.
Stuck behind an open truck full of jeering young boys  for several miles, she seized the first opportunity to over-take as the truck signalled to turn left.
Checking her rear-view mirror, she accelerated and moved into the centre of the road, not noticing the dark-grey jeep pulling out in front of the truck.
She slammed on her brakes and horn simultaneously as the jeep swerved to miss her, careering off the road and crashing into the gully alongside.
‘Oh, shit,’ Christina swore, and ground her car to a standstill.
She jumped out and ran the few feet to where a man was struggling out of his jeep, which had tipped onto one side with the two left wheels suspended above the open gully.
Even from the back he looked familiar.
‘Martin, is that you?’
He turned at the sound of her voice, anger ebbing away as he saw who it was.
‘Christina!’
‘How's your jeep?’
He jumped, across the gully and looked under the car.
‘Seems okay.
If I can get it back onto the road in one piece, I think it will survive.’
Several people had gathered around the accident, and all were chattering in fast Bajan-speak.
‘Dat's a bad nasty job you got there.
You needin' ol' man Boysey, he fixin' anyting,’ a young boy with wide eyes and a wider grin informed Martin.
‘Where is he, then?’
Martin asked.
‘He live up de gap next to mah house.
He got cars and stuff there — he fixin' all de cars in the whole gap.’
Martin handed the boy a dollar bill.
‘Will you go and ask him if he'll come and fix my jeep?’
The boy snatched the note and ran off up the hill, shouting: ‘Ol’ man Boysey, ol' man Boysey!’
‘I'm really sorry, Martin.’
Christina touched the side of his jeep and jumped away as it began to rock.
‘If this is what it takes to get to see you, 1'11 put up with  it.
But just be careful you don't injure me next time.’
He ran his fingers through his hair and smiled at her.
‘How are you, anyway?
Long time no see.’
‘I'm fine, and you?’
‘All the better for nearly running into you.’
She tried not to blush, but could feel the heat creeping into her face.
‘I have to rush, Martin.
I've a lunch date with Pauline Bascombe at 12.30 — it's almost that now.’
‘I haven't seen you for months, Christina.
You drive me off the road into a gully, and now you're dashing off!’
She looked uncomfortable and glanced at her watch.
‘What can I say?’
‘You can say: ‘I'll make it up to you, Martin.
I promise to come out for a drink or dinner, even a game of tennis with you.’’
She knew she ought not to agree, but she felt guilty about the accident, and surely a public meeting couldn't hurt?
‘Tennis this evening, 6.30, my place.
Can you make it?’
‘I've been practising my serve for weeks.
You're going to be in a lot of trouble later.’
He laughed, and she realized how much she had missed seeing him.
‘You're all talk, Martin!
Now I really must dash.’
She glanced in the wing mirror as she pulled her car into the road.
The young boy was running down the road towards Martin with a posse of four helpers close behind.
Christina did not reach the Waterside Café until fifteen minutes after one, panting, agitated and apologetic.
‘Don't worry, this is the West Indies.
Everyone is always late,’ said Pauline, unconcerned.
‘I'm afraid I'm still very English and get in a terrible state if I'm late for an appointment.
It was unavoidable this morning.
I drove Martin Ward off the road.’
‘Well, there are easier ways of meeting people,’ Pauline said, and signalled to a passing waiter.
‘Drink?’
Christina pushed her long hair off her face.
‘I'd love a beer, I'm so hot.’
They ordered two Banks'.
‘Martin Ward is the flavour of the month at the moment,’ Pauline commented.
‘Every hot-blooded female under sixty on the island wants to climb into his pants.
You have to admit, Christina, he's a dish.’
She lowered her voice to a throaty drawl.
‘That golden tan, sun-streaked hair, and rippling body.
Can't say I haven't thought about it myself on occasion.’
Her eyes levelled appraisingly at Christina, who flushed at the mention of Martin's name and buried her face behind the menu.
After deciding to have her favourite crab-cakes, Christina sat back in the uncomfortable rattan chair, admiring Pauline's Batik printed dress.
It was made of a fine gossamer fabric that clung to her smooth, flawless skin.
Heavy gold chains were coiled around her long neck, and chunky gold earrings swung from her pierced ears.
‘Your hair looks amazing,’ said Christina.
It was the first time she had seen Pauline's hair unbraided, and she couldn't believe the abundant black mane hanging in wild, tangled curls past her shoulders.
They both ordered crab-cakes with salad and hot-pepper sauce, accompanied by a bottle of dry white wine.
‘How's Danny?’
Christina asked between bites of crab-cake.
‘Danny is as always too busy, too motivated, too ambitious.
In a nutshell, too English.’
Pauline's wide, full mouth turned up at the corners.
A languid smile on her face, she pushed the plate to one side and leaned forward.
Christina could smell her musky perfume.
‘I'm sure we share the same problem.
Sometimes I think my husband is a driven man.’
‘Stephen's exactly the same.
I'm beginning to wonder, if I had a cardboard cut-out made of myself and stuck that in front of him, whether he'd even notice.’
Pauline looked up, fixing her huge, dark, liquid eyes on a tall man who had entered the restaurant.
He waved and she smiled, then returned her gaze to Christina.
‘Are we ever satisfied, I wonder?
I married Danny because I was madly in love and wanted to share my life with him.
I gave up a promising career in advertising in England and came back to Barbados with him.
I now find myself, after four years of marriage, still madly in love, but sharing less and less of his life.’
‘We're in exactly the same boat.
I have been married three and a half years, and the last year has been very difficult.
Stephen has been away so much, and is so obsessed with building another hotel, we eat, sleep and drink it.’
Christina flicked back her long hair and concentrated on Pauline, who seemed for the first time to want to confide in her.
‘Danny, as you know, is hell-bent on a political career.
I'm not sure if you're aware of it, but he is from a very poor background.
As a result, he has a social conscience which is way out of proportion, all based on guilt and of no practical use whatsoever.’
She paused and refilled her glass with wine before going on.
‘He listens to me about as much as he listened to his mother — in one ear and out the other.’
‘Stephen's determined to open a hotel chain and listens to me about the same amount.’
The two women smiled at each other, so different yet sharing a common bond.
It was almost three o'clock when Christina left Pauline after agreeing to meet for lunch once a week.
They had finished the wine and talked about almost everything but the charity that had been the purpose of the lunch.
They  vowed to sort that out when they next met, and Christina felt she had made a friend and ally in Pauline Bascombe.
There were several messages for her when she arrived back at the hotel, and she worked at her desk until six before walking back to the house through the gathering dusk.
Martin arrived for tennis while she was changing upstairs.
She heard his car in the drive, and called down to Victor to offer him a drink while he waited.
The match on the floodlit court was no match.
It was over in less than an hour with Christina winning in straight sets.
Martin conceded defeat gallantly.
‘Well done, Christina.
All that expensive coaching I've been having, and yet I'm still no match for you.
Are you sure you're not related to that other Chris?
I think her name's something like Evert.’
She chuckled and poked him gently in the ribs with the handle of her racquet.
‘Well, I do play several times a week, and to be honest you're not that difficult to beat.’
They walked side by side down a moonlit path leading to Crystal Springs House.
‘You can't send a beaten man home without a drink.’
Martin leaned against the door.
‘I'll die of thirst after all that effort.’
‘I think I owe you more than one drink after this morning.
Come on in.’
They walked into the hall, and both jumped when Clyde the night watchman spoke from the shadows behind them.
‘Evenin', mistress.’
He stood stiffly to attention.
‘Clyde your guard and protector here.’
‘Oh, you startled me!’
Christina breathed a heartfelt sigh of relief.
Clyde wouldn't intentionally startle even a fly.
He was old, infirm, and the most gentle man she had ever met.
She only hoped she was never attacked and needed him as protector, as he so sweetly put it.
‘I'm home safe and sound now,’ she assured him.
‘You can go and do your patrol.
Goodnight.’
‘Night, mistress.
Now you sure you's all right?
Lots of badminded folk around these days.’
Clyde eyed Martin suspiciously.
‘I'm fine, really.
Mr Ward is an old friend.’
She looked at Martin, who winked and reassured the old man.
‘Believe me, I'll look after her.’
Clyde left with a toothless grin.
‘Tha's okay, then.
Ah's goin' on patrol now, jus’ call fer Clyde if you needin' anythin' at all.’
He shuffled out of the courtyard, his over-sized shoes flapping noisily on the stone floor.
Martin and Christina both chuckled.
‘He means well,’ she said fondly.
‘I'm sure he does, but I doubt he could protect a miniature poodle,’ Martin commented, thinking how very vulnerable she was in this big house with only old Clyde to look after her.
‘I know,’ she agreed, ‘but he came with the house.
I've got a full security force as back-up at the hotel if I need them.
She held out her hand to lead him through the courtyard, stopping at the fountain which was lit by soft moonlight.
They watched a fat frog plop into the pond, its skinny back legs paddling frantically under a perfect white lily.
She had given Victor the night off, and got Martin a beer and herself a glass of juice from the fridge.
Martin was standing at the furthermost edge of the terrace, looking over the gardens and down to the sea.
His eyes did not leave the view as he said, ‘Did you ever think when you were living in that flat in Manchester that you would one day own all this?’
‘No, not for a minute, Martin.
I did know I would leave Manchester — I was determined to do that and never had  any doubts that I would succeed — but Barbados…
I don't think I dreamt that far.’
She handed him the beer and their fingers touched briefly.
Christina sat on the low wall of the terrace and he sat next to her.
Both lost in their own thoughts, neither spoke for several minutes, then they both spoke together.
‘I've really…’
‘Where's…’
‘You first,’ he said, grinning.
‘I was about to say I've missed seeing you, Martin.
I thought that this morning when I saw you again, and I want you to know I don't think we should leave it so long the next time.’
‘That had nothing to do with me.’
She touched his lips with her fingers.
‘You must appreciate Stephen is jealous and kicks up a fuss every time I even suggest seeing you, but I don't intend to let that stop me in future.
Life is too short.’
Martin took her hand in his.
‘Life's very short, Christina, and I don't have to tell you again how I feel about you.
Stephen neglects you, you've said so yourself.
I won't make any demands on you, I promise.
Just so long as I can see you.’
He lifted her hand to his mouth and kissed every one of her fingertips, his eyes, under golden, sun-kissed lashes, never leaving hers.
She made no attempt to stop him as he leaned forward to kiss her.
Encouraged, he covered her mouth with his, and started to pull her shirt free of the waistband of her shorts, sliding his hands beneath to cup her breasts.
Christina made soft mewing sounds in the back of her throat.
Martin's tongue slid into her mouth.
She could feel his bare legs, covered in wiry golden hairs, brushing against hers as he moved closer to her, his heart thudding wildly.
‘I want you, Christina, like I've never wanted any other  woman.’
He held her by the shoulders with shaking hands.
It was impossible not to notice how aroused he had become, and she thought of all the women who would envy her for being in this situation.
She felt reckless and more alive than she had for months, her own desire rising as his hungry mouth fell on her breasts like a starving child, and his eager hands tore at her clothes.
‘Martin, calm down!’
Christina pushed him gently away.
‘You're hurting me.’
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
‘But look what you've done to me.’
‘I noticed,’ she said, reaching out to touch him — and pulling away as if she had been stung as the telephone rang inside the house.
‘Ignore it.’
He grabbed her hand.
‘please.’
Christina hesitated, holding his pleading gaze for an instant while the telephone rang and rang insistently, determined to be answered.
She knew it was Stephen even before she picked it up.
‘Hi, Chrissy baby, how are you?’
His strong voice broke the spell.
‘I'm fine, just fine.
And you?
How are things up there in the Big Apple?’
‘It's wet and windy, and I'm bloody cold, but things seem to be progressing okay.
I saw Antonio this afternoon, very briefly.
He's set up a meeting for tomorrow with his financial boys, and I get the impression he's very keen, but it's all down to what he wants for the equity investment and how much I'm prepared to give him.’
‘I'm sure you'll sort it out, Stephen.’
Christina sat down in the small desk chair, her legs unsteady.
‘Are you okay, Chris?
You sound tired.’
‘I've been racing around for most of the day.
It's been very hot here.
I think I'm just whacked.’
‘Well, have a good night's sleep, because I want you to come up here tomorrow.’
‘What?’ she gasped.
‘I can't…’
‘It's very important,’ he interrupted.
‘Antonio and Susanna are having a big party at their house in the Hamptons.
I want you to be here with me.
I've made a reservation on the Pan Am flight in the morning, and there'll be a limo to pick you up at Kennedy.
It's all organized.
Anyway, you've never been to New York.
You'll love it.’
‘I've nothing to wear,’ she faltered, thinking of her tropical wardrobe and one old warm suit she had worn to travel out from England.
‘I will personally whisk you up Fifth and Madison tomorrow afternoon, and get you a dress to stun the Cellinis.
We could stay a few extra days and make a holiday of it.
What do you say, Chrissy?’
She turned at the sound of footsteps, expecting to see Martin, and was surprised when James Morris strode unannounced into her living-room.
She was flustered, and tried unsuccessfully to push her shirt back into her shorts whilst speaking to Stephen and holding the phone.
‘James has just arrived, Stephen.’
‘Oh, good.
He's got your itinerary and a set of photographs of the site in the Bahamas I need.
If you could bring them up with you, Christina, that would be great.’
‘Do I have a choice?’ she asked, her voice heavy with sarcasm.
Stephen ignored that and went on to say, ‘Okay, darling, I'll let you go.
Sleep tight, and I'll look forward to seeing you tomorrow.
Safe journey.’
‘Bye, Stephen.’
She hung up and joined James and Martin on the terrace.
There was an awkward silence.
‘Sorry to barge in on your cosy evening.’
James looked from her to Martin, and back again.
‘Hardly cosy,’ she snapped, over-reacting.
She could have bitten her tongue.
‘We had a game of tennis and came back here for a drink, that's all.’
Stop explaining, for goodness' sake, she  screamed to herself inwardly.
It's none of his damn business what you do!
‘Would you like a drink, James?’
She forced her voice to sound polite and casual.
‘No, I'm in a hurry,’ he said, and handed her a brown manila envelope.
She took it with slightly trembling hands.
‘Photographs for Stephen and flight details for you.
You're shaking, Christina.’
He touched her fingers and searched her face with suspicious eyes.
She held the envelope with both hands.
James was no fool.
He could see by her awkward stance and darting eyes that she was acutely embarrassed.
He would have liked to have stayed and pried further, but he had a list of figures to telex up to New York, and as usual Stephen wanted them instantly.
‘I really must be going, Christina.
Sorry I can't stay, but then you've already got company.’
‘Martin was just leaving when Stephen rang, weren't you?’
‘Yes, I've got a hot date with Linda Fields.’
James whistled.
‘I wish I was in your shoes.
Miss Barbados, and tipped to be Miss Eastern Caribbean — she's a stunner.’
Christina wondered if Martin really had a date, and suddenly felt cheated, guilty and annoyed, all at the same time.
Both men started to walk towards the door.
‘Don't forget my opening night, Christina,’ Martin said.
‘It should be a great evening.
We've organized a fashion show, and Spice are playing for us.’
‘I don't think I'll be able to make it.
It looks like I'll be in New York.’
The disappointment on his face was so intense she wanted to hug him and kiss it away.
‘Elaine and I can make it, Martin.
Thanks for the invite.
Elaine's really looking forward to it.
She says everyone is talking about the new store.’
Martin hardly heard James.
‘Yeah, great — look forward to seeing you there,’ he said absently.
James pointed to the brown envelope Christina still clutched in her hand.
‘Don't, whatever you do, forget those photographs or your husband will go ape-shit.
And, by the way, your ticket will be issued on departure.
Have a good flight, and regards to Stephen.
Goodnight, Christina — Martin.’
James stepped outside and started to walk towards the hotel.
Martin held back, and she waited until James was out of sight before she spoke.
‘I'm sorry for what happened back there.
I almost forgot for a moment that I'm married.’
‘I'm not sorry about what happened, I'm just sorry about you being married.
Christina…’
He came forward to kiss her and she pushed him gently away.
‘No, Martin.
I think you should go.’
A slight breeze ruffled his hair.
He gazed at her, hurt and disappointment in his eyes.
‘When will I see you again?’
‘I really don't know, Martin.
I'll call you.’
‘Is that a promise, Chris, or will I have to wait another six months before I bump into you — literally?’
She sighed.
‘No, it's a promise, Martin.
I meant what I said earlier.’
‘And I meant what I said.
I want you, Chrissy.
I'm just not sure how much longer I'm prepared to wait.’
He walked to his car and did not look back or glance in her direction as he drove quickly out of the drive.