

The Judiciary
There is one matter which I ought to mention.
All the judges, without exception, are members of the Athenaeum, and I presume you will wish to be a member.
If so, may I have the pleasure of proposing you?
There is a meeting of the Committee early next week.
Lord Cozens-Hardy, MR to Lord Buckmaster — as he became — on the latter's appointment to the Lord Chancellorship, in a letter dated 26 May 1915, quoted by R. F. V. Heuston,The Lives of the Lord Chancellors 1885–1940 , p. 269.
The most politically influential of the judges, however, has been the Master of the Rolls, Lord Denning…
With his own modest roots he dismisses the attacks on a class-based judiciary: ‘The youngsters believe that we come from a narrow background — it's all nonsense — they get it from that man Griffith.’
Anthony Sampson,The Changing Anatomy of Britain (1981), p. 159.
I would think about 10 or 15 per cent[of judges]are Labour Party voters.
I would think it's a diminishing number because I think that a large number of judges who would have voted for Mr Clement Attlee would look askance at voting for some of his successors, with all respect to them.
Lord Templeman, in an interview on Radio 4 with Hugo Young on 13 April 1988.
Since nearly all High Court judges are appointed when they are between about 45 and 57 it is likely that they will have shed such political enthusiasms as they may have had when young and have formed firm views about how the country should be run.
Sir Frederick Lawton (former Lord Justice),Solicitors Journal, 2 November 1990.
1.
Courts and judges
Introduction
This book is concerned with the relationship between the judiciary and politics.
In the courts political questions may come before the judges because the matter is already in public controversy, like race or industrial relations; or because it is claimed that a public authority has exceeded its powers; or because the matter concerns the activities of the police; or because the matter impinges on the individual rights of citizens, affecting their freedom or their property.
The laws relating to civil and criminal wrongs are made either by Parliament in the form of Acts of Parliament (also called statutes) or by the judges themselves (called the common law).
The common law is made as judges decide cases and state the principles on which they are basing their decisions, this accumulation of principles building into a body of law.
Some parts of this common law have long fallen into disuse as having no contemporary relevance.
Other parts have evolved to meet social changes.
Statute law, however, predominates over common law wherever there is conflict, and much statute law is made to change and to replace parts of the common law.
Statute law itself cannot be a perfect instrument.
A statute or one section of a statute may be made to deal with some particular subject — perhaps with immigration, or drugs, or housing or education — but a situation arises where doubt is cast on the meaning of the words of the statute.
Does the situation fall within these words or not?
For example, do the words ‘national origins’ include ‘nationality’(see below, pp. 17–1)?
The judges then must decide how to interpret the statute and by so doing they define its meaning.
Not only  therefore do the judges ‘make law’ through the development of the common law.
They also do so by this process of statutory interpretation.
Judges are employed to decide disputes.
Sometimes these disputes are between private individuals when neighbours disagree or one person is injured by another in an accident.
Sometimes these disputes may be between large private organizations when companies argue about the terms of a commercial contract.
But public bodies — Government departments, local authorities, and others — are also legal persons and also become involved in disputes which lead to judicial activity.
The fact that one of the parties is a public body does not necessarily affect the nature of the dispute or the law applicable to it.
If a Government department or Birmingham City Council enters into a contract with a building company for the construction of a block of offices, and a dispute arises, the law which governs the matter is essentially the same as it would be if the contract were between two private persons.
Such disputes are dealt with by the civil law and in the civil courts.
The judgment given will say where the rights and wrongs lie and the court may award damages to one party or even order a party to take certain positive steps or to refrain from certain action.
In criminal law, the dispute is with the State.
Over the years laws have been made and amended declaring certain kinds of action to be criminal and punishable with imprisonment or fines.
This has been done because it is believed that the State has an interest in seeking to prevent those actions and to punish those who so act.
So we have crimes called murder, manslaughter, rape, conspiracy, theft, fraud, assault, and hundreds of others, some of them quite trivial.
They are dealt with in the criminal courts.
If the judicial function were wholly automatic, then not only would the making of decisions in the courts be of little interest but it would not be necessary to recruit highly trained and intellectually able men and women to serve as judges and to pay them handsome salaries.
It is the creative function of judges (see further, below, chapter 8) that makes their job important and makes worthwhile  some assessment of the way they behave, especially in political cases.
It must be remembered that in most cases for most of the time the function of the judge with the help of the jury if there is one) is to ascertain the facts.
But when questions of law do arise, their determination may be of the greatest importance because of the effect that will have on subsequent cases.
A note on the structure of the courts appears below (pages 38–41).
From this it will be seen that the most senior judges are Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (or Law Lords) who are members of the House of Lords and sit, in their judicial function, in the Appellate Committee of that House.
Each is referred to as Lord So-and-so.
The next senior are Lords Justices of Appeal who sit in the Court of Appeal.
Each is referred to as Lord Justice So-and-so.
Next come judges of the High Court each of whom is referred to as Mr Justice So-and-so.
The High Court, the Crown Court and the Court of Appeal are together called the Supreme Court.
Next in seniority come the Circuit judges (often referred to as County Court judges when they are sitting in that court) each of whom is referred to as Judge So-and-so.
Recorders and Assistant Recorders are senior barristers or solicitors who sit as judges a few weeks each year.
Also there are District, Assistant District and Deputy District judges; stipendiary magistrates who act full time; and Justices of the Peace (JPs) who act part time and are unpaid.
The purpose of this book is to look at the ways in which judges of the High Court, the Court of Appeal, and the House of Lords have in recent years dealt with political cases which have come before them.
By political I mean those cases which arise out of controversial legislation or controversial action initiated by public authorities, or which touch important moral or social issues.
When people like the members of the judiciary, broadly homogeneous in character, are faced with such political situations, they act in broadly similar ways.
It will be part of my argument to suggest that behind these actions lies a unifying attitude of mind, a political position, which is primarily concerned to protect and conserve certain values and institutions.
This does not mean that the judiciary inevitably  and invariably supports what governments do, or even what Conservative governments do, though that is the natural inclination.
Individually, judges may support the Conservative or the Labour or the Liberal parties.
Collectively, in their function and by their nature, they are neither Tories nor Socialists nor Liberals.
They are protectors and conservators of what has been, of the relationships and interests on which,in their view , our society is founded.
They do not regard their role as radical or even reformist.
Appointment
The most remarkable fact about the appointment of judges is that it is wholly in the hands of politicians.
High Court and Circuit judges, Recorders, stipendiary and lay magistrates are appointed by the Lord Chancellor who is a member of the Government.
Appointments to the Court of Appeal, to the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords, and to the offices of Lord Chief Justice and President of the Family Division are made by the Prime Minister after consultation with the Lord Chancellor, who himself consults with senior members of the judiciary before making his choice or consulting with the Prime Minister.
The Lord Chancellor has his own department headed, since the 1880s, by a permanent secretary.
The department is the centre for the collection of information about the activity, the legal practice, and the reputation of members of the bar including those more senior, almost always Queen's Counsel (the conferment of which status is in the gift of the Lord Chancellor), from whom senior judicial appointments will be made.
Inevitably the officials in the department exercise some influence  but the extent of this varies and is difficult to assess.
By 1990, all but one of the Law Lords and all the Lords Justices of Appeal had been appointed by Mrs Thatcher.
When considering an appointment of a Circuit judge or a Recorder, the Lord Chancellor, through his officials, seeks the view of a wide range of High Court and Circuit judges, Leaders of Circuits and other sections of the Bar, and other senior members of the profession…
Above all, the Presiding judges are regularly consulted and play a key role in relation to appointments on their Circuits.
The four heads of Division (the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls, the President of the Family Division and the Vice Chancellor) are also involved.
Those appointed to the senior status of High Court judge will have acted as Recorders and will often have sat as Deputy High Court judges, having been invited to do so from time to time.
For the most part they will be senior practising members of the Bar but a few may be promoted from the Circuit bench (including, since 1 January 1990, those who were formerly solicitors).
‘In every case’, we are told, ‘the Lord Chancellor personally reviews the field of choice in detail, in close consultation with the heads of Division, and other senior members of the Judiciary.’
But that is all we are told and the relative weight given to the many relevant considerations, both favourable and unfavourable, is not disclosed.
How far the Prime Minister uses his or her power of appointment or, to put this another way, merely accepts the Lord Chancellor's advice varies with different Prime Ministers and differing circumstances.
It seems to be unusual for the Prime Minister or the Lord Chancellor to consult  other ministers (except that the Lord Chancellor may discuss the matter with the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General) unless any such minister happens to be also a distinguished member of the bar, as was Sir Stafford Cripps in Mr Attlee's administration from 1945.
But it would be a mistake to assume that Prime Ministers are necessarily mouth-pieces of their Lord Chancellors when making the most senior appointments.
Lord Simon of Glaisdale has written: ‘In 1951 Sir Winston [Churchill]particularly wanted [Sir Walter Monckton]in the unenviable post of Minister of Labour, and (presumably by way of compensation) undertook in writing that he should be appointed Lord Chief Justice on the next vacancy.’
Such an undertaking must have been of very little value.
Lord Goddard was then in only his sixth year as Lord Chief Justice, never looked like someone about to retire, and indeed continued in office for three years after Sir Winston gave way as Prime Minister in 1955.
But the story shows that Sir Winston had no doubt that the office was solely in his gift.
Although Prime Ministers may from time to time use words which suggest that they are not unwilling to exercise their power of appointment, in recent times there is no direct evidence that they have done so.
The likelihood is that a modern Prime Minister would depart from the recommendations of the Lord Chancellor only in the most exceptional case.
Solicitors and barristers may be appointed as Recorders or stipendiary magistrates.
A Recorder who has served for five years may be appointed as a Circuit judge.
Otherwise judges are appointed from the ranks of barristers of at least ten or fifteen years' standing and are likely to have had at least twenty years' practice at the bar.
Judges in the Court of Appeal are usually appointed from amongst High Court judges and Law Lords from amongst Appeal Court judges.
In 1990 Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (Law Lords) and the Master of the Rolls were paid £82,750; Lords Justices of Appeal (in the Court of Appeal) £79,500; judges of the High Court were paid £72,000; Circuit judges £48,100.
From these figures it will be seen that High Court judges gain little financially from promotion.
And at present Circuit judges are not often promoted to the High Court.
Judges of the High Court and above, with the exception of the Lord Chancellor, hold office during good behaviour subject to a power of removal by Her Majesty on an address presented by both Houses of Parliament, but no English judge has been removed under this provision which derives from the Act of Settlement 1701.
Circuit judges and Recorders, however, may be removed from office by the Lord Chancellor on the ground of incapacity or misbehaviour.
Magistrates are removable by the Lord Chancellor for good cause.
Senior judges must retire at seventy-five years of age, Circuit judges at seventy-two with possible extension to seventy-five, Justices of the Peace and stipendiaries at seventy.
In 1977 a full-time salaried judge in Scotland was removed from his office for misbehaviour because he was deemed to have-engaged in public political activity.
Sheriff Peter Thomson published a pamphlet advocating the holding of a plebiscite on Scottish home rule.
In accordance with the Sheriff Courts (Scotland) Act 1971, the Secretary of State for Scotland asked two senior Scottish judges (the Lord President of the Court of Session and the Lord Justice Clerk) to investigate and they reported their finding of misbehaviour which, as for Circuit judges and Recorders in England and Wales, was a ground for dismissal.
The Secretary of State, having taken into account that Sheriff Thomson had been previously warned, at the time of a similar offence in 1974, made an Order for his dismissal.
Such an Order had to be laid before Parliament and was there debated on 6  December 1977.
The case caused much discussion especially as it could scarcely be said that his activity was directly connected with his duties as a judge.
Thomson asked for permission to make a statement at the bar of the House of Commons but this was denied.
In December 1983, the Lord Chancellor dismissed for misbehaviour an Old Bailey Circuit judge who had been fined £2000 on two charges of smuggling whisky and cigarettes.
Judges of the superior courts may not be sued for anything done or said while acting in their judicial capacity even if they act from some malicious or corrupt motive.
The law does permit judges to be prosecuted for crimes they may commit, while so acting, but proof of criminal intent would be extremely difficult to obtain, even if an appropriate charge could be devised.
The danger of criticizing the appointment of particular judges was shown when in June 1980 a Belfast jury awarded £50,000 damages to a Northern Ireland county court judge for a libel contained in an article in the Economist suggesting that his appointment had been based, as The Times put it in a leading article, not so much on his ability but on the fact that he was a Roman Catholic.
One of the principal witnesses for the judge was the Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland.
The Lord Chancellor refused to disclose any of the correspondence concerning the judge's appointment on the ground that it was not in the public interest to reveal confidences about judicial appointments and this was accepted by the court.
Yet the Lord Chief Justice, giving oral evidence, said that he and the Lord Chancellor were at one in their belief that religious affinity should not take precedence over ability in the appointment of judges and, said The Times,he gave the impression that his positive feelings towards the judge were shared by the Lord Chancellor  So oral evidence was admitted on the kind of matter for which privilege from disclosure of documents was claimed by the Crown.
The Economist appealed and the matter was settled on undisclosed terms, the damages being ‘adjusted’ and the editor expressing himself as being extremely satisfied.
To what extent, if at all, do the Lord Chancellor and the Prime Minister take into account the political allegiance of those whom they appoint or promote to judicial office?
First, there is one special case.
The Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General (the law officers of the Crown) are ministers, not in the cabinet, appointed by the Prime Minister from the ranks of Members of the House of Commons who are barristers.
It is often said that by tradition they have a right to judicial appointment when vacancies occur and that this is particularly true of appointment to the office of Lord Chief Justice.
In a famous essay, H. J. Laski recorded that between 1832 and 1906, out of 139 judges appointed, 80 were Members of the House of Commons at the time of their nomination and 11 others had been candidates for Parliament; that, of the 80, 63 were appointed by their own party while in office; and 33 of them had been either Attorney-General or Solicitor-General.
Laski suggested that it was ‘probably undesirable’ for law officers to be suddenly made judges and so required to act impartially.
Laski treads very daintily here.
‘It is not necessary to suggest that there will be conscious unfairness; but it is, I submit, possible that such judges will, particularly in cases where the liberty of the subject is concerned, find themselves unconsciously biased through over-appreciation of executive difficulty…
Nothing is more disastrous than that any suspicion of the complete impartiality of the judges should be possible.’
From 1873 to 1945, 19 out of 23 Attorneys-General and over half the Solicitors-General later held high judicial office.
But since 1945, the only Attorneys-General to do so became Lord Chancellors which, being an appointment to  political office, is distinguishable; and only two Solicitors-General became judges.
It is perhaps significant that none of the last four Lord Chief Justices — Lords Goddard, Parker, Widgery and Lane — had been law officers.
The wider question, also raised by Laski's figures, is the extent to which an active political life, and particularly Membership of the House of Commons, is regarded by the Lord Chancellor as a positive qualification for appointment to a judgeship.
Practice has differed over the years.
Lord Halsbury was Lord Chancellor for far longer than any other during the last hundred years.
He had three periods in that office which he held, in all, for over seventeen years between 1885 and 1905.
His judicial appointments were much criticized on the ground in effect that ‘Halsbury appointed to the High Court, and to a lesser extent to the county court, men of little or no legal learning whose previous career in public life had been largely in the service of the Conservative Party or else were relations of his own’.
Professor Heuston has examined such criticisms.
Of the judges appointed by Halsbury to the High Court, eight were MPs at the date of their appointment and of these six were Conservatives.
Five others had been unsuccessful Parliamentary candidates, three of them being Conservatives.
One other had been a Conservative MP nearly twenty years before.
So fourteen out of the thirty appointments were, in those senses, of politicians — and ten were Conservatives.
Heuston concludes that of Halsbury's thirty appointments to the High Court, four or five were men of real distinction, eighteen or nineteen were men of competent professional attainments, leaving no more than seven ‘whose appointments seem dubious’.
Four of these seven were Conservative MPs at the date of the appointment, one had been a Conservative MP, and another had twice been an unsuccessful Conservative candidate.
We may say, therefore (this is my conclusion not Heuston's), that of the ten Conservative politicians whom Halsbury appointed, six were bad appointments.
Every Lord Chancellor, especially if he holds office as long as did Halsbury, will make some mistakes (and Heuston suggests that as many as three of the six were ‘unlucky’ appointments) but Halsbury's experience may suggest that the proportion of bad appointments is likely to be statistically higher amongst appointments made from the Lord Chancellor's political associates.
Certainly at that time it was accepted that a political career was likely to be an advantage for a barrister aspiring to a judgeship, though it was important that his seat should be safe, as no government would wish to run the possibility of diminishing its strength in the House.
Heuston tells us how Lord Halsbury when he was a Parliamentary candidate was congratulated by Sir Edward Clarke on his election defeat by nine votes in 1874.
Clarke explained that if Halsbury had won by such a majority he could not have expected elevation to a judgeship.
But, as it was, he could expect to be made Solicitor-General and found a safe seat.
This is indeed what happened although he held the office for over a year until the seat was found for him in 1877.
(During the interval he was in fact offered a judgeship, which he declined, but it was made clear that the government could not long countenance a Solicitor-General without a seat in the House of Commons.)
In August 1895, arising out of argument about the fees payable to the law officers, Lord Salisbury, as Prime Minister, promised Sir Edward Clarke that he would be appointed Attorney-General if a vacancy occurred within two years.
In 1897, a new Master of the Rolls had to be appointed.
If the Attorney-General (Sir Richard Webster) took the post, Clarke would have to be appointed Attorney-General.
Lord Salisbury, who had a poor opinion of Clarke's abilities (as had Halsbury), wrote in much perplexity to the Lord Chancellor but saying that the Rolls should be offered to Clarke ‘on party grounds’ because he would do less harm as a judge than as Attorney-General.
Salisbury continued:
There remains the third course, to throw Clarke over altogether and tell him that the highest point of his career has been reached.
I confess that the more I consider  this alternative, the more I dislike it.
It is at variance with the unwritten law of our party system; and there is no clearer statute in that unwritten law than the rule that party claims should always weigh very heavily in the disposal of the highest appointments…
It would be a breach of the tacit convention on which politicians and lawyers have worked the British Constitution together for the last 200 years.
Perhaps it is not an ideal system — some day no doubt the MR will be appointed by competitive examination in Law Reports, but it is our system for the present; and we should give our party arrangements a wrench if we throw it aside.
Lord Salisbury did offer the Rolls to Clarke, who declined it on the ground that it would put an end to his political career, though he added that he would accept being made a Law Lord.
But that offer did not come.
The change in the attitude to the appointment of barrister-politicians as judges is said to date from Lord Haldane's Chancellorship (1912–15) when legal and professional qualifications became the criteria, though at first the change was not extended to the most senior appointments.
Lord Haldane himself expressed his ‘strong conviction that, at all events for a judge who is to sit in the Supreme Tribunals of the Empire, a House of Commons training is a real advantage.
One learns there the nuances of the Constitution, and phases of individual and social political life which are invaluable in checking the danger of abstractedness in mental outlook.
But a little later Lord Sankey, who was Lord Chancellor from 1929 to 1935, when resignations occurred, replaced five Law Lords who had had political backgrounds by others whose reputations rested on their professionalism as lawyers.
In recent years Lord Chancellors have differed in their opinions about the value of judges having had experience as politicians.
During the 1950s, being an MP came once again to be regarded as a qualification for appointment to a judgeship.
In 1964, Lord Gardiner, who shortly afterwards became Lord Chancellor himself, said that since 1951 ‘one or two’ Lord Chancellors (there had been only three)‘felt that the standard of members of the bar going into the House of Commons has fallen noticeably since the war, and if you want the right men in the House of Commons then you must reward the man who votes the right way with a judgeship’.
Lord Gardiner himself thought that political views ought not to affect judicial appointments at all, and he pursued this policy during his period of office as Lord Chancellor (1964).
Today, being an active member of a political party seems to be neither a qualification nor a disqualification for appointment.
But those barristers retained to represent the Government — called Treasury Counsel — are very likely to be offered High Court judgeships in due course.
It must be remembered that Lord Chancellors in making their appointments to the High Court have a relatively small group to select from.
Effectively, the group consists of experienced barristers between the ages of forty-five and sixty and the number of genuine possibilities — the short list — may be as small as half a dozen.
Personal characteristics must be taken into account.
A man or woman whose social or personal habits are unconventional or uncertain is not likely to be risked.
Homosexuality is likely to be a bar or, if discovered later, to result in resignation.
On the other hand, it is obvious from the appointments made that the strength of a candidate's convictions, including his political opinions, is not considered a disadvantage.
But those opinions should fall within the ordinary range represented in the House of Commons, excluding the more extreme.
Politically the most important judicial appointment is that of Master of the Rolls.
As president of the Court of Appeal his view on the proper relationship between the Executive government and the individual, including powerful private organizations, is crucial.
When Sir John Donaldson was  appointed to succeed Lord Denning in July 1982, this was seen as a strongly political appointment and one which the Prime Minister favoured.
Sir John had been a Conservative councillor and had presided over the National Industrial Relations Court for the two and a half years of its existence during the Heath administration.
On its demise he reverted to his position as a judge of the High Court and was not promoted during the years of the Labour Government 1974–79.
From the beginning of 1984 when it seemed probable that Lord Hailsham would soon resign as Lord Chancellor, Sir John was widely discussed as his probable successor in the Thatcher cabinet.
This highlighted his political characteristics and qualifications and may have led to his decision not to preside over the Court of Appeal when it considered the appeal by the Government against the decision of Glidewell J rejecting the decision to ban trade union membership at GCHQ.
Social and political position
From time to time in recent years, analyses have been made, based on information in reference books, of the social background of the more senior judiciary.
The most comprehensive in terms of social class origins covers the period from 1820 to 1968.
Over the whole period the dominance of the upper and upper middle classes is overwhelming.
They account for 75.4 per cent to which may be added, proportionately, 10 per cent from those ‘not known’.
Moreover the total percentage of these first three groups in the most recent period is 76.8, which is higher than the overall percentage.
Over the whole period covered by this analysis the dominance of the first three classes is unchanged.
& table 
Another survey, published in 1975, covers the period 1876–1972 and, with a few omissions, analyses the 317 judges who sat in the High Court, the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords during that period.
The author does not, however, break down these ninety-six years into shorter periods, so trends within the whole are not apparent.
He considers school background and finds that 33 per cent attended one of the so-called Clarendon Schools (Charterhouse, Eton, Harrow, Merchant Taylors, Rugby, St Paul's, Shrewsbury, Westminster, Winchester), while 70 per cent attended Oxford or Cambridge Universities.
School education is a good indicator of social and economic class background, particularly as the relative cost of attendance at one of the independent ‘public’ schools has changed little, until very recently.
It must also be remembered  that university education at Oxford and Cambridge before 1945 (when those who are now judges attended) was also very largely a middle-class activity, within the first three groups of the table set out above.
In 1956 the Economist published a short survey.
This covered 69 judges of the Supreme Court, House of Lords and Judicial Committee of the Privy Council and showed that 76 per cent had attended ‘major public schools’(not further defined) and the same percentage had been to Oxford or Cambridge.
In May 1970 New Society looked at 359 judges including those offices surveyed by the Economist but also, amongst others, county court judgeships and metropolitan magistrates.
It found that 81 per cent had attended public schools and 76 per cent had attended Oxford or Cambridge.
In 1969, Henry Cecil investigated the background of 117 out of 235 judges of the House of Lords, the Supreme Court, county courts and stipendiary magistrates.
From a random group of 36 judges of the Court of Appeal and the High Court, he found that 31 had been to public schools (86 per cent) and 33 to Oxford or Cambridge (92 per cent ).
From a random group of 45 (out of 90) county court judges and 24 (out of 48) stipendiaries, he found that 52 had attended public schools (75 per cent) and 56 Oxford or Cambridge (81 per cent ).
In 1975 Hugo Young analysed the educational background of 31 appointees to the High Court during the previous five years.
He found that 68 per cent went to public schools and 74 per cent to Oxford or Cambridge.
These figures have changed very little over the last thirty or more years.
In 1940 about 80 per cent of the judges of the Supreme Court had attended public schools.
In 1969, this was true of 79 per cent of Henry Cecil's group of 117.
A higher proportion of the earlier generation did not attend university at all— 8 out of 35 in 1940 but only 8 out of 135 in 1970.
Of those who did attend, the bias in favour of Oxford and Cambridge has remained effectively  unchanged.
The New Society survey compared county court judges in three recent years.
In 1947, in 1957 and in 1967, seven county court judges were appointed.
Of these 21 judges, all but one in 1947, two in 1957 and one in 1967 had attended public schools; all but three in 1947, two in 1957 and three in 1967 had attended Oxford or Cambridge.
In 1978, of 74 High Court judges listed, over 75 per cent had attended public schools and, of these, 41 per cent had attended one of the Clarendon Schools.
Of the 17 High Court judges appointed between 1 January 1980 and 1 May 1982, 76 per cent attended public schools and 88 per cent Oxford or Cambridge.
In 1986, 29 out of 34 Law Lords, and Lords Justices of Appeal had attended public schools and Oxford or Cambridge Universities.
The decline in the number of ‘political’ judges is also shown.
The Economist's survey of 1956 recorded that 23 per cent of their 69 judges had been MPs or Parliamentary candidates.
But fourteen years later, Henry Cecil could find only 10 MPs and 5 candidates out of his 117 judges (13 per cent).
Since 1977, no judge sitting in the High Court, or the Court of Appeal or the House of Lords (as a Law Lord) had formerly been a Member of the House of Commons.
The age of the full-time judiciary has remained constant over many years: the average on appointment has been about fifty-two or -three and the average of all those in office has been about sixty.
Inevitably, given the system of promotion, the average age is highest in the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords, at about sixty-five and sixty-eight years respectively.
In 1988, of 509 judges (from the Circuit bench to the House of Lords), 91 had been born in or before 1920.
Between 1876 and 1972 there were 63 Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (Law Lords).
An analysis of 49 of these showed  that 18 had fathers who were lawyers, 16 had fathers of other professions (churchmen, doctors, teachers, architects, soldiers); 12 fathers were in business (of whom one was working-class), and 3 fathers were farmers or land-owners.
Forty-six Law Lords had been to Oxford or Cambridge, seven to Scottish universities, four to Trinity College Dublin, two to London University (one of whom had also been to Cambridge) and one to Queen's Belfast.
These facts and figures added relatively little to what was already known in outline.
More interesting is the analysis of political background.
The authors divided their period into three groups.
Group A included twenty Law Lords appointed in the period 1876–1914; group B had twenty-one appointed between 1918 and 1948; group C had twenty-two appointed in 1948–69.
Of the twenty Law Lords in group A, eleven had been MPs and three Parliamentary candidates; of the twenty-one in group B, five had been MPs; of the twenty-two in group C, four had been MPs and two Parliamentary candidates.
While these figures show the decline since the late nineteenth and early twentieth century of appointments of such politicians, they also show little change since 1918.
It is, however, unwise to base generalizations on such figures.
What matters more than prior political involvement is how far Law Lords consciously or otherwise are influenced in their judgments by their own political opinions, how far this is avoidable and how far it is undesirable.
One highly ‘political’ Lord Chancellor — like Lord Hailsham of St Marylebone — can, if he chooses, make a considerable impact on judicial lawmaking at the highest level but, for this to be so, it is not necessary that he should have held political office or have been a Member of Parliament or a law officer.
All these figures show that, in broad terms, four out of five full-time professional judges are products of public schools, and of Oxford or Cambridge.
Occasionally the brilliant lower-middle-class or working-class boy or girl has won their place in this distinguished gathering.
With very few exceptions, judges are required to be selected from amongst practising barristers and it is difficult for anyone without a  private income to survive the first years of practice.
To become a successful barrister, therefore, it is necessary to have financial support and so the background has to be that of the reasonably well-to-do family which, as a matter of course, sends its sons or daughters to public schools and then to Oxford or Cambridge.
Nevertheless, some men and women have, since the middle 1960s, benefited from the expansion of university education, from the growth of law faculties in universities, and from the wider availability of this education and, with little private income, have been able (largely because of the increase in publicly financed legal aid) to make a living at the bar.
In the 1990s some of these will move into the ranks of successful barristers from whom judicial appointments are made.
Only then shall we be able to assess how far the dominance of the public schools and (what is of much less significance) of Oxford and Cambridge has begun to lessen.
And not until the late 1990s shall we know whether (as seems most unlikely) judicial attitudes have changed as a result.
In March 1991, of the judges from the Law Lords to the Circuit bench (some 550 in all) only one was black.
Two Lords Justice, two High Court judges and nineteen Circuit judges were women.
Judicial independence means that judges are not dependent on governments in ways which might influence them in coming to decisions in individual cases, though their promotion, like their appointment, is effectively in the hands of the Lord Chancellor with, nowadays, a measure of Prime Ministerial intervention.
As we have seen, in financial terms, such promotion is not of much significance.
But life in the Court of Appeal and, even more, in the House of Lords is not so strenuous as in the High Court (or below), personal prestige and status are higher among the fewer, with a life peerage at the top.
These are not inconsiderable rewards for promotion, and the question is whether there are pressures on, particularly, High Court judges to act and to speak in court in certain ways rather than others.
Are there decisions  which could be classified as popular or unpopular in the eyes of the most important senior judges or the Lord Chancellor?
Is a judge ever conscious that his reputation as a judge is likely to be adversely affected in their eyes if he decides one way, and favourably affected if he decides another way?
The answer is that such pressures do exist.
For example, a judge who acquires a reputation among his seniors for being ‘soft’ in certain types of cases where the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls and other senior judges favour a hard line is as likely to damage his promotion prospects as he would if his appointment were found to be unfortunate on other more obvious grounds.
But this does not amount to dependence on the political wishes of governments or ministers as such.
In no real sense does such direct dependence or influence exist.
How far judges consciously or unconsciously subserve the wider interests of governments is another and more important question.
What is meant by saying that judges must be impartial and seen to be so?
Judges themselves claim this as their great virtue and only occasionally is it seen to be departed from.
Lord Haldane was a practising barrister in 1901 when he recorded:
I fought my hardest for the Dutch prisoners before the Privy Council this morning, but the tribunal was hopelessly divided, and the anti-Boers prevailed over the pro-Boers.
It is bad that so much bias should be shewn, but it is, I suppose, inevitable.
D. N. Pritt in his autobiography told of his many political cases and of one which ‘came before a judge of great experience and knowledge, so bitterly opposed to anything left-wing that he could scarcely have given a fair trial if he had tried’.
Are such phrases applicable today?
Every practising barrister knows before which judges he would prefer not to appear in a political case because he believes, and his  colleagues at the bar believe, that certain judges are much more likely than others to be biased against certain groups, like demonstrators or students, or certain kinds of action, like occupations of property by trade unionists or the homeless.
Sometimes counsel for one of the parties in a case will make objection to a particular judge hearing the case.
And the judge may then decide not to sit.
In 1978 Lord Denning MR acceded to such a request when told that the Church of Scientology of California felt that in his court there was an unconscious influence operating adversely to the church.
In January 1978, the Lord Chancellor announced that Judge Neil McKinnon had said that he wished not to preside in future over cases involving racial questions; and that this wish would be given effect to.
Judge McKinnon had been widely criticized for comments made during his hearing of a case of inciting racial hatred.
Occasionally the Lord Chancellor will publicly reprimand a judge, as happened in 1978 when Mr Justice Melford-Stevenson was rebuked for describing an Act of Parliament as a ‘buggers’ charter'.
In January 1982, Lord Hailsham repudiated the comment of a judge that a rape victim who hitch-hiked a lift was guilty of contributory negligence and that the rapist's penalty should accordingly be reduced.
In January 1984, Lord Hailsham reprimanded a Recorder who attacked as an affront to British justice a decision by Woolworths to prosecute a widow aged seventy-seven for shoplifting.
More seriously, Judge Argyle was severely reprimanded by Lord Havers ‘for a number of unfortunate remarks made by him in the course of a speech at Trent Polytechnic, Nottingham, on Friday, March 13, 1987’.
It was reported that he had said the Government ‘had fallen flat on its face in dealing with the situation’, adding that law and order did not exist in this country at the moment; that there could be up to five million illegal immigrants in Britain; and that judges should be able to impose the death sentence on  anyone convicted of an offence carrying more than a fifteen year sentence.
In November 1988, Circuit Judge Cassel was reported as having said, when putting a husband on probation for indecent assaults on his 12-year-old daughter, during his wife's pregnancy, that the wife's lack of sexual appetite led to considerable problems ‘for a healthy young husband’.
The Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, said it was regrettable that the judge should have expressed himself in this way.
It appeared that the judge had tendered his resignation on the grounds of ill health in a letter sent to the Lord Chancellor the day before his controversial comments.
It is generally agreed that making a bad decision (for which the remedy is an appeal) will not normally be treated as ground for dismissal of a Circuit judge as showing ‘inability or misbehaviour’.
In May 1989, a registrar admitted a drink-driving charge and was severely reprimanded by the Lord Chancellor.
In February 1989, the Lord Chancellor was reported as having sought an explanation of remarks made at a dinner by Sir James Miskin, Recorder of London.
Sir James was reported as having called for a return of capital punishment, launched an attack on the parole system, favoured the abolition of the right to silence for accused persons, referred to a black person as a ‘nig-nog’, and made a remark about ‘murderous Sikhs’ involved in a case he was hearing at the time.
The Court of Appeal subsequently upheld convictions in the case, saying that although the remarks ‘raised the appearance of bias’, and were ‘doubly deplorable’ as involving a respected ethnic minority, they could not have affected the outcome of the trial.
A simplified note on the structure of courts
Civil cases are first heard either in county courts by Circuit judges (of whom there are some 430); or in the High Court  by judges of the High Court (of whom there are over eighty).
Each case is heard by a single judge (very occasionally with a jury).
The High Court is divided into the Queen's Bench, Chancery and Family Divisions.
The head of the Queen's Bench is the Lord Chief Justice, of the Chancery is the Vice-Chancellor, and of the Family Division is its President.
For certain cases two or three judges of the Queen's Bench sit together and are then called the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division.
Appeal from county courts and the High Court lies to the Court of Appeal (civil division), which is presided over by the Master of the Rolls and where the other judges are Lords Justices of Appeal (of whom there are some thirty).
Two or three judges sit on each case.
From the Court of Appeal, appeal may lie to the House of Lords in important cases.
The House of Lords for this purpose consists of the Lord Chancellor (who sits infrequently) and the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (Law Lords, of whom there are not more than eleven).
Other peers who hold or have held high judicial office may sit but rarely do so.
Five usually sit on each case.
For an appeal to the House of Lords, either the Court of Appeal or the House of Lords must give leave.
It is possible, in certain circumstances, again if leave is obtained, to appeal direct from the High Court to the House of Lords, leapfrogging the Court of Appeal.
Less serious criminal cases are tried summarily (without a jury) by magistrates' courts where sit either two or more lay Justices of the Peace (of whom there are some 28,000) or a legally qualified stipendiary magistrate (of whom there are about sixty-five, most sitting in London).
More serious criminal cases are first enquired into by magistrates' courts to see if there is sufficient evidence for the case to go further.
If there is, the case goes to the Crown Court (sitting with a jury and in many different places), where it is heard by a  Queen's Bench or Circuit judge or by a Recorder (in certain circumstances joined by two to four Justices of the Peace).
Recorders (of whom there are over seven hundred, plus some five hundred Assistant Recorders) are practising barristers or solicitors who are required to sit for a few weeks each year.
Appeals from decisions of magistrates' courts on less serious cases go either, if only a question of law is disputed, to the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division or, where the appeal is on questions of fact and/or law, to the Crown Court.
Appeals from decisions in more serious cases (heard originally by the Crown Court) go to the Court of Appeal (criminal division), which draws its members from the Lord Chief Justice, the Lords Justices of Appeal and the judges of the High Court.
Normally, three sit on each case.
From the Divisional Court and the Court of Appeal, further appeal lies to the House of Lords if leave is obtained.
Finally, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council hears appeals from a very limited number of overseas territories.
It is composed of Law Lords, and others who hold or have  held judicial office in the United Kingdom or the Commonwealth.
2.
Extrajudicial activities
Commissions, inquiries, reports and the like
Judges are frequently called upon by the government of the day to preside over commissions, committees and administrative tribunals of different kinds.
Some of these are concerned with matters deep in political controversy.
Royal Commissions are appointed by the Crown to enquire into selected matters of concern.
Committees are appointed by ministers for the same purpose.
As the Crown acts on the advice of ministers in this matter, and as they deal with comparable matters, the distinction between the two is not substantial.
Royal Commissions have more prestige but nothing of real consequence flows from this, and the matters which these bodies investigate vary greatly in importance.
Dr T. J. Cartwright has recorded that 640 such bodies were appointed between 1945 and 1969 and he examined 358.
These included 24 Royal Commissions; and 334 ‘major’ departmental committees which he defined as those dealing with matters of direct concern to the government of Britain and whose reports were published as command papers.
The mean size of the twenty-four Royal Commissions was thirteen members, but when comparable committees are added the mean size falls to eight members.
Of the twenty-four Royal Commissions, judges chaired seven.
Only academics equalled them in number of Royal Commission  chairs and no one group of persons held half as many chairs of departmental committees.
Altogether, judges chaired 118 out of Dr Cartwright's 358 bodies.
Judges chaired commissions or committees concerned with, among other things, Justices of the Peace (1946–8), medical partnerships (1948), police conditions of service (1948–9), the industrial health services (1949–50), State immunities (1949–51), taxation of profits and income (1951–5), marriage and divorce (1951), dock workers (1955–6), the interception of communications (1957), prison conditions (1957–8), the working of the monetary system (1957–9), legal education for African students (1960), security in the public service (1961), the security service and Mr Profumo (1963), children and young persons in Scotland (1961–4), jury service (1963–5), the port transport industry (1964–5), pay for dock workers (1966), tribunals of enquiry (1966), ‘D’ notices (1967), the age of majority (1965–7), trade unions and employers' associations (1965–8), Scottish inshore fisheries (1967–70), the constitution (1969–73), one-parent families (1969–74), the adoption of children (1969–72), contempt of court (1974), defamation (1975), and the Brixton disorders (1981).
Many of these were highly political, some also highly controversial.
Since 1969, important departmental committees chaired by judges have included those on the interrogation of terrorists (1971–2), crowd safety (1971–2), legal procedures to deal with terrorists (1972), the working of the Abortion Act (1971–4), the Red Lion Square disorders (1974–5), standards of conduct in public life (1974–6), and police pay (1977–8).
All those related to affairs within the United Kingdom.
In addition, judges have frequently been employed on overseas matters.
One of the most famous of these in post-war years was the Nyasaland Commission of Enquiry of 1959 led by Mr Justice Devlin who reported in terms of which the government of the day did not wholly approve.
In 1972, Lord Pearce chaired a Commission on Rhodesian Opinion appointed to ascertain directly from all sections of the population of Rhodesia whether or not certain proposals for the government of that country were acceptable.
The number of such judicial appointments for overseas territories is considerable.
In December 1973, Mr John Morris MP asked how many judges had carried out non-judicial duties in the form of inquiries, commissions and reports, or similar tasks, during the previous twenty years.
He was told that, including Law Lords and Lords Justices but excluding standing bodies such as the Law Commission, the total was 79 judges.
The Labour Government of 1964 70 appointed more, on average, than did the Conservative Governments during this period from 1953 to 1973.
On 12 July 1984, Mr Morris tried the same question again for the period since 1973.
This time the Attorney General replied that the figures for the period before 1982 were ‘not fully available or reasonably accessible’, which can mean only that no one in his office was prepared to make the count.
However he did say that in the years ending June 1983 and June 1984 the total number of High Court judges so involved was 28.4 As no details were given, this figure is almost meaningless but if the categories counted were similar to those for the period of 1953–73 those two later years show almost a doubling, on average.
Most recently, in 1985, Mr Justice Popplewell reported on crowd safety and control at sports grounds, following the Bradford fire; in 1988, Lord Justice Butler-Sloss on suspected child abuse cases in Cleveland; in 1988 Mr Justice Barry Sheen on the sinking of the Herald of Free Enterprise; in 1988, Lord Cullen on the Piper Alpha oil rig explosion; in 1989, Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough stadium disaster.
In 1990, Lord Justice Woolf was appointed to inquire into the circumstances surrounding the riot at Strangeways prison and associated matters.
Judges are normally appointed as chairmen of those numerous committees which are concerned with reform of  substantive law or legal procedure.
Specifically a judge is chairman of the Law Commission which is the permanent body concerned with law reform.
Judges are therefore constantly involved in the process of making recommendations for improvement in the law and this includes not only technical legal subjects but also those on the boundaries of law and politics, like conspiracy.
The Scottish Law Commission, also chaired by a judge, became deeply involved in the debate on devolution, submitting memoranda particularly dealing with the distribution of powers between the United Kingdom Parliament and the proposed Scottish Assembly.
These memoranda, although generally avoiding comment that might be regarded as politically partisan on the question of the desirability or otherwise of devolution, contain passages which were bluntly, even scathingly, critical of the statements of the means by which the government hoped to achieve their objectives.
One of the Scottish Law Commission's proposals was that if the area of devolution was sufficiently extensive, responsibility for the courts should also be transferred to the Scottish Assembly.
A few months earlier Lord Wheatley spoke on behalf of all the High Court judges in Scotland.
He accepted that a judge, as a member of a Royal Commission or a departmental Committee of Enquiry, might have to explain publicly the recommendations arrived at.
However, he continued:
When the subject enters the political arena and becomes politically controversial, we assume an elective silence on the political issues and confine ourselves, if we intervene at all, to constitutional or legal questions or views on practical matters affecting the law and its administration where our views may naturally be expected and sought.
He went on to say that the unanimous view of the High Court judges in Scotland was that the Scottish courts should  remain the responsibility of the United Kingdom and not become the responsibility of the Scottish Assembly.
It is difficult to see how this disagreement between the Scottish Law Commission and the Scottish High Court judge could be thought of as other than political.
Judges are used to head permanent bodies concerned with national security.
In April 1980, Lord Diplock was appointed to review the interception of communications (mostly phone-tapping) undertaken by the police, Customs and Excise, and the security services.
Mr Robin Cook MP, objected to Lord Diplock's suitability on the ground that he had been chairman of the Security Commission since 1971, and had not formerly indicated any understanding of the concern for civil liberties and privacy which had given rise to public and press anxiety about the procedures of the security services.
Cook also referred to Diplock's ‘evident distaste for trade unions’ and said it was well known that ‘taps’were frequently placed on trade unionists involved in trade disputes.
The Home Secretary rejected the criticism.
Subsequently, the Speaker ruled in the House of Commons that it was offensive, even in relation to these extrajudicial activities, to refer to Lord Diplock as ‘a Tory judge’.
Under the Interception of Communications Act 1985, the appointment was made statutory and Lord Justice Lloyd was the Commissioner in 1990.
The chairman of the Security Commission, which investigates breaches of security and advises generally on security matters, is presently Lord Griffiths.
Under the Security Service Act 1989, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed Security Service Commissioner with a general supervisory role over the security services.
Mr Justice Simon Brown was appointed as the president of the complaints Tribunal under the Act.
High Court judges are the deputy chairmen of the Parliamentary Boundary Commissions.
In February 1985, the Lord Chancellor (Lord Hailsham) set up a Review Body on Civil Justice consisting of a small  team of officials mostly from the Lord Chancellor's Department and an advisory committee.
Lord Griffiths was a member of the committee.
The Review Body reported in 1988.
An important permanent body is the Judicial Studies Board.
Its function is to provide training for judges, especially for those acting as Assistant Recorders or deputy Registrars, and for lay magistrates; but also for other judges through refresher seminars, also attended by civil servants.
Originally limited to training in the criminal jurisdiction (with an emphasis on sentencing), the Board now is concerned also with the civil and family courts and tribunals.
There is a Main Board, chaired by a Lord Justice of Appeal; the committees on the different jurisdictions are also chaired by judges.
Judges also preside over enquiries set up under the Tribunals of Enquiry (Evidence) Act 1921.
These enquiries are nowadays reserved for investigations into matters which may involve the reputation of ministers or public officials.
Between 1945 and 1970 there were five: in 1948–9 into questions of possible bribery of ministers, chaired by Mr Justice Lynskey; in 1957–8 into leakage of bank rate, chaired by Lord Justice Parker; in 1959 into allegations of police assault on a boy, chaired by Lord Sorn; in 1962–3 into a case of spying in which a minister's moral behaviour might have been involved, chaired by Lord Radcliffe; and in 1966–7 into the responsibility for the Aberfan disaster, chaired by Lord Justice Edmund Davies.
Since 1970, this procedure has been used twice in Northern Ireland, as we shall see.
In 1972 a Tribunal of Enquiry presided over by Mr Justice James enquired into the collapse of the Vehicle and General Insurance Company and reported in terms  which were critical in particular of one civil servant.
In 1978 a Tribunal was appointed, under the chairmanship of Mr Justice Croom-Johnson, to investigate the activities of the Crown Agents.
Two outstanding examples of the use of the judiciary in politics have concerned industrial relations, and Northern Ireland.
Industrial relations
Under the Industrial Courts Act of 1919 the minister may set up a court of enquiry into a trade dispute.
Since 1954, fourteen of such courts have been presided over by judges, normally with two experienced non-lawyers.
Lord Pearson leads the field with five enquiries into disputes in the electricity supply, seamen's, civil air transport, steel, and port industries.
Lord Cameron follows with four: Ford's, port transport, printing, and building sites.
Lord Wilberforce presided over two enquiries into disputes in the electricity supply and coal industries; Lord Morris into a shipbuilding and engineering dispute; Lord Evershed into a London docks dispute; and Lord Justice Scarman into the Grunwick dispute.
These are far from being solely fact-finding enquiries.
The terms of reference frequently require the court to have regard to the public interest or the national interest or the national economy or considerations like ‘the need for an efficient and competitive’ industry.
In one recent enquiry  into the electricity supply industry, Lord Wilberforce asked the Treasury to submit a memorandum on the significance of the dispute to the interests of the national economy and the Treasury responded with a document that argued for a progressive and substantial reduction in the levels of settlements.
This request from the court caused some difficulties as it was argued that the government was seeking to impose its views and even a favoured solution of the dispute upon the court.
Lord Wilberforce sought to rebut this but the request clearly, in the minds of some, showed that the court was not independent or impartial.
The status and function of these courts came into question during one of the most critical of these enquiries, that presided over by Lord Wilberforce in 1972 into the dispute about miners' pay which had led to a widespread stoppage of work.
The extent to which the courts could become involved in the politics of such disputes had been shown a few years earlier when Lord Cameron presided over an enquiry into a dispute on London building sites.
The report then expressed the opinion that certain workmen should be eligible for re-employment if they sought it but not in any circumstances for election as shop stewards; and that other workmen should not be offered re-employment.
In the miners' dispute Lord Wilberforce became deeply enmeshed in job evaluation, the social and physical conditions in the pits and, above all, the need to produce a settlement under which the miners would go back to work.
Lord Wilberforce discovered that there were two factors in any possible wage increase.
One was the periodic factor that wages did increase from time to time -and the other was what he called the adjustment factor which meant that a time might come in any industry when a distortion or trend had to be recognized as such for correction.
‘The existence of these two quite separate factors’, said the report, ‘appears to have been overlooked until the present Enquiry brought  it to light.’
If a large increase could not be paid for by the National Coal Board then the government should meet it.
The Economist referred to the device of ‘calling in a High Court judge to write incredible economic nonsense’, but whatever view is taken of the justice or the wisdom of the report which recommended a considerable wage increase and which formed the basis of the settlement, the impression given was that the government had set up this enquiry to produce a report which would enable them to yield to the miners' claim without total loss of face.
Under other legislation, less formal committees may be set up to enquire into trade disputes, and in the 1960s Lord Devlin produced three reports on the port industry and Lord Cameron reported on a dispute concerning bank employees.
In 1962, the Royal Commission on the Press recommended that there should be set up a Press Amalgamations Court, like the Restrictive Practices Court, consisting of judges of the High Court and lay members appointed on the recommendation of the Lord Chancellor after consultation with the Trades Union Congress and the Press Council.
Lord Hailsham, then a minister, was doubtful about the value of the idea as he thought that the question of the public interest in a proposed amalgamation (which the court would have to consider) was ‘not justiciable’.
He went on to point out ‘the danger of getting the judiciary into politics’ especially as newspapers were often linked to political parties.
The primary concern of the judiciary, said Lord Hailsham, must be ‘to retain the respect of the public for their independence which involves not merely their real independence of mind, but also the belief which the public can have that they are seen to be independent in every respect’.
Eight years later these considerations did not apparently deter Lord Hailsham  (then Lord Chancellor) from supporting the setting up of the National Industrial Relations Court (NIRC).
When in 1970 the minister was introducing in the Commons legislation which created the NIRC, he said that the NIRC's existence showed ‘in fact as well as in symbol’ that the provisions of the Bill would not be arbitrarily implemented by the Secretary of State of the day but would ‘depend on the rule of the law’.
The court, he said (inaccurately), would be ‘something new in British justice’ and would consist of judges and laymen sitting together.
Many kinds of dispute arising out of industrial relations could find their way to the NIRC which, because of its status as a superior court of record and the powers given it by statute, was able to order the payment of fines and, if that or any other of its orders was disregarded, could imprison for contempt.
The application of that sanction led to the involvement of the ordinary courts.
Here I am concerned to emphasize that the NIRC was required by the legislation under which it operated to make decisions which were likely to lead, and did in fact lead, to considerable and widespread political protest.
Whether the NIRC always acted with the greatest wisdom may be debatable.
But its failure was due not primarily to the way it performed its functions, but to the nature of those functions.
Many people doubted whether the issues before the Restrictive Practices Court were justiciable.
What the NIRC was required to do was to make binding decisions, and to see that they were enforced, in the context of dispute between trade unions, individual workmen, employers, and employers' federations.
This, as many said at the time, was not a function which judges and courts could perform successfully.
Now under the Employment Protection Act of 1975 an Appeal Tribunal has been set up consisting of judges, and of others having special knowledge or experience of industrial relations, either as representatives of employers or as representatives of workers.
So in structure, if not in other ways, this tribunal is similar to the NIRC.
It can hear appeals from tribunals under or by virtue of the Equal Pay Act 1970, the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and others, as well as the Employment Protection Act itself.
It is a somewhat curious body in that much of its jurisdiction is to hear appeals on questions of law, for which the lay members might appear unfitted.
Perhaps we are seeing, as an evolution (the origins of which can be traced to the nineteenth century), the emergence of a genuine hybrid tribunal, in which case to suggest that this body is a further example of the use of judges for extrajudicial activities is only one way to describe it.
It could also be said to be an example of the developed use of experienced laymen to assist in the determination of disputes.
Northern Ireland
The first involvement of judges, acting outside their courts, in Northern Ireland was in 1969 when the Governor appointed Lord Cameron to lead a commission of enquiry into disturbances.
Then in 1971 Sir Edmund Compton (not a judge but the former Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration) chaired an enquiry into allegations of physical brutality by the security forces.
Sir Edmund found there had been cases of physical ill-treatment such as wall-standing, hooding, noise, deprivation of sleep, and diets of bread and water.
The Home Secretary rejected any suggestion that the methods authorized for interrogation contained any element of cruelty but he appointed three Privy Councillors to consider those methods.
One was Lord Parker (who had just retired as Lord Chief Justice) and another was Lord Gardiner (who had been Lord Chancellor from 1964 to 1970).
Lord Parker and the third Privy Councillor (Mr J. A. Boyd-Carpenter) concluded that these methods, subject to proper safeguards, and limiting the occasions on which and the degree to which they could be applied, conformed to the authority given.
Lord Gardiner said that they were secret, illegal, not morally justifiable and alien to the traditions of  what he believed still to be the greatest democracy in the world.
The disagreement was wide.
In April 1972, two reports were published.
Lord Widgery (who had succeeded Lord Parker as Lord Chief Justice) had been appointed as a one-man tribunal of enquiry to enquire into the events of ‘Bloody Sunday’ which led to thirteen civilian deaths in Londonderry.
This tribunal was set up under the Tribunals of Enquiry (Evidence) Act 1921 the procedure of which is designed to elicit facts.
The line between matters of fact and opinions deduced from facts is not always easy to draw.
Lord Widgery spoke about the justifiability of decisions taken by army commanders and soldiers, about actions which, he concluded, did ‘not require censure’, and in using such language caused dispute and argument about the nature of his findings.
In the meantime Mr Justice Scarman had since 1969 been enquiring with two others into the violence and civil disturbances of that year.
This tribunal also operated under the Act of 1921 and its report was substantial.
It investigated a large number of incidents and drew conclusions about fault and responsibility.
It assessed the social cost in terms of deaths, personal injuries, damage to property, damage to licensed premises, intimidation and displacement of persons.
At the end of 1972 a commission under the chairmanship of Lord Diplock reported on the legal procedures to deal with terrorist activities in Northern Ireland.
It concluded that the main obstacle to dealing efficiently with terrorist crime in the regular courts of justice was intimidation of would-be prosecution witnesses.
It recommended that trials of scheduled terrorist offences should be conducted without a jury; that members of the armed services should be given power to arrest and to detain for up to four hours to establish identity; that bail should not normally be granted; that the onus of proof as to the possession of firearms and explosives should in certain circumstances be shifted to the accused; and that the rules about the admissibility as evidence of confessions and signed statements should be relaxed.
That commission led to the passing of the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1973.
In 1974 Lord Gardiner was appointed chairman of a committee to consider what provisions and powers, consistent to the maximum extent practicable in the circumstances with the preservation of civil liberties and human rights, were required to deal with terrorism and subversion in Northern Ireland, including provisions for the administration of justice; and to examine the working of the Act of 1973.
The committee reported early in 1975, and made a large number of recommendations, some endorsing the Diplock Commission and the Act, others being critical and proposing amendments to the law.
In particular, it proposed the ending of detention without trial as soon as was politically possible, and it condemned as a serious mistake the establishment of a ‘special category’ for convicted prisoners claiming political motivation.
So from the beginning of 1972 there have been involved in five major enquiries relating to Northern Ireland a former Lord Chancellor (twice), a present and a former Lord Chief Justice, a Lord of Appeal, and a High Court judge.
On one occasion, two of these were seen to be in open disagreement about the legitimacy and desirability of actions taken by the authorities; on another occasion, one of these was set up, in effect, to review recommendations made by another.
It may be that a judge is well qualified to conduct enquiries to establish what took place on particular occasions.
But it is impossible for him in his findings not to interpret events.
He must draw deductions about what he thinks took place from the evidence that is presented to him.
And so he will be involved in political controversy and, in circumstances like those prevailing in Northern Ireland, inevitably accused of bias, of whitewashing, of serving certain political masters.
These accusations may be wholly untrue but they will be  made to an extent not paralleled by criticism of any judgment he may make from the bench of the regular courts.
Legislative process
The most senior judges sit in the House of Lords and may take part in its legislative and other activities.
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary — Law Lords — receive life baronies on appointment unless they are already ennobled.
A survey has been made of the twenty-six judges who were active Law Lords during the period 1952–68 together with two Lord Chief Justices, two Masters of the Rolls and one president of what was then the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division.
The authors of the survey say that there was very little ‘in the way of political activism’ on the part of the Law Lords whose contribution to debates on bills was largely that of acting as ‘resident technical consultants to the legislature on legal points’and it seems that those with records of overt political affiliation did not speak more than others.
While participating Law Lords agreed with one another more frequently than they disagreed, the authors of the survey list thirteen items between 1956 and 1967 where there was a substantial measure of disagreement and of these several were not matters of technical law.
They included capital punishment, artificial insemination, adultery, the minimum age for the death penalty, corporal punishment of young offenders, and disputes concerning majority verdicts, suspended sentences and parole.
In one recent debate, five Law Lords, in an unprecedented way, spoke against a legislative proposal which provided that in assessing damages payable to a widow on the death of her husband, her remarriage or prospects of remarriage should not be taken into account.
Two other Law Lords participated and all the Law Lords with two exceptions attended the debate on 6 May 1971.
‘In the face of almost certain defeat in the Lobby,’ say Blom-Cooper and Drewry, ‘the Law Lords, as decorously  as they were able, withdrew their amendment and retired once more into their judicial shells.’
Where technical law ends and political controversy begins is not always easy to determine.
It is clear, however, that Law Lords while for the most part restricting themselves to the obviously technical are not averse to speaking on social questions like capital punishment, the treatment of offenders and adultery.
They do occasionally assume the role of ‘self-appointed guardians of the nation's conscience’.
A well-known example from earlier in this century of a Law Lord speaking on a political matter in the House of Lords arose when Lord Carson in 1921 strongly attacked the proposal to establish an Irish Free State.
His right to do so was challenged by Lord Chancellor Birkenhead and defended by former Lord Chancellor Finlay during a debate in 1922 on Law Lords and party politics.
In 1963, Lord Hodson, already well known for his judicial views on matrimonial matters, strongly opposed provisions in Mr Leo Abse's Matrimonial Causes and Reconciliation Bill.
He spoke once during the second reading debate, spoke or intervened thirteen times in committee, once on report, and once on third reading.
And Lord Hodson was concerned primarily with the substantive merits and demerits of the Bill, not with its legal technicalities.
But more dramatic and more political was Lord Salmon's contribution in 1975 to the debates on the government's controversial Trade Union and Labour Relations (Amendment) Bill.
He said:
We cannot shut our eyes to the fact that there are groups, very small numerically but extremely cohesive and tenacious, who have infiltrated the unions with the intention of seizing power if they can.
Their objects and ideas are entirely different from those of the trade  unions, which we all know and respect.
Their avowed purpose is to wreck the Social Contract and the democratic system under which we live.
Their ethos derives from foreign lands where individual liberty is dead, and where the courts and trade unions are mere tools of the Executive, to do its will.
The argument is familiar — Lord Gordon-Walker said he had heard it for forty years — but, even more, it is a political argument.
Lord Salmon clearly felt strongly and spoke in the name of freedom and democracy.
He posed the question whether the disadvantage of a judge speaking on matters which in one form or another — such as unfair dismissal from employment or from a trade union — might well come before him when he was on the bench was outweighed by the advantage of hearing his views or by the argument that he should not be prevented, by convention or otherwise, from speaking in Parliament on such a matter.
In 1984, when the Police and Criminal Evidence Bill was being debated in the House of Lords, Lord Scarman, who had spoken at second Reading, moved two amendments during the Committee stage.
The first concerned unlawfully obtained evidence and had the object of strengthening the deterrent effect of the Bill in dealing with problems of the misuse of police power.
He returned to the same matter during the Report stage and his amendment was carried, against the Government, on a division.
Subsequently, the Government inserted a clause of their own which went some way to meet Lord Scarman's amendment.
On third Reading, he moved a second amendment to make racially discriminatory behaviour by the police a specific disciplinary offence.
This was also carried on a division; the Government accepted their defeat and did not seek to reverse the decision.
Both these matters were deep in political controversy, the second in particular being strongly resisted by the police as well as by the Government.
Occasionally, a Law Lord may introduce a Bill, as did Lord Templeman in 1987–8 when he took the Land Registration Bill through the House of Lords on behalf of the Law Commission.
The participation of judges in the debates on the Courts and Legal Services Bill 1989–90 is discussed below.
Participation in public debate
In July 1955, the Director-General of the British Broadcasting Corporation (Sir Ian Jacob) wrote to the Lord Chancellor (Lord Kilmuir) about a project he had in mind for broadcasting a series of lectures about great judges of the past in which Sir Ian hoped members of the judiciary would participate.
The Lord Chancellor consulted the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls and the President of the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division of the High Court who all agreed with his reply.
The Lord Chancellor began with the complacent and highly debatable observation that ‘we are likely…to get a better assessment of the qualities of some eminent judge of the past through an existing member of the judiciary than from anyone else’.
He continued in words which became known as the Kilmuir rules:
But the overriding consideration, in the opinion of myself and my colleagues, is the importance of keeping the judiciary in this country insulated from the controversies of the day.
So long as a judge keeps silent his reputation for wisdom and impartiality remains unassailable: but every utterance which he makes in public, except in the course of the actual performance of his judicial duties, must necessarily bring him within the focus of criticism.
It would, moreover, be inappropriate for the judiciary to be associated with any series of talks or anything which could be fairly interpreted as  entertainment…
My colleagues and I, therefore, are agreed that as a general rule it is undesirable for members of the judiciary to broadcast on the wireless or to appear on television…
We consider that if judges are approached by the broadcasting authorities with a request to take part in a broadcast on some special occasion, the judge concerned ought to consult the Lord Chancellor, who would always be ready to express his opinion on the particular request.
Lord Kilmuir added that he had no sort of disciplinary jurisdiction over Her Majesty's judges, each of whom, if asked to broadcast, would have to decide for himself whether he considered it compatible with his office to accept.
In January 1986, the then Lord Chancellor (Lord Hailsham) said that the rules had been reviewed from time to time and the judiciary of the Supreme Court and the Circuit bench consulted.
He himself had consulted the judges in 1971, 1979 and 1985.
On each occasion the ‘overwhelming consensus’ was that there should be ‘no change at all’.
The course adopted, said Lord Hailsham, was to channel invitations for participation in journalism, appearances on the media, and other public engagements through the Lord Chancellor's office.
Certain kinds of publications seem not to have caused difficulties.
Lord Scarman was a judge in the Court of Appeal when he gave and published the Hamlyn lectures in 1974, which were controversial, as was the Dimbleby lecture given by Lord Denning in 1980.
There have been other examples.
There have also been conflicts.
The ‘controversies of the day’ certainly included the dispute over clause 43 of the Administration of Justice Bill in 1985, by which the Government proposed to end the citizen's right to go to the Court of Appeal when a lower court refused to give leave to apply for judicial review of the decision of a Minister or other public authority.
Among the many public critics were  two Lords Justices of Appeal.
This, said Lord Hailsham, was ‘utterly improper’.
The judges were reported to have apologised.
There were other reports that judges had been refused permission to appear on television in the early 1980s.
Extended to journalism, the rules were directly challenged by Circuit Judge Pickles.
In March 1985, he came into conflict with the Lord Chancellor over an article he had written for the Daily Telegraph on Government pressure on the judiciary to shorten sentences and on the inadequacies of the prison system.
The Lord Chancellor told him that, prima facie, the article constituted ‘judicial misbehaviour’ which is a ground for dismissal.
In August 1985, Judge Pickles wrote a second article for the newspaper and was interviewed by the Lord Chief Justice.
In February 1986, he wrote an article in The Guardian attacking the Kilmuir rules as ‘much too wide’ and setting out the attempts to silence him, quoting letters from the Lord Chancellor (Hailsham).
He also recorded programmes about law and society for the British Broadcasting Corporation.
In other public statements he was openly critical of the Lord Chancellor and his department, accusing it of being secretive and antiquated.
In April 1987, Judge Pickles published an outspoken autobiography.
It was reported that in 1985 and 1986, objection was taken by the Lord Chancellor to Lord Justice Brown-Wilkinson's participation in public debates as a result of which he did not appear.
It seems to be accepted that peers are not expected to contact the Lord Chancellor's department before they speak extrajudicially in public.
Lord McCluskey, in the Reith lectures of 1986, expressed many criticisms and warnings.
Lord Templeman in the same year took part in radio and television programmes.
In 1987, the Lord Chief Justice (Lord Lane) publicly backed police demands for the abolition of the suspect's ‘right to silence’; and was reported as attacking politicians for delay in passing tougher laws on sentencing  policy, a question on which the judiciary was divided.
Whether these three informed the Lord Chancellor that they intended to speak on these lines is not known.
It seems improbable.
It is sometimes said that judges are entitled to make extrajudicial statements critical of the existing law and advocating reform.
Perhaps Judge Pickles's utterances were disapproved of more for their style than for their content.
In November 1987, Lord Mackay, the newly appointed Lord Chancellor, ended the practice whereby judges were expected to seek the guidance of the Lord Chancellor's department before making public statements or taking part in radio or television programmes.
They were now to be trusted to use their own discretion.
The consultative function
From mediaeval times, the sovereign and his or her principal ministers have consulted with the judges, those ‘lions under the throne’.
The advice they gave was not always to the sovereign's liking as the famous conflicts between James I and Chief Justice Coke showed.
The peers also consulted the judges on occasion and when they did so in 1614 over the long-debated matter of the right of the King to tax through ‘impositions’ without Parliamentary approval, Coke took the view that the judges should not be required to give an opinion ‘on the ground that they were expected in judicial course to speak and judge between the King's majesty and his people, and likewise between His Highness's subjects, and in no case to be disputants on any side’.
It is tempting to see this as the first occasion when the judges insisted on independence on this principle.
We shall see that the conflicts between the different roles played by the judge in the political order persist today.
Government departments, especially the Home Office, frequently consult the judges on matters which require law reform, as do so many political changes.
Departments have their own legal advisers but the view of the judges, who will  be required to interpret and apply the legislation, may be thought valuable.
The Judges' Council of the Supreme Court and the Council of Circuit Judges may be consulted.
So may individual judges.
Thus on 7 June 1988, the House of Commons debated a proposal that juries should be empowered to recommend the use of the death penalty.
The Home Secretary asked the Lord Chief Justice for his opinion and, said the Home Secretary, ‘I can tell the House that he would be strongly opposed’ to the proposal, on the ground that it was for Parliament, not the judges, to decide which types of murder should be met with death.
Sometimes the relationship goes beyond consultation.
Lord Justice Butler-Sloss presided over the Cleveland inquiry into child abuse.
Later, in June 1989, it was reported that she was proposing to the Lord Chancellor that the Children Bill should reverse a decision which she and other members of the Court of Appeal had felt obliged to make excluding hearsay evidence.
In September 1989, following a private conference, the Lord Justice was reported as launching an education programme for judges on sentencing and treatment of child sex abusers.
It was also reported in August 1989 that Circuit Judge Bracewell was to play a vital role in the administration of the Children Act, advising on the system needed to match individual cases to the court best fitted to deal with them.
In this connection, she was reported to have been co-opted to the Judicial Studies Board.
In September 1989, it was reported that the Home Secretary had begun a series of private discussions with public officials including the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice (who had hitherto been reluctant to participate in such discussions lest they were seen as prejudicing judicial independence) and the senior Lord Justice of Appeal.
The discussions were seen as preliminary to the Government policy paper on criminal justice.
Judges and the public service
The relationship between the judiciary and the Government has been changed by developments over the last twenty years and especially over the last five years or so.
The longer term has seen a greater willingness on the part of the judiciary to challenge the exercise by Ministers and civil servants of their discretionary powers.
An early example is shown in Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture (1968).
The procedure by way of judicial review was simplified in 1977 and the number of applications rose considerably.
In some areas the judiciary seems more willing to limit the exercise of discretionary powers; in others, less willing, even reluctant.
In 1987 a pamphlet, prepared by the Treasury Solicitor's Department in conjunction with the Management and Personnel Office of the Cabinet Office, was published under the title The Judge Over Your Shoulder .
This was directed to civil servants as an introduction to the basic principles of judicial review.
It attributed the growth of judicial review to, amongst other things, ‘an increasing willingness on the part of the judiciary to intervene in the day-to-day business of government, coupled with a move towards an imaginative interpretation of statutes’.
The pamphlet explained, in simple terms, how civil servants could protect themselves from the possibility of having their actions and decisions overturned by the courts.
A more direct conflict between the judiciary and the Government arose because of an alleged change in the attitude of the Lord Chancellor's Department.
The conflict arose over the way in which the courts were administered and was a result of the application of managerial principles propagated by the Thatcher administrations of the 1980s.
Before this, the judges themselves, and especially the Master of the Rolls, whose responsibility it was seen to be, considered and made the necessary recommendations to the Department on the staffing and other administrative arrangements of the courts.
Because public expenditure was  involved, the judges did not always get all the changes they wanted.
But theirs was the initiative; and it was usually successful.
Those arrangements can seriously affect the work of the courts, being concerned with assessing the needs of the courts and securing resources, organising the internal structures of the courts so that they can best deal with the caseloads arising, laying down pre-trial and trial procedures, managing the case-flow, measuring and monitoring court performance, managing court records, and planning necessary reforms to court structures and processes.
In November 1987, the head of the Chancery Division of the High Court, Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson, in a public lecture spoke of a threat to the independence of the legal system arising ‘by reason of the executive's control of finance and administration’.
He was explicit: ‘There appear to be those in the Lord Chancellor's Department who perceive its role as being far wider than is consistent with any concept of the independence of the judiciary.’
He referred to the political reforms introduced by the Treasury in other Departments and to the Financial Management Initiative.
This had affected staffing levels, prejudicing the proper administration of justice.
It had resulted in the allocation of funds based not on the best interests of justice but on value for money.
Behind this lay the complaint that the judiciary had been effectively excluded from policy-making.
A year later, the then Lord Chancellor (Lord Hailsham) replied by claiming that the essential function of the Lord Chancellor was to defend the independence and integrity of the judiciary.
He denied that the Lord Chancellor was ‘the lackey or dupe of the Chief Secretary of the Treasury’ and scorned the idea that judges should be permitted ‘to run a sort of legal Arcadia’.
In 1988 the Lord Chief Justice (Lord Lane) re-instituted the Judges Council of the Supreme Court.
The report of the  Review Body on Civil Justice said the Council ‘should enable the judiciary to plan for the allocation of High Court caseloads and judge power in the light of needs and resources of that court as a whole rather than of individual Divisions.
It will also enable it to put a common view to the Lord Chancellor about needs for resources and about priorities for some needs.’
The Council consists of the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls, the President of the Family Division, the Vice-Chancellor as head of the Chancery Division, the senior presiding judge and two judges of the High Court, one of whom is a presiding judge.
Its staff is provided by the Lord Chancellor's Department.
It is too early to assess its general impact.
In the meantime, it is clear that many judges consider that the Lord Chancellor's Department has ceased to act as an intermediary or ‘hinge’ between themselves and the executive Government and has become as much a part of the governmental machinery as any other Department of State.
Judges feel that in this process they have lost a privileged position which also helped to preserve their independence.
This conflict between the judges and the Lord Chancellor's Department erupted when Lord Mackay put forward his proposals for the reform of the legal profession.
So also, it must not be assumed that Ministers and civil servants regard judicial decisions as necessarily embodying the ultimate wisdom, especially where those decisions limit their powers.
Indeed, their immediate reaction may be to seek ways which circumvent judicial pronouncements.
A striking example of this occurred in 1989 when a decision of the Divisional Court interpreting immigration rules was considered by the Treasury Solicitor's Department to be wrong and too advantageous to the prospective immigrant.
As a result, a senior member of the Treasury Solicitor's staff sent an advisory letter to the President of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal saying that the decision undermined the  rules and that the judge went ‘much too far’.
On the authority of the President, the letter was distributed to immigration adjudicators, with a copy of the decision and a briefing to counsel defending such applications for judicial review.
The advice suggested: ‘we must try, by adopting a uniformly more robust and aggressive approach, to recover some lost ground’ and accused the Divisional Court ‘almost invariably’of looking for errors or ambiguities so as to upset the determinations of adjudicators.
As a result of the publicity given to these events, it was decided that the Treasury Solicitor would no longer act as solicitor for the Tribunal.
A similar attitude was shown in 1986 when the Law Lords stated that the Trustee Savings Bank and its assets belonged not to depositors but to the state, shortly before the Bank was floated on the Stock Exchange.
This view was contrary to that of the Government.
It was ignored by the Treasury.
Sentencing policy is a source of disagreement between judges and the Home Office.
Arguments have arisen over proposals to introduce automatic parole for short-term prisoners; also over the possibility of dividing every sentence of three years or under into three parts: imprisonment, supervised release, and remission (which Lords Justices on the criminal side of the Court of Appeal made clear they did not like).
Ministers from time to time make statements seeming to indicate to judges generally what sentencing policy should be, within the range of punishments laid down by statutes for different crimes.
Similarly, when life sentences are reviewed, the trial judge makes a recommendation to the parole board but complaints have been made that too frequently junior Ministers in the Home Office depart from the recommendation, usually by increasing the length of the period of imprisonment.
This is seen by some judges as usurping their function.
A Government policy paper in 1990 on criminal justice would impose new duties on judges.
These include requiring a Court before giving a custodial sentence to consider a  report by the probation service and to give reasons for such a sentence, except for the most serious offences; also to satisfy itself that the offence was serious enough to justify the use of custody.
The white paper proposed to give the courts power to give longer custodial sentences to persistent violent and sexual offenders.
The courts have always exercised considerable discretion, within the maximum penalties laid down by statute, depending on the particular facts of the cases before them.
Inevitably they have been criticized, from time to time, for what was seen, usually, as undue leniency, sometimes as undue harshness.
The Court of Appeal frequently gives sentencing guidance, for example on rape, incest and drug trafficking; where firearms are used; and on young offenders.
How far judicial discretion on sentencing should be directed by Government policy is problematic.
The policy paper stated:
No Government should try to influence the decisions of the courts in individual cases.
The independence of the judiciary is rightly regarded as a cornerstone of our liberties.
But sentencing principles and sentencing practice are matters of legitimate concern to Government, and Parliament provides the funds necessary to give effect to the court's decisions.
This is unexceptionable, if not particularly helpful.
The judges may be less happy with what follows:
To help the courts in sentencing decisions, the Government also proposes that the legislation should place a new duty on the Secretary of State to inform the courts annually of the costs of implementing penalties…
The courts, as well as other services, should know the costs of the decisions they take.
Financial considerations can never be the deciding factor in sentencing.
Even so the courts should take some account of the costs of implementing their decisions when they sentence, especially when they have a choice of suitable penal ties.
The general intention of the Government is to seek to reduce the prison population by encouraging judges to apply alternative penalties in many cases.
Much will depend on the willingness of the courts to co-operate and, in particular, to give non-custodial sentences for repeated non-violent crimes, like burglary.
Clearly the Government decided to tread carefully so as not to offend the judiciary by appearing to interfere directly with their discretionary powers to sentence as they think appropriate.
In June 1990, it was reported that the Home Secretary was seeking a compromise with the judges on the proposals to limit custodial sentences.
Lord Mackay's proposals
In January 1989, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, published his proposals for reform of the legal profession in three policy papers.
Some of the proposals, including those which threatened the monopoly of barristers in superior courts, required all advocates to have certificates of competence, and permitted multi-disciplinary partnerships, aroused considerable opposition from within the profession.
Most remarkable was the language used by some senior members of the judiciary.
The Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane, referred to the first paper on the profession as ‘one of the most sinister documents ever to emanate from Government’.
The Master of the Rolls, Lord Donaldson, said he had ‘absolutely no disagreement’ with Lord Lane over the main issues.
Lord Scarman criticized the papers as being ‘ill-considered’, ‘superficial’ in their reasoning and ‘flawed’in their logic.
Lord Ackner spoke of the proposals as involving ‘at the very least a substantial risk of the destruction of the Bar’, of ‘the myopic application of dogma’ and  much else besides.
The former Lord Chancellor, Lord Hailsham, was reported as saying that the Government was ‘thinking with its bottom and sitting on its head’.
It is, of course, common practice for Government departments to consult with affected interests before they publish proposals.
By so doing they can often make modifications which buy off subsequent opposition.
In the debate in the House of Lords on 7 April 1989, Lord Lane suggested that it would have been ‘courteous or even helpful’ if those responsible had seen fit to consult the judges upon the draft of the proposals.
But Lord Mackay drew attention to correspondence he had had with Lord Lane the previous autumn after the Government's announcement of their intention to publish proposals.
The Lord Chief Justice had said then that it would be wrong for it to appear that the proposals had the backing of the judges or that they had had any hand in their preparation; and that it was essential that the judges remained at arm's length.
This dispute emphasises the ambiguity of the judges' position.
They want, at one and the same time, to be ‘independent’ of Government and to be involved in the processes of government.
But, like everyone else, once they enter into discussions on policy with Ministers and civil servants they compromise their vaunted independence.
In the debate referred to, the senior judges renewed their attack.
Lord Lane said:
Oppression does not stand on the doorstep with a toothbrush moustache and a swastika armband.
It creeps up insidiously; it creeps up step by step; and all of a sudden the unfortunate citizen realizes that [freedom]has gone…
One asks whether we are now seeing tools being fashioned which by some future, perhaps less scrupulous, Government may be used to weaken the independent administration of justice and so undermine the rule of law.
Lord Donaldson spoke of the further proposed fragmentation of the profession as ‘an unmitigated disaster’; of ‘an irreversible plunge into the unknown’; of ‘an affront to the constitutional doctrine of the separation of power’; of freedom disappearing ‘by gradual erosion’.
And he reserved the right to say to the Government ‘Get your tanks off my lawn’.
Lord Bridge spoke of a ‘deep sense of unease’ felt by the great majority of the judiciary and of ‘hasty and ill-considered legislation’.
Lord Goff referred to multidisciplinary partnerships as ‘most objectionable’, and Lord Griffiths called them a ‘profound mistake’.
Lord Ackner inveighed against ‘political considerations, political dogma and doctrine which are about to do untold harm to the future quality of the administration of justice.’
Lord Oliver spoke of the Government taking ‘a terrible and unjustifiable risk’ and of the papers containing much that was ‘quite unacceptable’
In May 1989, the Judges' Council set out the majority views of High Court and Court of Appeal judges.
To a considerable extent these views supported those of the Bar Council in seeking to retain the monopoly of barristers in the superior courts, in rejecting multi-disciplinary partnerships, and in objecting to the Lord Chancellor having power to make final decisions on the training, conduct and rights of audience of advocates.
In July, Lord Mackay published a white paper which abandoned the proposal of a single accreditation for advocates, gave the judges a veto over the rules for accreditation of solicitors, and did not continue to propose multi-disciplinary partnerships.
The effect may be to limit greatly the opportunity for solicitors to act as advocates in more serious criminal cases.
On 19 December 1989, the Courts and Legal Services Bill  was given a second reading in the House of Lords.
The general temperature of the debate was lower than that on 7 April.
Much of the strongest criticism was voiced not by the judges in the House but by non-lawyers such as Lord Benson who had chaired the Royal Commission on Legal Services which reported in 1979.
Lord Ackner, however, remained unsubdued.
He said:
I am convinced that the probable long-term — and not all that long -collective effect of this Bill as it now stands will be to inflict serious damage on the quality of justice in this country…
The ever-increasing megafirms, with their growing litigation departments, growing both in size and cost, with full rights of audience in all courts, will cause the Bar to wither away.
The district attorney system will take over the criminal prosecutions, and the corrupt philosophy of the contingency fee will pervade the whole system.
The strong and independent judiciary, acknowledged by the Government in the Green Paper to be one of the central supports upon which our liberties are based and upon which the rule of law depends, will be weakened by the diminishing quality of available recruits and the growing political influence in their appointments.
And he quoted Chief Justice Cardozo of the Supreme Court of the USA:
We must always take care to safeguard the law against the assaults of opportunism, the expediency of the passing hour, the erosion of small encroachments, and the scorn and derision of those who have no patience with general principles.
When the Bill was debated in committee and on report, language was again more restrained.
To a remarkable extent, speeches and interventions by judicial peers were dominated by Lords Ackner and Donaldson.
Lord Ackner  spoke on over 80 occasions and moved 17 amendments.
Lord Donaldson spoke on 54 occasions.
On third Reading, Lords Ackner and Donaldson spoke on 17 occasions, Lord Ackner moving two more amendments.
During all these proceedings six other judicial peers spoke on a total of 16 occasions.
On third Reading, Lord Ackner returned to the attack.
With the particular merits and demerits of these proposals I am not here directly concerned.
But the reaction of the most senior members of the judiciary — the Law Lords, the Lord Chief Justice and the Master of the Rolls — was felt by many of the general public, I believe, to conflict with the image which the judiciary have been at pains to promote.
Judges, it was thought, did not enter into open controversy with politicians, certainly not in such outspoken language.
Lord Benson referred to the debate of 7 April when he commented on ‘the degrading spectacle of the Lord Chancellor and virtually the whole of the judiciary in open conflict’.
This conflict was uncharacteristic both because judges usually avoided speaking against the Government on matters of party policy and because judges usually worked behind the scenes to advance their own causes or to influence legal reforms.
Senior professional persons have traditionally not descended into the open political pit because they have not needed to, having more effective ways to achieve their ends.
But, until recently, senior professional persons have not been directly challenged over what Bernard Shaw called their conspiracies against the laity.
This conflict showed that judges, no less than physicians and surgeons, churchmen, academics, and practising lawyers would seek, for a variety of reasons (some being more elevated than others) to defend their professional status with much vigour and little subtlety.
Conclusion
If it is accepted, as I argue, that a judge, when sitting in his court, is frequently required to make decisions which involve  an assessment of where the public interest lies and so to make a political decision, then he cannot be said to act neutrally, although he may still be the person best suited to make that particular decision.
Also he may be the best person to make certain extrajudicial decisions and his opinions on a range of public matters may be worth hearing.
There is nothing inherently improper in consultations between a judge and public officials on general matters of policy concerning the administration of the judicial system.
But judges should not be involved in the making of decisions for which they are unsuited.
The falseness arises when judges are presented, or present themselves, as neutral arbiters capable of providing unpolitical solutions to political problems or of expressing unpolitical opinions on political issues.
It is when the claim to neutrality is seen, as it must be, as a sham that damage is done to the judicial system.
lank Page 
Cases
The Court's position had not been made any easier by suggestions that it was possible for the Government to influence its decisions.
The Court was surprised that those suggestions should have been made, and the Court owed it to its members and to all concerned to make it clear that no attempt had been made by anyone directly or indirectly, otherwise than in open court, to influence its decision.
Sir John Donaldson , President of the National Industrial Relations Court, in Midland Cold Storage Ltd v. Turner and Others , as reported in The Times, 28 July 1972.
It was a matter of real concern that the divisional court, exercising the power of judicial review, was increasingly…being used for political purposes superficially dressed up as points of law.
The proper remedy was the ballot box and not the court.
If a rating or precepting authority over-rated or over-precepted, the remedy was in the hands of the electorate…
The impropriety of coming to the court when political capital was sought to be made could not be overstressed.
It was perhaps even worse when public servants were or felt constrained to file affidavits which demonstrated a political purpose.
McNeill, J. in R. v. Greater London Council  ex parte Kensington and Chelsea LBC dismissing an application for judicial review of a precept issued by the GLC, as reported in The Times , 7 April 1982.
The intellectual isolation of appellate judges, who resolve ‘hard cases’ with reference to notions of social justice and public policy which they are singularly (and collectively) ill-equipped to understand…remains a deeply worrying feature of our judicial process.
Mr Gavin Drewry in 47 Modern Law Review (1984), p.380.
Spycatcher is a very interesting case, in this respect.
Some people say we're all establishment minded and other people say we're all something else minded.
But in fact in Spycatcher we're not.
No one can sack us, no one can take our pensions away, in Spycatcher three of us decided in favour of Mrs Thatcher and against the editor of The Sunday Times , and those three of us didn't care a damn for the editor of The Sunday Times .
Two of us decided in favour of The Sunday Times and against Mrs Thatcher, and those two didn't give a damn for Mrs Thatcher, we each of us decided it was a matter of principle, knowing that we were bound to be criticised, whatever we did, and we decided it, and there's an end of it.
Lord Templeman, in an interview on Radio 4 with Hugo Young on 13 April 1988.
3.
Industrial relations
The early cases
From the middle ages, Parliament has been concerned with the problems, central to the national economy, of productivity and the control of wages.
And, for hundreds of years, workers who were thought to be failing in their duties were subjected to imprisonment and other penalties.
The use of the penal law against workers, especially when it involves imprisonment, or the possibility of imprisonment, is one of the most persistent sources of conflict between labour and management, and between labour and governments.
Parliament legislated extensively against the combination of workers but the judges also, through their power of interpreting statutes and of making and extending the common law, were a powerful source of constraint on the emerging trade union movement in the industrial society of the nineteenth century.
Two outstanding characteristics of labour law during the second half of that century were the intermittent recognition by politicians in government and Parliament that control of trade unionism by the imposition of penalties was of doubtful efficacy; and the recurrent attempts by the courts to preserve the penal method.
Statutes of 1859,1871 and 1875 were designed to relieve trade unions of criminal liability, especially for conspiracy.
Specifically, the Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act 1875 provided that an agreement by two or more persons to do or procure to be done any act in contemplation or  furtherance of a trade dispute should not be a criminal conspiracy unless the act itself was punishable as a crime.
So to strike ceased to be a crime.
The last decade of the nineteenth century saw the development of a considerable antipathy to trade unionism among influential public opinion.
This was in part due to the emergence of New Unionism which sought to organize unskilled workers.
Professor Saville has written that the old unions ‘were able to rely upon the skill of their members as a crucial bargaining weapon’ but ‘the new unionists were at all times, even in years of good trade, subject to the pressures of an over-stocked labour market’.
So ‘the employers, too, in the semi- and unskilled trades were more uncompromising than their fellows in industries where unionism had long been established’.
The industrial offensive against the trade unions in the early years of the 1890s was ‘most successful against the dockers, the seamen and the casual trades’ but all the New Unions lost heavily in membership.
It is against the background of this offensive that the judicial decisions of 1896–1901 must seen.
Although the right to strike had been established, some of the judges were not to be so easily defeated.
In addition to the crime of conspiracy, there is the civil wrong (or tort) of conspiracy, consisting of an agreement which has been acted on and which is made in order to attain either an unlawful object or a lawful object by unlawful means.
It was to this that some judges turned their attention.
In Allen v. Flood a dispute arose between the ironworkers' union and woodworkers, the former objecting to certain work being done by the latter.
Ironworkers told one of their officials that they would stop working if the woodworkers were continued in employment.
The official informed the employers accordingly and the employers lawfully  dismissed the woodworkers, who then brought an action against the official.
The case was first argued in December 1895 before seven members of the House of Lords including Lord Chancellor Halsbury, and a former Lord Chancellor, Herschell.
‘From the very beginning,’ says Professor Heuston, ‘Lord Halsbury took a view strongly adverse to the position of the trade union and expressed his firm opinion that the plaintiffs…were entitled to damages for an interference with their right to work.
It was also clear, however, that on this point he would be unable to carry with him a majority of his colleagues.’
Apparently, Halsbury then ‘conceived the idea that the case should be re-argued before an enlarged body of Law Lords and that, in addition, the House should adopt once more the practice of summoning the High Court judges to advise’, a practice generally thought to be obsolete.
Lord Herschell was angered by this idea and, says Professor Heuston, ‘the High Court judges at that time, many of whom were Halsbury's own appointments, were not on the whole notable for progressive views on social or industrial matters.’
Between 25 March and 2 April 1897 the case was reargued before the original seven Law Lords and two others.
Of the eight High Court judges who attended, and gave their ‘opinions’, six agreed with Lord Halsbury and two disagreed.
But when the nine Law Lords delivered their judgments in December 1897, Lord Halsbury's views were supported by only two of his colleagues, with Lord Herschell and five others in the opposing majority.
So the trade unions remained protected.
Then in 1901, in Quinn v. Leathem , the effect of that decision was reversed.
For many years, L supplied a butcher with meat.
The trade union sought to persuade L not to employ non-union men.
When this failed, the union  instructed their members working for the butcher that, if he continued to buy L's meat, they were to cease work.
So the butcher took no more meat from L who brought an action against the union officials for conspiracy to injure him.
The House of Lords decided unanimously in his favour.
From the trade unionists' viewpoint the effect of Quinn v. Leathem was seriously to curtail their power to operate in ways which would strengthen the working-class movement against employers.
This was thought by trade unionists to be inconsistent with the leading decision of ten years before which had protected employers' associations from conspiracy on the ground that the acts had been done ‘with the lawful object of protecting and extending their trade and increasing their profits’ without employing unlawful means, although the consequence had been to injure their competitors.
These judicial decisions caused great political upheaval and resulted in the passing of the Trade Disputes Act 1906 which followed the same pattern as the Act of 1875, protecting trade unions from actions for civil conspiracy if the acts were done in furtherance or contemplation of a trade dispute.
Another struggle centred on trade union funds.
In law, property may be held either by a natural person, or by a number of such persons, or by an incorporated body such as a company.
Trade unions fell into the second of these groups, but, because of their large and fluctuating membership and because of certain provisions in the Trade Union Act 1871, it was assumed that it was impracticable to bring actions against them so as to make their funds liable.
In 1900 a dispute arose because it was said that the Taff Vale Railway Company had victimized a trade unionist who led a wage demand.
The House of Lords held that trade unions could be sued, in effect, for losses sustained by employers as a consequence of strike action.
Lord Halsbury gave one of the five unanimous judgments.
As Professor Heuston says, the decision left ‘a legacy of suspicion and mistrust…to poison relations between the courts and the unions for many years’.
He adds: ‘One of Baldwin's favourite themes was the folly of this Taff Vale decision: ‘The Conservatives can't talk of class-war: they started it,’ he would remark to G. M. Young.
The Taff Vale decision was a serious blow to trade unionism.
The law had seemed ‘so clearly settled to the contrary’, wrote Lord Asquith, that ‘public opinion was unprepared for any such decision’.
Liberal opinion strongly favoured its reversal.
This was effectively carried through by the strong Liberal government elected in 1906 in the Trade Disputes Act of that year.
A few years later, the judiciary again intervened, this time by invoking the doctrine of ultra vires .
This doctrine applies mainly to public authorities exercising statutory powers and to companies registered under the Companies Acts to pursue certain objects described in their constitutions.
If powers or objects are exceeded, action can be brought to restrain those authorities or companies.
Trade unions had for some time been supporting candidates for the House of Commons and spending union funds for this purpose.
In 1909, a member of the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants successfully challenged this practice.
This of course was also a severe blow to the emerging Labour Party and again the politicians had to try to restore what had been understood to be the position by passing the Trade Union Act 1913.
For much of the interwar period and for some years after 1945, the judges seemed to withdraw from the conflict or, when asked to intervene, tended to adopt a neutral position.
Indeed, such decisions as were made were markedly more generous in their recognition of the legitimacy of the purposes of trade unions.
Moreover, during the 1930s, employers did not need to seek the help of the courts, the unions being in a weak condition.
As we shall see, judicial  intervention was not noticeably restrained at this time in other political cockpits.
But the 1960s gave rise to certain assumptions about the nature and the power of trade unions which, true or false, have coloured and affected the attitudes of the middle classes and, in consequence, the policies of the Conservative, Labour and Liberal parties.
Once again, the judges have become central figures in these political issues.
Picketing
Picketing is a practice which stands uneasily across the boundary, as variously interpreted, of legal and illegal action.
It can become conduct likely to cause a breach of the peace, or obstruction, or even assault.
The Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act 1875 restated the criminal offence of ‘watching or besetting’ but excluded from that activity ‘attending at or near the house or place where a person resides, or works, or carries on business, or happens to be…in order merely to obtain or communicate information’.
But in Lyons v. Wilkins the Court of Appeal had decided against the officers of a trade union who, having ordered a strike against the plaintiffs and against S (who made goods for the plaintiffs only), organized pickets to seek to persuade work-people not to work for the plaintiffs.
That, said Lindley LJ, was not merely obtaining or communicating information.
It was putting pressure on the plaintiffs by persuading people not to enter their employment.
And that was illegal.
It was further decided that such watching and besetting might be a nuisance at common law and illegal on that ground also.
Once again the legislature reversed the courts and by the Trade Disputes Act 1906 made picketing lawful if in contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute and if the purpose was peacefully obtaining or communicating information or ‘peacefully persuading any person to work or abstain from working’.
The interpretation of the law remained contentious.
During a trade dispute in 1960, a police officer found two pickets standing at the front entrance of a factory, four standing at the back entrance and ten or twelve outside the back entrance.
The officer told the defendant three times that he considered two pickets at each entrance were sufficient but the defendant, persisting in his intention to join the pickets, ‘pushed gently past’ the police officer, ‘was gently arrested’, and was charged with obstructing the police in execution of their duty.
The Divisional Court held that he was properly convicted on the ground that the police officer had reasonable grounds for anticipating that a breach of the peace was a real possibility.
In Tynan v. Balmerls (1966) forty pickets in a continuous circle around a factory (which had the effect of sealing off the highway) were held not to be legalized by the Act of 1906 because their action was a nuisance at common law and an unreasonable use of the highway.
In 1972, a strike picket held a placard in front of a vehicle on a highway, urging the driver not to work at a site nearby and preventing him from proceeding along the highway.
The picket was charged with obstruction of the highway although the whole incident lasted for not more than nine minutes.
The House of Lords upheld the prosecution.
Lord Reid said it would not be difficult to infer, as a matter of fact, that pickets who assemble in unreasonably large numbers do have the purpose of obstructing free passage.
The following year, a police cordon prevented pickets from approaching a coach carrying workers out of a site.
The defendant was involved in a scuffle with a constable and was successfully charged with obstructing him in the execution of his duty.
The result of these cases was greatly to limit the right to picket.
They enlarged the scope within which the police could prevent picketing and they greatly narrowed the scope within which picketing could lawfully be undertaken.
Moreover, the use by the courts of these common law devices of obstruction, breach of the peace and nuisance is difficult to legislate against as the essential purpose (which before the 1960s had been more or less achieved with police co-operation) is to permit ‘reasonable’ picketing, including the right to accost for a short period within which arguments can be advanced, without putting persons in fear or to immoderate inconvenience.
‘The attendance’, said counsel for the defendant in Hunt v. Broome , ‘is for the purpose of peacefully persuading a man not to work so the attendance must be in a position where the persuasion can be carried out; otherwise its purpose is frustrated…
Attendance for the purpose of peaceful persuasion is what is protected by the Act…not mere attendance, standing with banners; the attendance is for oral communication.’
As the courts presently interpret the law this purpose is often difficult and sometimes impossible to achieve.
It is also true that the right to picket may be abused.
The right to strike
In 1964 the House of Lords in Rookes v. Barnard delivered a judgment which seemed like a return to the early heady days of the century.
R worked for BOAC with whom his union had an agreement that all workers should be union members.
In 1955 R left the union after a disagreement with union members.
Two local union members, and a district union official employed by the union, threatened BOAC that labour would be withdrawn if R were not removed within three days as required by a resolution passed at a members’ meeting.
Such a strike would have been a breach of contract by each member.
BOAC gave R long notice and lawfully discharged him.
R sued the two members and the official for conspiracy.
Under the Trade Disputes Act 1906 no action for  conspiracy would lie unless the act would be unlawful if done by a person alone.
So the Law Lords considered whether a threat to strike could be ‘unlawful’ in this sense.
And they held it could be.
This decision was seen by trade unionists as a direct attack on the right to strike.
The Law Lords certainly seemed to stretch themselves to arrive at their conclusion.
Lord Devlin, for example, could find ‘nothing to differentiate a threat of a breach of contract from a threat of physical violence’.
It was a time when strikes were being blamed for most of the country's ills, and Lord Hodson said: ‘The injury and suffering caused by strike action is very often widespread as well as devastating and a threat to strike would be expected to be certainly no less serious than a threat of violence.’
Once again the politicians had to seek to reverse their Lordships' decision and passed the Trade Disputes Act 1965.
Inducing breach of contract
In 1952, certain drivers and loaders told Bowaters Ltd, the paper suppliers, that they might not be prepared to deliver paper to the plaintiffs who were printers and publishers.
Bowaters told the plaintiffs and they brought an action against officers of the unions to which the drivers and loaders belonged.
The Court of Appeal held that the evidence did not establish that there had been any direct procurement by the defendants of any wrongful acts by the drivers or loaders or that the latter had committed any wrongful acts; also that there was no evidence of any actual knowledge by the defendants of any contract between Bowaters and the plaintiffs.
So the plaintiffs lost their action.
In 1964, the House of Lords considered a case in which a union were met by a refusal of a company to negotiate with them on terms and conditions of service although they organized the majority of the men concerned, being watermen in the Port of London.
Another union organized the minority.
So the first union issued instructions that none of  their men would man, service or tow empty barges belonging to the company.
The company owned and hired out barges but did not employ any of the union men, but their action meant that barges were not returned and so the company's business came to a standstill.
The company brought an action against the union officials.
The House of Lords found for the company on the ground that the union had knowingly induced breaches of the hiring contract and their members' contracts of employment.
Most importantly, their Lordships decided that there was, on the facts, no trade dispute within the meaning of the Trade Disputes Act 1906 because the basis of the embargo was trade union rivalry.
This attitude of the courts was strengthened by the decision of the Court of Appeal in Torquay Hotel v. Cousins .
Union members picketed the Torbay Hotel, cutting off fuel oil supplies, and later, when the manager of the plaintiff hotel was reported as having called for a stand against the union, picketed that hotel with the same result.
The union also told an alternative oil supplier not to supply the plaintiff hotel.
The Court of Appeal held that as the plaintiffs employed no union members the union's actions were not in furtherance of a trade dispute and injunctions were issued against the union.
As Professor Wedderburn has observed, the result of this decision could be that where an association of employers is fighting off a trade union, it may be able to ‘keep its smaller members in the front line and avoid any of its bigger members being parties to the dispute’.
The trade unions' ‘golden formula’ of action ‘in furtherance of a trade dispute’looks weaker as a protection than it did.
No wonder that, in 1968, a member of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers' Associations wrote:
A thing that worried me all through the deliberations…was this: supposing we made all the right recommendations and supposing the Government gave  effect to them in legislation, how long would it be before the judges turned everything upside down?
Industrial Relations Act 1971
But the most dramatic judicial intervention was yet to come.
In 1971 was passed the Industrial Relations Act.
This measure of a Conservative government was strongly opposed, in and out of Parliament, by the trade union movement and the Labour Party.
It established the National Industrial Relations Court (NIRC), presided over by Sir John Donaldson, formerly a judge of the High Court.
The NIRC had wide jurisdiction to consider complaints arising under the Act, to impose penalties, and to punish those who disregarded its orders.
In recent years, the amount of work available for dockworkers has drastically declined because of the growing practice of loading and unloading goods in containers at depots outside the port areas.
From mid-1971, the Transport and General Workers' Union authorized the practice of selective ‘blacking’ of the goods carried by certain road haulier firms to ports.
When the Act of 1971 came into force in February 1972, the union became liable to complaints and penalties for this blacking.
The first complaint was made on 23 March 1972 and the NIRC ordered the union, its officers, servants and agents to refrain from certain specific blacking.
The union's officers advised their shop stewards to obey this order but the advice was rejected.
On 29 March the NIRC found the union in wilful contempt of the order and, following subsequent complaints, imposed fines totalling £55,000.’
On 13 June the Court of Appeal decided that the union was not accountable for its shop stewards and set aside the fines.
But the next day the NIRC ordered three London dockers who had defied an order against blacking made on 12 June to be committed to prison for contempt of court.
The warrants for their arrest were to be issued on 16 June, and widespread strikes became imminent.
However, as the result of a curious intervention by the Official Solicitor (an officer of the court), the Court of Appeal was able to review the decision to imprison, although the three dockers did not ask for it to be reviewed; and the decision was set aside.
So the dockers did not go to prison and the strikes were avoided.
For a fortnight there was a breathing space.
Then on 3 July another complaint was lodged with the NIRC against seven dockers including two of the original three.
On 7 July, the NIRC ordered them to refrain from their actions and, after further proceedings, on 21 July committed five of the seven to prison for contempt.
Unofficial dock strikes began at once and the threat of widespread stoppages of work became very real.
On 24 July the General Secretary of the Trades Union Congress went to see the Prime Minister who said, according to The Times , that he would not intervene.
On 25 July, the Official Solicitor visited the dockers in prison, but they made clear that they did not intend to give any undertakings of obedience to the NIRC or to apologize — which is normally essential before those in contempt are released.
Nevertheless the Official Solicitor on that day tried to persuade the NIRC to convene immediately so that he could apply for the committal orders to be discharged.
But he was told to come back not later than the afternoon of the next day.
On 25 July the situation seemed to have reached an impasse.
Sir John Donaldson, president of the NIRC, had said in June: ‘By their conduct these men are saying they are above the rule of law.
No court should ignore such a challenge.
To do so would imperil all law and order.’
On 21 July he said: ‘These breaches are serious and were deliberately committed, quite literally in contempt of this court…
The issue is whether these men are to be allowed to opt out of the rule of law…
It is a very simple issue but vastly important for our whole way of life is based upon acceptance of the rule of law.’
The NIRC had committed the men to prison.
The men showed no intention of modifying their  position.
Dock strikes were occurring and a general strike was clearly impending.
How could industrial action on a wide scale be avoided and the face of the NIRC be saved?
We have seen that on 13 June the Court of Appeal had decided in Heaton's case that the Transport and General Workers' Union was not accountable for the action of its shop stewards.
From that decision, leave was given to appeal to the House of Lords.
That appeal was heard between the 10th and 19th of July.
Their Lordships reserved judgment and then, with almost unprecedented speed (at least eight weeks normally elapse), Lord Wilberforce delivered their joint opinion, on the morning of 26 July — that ‘next day’ intimated to the Official Solicitor.
And the House of Lords reversed the Court of Appeal and decided that the union was responsible for its shop stewards.
Immediately the NIRC convened and, avowedly because of that decision, released the dockers from prison.
The difficulty is finding any necessary connection between two cases.
The House of Lords' decision determined an important question of law concerning the liability of trade unions for the actions of their shop stewards.
But the five dockers' case was about the ‘very simple issue’ of punishment for men who had defied the order of the NIRC and had expressed their intention to continue in that defiance.
In releasing the dockers, the president of the NIRC said that, because of the House of Lords' decision, the situation was ‘entirely changed’.
The unions were accountable and the burden of their task would be ‘immeasurably increased’ if the dockers remained in prison.
‘The cause of the rule of law will not be advanced by placing an avoidable burden upon the unions.’
Nevertheless five men, who had been imprisoned because they deliberately and flagrantly disobeyed the orders of the NIRC, and so imperilled the rule of law and ‘our whole way of life’, were released although  they had not asked to be released and had made clear that they had no intention of apologizing to the court for their behaviour or of desisting from that behaviour.
A political and economic crisis of possibly considerable dimensions was avoided by two actions.
First, the speeding-up of the delivery of the House of Lords' decision; and secondly, the discovery by the NIRC that, because of that decision, they could release the dockers.
It appeared very much as if the judicial system had bent itself to the needs of the politicians and that, in particular, the principles of the rule of law to which the NIRC earlier paid such respect had been sacrificed to the expediency of the political and economic situation.
This last example of judicial activism in political affairs differs from the others.
The latter have shown a conservative judiciary interpreting legislation and developing the common law in ways which government and Parliament sought to reverse.
The establishment of the NIRC was a political act aimed at trying to contain trade union power within particular rules prescribed by the Industrial Relations Act 1971.
The experiment failed and the NIRC was abolished in 1974.
But the apparent willingness of the House of Lords to expedite the delivery of their judgment coupled with the highly eccentric use made of that judgment by the NIRC to release the five dockers was so convenient for the government of the day that it aroused the strong suspicion of judicial compliance with political expediency.
A later industrial dispute was a pretty example of the intermingling of the exercise of powers in the high places of government in the United Kingdom.
In October 1973, the NIRC fined the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers £100,000 for contempt of court when they refused to obey the court's order to call off a strike.
To obtain payment of the fine the court sequestrated against assets held in the political fund of the union.
Labour MPs put down a motion in the House of Commons calling for the removal from office of the president of the NIRC for ‘political prejudice and partiality’.
Sir John Donaldson  defended himself in a public speech saying that the court had not known that the assets had been earmarked for a political or any other purpose.
At this point Lord Hailsham, then Lord Chancellor, in a public speech and as head of the judiciary, attacked those who had signed the motion and said that the public should note the identity and party of the Members concerned.
Whereupon Labour Members tabled another motion condemning the Lord Chancellor and alleging ‘a gross contempt of the House of Commons’.
In the event neither of the motions was debated and the matter lapsed.
The conflict between the courts and trade unions showed itself in the second half of the nineteenth century and the first decade of the twentieth as an expression of class conflict.
The trade unions were growing in militancy, especially during the years after 1890, and were displaying powers which dismayed a large part of middle-class society.
The dismay was in part because of the anticipated economic consequences of this militancy, but also because it threatened the existing social order of late Victorian England.
Many politicians, from Disraeli onwards, had realized that trade union power was an economic factor which had to be taken seriously into account and certainly was not capable of being overcome by crude shows of force.
Her Majesty's judges, however, were less prescient and less capable of adjusting legal principles and traditions to the new pressures.
So, under men like Halsbury, they reacted to the legislation of the later nineteenth century with all the inflexibility of those who are determined that what was good enough for their fathers' social and economic structures was good enough for them.
And in the more general upheaval of political beliefs which accompanied ‘the strange death of liberal England’, influential judges were more often to be found towards the right of the spectrum of opinion.
The most recent developments may prove to be of the utmost importance and to have the most lasting consequences.
What litigation might have been promoted by the  Labour government's aborted proposals in the late 1960s we shall never know.
But the much more rigorous policy embodied in the Conservatives' Industrial Relations Act of 1971 was a revolution in the long story.
For this Act deliberately sought to use the courts and the judges to achieve political ends.
The institution of the NIRC reflected the new techniques and reintroduced the old arguments.
The identification of ‘law’ and ‘policy’made almost impossible the continuance of the interplay between the judges and politicians which had provided a valuable tolerance.
Had the Act succeeded, the damage to the reputation of judicial institutions would have been considerable; but it was always highly probable that this attempt to use the judges for these political purposes would fail.
The failure was forecast by almost all those with the greatest knowledge of the working of industrial relations in this country and, more particularly, abroad.
But the circumstances of its failure, and the manoeuvrings of politicians and judges which accompanied that failure, combined to produce a calamity which went far beyond the collapse of a doomed policy, for the failure directly resulted in a deep distrust of the judicial system.
Trade unionists, as we have seen, had little cause to look to the judiciary for the protection of their statutory rights.
Now the suspected subservience of the judiciary to the politicians seemed to be made manifest.
There is no evidence that the judges at any time protested to Her Majesty's government in or out of Parliament against the proposals to involve them directly and indirectly in the administration of the act of 1971.
Their failure to do so rests with the Lord Chancellor (Lord Hailsham), the Master of the Rolls (Lord Denning), and, to a lesser extent, the Lord Chief Justice (Lord Widgery).
The events of 1972 finally persuaded the leaders of organized labour (and the great mass of trade union members) that the judges were not to be trusted.
Today the relations between the trade unions and the judiciary are worse than they were in the period immediately following the Taff Vale decision in 1901.
Mr Heath deliberately employed the judges  as instruments of his policy, enmeshed trade unionists in new legal rules, and then, in chorus with the judges, condemned them, in the name of the rule of law, for seeking to extricate themselves.
Less easy to understand is the apparent willingness of the judiciary to lend themselves to this manoeuvring.
It is difficult to believe in the political naivete of judges, but Sir John Donaldson, president of the NIRC, looking back on the short history of that court, has expressed views which are bewildering in their ingenuousness.
He emphasized the need for guidelines in all aspects of industrial relations and continued:
With such guidelines, the courts could be given their traditional role of investigating the merits of disputes and helping the party who is right…
The public suffers from every industrial dispute.
Ought they not to know who is right?
Adopting this new approach they would know, for the court which investigated the dispute would tell them.
Those who suffered injustice would then be supported by the courts.
On this evidence it seems possible that a large part of the conflict that arose in the administration of the NIRC was the result of a belief of its president that, in industrial conflicts, one side can be discovered, after proper examination by judges, to be ‘right’ and the other side ‘wrong’.
But industrial conflicts are not of this kind.
They can be solved only by compromise and by the exercise of economic and political strength, not by the application of legal principles or guidelines.
This may be unfortunate but it is the reason why the NIRC was bound to fail.
The Law Lords restrain Denning
In a group of cases in 1978 and 1979 the Court of Appeal sought considerably to limit the immunities of trade unionists from criminal and civil liabilities for acts done ‘in contemplation  or furtherance of a trade dispute’.
Then, in three cases decided between July 1979 and February 1980, the House of Lords reversed this development.
Both the substance and the manner in which this was done throw further light on the politics of the judiciary in dealing with industrial relations.
The first of these cases was NWL Ltd v. Woods .
The International Transport Workers' Federation blacked a ship in an attempt to force its owners to pay wages in accordance with the Federation's scales.
Since the crew of the ship were not directly involved, the owners argued that there was no trade dispute.
Two years before, in BBC v. Hearn (1977), trade union officials had threatened that their workers would refuse to allow the BBC to televise the cup final so that it could be seen in South Africa, because of the union's disapproval of the racial policies of the government of that country.
The Court of Appeal had held that there was no trade dispute and so no protection for the trade union officials.
In NWL the House of Lords did not question that decision.
But in 1978, the Court of Appeal had decided, in ‘The Camilla M ‘, where the facts were similar to those in NWL , that the presence of an ‘extraneous motive’ for trade union action was sufficient to prevent that action being a ‘trade dispute’.
In NWL the House of Lords rejected this test.
Lord Diplock said that even if the predominant motives were ‘to bring down the fabric of the present economic system by raising wages to unrealistic levels’, that would not make the dispute any less one connected with the terms and conditions of employment and therefore a trade dispute.
Similarly Lord Scarman said that if the dispute were connected with one of  the matters referred to in the statute (for example, terms and conditions of employment) then ‘it is a trade dispute, and it is immaterial whether the dispute also relates to other matters or has an extraneous, e.g. political or personal, motive.
The connection is all that has to be shown.’
The legislative purpose of the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974, said Lord Scarman, was ‘to sweep away not only the structure of industrial relations created by the Industrial Relations Act 1971, which it was passed to repeal, but also the restraints of judicial review which the courts have been fashioning one way or another since the enactment of the Trade Disputes Act 1906…
Briefly put, the law is now back to what Parliament had intended when it enacted the Act of 1906 — but stronger and clearer than it was then.’
In Express Newspapers v. McShane , there was a dispute over pay between the proprietors of provincial newspapers and members of the National Union of Journalists.
The national executive of the union called out on strike all its members on provincial newspapers.
These newspapers used news copy supplied by the Press Association and the union called on PA journalists to strike also.
This strike affected national newspapers.
The union instructed its members on the Daily Express and other nationals to refuse to use copy sent out by the PA.
The plaintiffs sought an injunction against the members of the national executive of the union to restrain them from inducing or procuring their members not to use PA copy.
The defendants claimed that what they were doing was in furtherance of their dispute with the provincial newspapers.
The judge at first instance granted the injunction and the Court of Appeal upheld his decision, Lord Denning MR saying that there was no evidence that the blacking at the Daily Express had had any effect on the provincial dispute.
So the Court of Appeal held that the acts were not done in furtherance of a trade dispute.
‘Furtherance’ was to be tested objectively by the courts as well as subjectively by reference to the defendants' intentions.
The House of Lords overruled the Court of Appeal, giving its reasons on 13 December 1979.
Four of their Lordships held that ‘in furtherance’ referred only to the subjective state of mind of the defendant and that he so acted if his purpose was to help the parties in the dispute to achieve their objectives and if he honestly and reasonably believed his actions would do so.
Lord Wilberforce, while agreeing in the result, said that the test was whether the act done, pursuant to the general intention, was reasonably capable of achieving its objective.
Lord Denning, said Lord Wilberforce, ‘finally settled, I think, upon practical effect.
This, I think, with respect goes too far.’
Six weeks later, on 26 January 1980, the Court of Appeal decided Duport Steels v. Sirs .
Steelworkers in the public sector had for some time been in dispute with their employers, the British Steel Corporation, and had come out on strike.
Their union, the Iron and Steel Trades Confederation, in order to bring pressure on the government (who, the union hoped, would then put pressure on the BSC to settle the strike), decided to extend the strike to the private sector of the steel industry.
Certain private steel companies sought injunctions to prevent this.
The Court of Appeal granted the injunctions on the ground that the extension had generated a second dispute, between the ISTC and the government, which was separate from the union's dispute with the BSC, and not a trade dispute because the government was not the employer.
Lord Denning MR added the further reason that the acts done were too remote to be regarded as furtherance.
As a leading article in The Times put it: ‘Undaunted by the superior timidity of the House of Lords the Court of Appeal persevered in its determination to set limits to the scope of the immunities granted to trade unions by statute.’
This ‘second dispute’ argument was not advanced by counsel for the steelworkers but emanated from the bench.
Counsel thought so little of it that he did not seek to sustain  it before the House of Lords.
On the legal substance of the case, the House of Lords had little to add to the principles on which they had decided Express Newspapers v. McShane .
The ‘connection’ between the strike in the private sector and the strike in the public sector was obvious, as was the honest and reasonable belief of the union that that extension would further their dispute with the BSC.
So their Lordships again overruled the Court of Appeal.
In another group of cases the courts grappled somewhat variously with a new institution.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) was established by the Employment Protection Act 1975.
It is charged with the general duty of promoting the improvement of industrial relations, and in particular of encouraging the extension of collective bargaining and the development and, where necessary, reform of collective bargaining.
One of its powers is to make recommendations requiring an employer to recognize a particular trade union as a negotiating body.
Its functions were not at first regarded by the courts with much enthusiasm.
It is therefore clear that as a result of the statutory machinery an individual can have a substantial measure of control over his own working life compulsorily delegated to an agent, a trade union, which he has not selected and may even have his own contract of service varied without his consent.
These are very large powers, every bit as large as powers of compulsory acquisition of property; and, in my judgment, the court should seek to ensure that, just as in the case of compulsory purchase powers, the conditions for the exercise of the powers conferred by the 1975 Act are strictly observed.
In the case from which that quotation is drawn the court set aside a questionnaire issued by ACAS on the ground that it was an unlawful exercise of discretion.
Much more seriously, the House of Lords in Grunwick Processing  Laboratories Ltd v. ACAS (1978) effectively made the resolution of recognition disputes dependent on the co-operation of employers.
This could be seen as an example, from the other side, of the dangers of seeking to impose legal and compulsory arbitration over industrial relations.
The union request for recognition was referred to ACAS which sent questionnaires to union members at Grunwick's but not to the rest of the workers because the employers would not supply ACAS with their names and addresses.
The duty of ACAS under the statute was to ‘ascertain the opinion of the workers to whom the issue relates’.
The failure of ACAS to ascertain the opinion of the non-union members (who numbered two-thirds of all those employed) rendered void ACAS's recommendation of recognition for the union.
The next two cases, however, show a broader understanding of what ACAS was supposed to be doing.
In United Kingdom Association of Professional Engineers v. ACAS (1980) the Association sought recognition from a company already well supplied with trade unions.
ACAS refused to recommend recognition partly because to do so would arouse strong opposition from the other unions with a risk of industrial action which would be damaging to the industry.
In the Court of Appeal, Lord Denning MR saw this as ‘another story of David and Goliath…a small union pitted against a great one’.
He set aside ACAS's report, saying that the threats of industrial strife should have been ignored.
But the House of Lords (Lord Scarman delivering the main opinion) reversed the Court of Appeal and upheld the report.
Similarly, in Engineers' and Managers' Association v. ACAS (1980) the House of Lords by a majority held that ACAS had not acted unreasonably in postponing its statutory enquiries for the time being because another union was also seeking recognition and the plaintiff Association was also suing the Trades Union Congress.
Lord Scarman said: ‘ACAS has to form its view as to what is best for the promotion of industrial relations and the extension of  collective bargaining.
The Court of Appeal erred in substituting its judgment for that of ACAS.’
ACAS has had a troubled life and its powers have been limited and subjected to greater ministerial control by the Employment Act 1980.
The Conservative attack
Legislation since 1979 has greatly affected industrial relations, often in line with the expressed views of the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords.
Section 17 of the Employment Act 1980 is designed to limit ‘secondary action’, that is action taken by workers in support of a trade dispute between other workers and their employers.
The section defined secondary action in relation to a trade dispute as arising when a person induces another to break a contract of employment if the employer under the contract of employment is not a party to the trade dispute.
Marina Shipping Ltd v. Laughton (1982) was one in a long line of cases arising out of attempts by the International Transport Workers Federation (ITF) to force ship owners employing cheap labour recruited abroad to pay European standard rates of wages.
In this case, ITF officials blacked a ship with the result that lock keepers, in breach of their contract with port authorities at Hull, refused to operate gates and so prevented the ship from sailing.
Section 17(3) of the Act permits secondary action if (a) the purpose or principal purpose of the secondary action was directly to prevent or disrupt the supply during the dispute of goods or services between an employer who is a party to the dispute (here the ship owners) and the employer under the contract of employment to which the secondary action relates (here the port authorities); and (b) the secondary action was likely to achieve that purpose.
This would seem to cover the action of the lock keepers in this case.
But section 17(6) provides  that references to the supply of goods and services between two persons are references to the supply by one to the other in pursuance of a contract between them.
The Court of Appeal held that there was no contract between the owners and the port authority and so the secondary action was illegal.
Very similar facts were considered by the House of Lords in Merkur Island Shipping Corporation v. Laughton (1983).
Here the ITF persuaded tugmen, in breach of their contract with their employers, to refuse to operate tugs to enable the ship to leave port.
The House of Lords held that since the ship owners were not party to any contract with the tug owners (the arrangements had been made by the charterers of the ship) the secondary action was, again, illegal.
The effect of these decisions is to prevent the ITF from pursuing its aim of requiring owners of ships flying ‘flags of convenience’ to pay wages at levels compatible with collective agreements made by ‘bona fide organizations of shipowners and seafarers’in accordance with the recommendations of the International Labour Organisation.
It has been strongly argued that the interpretation is mistaken.
As the law stands, everything turns on the fortuitous circumstance of the existence or non-existence of a formal contract between two parties even though the reality of the supply of goods and services from one of the principals to another within the meaning of section 17(3) is not in question.
If the purpose is to interrupt an apparent contract and the secondary action would be likely to achieve that purpose, then the secondary action should be legitimate even if no such contract exists in fact.
In Cheall v. Association of Professional, Executive, Clerical and Computer Staff , the House of Lords overruled a majority of the Court of Appeal.
Cheall resigned from one trade union (ACTSS) and joined another (APEX).
In  accepting Cheall, without first enquiring of ACTSS whether it objected, APEX breached the Bridlington principles designed to prevent unions poaching members from one another.
As a result the Trades Union Congress Disputes Committee required APEX to dismiss Cheall and advise him to rejoin his former union.
This APEX did, in accordance with its own rules, whereupon Cheall sought a declaration that his dismissal was invalid.
In the Court of Appeal, Lord Denning MR decided in favour of Cheall, invoking the European Convention on Human Rights, which declared that everyone had a right to join a trade union, which proposition Lord Denning identified with the common law.
He also referred to the case of the three railwaymen, dismissed for refusing to join a trade union, who had succeeded before the Court of Human Rights and he reached the conclusion that the relevant article of the Convention was ‘part of the law of England or at any rate the same as the law of England’.
Had this view been upheld, it would have destroyed the Bridlington principles.
Slade LJ also decided in favour of Cheall but on more modest grounds.
Donaldson LJ disagreed.
He quoted Lord Atkin that the doctrine of public policy ‘should only be invoked in clear cases in which the harm to the public is substantially incontestable, and does not depend upon the idiosyncratic inferences of a few judicial minds’.
Donaldson LJ continued:
Above all I think that judges must beware of confusing political policy with public policy…
Whether judges are better or less able than others to assess the merits and demerits of political policies is beside the point, because that is not their function.
…
We are being invited to apply considerations of political rather than public policy.
This I absolutely decline to do.
The Law Lords unanimously rejected Cheall's application on the ground that there was no principle of law which  prevented the union from relying on its own rules which also bound Cheall.
‘My human sympathies’, said Lord Diplock, ‘are with Mr Cheall, but I am not in a position to indulge them; for I am left in no doubt that upon all the points that have been so ingeniously argued, the law is against him.’
But Lord Diplock suggested that different considerations might apply if the effect of Cheall's expulsion from APEX were to have put his job in jeopardy because of the existence of a closed shop or for some other reason.
In Carrington v. Therm-A-Stor Ltd , a group of employees decided to try to introduce a trade union into the factory where they worked.
By late April 1980 between sixty and sixty-five of the seventy employees had joined or applied to join.
The district secretary of the union wrote to the managing director setting out the union's case for recognition.
Two days later the employers' managing committee decided to dismiss twenty of the employees and instructed the chargehands to decide who should be chosen.
Four of those chosen brought this action for unfair dismissal.
The industrial tribunal found that the reason for the dismissals was that the managing director was strongly anti-union but that none of the four could show that the reason for his dismissal was his own union membership or activities.
The Court of Appeal, with regret, rejected their claim on the ground that, although the relevant statutory provision declared a dismissal to be unfair if the reason for it was that the employee proposed to join a trade union or take part in union activities, the provision was ‘not concerned with an employer's reactions to a trade union's activities, but with his reactions to an individual employee's activities in a trade union context’(Sir John Donaldson MR).
The narrowness of this interpretation is self-evident.
The British Telecommunications Act 1981 established BT as a public corporation and transferred telecommunication functions to it from the Post Office.
By a government licence under the Act, Mercury Communications, a private company, was authorized to establish a communications system.
An agreement between BT and Mercury provided for  interconnections between the two systems.
The Post Office Engineering Union waged a campaign against the licensing of competitors of BT and against proposals, in a Bill before Parliament, on privatization of BT.
The union instructed its members not to make the interconnection, there was a day of action and a series of selective strikes.
The union also instructed its members to ‘black’ BT services at Mercury's premises.
There was a threat of industrial action against Mercury's shareholders.
Mercury applied to the court for interlocutory injunctions to restrain the union and its members from inducing breach of contract between Mercury and BT.
We have seen that a persistent principle since 1906 had been that an act done by a person in contemplation or furtherance of trade dispute could not be actionable in tort on the ground of inducing another person to break a contract.
By the Employment Act 1982 the definition of a trade dispute is narrowed.
Disputes between workers and workers — demarcation disputes — are excluded; so are disputes between workers and an employer unless he is their own.
Also it is no longer sufficient that the dispute should be ‘connected with’, in the instant case, termination of employment; now it had to relate ‘wholly or mainly’ to that.
The Court of Appeal readily allowed new evidence to be admitted and held that since the risk to jobs did not appear to be a major factor in the dispute, it seemed unlikely that the union would be able to bring itself within the definition of a trade dispute and so the injunction should be granted.
Sir John Donaldson MR said it was important in such disputes, which gave rise to strong, indeed passionate, feelings, that ‘everyone should know where the courts stand.
They are on neither side.
They have an independent role, akin to that of a referee…
Parliament makes the law and is solely responsible for what the law is.
The duty of the court is neither to make nor to alter nor to pass judgment on the law.
Their duty is simply to apply it as they understand it.’
The effect of the decision was to make clear that the courts, under the new legislation, will decide in what  circumstances industrial action is, in their view, ‘political’ and when not.
And this, far more than in the past, will determine the legality or illegality of the action.
The House of Lords shows every sign of adopting a hard line against trade unions when interpreting the new legislation, as this next case demonstrates.
The Dimbleby newspapers had been printed by an associated company, Dimbleby Printers Ltd, which became engaged in a closed shop dispute with the National Graphical Association.
As a result of that dispute, the NGA members were on strike and the Dimbleby newspapers were not being printed.
So the Dimbleby company turned to TBF (Printers) Ltd, which was itself a company closely associated with (same shareholdings, same management) T. Bailey Forman Ltd, with whom the NUJ was engaged in a trade dispute and had been since 1979.
The NUJ instructed its members employed by Dimbleby newspapers not to supply copy to Dimbleby newspapers and argued that, because of their effective identity, TBF (Printers) Ltd, as well as T. Bailey Forman Ltd, was an ‘employer who is party to the dispute’ between the NUJ and T. Bailey Forman Ltd, within the meaning of that phrase in section 17(3) of the Act of 1980.
But the House of Lords rejected this argument.
Lord Wedderburn has summarized several of these recent developments thus:
So, workers may picket, but only at their own place of work.
Sympathy or solidarity action must be made tortious because it is ‘secondary’, i.e. it transgresses the rule about staying within employment unit boundaries.
Access to tribunals for unfair dismissal of strikers is narrowed to victimization in the complainant's own ‘establishment’; workers taking part in it elsewhere no longer count as his fellows.
And the ‘trade dispute’ itself — the central concept of the system of immunities — is now confined to disputes with a worker's own employer only and to disputes which relate wholly or mainly to  the industrial conditions of the workers in that employment unit only.
As it faces the power of capital organized in interlocking but legally separate corporate entities, labour is now cut up into atomized units of which the boundaries are by law coterminous with the employers' definitions of employment units in both private and public sectors.
Trans-enterprise solidarity is no longer acceptable to the law.
Any doubtful points are increasingly swept aside by Law Lords who found that the old immunities stuck in their ‘judicial gorges’.
And if need be, there are always new common law liabilities ready to hand not necessarily protected by immunities.
The last sentence refers particularly to the development of the notion of ‘economic duress’ as creating liabilities for trade unions.
The uses of the labour injunction
An injunction may be issued whenever the court ‘finds it just and convenient to do so’.
This very wide discretion the judge may exercise in different ways in different cases or in different types of cases.
Labour injunctions are sought by employers or dissident trade unionists or others to prevent or to stop industrial action, including strikes, by trade unions or their officials which the plaintiff claims is illegal.
If the action continued, he argues, damage would result to his business or personal interests which would be irreparable and for which the subsequent payment of compensation would be an inadequate remedy.
The plaintiff seeks an interim or interlocutory injunction, being an order of the  court requiring the defendant to desist from his action in order to maintain the status quo until its legality or illegality can be determined at a subsequent trial.
Where the case is urgent, the application to the court is made ex parte , that is, without the other side being present.
If not urgent, two clear days' notice is required but is often waived.
The question for the court used to be whether the applicant had shown prima facie evidence, or a probability, that his legal rights were being infringed.
He also had to show that he would suffer more harm if the interim remedy were not granted than the defendant would suffer if it was (the ‘balance of convenience’).
But in 1975, the Law Lords said this test caused confusion.
Lord Diplock said the court need be satisfied only that the applicant's claim was not ‘frivolous or vexatious’ and that there was ‘a serious question to be tried’.
This made the granting of an interim injunction much easier to obtain.
The balance of convenience still had to be shown by the plaintiff to be in his favour but, as Wedderburn says, the threat of irreparable harm to the employer's ‘property’ in his business interests could not be out-weighed by the defendant union.
Failure to abide by the terms of an injunction leads to proceedings for contempt of court, followed by fines and by possible sequestration (seizure) of the assets of the union.
For the union, an interim injunction prevents the calling of a strike or other action at a time which the union has decided is the most effective.
As the full trial is not likely to take place until weeks or months later, the bargaining position of the union is greatly weakened.
Very frequently the full trial never takes place because the dispute is ended one way or another.
Throughout the 1980s Government legislation progressively reduced the number of situations in which unions or individuals could legally take industrial action.
In Messenger Newspapers Group v. NGA (1984) the union called a strike to support the policy of 100 per cent union membership which had been departed from in some subsidiary companies belonging to the Group.
Picketing led to violence and one company dismissed the union workers on strike.
The Group company obtained injunctions to stop secondary picketing and attempts to prevent advertisers taking space in the newspapers.
The union disregarded the injunctions and was fined £50,000 for contempt of court.
When mass picketing continued a further £100,000 fine was levied and the union's assets were sequestrated.
Further violent demonstrations by mass pickets led to £525,000 additional fines being imposed.
Also the union had to pay aggravated and exemplary damages amounting to over £125,000.
It was this case that first showed the considerable legal sanctions available against unions under the new legislation.
During the miners' strike in 1984, members of the South Wales area of the National Union of Mineworkers supported the strike call but, months later, a few of them returned to work under extensive protection from the police.
Demonstrations and pickets collected at pit gates and shouted abuse at them, as they passed through in coaches.
Injunctions were sought to prevent this, but the judge had some difficulty in finding that the demonstrators were acting illegally.
However he decided that the protest was ‘a species of private nuisance, namely unreasonable interference with the victim's right to use the highway’.
This was an example of judicial creativity at its most blatant.
In another case, the National Union of Mineworkers was fined £200,000 for refusal to obey an interim injunction and the judge ordered sequestration of its assets, some of which had been transferred abroad.
It was claimed that trustees of the NUM (the President, the Vice-President and the Secretary) were in breach of their duties and the High Court ordered them to recover these assets and hand them over to  the sequestrators.
When this was not done the judge ordered a receiver to be appointed as an officer of the court in place of the trustees.
The powers of the courts in such cases spread very wide.
A strike was called by a joint negotiating committee of several unions, one of which (TASS) had two representatives on the committee of thirty-six members.
Contrary to statutory requirements, no ballot had been held and interim injunctions were granted requiring the unions to withdraw and cancel their instructions and take all practical steps to inform their members to desist.
Contempt proceedings were brought for failure to comply.
TASS argued that they had nothing to withdraw, not having taken the original decision to strike.
Nevertheless they were held to be in contempt but, the strike having collapsed, no penalty was imposed.
The statutory liability of unions for the actions of their members has given rise to many difficulties.
In Express and Star v. National Graphical Association , the plaintiff newspapers obtained an interim injunction requiring the union to withdraw a direction to their members to take industrial action.
The union circulated all its branches accordingly.
But the court subsequently found two specific breaches involving officers of the union and held the union guilty of contempt.
The Court of Appeal upheld this decision and ruled inapplicable to contempt proceedings statutory protection provided to unions under the Employment Act 1982.
The Spycatcher litigation may have serious implications for trade union liability.
Injunctions were issued against The Observer and The Guardian newspapers to prevent them from publishing extracts from Peter Wright's book and the Court of Appeal, overruling the judge at first instance, held that although publication by The Independent newspaper and others could not be a breach of those injunctions nevertheless, since they knew of their issue, they could be guilty of  contempt of court if their publication interfered with the course of justice.
Presumably this principle would apply to trade unions taking action in the same dispute where their fellow members had been injuncted.
In no recent case has the Court of Appeal gone further in its attempt to control trade union activity than in the dispute over the Government's suddenly announced decision in April 1989 to abolish the National Dock Labour Scheme.
In May, Associated British Ports sought interim injunctions to prevent the Transport and General Workers Union from calling a national docks strike after a favourable ballot of 9,400 dockers employed under the Scheme.
The Court of Appeal, overruling the High Court judge, granted the injunction on the ground that in ‘the balance of convenience’ the wish to strike at this time was more than counterbalanced by the financial loss to the employers and the inconvenience to the public.
The Court of Appeal said the strike was not in the public interest.
This was a novel formulation.
The 1967 Scheme provided that workers should ‘work for such periods as are reasonable’ and the employers argued that this made the strike illegal.
The Court of Appeal said that difficult questions of law were raised, that there was a ‘serious issue’ to be decided and that, pending the full trial, the injunction should be granted.
Not surprisingly and not for the first time, trade union leaders wondered whether it had become impossible to mount a legal strike.
Over 2,000 dock workers immediately walked out despite the judgment and despite the advice given by their leaders not to do so.
The union appealed to the House of Lords and the unofficial action was abandoned.
The Law Lords allowed the appeal on the ground that the clause in the Scheme relied on by the employers could not have the meaning attributed to it.
The Bill to abolish the Scheme was meanwhile being rushed through Parliament, and a fresh ballot was needed for the strike.
A few days later a second action brought by the newly created Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members seeking an injunction was rejected by the High Court.
When the Act was passed, the strike collapsed.
During the dispute in 1984, striking miners travelling in convoy on the motorway in Nottinghamshire were stopped within a few miles of four collieries.
They were told by the police that there was reason to fear a breach of the peace if they proceeded and, when they attempted to push through, they were arrested for obstructing the police.
In another case, the judge suggested that mass picketing was of itself capable of amounting to intimidating conduct, echoing Lord Reid in Hunt v. Broome (above page 83) and so contrary to section 7 of the Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act 1875.
In Read (Transport) Ltd v. NUM (South Wales)road hauliers with contracts to take coke from British Steel Corporation works were subjected to mass picketing, abuse and threats.
They obtained an interim injunction directed against the union, which then agreed to comply.
But breaches of the injunction continued and the union officials were held to be in contempt, the union being fined £50,000 with sequestration of assets to follow, if needed.
In 1984, it became common for bail conditions, following arrests during the strike, to require those charged not to visit any premises or place for the purpose of picketing or demonstrating in connection with the current trade dispute between the NUM and the National Coal Board other than peacefully to picket or demonstrate at their usual place of employment.
In R. v. Mansfield Justices ex parte Sharkey the court added: ‘It does a bench of justices no credit if their clerk is affixing standard conditions to bail forms while applications for unconditional bail are being made.’
But that was the limit of their comment, except to admit that the large numbers involved did sometimes make it difficult to avoid an appearance of ‘group justice’.
The dispute between, on the one side, the News International newspapers (Sun and News of the World ), the Times Group (The Times and The Sunday Times ) and others, and, on the other side, the unions (SOGAT 82, the NGA and others) which centred on the new site at Wapping, followed the breakdown of negotiations and the dismissal of all those on strike.
There were daily (and nightly) demonstrations involving thousands of protestors and large numbers of police.
Actions were begun by the employing newspapers alleging nuisance, intimidation, harassment, and interference with commercial contracts.
Injunctions were issued and some of the unions instructed their members to stop the forbidden activities.
Several unions were held to be in contempt, were fined and had their assets sequestrated.
The requirements of a ballot before strike action have been variously interpreted by the courts.
The requirements in Area union rules were held not to have been fulfilled by the NUM in Derbyshire and an order followed restraining the union from using funds in this connection.
But British Rail failed to obtain an interim injunction against the NUR, the court holding that the union was likely in the highest degree to be able to show that their, ballot was valid.
London Underground, however, were granted an injunction to prevent a ballot being held on the ground that the issues did not constitute trade disputes.
And when the Employment Act 1988 tightened the ballot requirements, the Union of Communication Workers had their ballot declared invalid.
In 1988, disputes arose between British shipowners, who proposed to introduce changes to existing terms and conditions of work for their employees, and the National Union of Seamen.
The union decided to ballot its members on industrial action but P & o and Sealink successfully applied  for injunctions to prevent the holding of ballots.
The basis of these decisions was that strikes would result in unlawful ‘secondary’ action involving employers who were not parties to the dispute.
Unofficial strike action followed and the union's own bankers were granted an injunction prohibiting the NUS from transferring any of their property abroad, on the principle that third parties must ensure that they gave no aid to any action which might occur if the union's property were sequestrated as a result of some future contempt of court.
Such a sequestration was ordered on the application of Sealink.
The NUS persuaded its members to end their unlawful industrial action but the courts ‘transferred’ the sequestration to apply to a separate complaint by P & o that NUS workers were unlawfully picketing its premises.
Fines were also imposed and crippling fines were threatened.
At the same time as the dispute over the Dock Labour Scheme was moving rapidly through the courts, the British Railways Board was being denied an injunction against the National Union of Railwaymen.
The Board claimed that a ballot on industrial action had not been validly conducted but the High Court judge said the evidence for this ‘did not come anywhere near justifying injunctive relief’.
The judge seemed unimpressed by the argument that a rail strike would cause ‘enormous public inconvenience’.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, Lord Donaldson MR taking the high ground that the function of the independent judiciary under the rule of law was simply to decide whether there had been compliance with the statute requiring the holding of a ballot, however unpopular the strike might be with the travelling public.
The extent to which trade unions are disadvantaged by the rules developed by the judiciary is shown in a case involving the National Union of Teachers.
It is well known that teachers undertake a number of tasks which appear to be  additional to their contractual duties and so voluntary.
The union called on teachers in certain schools to take action by refusing to supervise in lunch periods, or to attend meetings outside school hours.
No ballot was held, as was legally required if the action was in breach of contract.
An interim injunction was granted to the local authority employers by the judge on the ground that it was ‘improbable’ that there was ‘no serious issue to be tried’.
As Wedderburn says, a further advantage accrues to the plaintiff when the test is turned into this negative form.
And he continues: ‘The judge may as easily say ‘This is all too difficult for interlocutory motion.
It must go to trial, so I will not grant an injunction’, as he may conclude, ‘so I will grant an injunction’.
But the judge usually takes the second course in cases concerning industrial relations.
4.
The control of discretionary powers
The earlier cases
During the inter-war period, the courts showed little reluctance in overruling the decisions of Ministers and local authorities especially where, as in slum clearance and compulsory purchase cases, property rights were interfered with.
The exercise of statutory powers was closely scrutinized and any procedural or substantive defect was generally found to be sufficient to nullify a decision.
Typical of this attitude was that of Swift J in Re Bowman :
When an owner of property against whom an order has been made under the Act comes into this court and complains that there has been some irregularity in the proceedings, and that he is not liable to have his property taken away, it is right, I think, that his case should be entertained sympathetically and that a statute under which he is being deprived of his rights to property should be construed strictly against the local authority and favourably towards the interest of the applicant, in as much as he for the benefit of the community is undoubtedly suffering a substantial loss, which in my view must not be inflicted upon him unless it is quite clear that Parliament has intended that it shall.
Similarly in Errington v. Minister of Health , Maugham LJ said:
It seems to me a matter of the highest possible importance that where a quasi-judicial function is being exercised, under such circumstances as it had to be exercised here, with the result of depriving people of their property, especially if it is done without compensation, the persons concerned should be satisfied that nothing unfair has been done in the matter, and that ex parte statements have not been heard before the decision has been given without any chance for the person concerned to refute those statements.
Decisions such as these show that the courts inclined to the view that in a conflict between the common law property right of an individual and the statutory powers of a local authority to interfere with those rights, the benefit of any doubt in statute was to be given to the individual — and that this was particularly so if the statute gave less than full compensation to the individual.
This is, indeed, often said to be a presumption to which judges should have regard in interpreting statutes.
The idea that Parliament, in this field, was ‘interfering’ with the common law died hard.
The changes in attitudes and the growth of interventionism
But during 1939–45 and for some years after the war, there was a marked change in judicial attitudes.
The classic judgment was that in Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v. Wednesbury Corporation .
On the one hand, Lord Greene MR indicated the strict limits on the powers of the courts to set aside an administrative decision where the public authority acted within its jurisdiction.
On the other hand, such an authority must act in good faith, use the powers for the purpose for which they were given, take into account relevant matters and disregard the irrelevant, and must not act  in a way so unreasonable that no reasonable authority could have so acted.
But it was no part of the courts' function to replace the discretionary decision of the public authority with one of its own.
The highest point in this reluctance to intervene with governmental activities was reached in the mid-1950s when the House of Lords interpreted a statutory provision, which limited the courts' jurisdiction to review a compulsory purchase order on land, so broadly that even fraud by public servants was held not to entitle the owner to bring an action.
From the early 1960s, the courts reverted to their former attitude and became increasingly willing to review governmental activities on a variety of grounds; the reluctance of the 1940s and 1950s disappeared.
In Ridge v. Baldwin the House of Lords held that a chief constable, who had been acquitted on a criminal charge but criticized for lack of leadership by the judge, was entitled, under the common law rules of natural justice, to a hearing before he could be dismissed by the local authority who employed him.
This decision led the way to a general concept of the need for ‘fairness’ in the administrative process.
The earlier distinction between those matters which fell within ministerial or local authority discretion and those which were within the competence of the courts to adjudicate became increasingly blurred.
Thus in Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food milk producers from the south east asked the minister to appoint a committee of investigation, alleging that the price they were paid by the Milk Marketing Board was too low having regard to transport costs.
The relevant statute empowered the minister to set up such a committee but in this case he refused to do so on the ground that the complaint was unsuitable for investigation because it raised wide issues; that if the committee upheld the complaint he would be expected to make an  order to give effect to the committee's recommendations; and that the complaint should be dealt with by the Board rather than by the committee of investigation.
A majority of the House of Lords found these reasons insufficient and ordered the minister to set up the committee.
They agreed that he had a discretion under the statute whether or not to do so but said that he was not justified in refusing if the result was to frustrate the policy of the Act of Parliament.
Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest disagreed.
In his view, the court could intervene only if the minister (a) failed or refused to apply his mind to or to consider the question whether to refer a complaint to the committee or (b) misinterpreted the law or proceeded on an erroneous view of the law or (c) based his decision on some wholly extraneous consideration or (d) failed to have regard to matters which he should have taken into account.
And he held that none of these was the case.
The view taken by the majority was surprising as the decision of the minister not to intervene was clearly one of policy with which the courts are usually reluctant to interfere.
The decision of the House of Lords in Anisminic Ltd v. Foreign Compensation Commission shows how, on occasion, the courts will resist the strongest efforts of the government to exclude them from reviewing executive discretion.
The Foreign Compensation Commission was empowered by statute to deal with claims to compensation under agreements with foreign governments.
The plaintiffs owned property in Egypt which they lost at the time of the Suez crisis in 1956.
The Commission made a provisional determination that the plaintiffs had failed to establish a claim according to the rules laid down under the statute.
The statute provided that: ‘The determination by the Commission of any application made to them under this Act shall not be called in question in any court of law.’
Despite these last words the plaintiffs applied to the courts for an order declaring that the Commission had  misconstrued the rules.
The House of Lords, not for the first or for the last time, held that ‘determination’ should not be construed as including everything which purported to be a determination but was not, and so the court was not precluded from deciding that the order of the Commission was a nullity.
Looking at the way the Commission had construed the rules, the House decided that the determination was a nullity.
Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest again dissented.
He agreed that the courts could intervene if the question was whether or not the Commission had acted within its powers or its jurisdiction.
But ‘what is forbidden is to question the correctness of a decision or determination which it was within the area of their jurisdiction to make.’
This distinction has a long and respectable history.
If an Act of Parliament says that A (who may be a minister or a commission or a local authority or an individual) shall be the person to settle certain specified questions and that there shall be neither appeal to nor review by any other body or person (including the courts), then A's decisions are unchallengeable so long as(a) it is A, not another, who decides,(b) A decides those specified questions and not others and (c) A does not act in bad faith or with similar impropriety.
The Anisminic decision goes much further than this and says in effect that A's decision can be set aside by the courts if they disagree with his interpretation of the rules which he is required to apply.
In a later case Lord Denning MR said,
So fine is the distinction that in truth the High Court has a choice before it whether to interfere with an inferior court on a point of law.
If it chooses to interfere, it can formulate its decision in the words: ‘The court below had no jurisdiction to decide this point wrongly as it did.’
If it does not choose to interfere, it can say: ‘The court had jurisdiction to decide it wrongly, and did so.’
Softly be it stated, but that is the reason for the  difference between the decision of the Court of Appeal in Anisminic…and the House of Lords.
As Lord Diplock said in Re Racal Communications Ltd , ‘The breakthrough made by Anisminic was that, as respected administrative tribunals and authorities, the old distinction between errors of law which went to jurisdiction and those which did not, was for practical purposes abolished.’
In Racal the House of Lords held that where a statute provided that the decision of a High Court judge should ‘not be appealable’, it could not be reviewed or appealed from.
This extreme case of judicial interference with the powers of public authorities may be contrasted with the attitude of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for Employment v. ASLEF and Others (No. 2).
The Secretary of State exercised his powers to apply to the NIRC under the Industrial Relations Act 1971 for an order requiring a ballot of trade union members to be held.
This power existed where, as the statute provided, it appeared to him that there were reasons for doubting whether the trade union members, in taking part in industrial action, were acting in accordance with their own wishes.
The trade union appealed against the order given by the NIRC.
Lord Denning first considered how far the words ‘if it appears to the Secretary of State’ put his decision beyond judicial challenge.
He said:
In this case I would think that, if the minister does not act in good faith, or if he acts on extraneous considerations which ought not to influence him, or if he plainly misdirects himself in fact or in law, it may well be that a court would interfere; but when he honestly takes a view of the facts or the law which could reasonably be entertained, then his decision is not to be set aside simply because thereafter someone thinks that his view was wrong…
Of course it is to be remembered here  that we are concerned with a grave threat to the national economy.
The steps that are proposed do not imperil the liberty, livelihood or property of any man.
The issue is simply: should a ballot be held of the railwaymen to ascertain their views?
Lord Denning then turned to the claim that the minister had acted improperly.
It is said that it must ‘appear’ to the minister that there are ‘reasons’for doubting whether the workers are behind their leaders: and that the minister has given no reasons.
We have been referred to several recent cases, of which Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is the best example, in which the courts have stressed that in the ordinary way a minister should give reasons, and if he gives none the court may infer that he had no good reasons.
Whilst I would apply that proposition completely in most cases, and particularly in cases which affect life, liberty or property, I do not think that it applies in all cases.
Lord Denning concluded that the proposition did not apply in this case and that there were reasons which a reasonable minister could entertain and so there was no ground on which the court could interfere with the minister's decision to ask for a ballot order.
He was supported by the other members of the Court of Appeal.
In the event the union leaders were wholly justified, as the result of the ballot showed, in their claim that there were no reasons for doubting that the industrial action was in accordance with the wishes of the workers.
Two cases exemplify greater willingness of the courts to control ministerial discretion.
In Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council the minister acted under section 68 of the Education Act 1944 which provided:
If the Secretary of State is satisfied…that any local education authority…have acted or are proposing to  act unreasonably…he may…give such directions…as appear to him to be expedient.
In March 1975 the Labour-controlled Tameside Council put forward proposals to the Secretary of State for the reorganization of secondary education along comprehensive lines to come into effect in September 1976.
The proposals were approved in November 1975.
The council made many of the necessary arrangements for the changeover and told pupils which schools they would be going to.
At the local elections in May 1976, the Conservatives won control of the council and on 7 June told the Secretary of State that they proposed not to implement the plans for the conversion of the five grammar schools into comprehensives and sixth-form colleges.
On 11 June the Secretary of State gave the council a direction under section 68, requiring them to implement their predecessors' plans, and on 18 June the Divisional Court ordered the council to comply.
On 26 July the Court of Appeal overruled the Divisional Court and on 2 August, moving with impressive speed, Lords Wilberforce, Dip lock, Salmon, Russell and Dilhorne upheld the Court of Appeal.
The basis of their Lordships' decisions was that the minister could give a valid direction only if he was satisfied that no reasonable local authority could have decided as the Conservative majority did; and that he could not have been so satisfied.
The second case was that of Laker Airways.
Under the Civil Aviation Act 1971, the Civil Aviation Authority was empowered to grant licences to those wishing to operate air transport lines.
The Authority granted a licence to Mr Freddy Laker for the period from 1973 to 1982 to operate a cheap passenger service known as ‘Skytrain' between the United Kingdom and the USA.
The Conservative government supported the project but in February 1976 the Labour government (which had previously supported Mr Laker) through its Secretary of State for Trade in a White Paper announced a change of civil aviation policy.
The Act of 1971, empowered the Secretary of State to ‘give guidance’ to the Authority with respect to their statutory  functions.
The White Paper purported to contain such guidance which, in accordance with the Act, was approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.
The crucial phrase in the White Paper guidance was that the Authority should not license more than one British airline to serve the same route, with British Airways as the preferred airline to the USA.
That prevented Sky train from coming into operation.
The Court of Appeal held that the power of the Secretary of State to give guidance to the Authority did not extend to such a discretion.
Said Lord penning MR:
‘Guidance’ could only be used to explain, amplify or supplement the general objectives or provisions of the Act.
If the Secretary of State went beyond the bounds of ‘guidance’ he exceeded his powers; and the Civil Aviation Authority was under no obligation to obey him.
So Mr Laker succeeded in his action.
These two cases while comparable are also dissimilar.
In both cases two public authorities were in conflict.
In Laker's case the minister was seeking to require the Civil Aviation Authority to follow his policy but he chose a way of doing this which the Court of Appeal considered not to be within his powers.
In Tameside the central department and the local authority were in direct conflict over a matter of administrative feasibility.
The minister did not believe that Tameside Council could properly implement the change within the limited time available.
The decision in Tameside may be contrasted with ASLEF (No. 2)where the trade union's complaint that the minister had no reason to believe that the members were not behind their leaders was not supported by the court.
In Tameside the minister had sound administrative reasons for believing that the local authority was acting unreasonably but it was held that merely to have such reasons was insufficient.
A remarkable feature of this decision of the House of Lords  was that it was based on almost no judicial authority at all.
One of their Lordships referred to ASLEF (No. 2), and to one other decision.
The other three referred to none.
Yet this is hardly an area where judicial pronouncements have been lacking.
It concerns the whole matter of judicial control over ministerial discretion.
Professor de Smith wrote that Parliament might purport to restrict judicial review by conferring powers in subjective terms, the public authority being entitled to act when it ‘is satisfied’ or when ‘it appears’to it that, or when ‘in its opinion’, a prescribed state of affairs exists.
Then the courts interpret such phrases so as to give themselves more or less control as they wish.
This depends on the judges' views of the merits of the case before them or (I would add) the direction their political inclinations lead them — what I call below their ‘view of the public interest’.
If trade unions are being restricted by ministerial action (as in ASLEF [No. 2]) then statutory limitations on ministers' powers will be interpreted loosely.
If ministers appear to the courts to be acting in a way which is arbitrary or unfair (as in Padfield and Tameside and Laker) then the limitations will be insisted on.
Little attempt is made to treat like situations in a like manner or to act consistently within a framework of judicial analysis.
And one is often left with a feeling that in this area of the law judges rely almost entirely on their own sense of justice or on their own personal conception of what is best.
Another case in which the courts appeared to be in conflict with ministers was Gouriet v. Union of Post Office Workers , in which the plaintiff sought an order from the court to restrain the defendant trade union from breaking the law by refusing to handle mail to South Africa.
Usually a person, like the plaintiff, who suffers no special damage from a breach of the law must ask the Attorney-General either to institute proceedings or to give his consent (in a relator action) to the plaintiff's proceeding.
In this case the Attorney-General refused to do either.
One question that  arose in the Court of Appeal was whether this decision was subject to judicial review.
Lord penning said:
The Attorney-General tells us that when he refuses his consent, his refusal is final.
It cannot be overridden by the courts.
He is answerable to Parliament, and to Parliament alone.
He declines even to give his reasons for his refusal.
This is, to my mind, a direct challenge to the rule of law…
Suppose that he refused his consent for corrupt motives, or in bad faith…for party-political reasons, and not in the interests of the public at large…or because he considered that the information was laid by a pressure group, of which he disapproved…
These instances are, of course, entirely hypothetical.
I would not suggest for one moment that they existed here.
But the possibility of them convinces me that his discretion to refuse is not absolute or unfettered.
It can be reviewed by the courts.
If he takes into account matters which he ought not to take into account, or fails to take into account the matters which he ought to take into account, then his decision can be overridden by the courts.
Not directly, but indirectly.
If he misdirects himself in coming to his decision, the court can say: ‘Very well then.
If you do not give your consent, or your reasons, we will hear the complaint of this citizen without it.’
But in this Lord Denning was in a minority, both the other Lord Justices (Lawton and Ormrod) holding that the Attorney-General's exercise of his discretion to refuse his consent to the bringing of relator proceedings in his name could not be reviewed or questioned by the courts.
In the House of Lords Lord Wilberforce said:
The distinction between public rights, which the Attorney can and the individual (absent special interest) cannot, seek to enforce, and private rights is fundamental in our law.
To break it, as Mr Gouriet's counsel invited their Lordships to do, was not a development of the law, but a destruction of one of its pillars.
So Mr Gouriet could not bring his action, the Attorney  General being the only person entitled to represent the public in a court of justice.
Judicial review
The growth of interventionism during the 1960s and 1970s was consolidated by a procedural change introduced in 1977 when the Supreme Court Rule Committee created a specific new remedy of judicial review.
This brought together in a simplified form a number of remedies obtainable from a Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division consisting of two or three judges.
The grounds on which this remedy could be sought were summarized by Lord Diplock in the GCHQ case under the three headings of illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety.
These cover the situations where a public authority is alleged to be acting outside its statutory powers, to be acting in a grossly unreasonable way, or to be abusing the rules of natural justice governing procedure.
So review is not an appeal on the merits of a decision but limited to those grounds.
Sometimes the distinction between a fair procedure and a fair decision is very narrow.
Since 1977 a case law has been built up to define the limits of the availability of this remedy, which proved very popular.
In early days the judiciary greatly encouraged litigants to use it and the number of civil applications rose from 356 in 1981 to 1580 in 1989, the House of Lords having ruled in 1983 that those seeking redress for an infringement of public law rights must proceed by way of this remedy only.
As a consequence of government policy, many of the challenges to the exercise of ministerial discretion in recent  years have been instituted by Labour local authorities.
These have been largely unsuccessful.
In ex parte Norwich City Council , the local authority were not proceeding with the sale of council houses as expeditiously as the minister wished.
Under the Housing Act 1980 he was empowered to ‘do all such things as appear to him necessary or expedient’ to enable tenants ‘to exercise the right to buy’.
The minister decided to use his powers of intervention.
He was upheld by the Court of Appeal.
Given the statutory provisions, it is difficult to see how the court could have decided otherwise.
The introduction of the new block grant system for local authorities under the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 resulted in one hiccough for the minister when the Divisional Court held that he had not listened to further representations when he should have done.
This decision is in line with those, like Padfield , where the courts have been willing to limit ministerial discretion on various grounds, some of them relatively new, at least in their present application.
Attempts in the Court of Appeal to set aside ministerial decisions on other aspects of the new block grant on more technical and precise grounds failed.
The lesson seems to be that a plaintiff has a better chance of attacking the exercise of ministerial power if he can show that in some general way, especially procedural and not substantive, the minister has not played the game according to the newly enlarged rules of natural justice.
Hackney LBC tried another line of attack which was repulsed when the Divisional Court held that there was no requirement for the Secretary of State, issuing guidance to a local authority as to the level of its expenditure, to have regard to whether or not the authority would by restricting  its expenditure in such a way render itself unable reasonably to discharge any of its statutory duties.
The decision in Lambeth LBC v. Secretary of State for Social Services where Woolf J struck down the minister's decision to use his statutory powers to suspend the members of an area health authority and to appoint commissioners in their place was strongly interventionist.
The power of the minister arises under the National Health Service Act 1977 if he considers that by reason of an emergency it is necessary for a specified period to transfer functions from one body to another.
The disagreement between the minister and the area health authority was caused by the overspending by the authority and its unwillingness to make economies.
The court held that such a power could not be used, where there was no particular crisis and no specified power, so as to control the authority's financial affairs.
The minister had a separate power, which he did not use, to issue directions to the authority.
Woolf J referred to the Tameside decision and to ASLEF (No. 2).
‘There can be no question’, he said, ‘of my substituting my view of the facts for that of the Secretary of State.’
He seems nevertheless to have come very close to substituting his view of the statutory power and the discretions within it for that of the minister.
Mr Louis Blom-Cooper QC appeared for the applicants in that case.
He has told us that the minister relied on the legal advice from within the Department when he issued his directive to the area health authority and put in the commissioners.
‘Long, and refreshingly frank, affidavits were addressed in evidence which revealed the faulty advice given to the minister.
The drafters of the affidavits had forgotten the lesson that the mother whale gave to her  offspring: ‘It is only when you begin to spout that you get harpooned!’
The Fares Fair litigation
The decision of the House of Lords in R v. Greater London Council ex parte Bromley London Borough Council (1981), confirming that of the Court of Appeal, has been widely regarded as a political decision, no doubt because it gave a ruling in an acutely political controversy.
Both the ruling itself and the judicial reasoning adopted by the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords exemplify what is meant by the politics of the judiciary.
The case is of great importance and interest because it illuminates the weaknesses inherent in the role of the judiciary when required to adjudicate in such matters.
In July 1981, the GLC passed a resolution implementing a commitment in the election manifesto of the Labour Party to reduce fares charged by the London Transport Executive (LTE) by 25 per cent and to meet this cost (some £69m) issued a supplementary precept for rates of 6.1p in the £ to all London boroughs.
In addition this policy resulted in the GLC losing some £50m of rate support grant from the government.
Bromley London Borough Council applied to the High Court to quash the supplementary rate as ultra vires .
Under the Transport (London) Act 1969, the GLC was placed (by section 1) under the general duty to develop policies, and to encourage, organize and, where appropriate, to carry out measures, which would promote the provision of integrated, efficient and economic transport facilities and services for Greater London.
The LTE consisted of persons appointed by the GLC with the function of implementing  the policies of the GLC (section 4).
The GLC was empowered by the Act to make grants to the LTE for any purpose (section 3) and the GLC intended in this way to reimburse the LTE for the revenue lost by the fares reduction and so enable the LTE to balance its books, this being an obligation placed on the LTE ‘so far as practicable’.
Subject to that obligation, the LTE was under a duty to exercise and perform its functions, in accordance with principles laid down or approved by the GLC, in such manner as, and with due regard to efficiency, economy and safety of operation, to provide or secure the provision of such public passenger transport services as best met the needs for the time being of Greater London (section 5).
If the LTE accounts showed a deficit, the GLC was required to take such action as appeared necessary and appropriate to enable the LTE to balance its books (section 7(6)).
Additionally the GLC was empowered to give the LTE general directions, and the approval of the GLC was required for the general level and structure of fares to be charged by the LTE (section 11).
The Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division which first heard the action refused Bromley's application but the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords upheld it and quashed the precept and so the scheme.
The five Law Lords were Wilberforce, Diplock, Keith, Scarman, and Brandon.
All agreed that the GLC's power to make grants to the LTE included a large degree of discretion to supplement revenue received by the LTE from fares, including anticipated or prospective revenue deficits.
But they put limitations on this discretion.
All except Lord Diplock founded their decision on the ground that the LTE was under a general duty to run its operations on ordinary business principles and that this had been breached by the reduction of fares without regard to those principles.
All except Lord Diplock (and in this he positively disagreed) held that the GLC had to have regard, when making a grant, to the LTE's obligation to run its operations so far as practicable, on a break-even basis; so the GLC could make grants to the LTE only to make good unavoidable losses and not to further a particular social policy.
All except Lord  Keith also held that the GLC was under a fiduciary duty to its ratepayers which they had breached by the scheme, Lord Diplock particularly emphasizing the loss of rate support grant, and that they had acted thriftlessly.
Much argument centred on the proper meanings to be attached to particular words such as‘economic’ and on the recent history of transport legislation.
But the concept of the fiduciary duty said to be owed by the GLC to its rate payers was most widely emphasized by their Lordships.
It is a judge-made concept and wholly imprecise.
Lord Scarman, for example, rejected the GLC's interpretation of the 1969 Act on the ground that it ‘would make mincemeat of the fiduciary duty owed to the ratepayers’.
If Parliament had intended to depart from the break-even basis, he argued, this would have been enacted expressly in Part 1 of the Act where the general duties of the policy-maker, the GLC, were set; and added: ‘But section 1(1) says nothing to suggest the exclusion of the fiduciary duty to the rate payers.’
The answer is, of course, that ‘Parliament’ never thought about the fiduciary duty at all .
And this for the very good reason that the only relevant decision on the fiduciary duty — Prescott v. Birmingham — had been immediately negatived by Parliament in its application to the power of local transport authorities to fix the level of fares.
The doctrine of the fiduciary duty, being judge-made, is capable of extended application as the courts please.
In this case, the Law Lords chose to say that the GLC had not adequately taken into account the interests of the rate payers and that the interests of the users of public transport had been unduly preferred.
Such an argument can logically be applied whenever public authorities spend the rate payers' (or the taxpayers') money to further some statutory purpose.
Particular public expenditure can always be criticized on the ground that it is excessive or wrongly directed, whether on  defence or education or the building of motorways or any other public service.
The constitutional reply is that public authorities, being directly or indirectly elected, are the representatives of the public interest and that their function is precisely that of making such decisions.
The criticism is then seen as being political and if the electors of Greater London disapprove of what is done in their name by their representatives, the remedy lies in their hands at the next election.
Nor is this merely constitutional or political theory, divorced from reality, for without doubt the election in 1985 for the GLC would have turned very largely on this issue and on the view taken of the controversial Labour administration at County Hall during its four years in office.
It is surely no more the function of the judiciary to tell the GLC where the public interest lay in its spending of public money than it is the function of the judiciary to make similar judgments about spending by the Departments of the central government.
The application of the doctrine of the fiduciary duty in this case was gross interference by the judiciary in the exercise of political responsibility of an elected local authority.
There remains, however, the much more substantial argument that the GLC had exceeded its statutory powers as laid down in the Transport (London) Act 1969.
We may take Lord Wilberforce's argument as typical of the Lords' approach.
He emphasized sections 5 and 7 as ‘critical’.
Section 5 provided that, subject always to section 7(3), it was the general duty of the LTE to exercise and perform their functions with due regard to efficiency, economy and safety of operation.
He said that those last three sets of words ‘point rather more clearly than does section 1 in the direction of running on business-like or commercial lines’.
And, he said, the word ‘economy’ prevented the LTE from conducting its undertakings on other than economic considerations.
He called the initial words of section 5 important as drawing attention to the ‘paramount’ financing provisions of section 7(3).
This section 7(3) required the LTE so to perform their functions as to ensure so far as practicable that at the end of each accounting period the aggregate of the net balance of the consolidated revenue account of the LTE and of their  general reserve was such as might be approved by the GLC; and that if, at the end of any accounting period, the aggregate showed a deficit, the amount properly available to meet changes to revenue account in the next following accounting period should exceed those charges by at least the amount of that deficit.
In order words the LTE was to balance its books taking one year with the next.
Further, under section 7(6) , the GLC was required to have regard to section 7(3) and, where there was a deficit, the GLC was to take such action as appeared to the GLC necessary and appropriate to enable the LTE to comply with the requirements of section 7(3) .
As Lord Wilberforce said, the GLC might direct fares to be raised or services to be adjusted; or might make a grant to the LTE.
Lord Wilberforce read this as meaning that the GLC could not exercise its powers ‘unless and until’ the LTE had carried out its duty.
‘It appears to me clear’, he said, ‘that neither the LTE in making its proposals, nor the GLC in accepting them, could have power totally to disregard any responsibility for ensuring, so far as practicable, that outgoings are met by revenue, and that the LTE runs its business on economic lines.’
The alternative view is that ‘revenue account’ did not mean internally generated revenue only but included GLC grants.
This is reinforced if the intention of Parliament in passing the Act was that deficits on internally generated revenue would most likely be incurred, not merely casually, but deliberately as a consequence of treating transport as a social service.
This view argued that section 7 was meant as an accounting section only and contained only a prohibition against annual accumulation deficits.
The GLC was meant to be the dominant authority (see section 1), with the LTE as its instrument, and the power of the GLC to make grants to the LTE ‘for any purpose’ was strong evidence of this.
Lord Wilberforce answered this alternative view in these words:
There is indeed, and has been for some years, discussion on the political level as to whether, and to what extent, public transport, particularly in capital cities, should be regarded, and financed, as a social service, out of taxation whether national or local.
We cannot take any position in this argument; we must recognize that it exists.
But I am unable to see, however carefully I reread the 1969 Act, that Parliament had in that year taken any clear stance on it.
The other Law Lords (Lord Diplock excepted) also placed great reliance on section 7(3) and correspondingly less on sections 1 and 3.
Before we discuss this decision further, there is an aftermath to consider.
The Law Lords' speeches in Bromley were delivered on 17 December 1981.
Almost immediately commercial ratepayers on Merseyside sought to quash a similar scheme.
Following the May 1981 elections, the new Labour majority on Merseyside County Council set about implementing its own manifesto which had promised no reduction in transport services but a reduction in fares.
The precept required an additional supplementary rate of 6p in the £.
The Merseyside authorities operated under the Transport Act 1968 which, though similar, was not the same in its provisions as the Transport (London) Act 1969.
Thus the County Council as Transport Authority and its subordinate, the Transport Executive, had to have regard to the promotion of ‘a properly integrated and efficient system of public transport to meet the needs of that area with due regard to the town planning and traffic and parking policies’ of the other councils.
Also the Transport Authority was expressly empowered to require the Executive to provide a service at a cost the Executive considered to be too high, so long as the Transport Authority provided the necessary additional cost.
Woolf J also found that the Authority had properly considered the interest of the ratepayers and that the financial duties were not overriding.
Further, there was no automatic loss of rate support grant as a result of introducing the scheme.
On these and other grounds the judge distinguished Bromley v. GLC .
As a result of the decision in Bromley v. GLC the fares were doubled and Camden London Borough Council contemplated taking legal proceedings to challenge their validity.
Legal advice from learned leading counsel on both  sides was contradictory, and at one stage the Attorney-General advised the Minister of Transport that if the GLC should adopt a certain budgetary policy he thought the courts would accept it.
He then made this advice public, thus instituting a free legal aid service of a novel kind.
The reality was that the decision in Bromley v. GLC was one which no one wished to be bound by.
It seemed to suggest that the GLC and the LTE must try to break even, a course which was certainly feasible if fares were sufficiently increased and services sufficiently reduced, but which was politically as unacceptable to the government as it was anathema to the GLC.
The GLC, bloody but unbowed, next produced a new scheme.
This directed the LTE to reduce fares by 25 per cent and involved a grant to be made to the LTE to meet the resulting deficit on revenue account.
The LTE objected to the direction on the ground that it failed to have regard to the LTE's financial duty under section 7(3) to break even so far as is practicable.
Kerr LJ said that some of the public comments on Bromley v. GLC gave the misleading impression that the judgments in the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords were designed to thwart the wishes of the majority on the GLC for political motives.
‘Such reactions,’ he said, ‘whether based on ignorance or whatever, can only be described as utter rubbish…
It is to be hoped that nothing like that will happen again.’
All three judges in the Divisional Court (the others were Glidewell J and Nolan J) found the speeches of the Law Lords in Bromley v. GLC not easy to understand and impossible to reduce to agreed principles.
As Mr George Cunningham MP said in the House of Commons on 22 December 1981, referring to those speeches:
Each of the five judgments rambles over the territory in what can only be called a head-scratching way, making it  impossible for the consumer of the judgment to know at the end just what the law is held to be, except negatively, and then only negatively on a few points.
When one puts the five judgments together, the effect is chaos.
The Divisional Court upheld the scheme adopted by the GLC but the ground on which they did so seemed to be no more than that ‘since the LTE could exercise its function to balance its revenue account by a grant from the GLC, a policy that reduced fares by means of such a grant was not unlawful’.
Those words are taken from the headnote in the Law Reports and seem a fair if wholly circular summary.
To this was added the proviso that the GLC had not acted arbitrarily and had considered both its duties to the ratepayers and the statutory duties imposed by the 1969 Act on it and on the LTE.
This reinforces the view that what upset the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords in Bromley v. GLC was, above all, the way in which the Labour majority went about implementing their election promises rather than their statutory powers to do so.
Local authorities would be well advised in future to preface all their decisions with the words: ‘Having had regard to all relevant matters and having disregarded all irrelevant matters, and having considered the interests of all those likely to be affected,resolved that' etc.
When all this has been said, it is still very difficult to see how the Divisional Court in R. v. LTE ex parte GLC managed to come down in favour of the GLC in the face of the unanimous decision of the Law Lords.
That decision was based primarily not on procedural defects but on interpretations of the words of the statute and on the notion of the fiduciary duty.
The new scheme, upheld by the Divisional Court in the later case, was made under the same statute and did not appreciably hold a different balance between ratepayers and transport users.
The decision of the Divisional Court bears the marks of a rescue operation, seeking to save some sanity for transport policy in London and for  the right of statutory authorities to exercise statutory powers within the statutory terms given to them.
The later cases
An important limitation on the availability of judicial review arose when a senior nursing officer employed by a Health Authority was dismissed for misconduct.
At the first hearing the judge held that the public was concerned to see that a great public service acted lawfully and fairly towards its officers and so judicial review was available.
But the Court of Appeal, no doubt alarmed by the prospect of large numbers of public sector employees seeking similar review, held that such cases should be treated as ordinary master-and-servant situations governed by private law.
This principle was extended to civil servants who had the alternative remedy of taking their complaints to an industrial tribunal.
A similar reason was given for refusing the remedy to a convicted prisoner who brought an action against the Home Secretary and the prison governor requiring them to provide him with the necessary medical treatment in accordance with the Prison Rules.
But the remedy was made available by the House of Lords to a prisoner who alleged breaches of procedural rules by a deputy governor inquiring into disciplinary offences.
Judicial policy-making was apparent in the decision of the House of Lords in R. v. Secretary of State for the Environment ex parte Nottinghamshire County Council in 1986.
This was an attempt by a local authority to object to the level of grant it was deemed to be entitled to from the central  government.
Their Lordships expressed the opinion that in the absence of some exceptional circumstance such as bad faith or improper motive on the part of the Minister it was inappropriate for courts to intervene on the ground of unreasonableness in a matter of public financial administration of this kind.
Lord Templeman said that such matters were not for judges ‘who are not qualified to listen’ but for the Minister, for Members of Parliament, and ultimately for the electorate.
The courts could intervene only if unfairness was such as to amount to an abuse of power.
Such an ‘abuse’ was exemplified by the courts in Wheeler v. Leicester City Council where the City Council (which had adopted an anti-apartheid policy) banned the Leicester Rugby club from using a Council recreation ground because three members of the club had joined an English touring side to South Africa.
The majority of the Court of Appeal held that the council was entitled to have regard to the need to promote good race relations under the Race Relations Act 1976.
But the House of Lords held that in the absence of any infringement of the law or any improper conduct by the club the banning was unreasonable and a breach of the council's duty to act fairly, hence a procedural impropriety and a misuse of statutory powers.
The Monopolies and Mergers Commission may, under the Fair Trading Act 1973, have referred to it by the Director of Fair Trading or a Minister for investigation and report whether a monopoly, as defined, is or is not against the public interest.
On several occasions judicial review has been sought of the Commission's recommendations.
In 1986, the Argyll group of companies and Guinness were rival bidders in attempts to take over Distillers Ltd.
After bids and counter bids the Secretary of State referred the Guinness proposal to the Commission for inquiry and report.
Then Guinness decided to divest itself of certain whisky brands to reduce its market share and the chairman of the Commission ruled that this meant its bid had been abandoned and that  the reference should be set aside.
Argyll applied unsuccessfully for judicial review based on a restrictive view of the Commission's substantive and procedural powers.
In another case, the objection was that the Commission had heard argument from one company which had not been put to the other company.
This was also rejected on the ground that the Commission had wide and flexible discretion and was not obliged to put every piece of material to all interested parties.
Also rejected was an objection that the Commission had decided to disclose information given in confidence.
Most famously, after the Al Fayed brothers had acquired the House of Fraser, which includes Harrods, the Secretary of State in April 1987 appointed inspectors under the Companies Act 1985 to investigate and report on alleged fraud and deceit in the takeover.
In July 1988, the Minister sent a copy of the report to the Serious Fraud Office but decided against immediate publication, and, following advice from the Director of Fair Trading, did not refer the takeover to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Lonrho plc applied for judicial review for an order requiring the Minister to publish the report and to refer the takeover.
Watkins LJ gave the principal judgment in the Divisional Court and upheld the application on the ground that the Minister had not given his reasons for the decision not to make a reference and that this was ‘irrational’.
But both the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords supported the Minister, Lord Keith saying that the judgments in the Divisional Court illustrated the danger of judges wrongly, though unconsciously, substituting their own views for the views of the decision-maker who alone was charged and authorized by Parliament to exercise a discretion.
These cases illustrate the importance which the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords attached to the need not to constrain the Commission and the Office of Fair Trading within narrow bounds and to emphasize the width of their discretionary powers.
The decisions are in contrast to the attitude of the courts to the powers of the Commission for Racial Equality.
No doubt also the judges have been anxious further to limit the availability of judicial review given its tendency to ‘overburden’ the courts.
But two other examples of the application of these restraints are more serious.
During the 1980s, the group providing most of the applications for judicial review were immigrants.
During the years 1981–4, the number of applications for judicial review from immigrants rose from 157 to 266 per annum.
Between 1984 and 1985 the figure almost doubled from 266 to 516, the latter figure representing 59 per cent of the total caseload.
Among the reasons for these large numbers are that there is no right of appeal from the Immigration Appeal Tribunal to the courts; that from many decisions by immigration officers adverse to immigrants, an appeal can be made only from outside the United Kingdom; and that from some decisions (such as some exclusions deemed conducive to the public good by the Secretary of State) there are no rights of appeal at all.
So judicial review, even on the limited grounds for which it is available, is the only way of having a rejection looked at again.
In February 1986, the Court of Appeal delivered judgment in R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte Swati .
The applicant sought permission to enter the United Kingdom as a visitor for one week.
The Immigration Officer refused, saying: ‘I am not satisfied that you are genuinely seeking entry only for this limited period.’
Leave to apply for judicial review was sought on the ground that this  statement was not a sufficient reason, as required by the regulations, and was itself irrational.
The court rejected these arguments but also ruled that those refused entry on the ground that they were not genuine visitors must normally use their statutory right of appeal (available only after they have left the United Kingdom) and not use judicial review.
At the same time the Government was seeking to limit the opportunities for Members of Parliament to make representations to Ministers on behalf of those refused entry.
This decision in ex parte Swati was almost certainly the reason for a sharp decline in the number of applications for judicial review from immigrants in 1986.
The number fell from the high point of 516 in 1985 to 409 in 1986.
The decision in Swati was reinforced by the Court of Appeal in Davendranath Doorga v. Secretary of State for the Home Department .
The applicant was refused entry as a student although he had written evidence that the course fees had been paid, that his brother (resident in the UK) would maintain him, and that his employers in Mauritius had given him a year's leave for study.
The court held that there was no evidence to suggest that the decision to exclude was unreasonable on Wednesbury grounds.
Again, it is clear that the courts are taking a very restricted attitude to their powers of judicial review in these cases and are refusing to consider general questions of the fairness of decisions.
Another large group of applicants for judicial review are the homeless.
Under the Housing (Homeless Persons) Act 1977, local authorities in certain circumstances become bound to provide accommodation where applicants have a priority need and have not become homeless intentionally.
In Cocks v. Thanet DC the House of Lords made clear that those aggrieved by local authority decisions must proceed by way of judicial review and could not use procedures available in private law between landlord and tenant.
This protected what Lord Bridge called the safeguards built into the judicial  review procedure which protected from ‘harassment’ public authorities on whom Parliament imposed a duty.
He referred particularly to the need, under judicial review procedure, to obtain leave to apply on the basis of sworn evidence, on the court's discretionary control of both discovery of documents and cross-examination, on the capacity of the court to act with the utmost speed when necessary and on the court's avoiding the temptation to substitute its own decision of fact for that of the housing authority.
As early as 1979, Lord Widgery CJ was emphasizing the limits of judicial intervention in this field.
The Government issued a Code of Guidance which widened the definitions in the Act and was more wide-ranging, to the advantage of the homeless.
However Lord Denning was quick to point out that although local authorities had to have regard to the Code, they could depart from it if they thought fit.
In many of the cases arising out of homelessness, local authorities have sought to interpret their statutory obligations narrowly.
Especially in London, the dimensions of the social problems far exceeded the available resources both physical and financial.
So the courts were called on to decide whether the authorities had correctly interpreted their duties.
For example, in 1983 it was said that ‘even where the husband had been violent, it would be reasonable for the wife to continue to reside in the matrimonial home but to seek a court order restraining his violence or barring him from the home’ and in these circumstances the authority's duty would be ‘to advise the applicant so to do, not to accommodate her as a homeless person’.
So also, where an impoverished family left their accommodation on receipt of a distress warrant for rent arrears rather than wait for an eviction order, they were held by the House of Lords to have become homeless intentionally and this encouraged  local housing authorities to require such orders before accepting such homeless applicants.
By the end of 1986 there had been 84 reported decisions on the 1977 Act in the High Court and 41 of these had gone in favour of the homeless.
But there was to be a change.
In Puhlhofer v. Hillingdon London Borough Council a married couple with two young children lived in one room at a guesthouse.
No cooking or laundry facilities were provided and no meals except breakfast.
They applied to the local authority for accommodation as homeless persons, but were rejected on the ground that they had accommodation.
At first instance, the judge held that the accommodation had to be appropriate and that no reasonable authority could have come to that conclusion in this case.
But the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords supported the local authority.
Lord Brightman said that ‘great restraint’ should be exercised in giving leave to proceed by judicial review, and that he was troubled at ‘the prolific use’of the procedure in these cases.
He said:
The plight of the homeless is a desperate one…and commands the deepest sympathy.
But it is not, in my opinion, appropriate that the remedy of judicial review, which is a discretionary remedy, should be made use of to monitor the actions of local authorities under the Act save in the exceptional case…
I express the hope that there will be a lessening in the number of challenges which are mounted against local authorities who are endeavouring, in extremely difficult circumstances, to perform their duties under the [Homeless Persons Act with due regard for all their other housing problems.
In 1985 there were 66 applications for judicial review and the number was on the decline.
Prior to Puhlhofer , failure  to obtain leave to proceed by judicial review occurred in less than 10 per cent of the applications.
But following Puhlhofer the number of applications halved to 32 in 1986 and the number refused leave rose from 6 in 1985 to 13 in 1986.
As Maurice Sunkin says, the decision in Puhlhofer ‘appears to have led to the introduction of a more stringent test than previously existed’.
But the warnings of Lord Brightman seem to have been made more to discourage even the modest number of applications than to respond to excessive use.
In 1986, it was provided that an applicant should not be treated as having accommodation unless it was such that it would be reasonable for him to continue to occupy it.
In determining what was reasonable, regard might be had to the general housing circumstances prevailing in the local authority to whom the application was made.
Where an applicant voluntarily left accommodation but had then acquired temporary accommodation, the courts interpreted the legislation so as to entitle the local authority to relate back to the first accommodation and so to find that he was intentionally homeless.
And this was applicable where the first accommodation was in another country.
So where Bangladeshis spent periods of time in the United Kingdom interspersed with periods in Bangladesh and then brought their families to the United Kingdom, took temporary accommodation, and then applied to be treated as a homeless person, it was held that the local authority was entitled to refuse them.
In considering whether it was reasonable for an applicant to continue to occupy accommodation in another country the local authority might take into account the custom and lifestyle in that country.
The fact that the authority disregarded certain factors (for example, the limited availability of welfare benefits or the poor prospects for employment) in that country could not ground an application for judicial review as they were not factors which the authority was obliged to take into account.
Lloyd LJ referred to Lord Brightman's concern in Puhlhofer at the ‘prolific use of judicial review’ in these homelessness cases.
Despite the legislative amendments in 1986, that observation, he said, was ‘as pertinent now as it ever was’.
The Court of Appeal supported this view, Lord Justice Purchas saying that it was ‘clearly established’ that the circumstances in which the court would intervene by judicial review were ‘severely circumscribed’, though remitting the cases to the local authority for them to state correctly their reasons for determining that it was reasonable to expect the applicants to continue to occupy their settled accommodation in Bangladesh.
In a remarkable case, very much of our times, the applicants lived in Belfast and had been guilty of criminal and anti-social activities.
Their neighbours sought the help of the IRA (which adopted a vigilante role in the area) who told the applicants that, unless they left Northern Ireland within 72 hours, they would all be killed.
They came to Hammersmith in London and applied for accommodation as homeless persons.
The court held that they were intentionally homeless and so disqualified.
The complexities of these situations are shown by the case of an applicant and his family who left what was described as an ‘overcrowded tin or galvanised structure with no basic amenities’ in Bangladesh and who were treated as intentionally homeless by one London borough (who considered that it was reasonable for them to continue to occupy that accommodation) but not intentionally homeless by a second London borough who referred the applicant back to the first.
Lord Justice Watkins criticised the legislation and doubted whether Parliament had intended it to apply to the housing of immigrants.
It is a condition of an application for judicial review that  the applicant shall have ‘a sufficient interest’ in the matter.
What this means in practice is very complicated and the caselaw is not clear.
Mrs Whitehouse as a television licence holder had such an interest when seeking a declaration that the Independent Broadcasting Authority had acted unlawfully over the screening of the film Scum .
The Child Poverty Action Group was allowed to challenge the Secretary of State for Social Services over delay in paying social security benefits.
Whether a body like the National Federation of Self-Employed and Small Businesses Ltd had a sufficient interest to allow them to challenge the Inland Revenue Commissioners when the IRC made a deal with certain non-payers of tax remains unclear.
But Lord Justice Woolf has written that, as a result of this case, usually it is not until the application has been heard on the merits that it can be decided whether the applicant has sufficient interest, and it is rare in cases which may otherwise be meritorious for leave to be refused on the ground of lack of standing.
In Re Friends of the Earth the applicants sought review of Minister's decision to consent to the construction of Sizewell B nuclear generating plant.
It was held that they had a sufficient interest but the Court of Appeal said they had no arguable ground.
But in R. v. Secretary of State for the Environment ex parte Rose Theatre Trust when the Minister decided not to make an order protecting the site of an Elizabethan theatre, a company of interested individuals was denied the right to challenge this decision, even though this meant that no one was in a position to do so.
And when a ratepayer challenged a local authority's conduct of its  policy to sell council houses and invoked his statutory right to complain to the District Auditor, he was debarred from at the same time pursuing the alternative remedy of applying to the courts for judicial review.
Within the broad and imprecise terms of ‘illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety’, it is not easy to forecast what is the extent and what are the limits of judicial review.
Where a rating authority had a statutory power, but no duty, to refund rates overpaid by mistake, the House of Lords granted judicial review and ordered repayment where the reasons given by the authority for its refusal to repay were held not to be valid.
Where the local ombudsman exceeded his jurisdiction when reporting on a complaint against a local authority the Court of Appeal granted a declaration to that effect.
In R. v. Secretary of State for Education and Science ex parte Avon County Council , the Minister approved an application from a school for grant-maintained status outside the jurisdiction of the local authority which contended that this rendered the re-organisation of their schools no longer viable.
The court quashed the Minister's decision on the ground that he should have considered the school's application in the wider context and not only as it affected the particular school.
The judge ordered the Minister to reconsider his decision.
He did so and reaffirmed it.
In subsequent proceedings the Court of Appeal held that in such circumstances the court could grant a stay of the Minister's decision.
A differently composes Court of Appeal rejected an appeal by the local authority on the substantive questions.
Lord Justice Nichols said:
An application to the court for judicial review of the Minister's decision was not the appropriate means by which the council should seek to ventilate or pursue its differences of opinion with the Minister.
In R. v. Inner London Education Authority ex parte Ali a parent failed to persuade the court that he should be awarded damages for the failure of the respondents to fulfil their statutory duty to provide sufficient schools.
For a period of months, several hundred school children in the London Borough of Tower Hamlets — mostly Bangladeshi in origin — had been without places but the court held this did not mean that the respondents were in breach of their duty if they were taking steps to remedy the situation.
The complexity of the social security regulations and the attempts, during the 1980s, by Ministers to limit their applicability resulted in a series of judicial decisions.
In 1985 regulations were held to be void as having no statutory authority where their purpose was to force able-bodied young people who lived on supplementary benefit to move from one area to another in search of employment.
But where thousands of claimants did not receive repayments to which they were entitled because of errors of local officials the Court of Appeal held that the Minister was not obliged to carry out a fullscale review of files.
Nor was he under a duty to appoint a sufficient number of adjudication officers to handle applications within a statutory period.
The Social Security Act 1986, radically changed the law by requiring special or emergency needs, which had previously been dealt with at the discretion of local officers, to be met out of the Social Fund under directions and guidance from the Minister who allocated funds to local offices.
The Minister purported to give guidance, the effect of which was, that social fund officers must not make payments which  would result in the budget being exceeded.
The court held that the guidance was defective because it was couched in mandatory terms, and inconsistent with the intended flexible nature of the scheme.
The court quashed decisions not to give furniture grants in two cases.
But, in a third case, the court upheld a Ministerial direction that no money was to be paid out for domestic assistance and the Court of Appeal confirmed this decision.
But where Ministerial powers are drawn more broadly, the courts are much more reluctant to intervene.
A group of consultants at Guy's Hospital were unsuccessful in seeking to prevent the Minister from spending money in anticipation of the legislation which would enable hospitals to apply for self-governing status.
So were a group of medical general practitioners who claimed that changes in their contracts would seriously damage the health of patients.
When local expenditure was greatly curtailed by Government restrictions on the raising of revenue (rate-capping) many authorities sought ways of raising money by other means.
The London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham entered into a series of transactions with various banks which resulted in considerable losses when interest rates rose.
The Court of Appeal held that those transactions were valid so far as they were entered into for the purposes of interest rate risk management and not for trading purposes.
The London Borough of Greenwich sought judicial review of a Government leaflet distributed to every household in England which was explanatory of the community charge or poll tax.
The borough argued that the leaflet was misleading because it omitted all references to the joint liability of spouses and cohabiting couples.
The court held that in the  absence of bad faith (for example, an intention to deceive) the court should not intervene unless the leaflet misstated the law or was manifestly inaccurate or misleading.
The Local Government Finance Act 1988 imposes a duty on local authorities to calculate how much they needed to raise by way of the poll tax.
The Act empowered the Secretary of State to put a limit on the amount if in his opinion the amount proposed to be raised was ‘excessive’ according to principles he determined which were to be the same for all authorities falling within the same class.
In June 1990, the Minister proposed to ‘cap’ nineteen Labour authorities in this way.
They argued that the principles he adopted had been politically motivated and should have had regard to the spending needs of each authority.
The House of Lords rejected this and held that the Minister was entitled to decide what was meant by ‘excessive’ and what principles to apply.
One of the more striking interventions by the courts in recent years came when the Court of Appeal overturned the decision by the Secretary of State for the Environment to allow the demolition of listed buildings in the City of London.
The Mappin and Webb building adjoins the Mansion House and the Bank of England.
Proposals were put forward by the owners during the 1980s for the development of the site and were opposed by Save Britain's Heritage.
The published policy of the Secretary of State was that he would not grant consent for the total or substantial demolition of a listed building unless he was satisfied that every effort had been made to continue the present use or find an alternative use.
After an inquiry, the Minister granted planning permission and listed building consent for the demolition of the building.
The Court of Appeal held that this decision should be quashed because the Minister had not adequately explained his reasons, particularly in failing  to give his assessment of the merits of the existing building.
In July 1990, the House of Lords held that a byelaw prohibiting entry to the Greenham Common military bars was invalid because it infringed rights of common.
On the other hand, when the Greater London Council was abolished in 1986, County Hall on the south bank of the Thames became vested in the London Residuary Body which applied for planning permission to use the main block for mixed hotel, residential and general office purposes unconnected with any local government functions.
After an inquiry, the Secretary of State disagreed with his inspector and decided that these general office purposes should be permitted.
The Court of Appeal held that this decision should be quashed because the Minister had not applied the correct test of competing needs, in this case between those of local government and those of other office users.
But the Law Lords unanimously decided that he was obliged to have regard only to ‘material considerations’ and that the amount of weight to be given to these was a matter for his judgment.