

LONDON, APRIL 1987 — APRIL 1988
IT HARDLY SEEMED ANY TIME AT ALL BEFORE THE DAYS started to get warmer and spring was here again.
I love the fresh smell in the air when everything seems to be coming to life again and I felt a natural surge of joy, as if in a few weeks' time John would be coming home from his first trip away just as he should have done the previous April.
The feeling almost wiped out that terrible year as if it hadn't happened at all.
It had been impossible to think of the future since John's abduction, but 17 April was only weeks away and I had been discussing with Chris and Nick how we might mark it in some way.
As I tried to think about what we should do, the day began to represent something we could work towards and almost look forward to, at a time when Waite's kidnap had left us nothing to hope for.
I knew now that I might have been foolish to have expected so much from Waite, but he had been the only person who'd been willing to treat both kidnappers and hostages as human beings and to attempt some kind of understanding about how the situation could be resolved.
Now he was gone.
In the pub on the night of John's kidnap people had tried to reassure me that if he wasn't freed soon then there would be nationwide protests demanding his release.
The reality was that he seemed to have been forgotten and nothing was going to serve as a reminder unless the kidnappers broke their silence.
Our recent low-key attempts at publicity, the Day to Day programme, the press conference to mark the three hundredth day and a few other interviews — had been fairly successful and hadn't offended or worried Pat or Sheila, although Roby had been against them.
I had been taken aback by the extent of his feelings.
‘How many times are you going to want to do this, Jill?’ he had said.
‘Who do you want to convince, the man in the pub?’
I was upset, but when I'd calmed down, I wondered if Roby was right.
Did I want to seek publicity just to make myself feel better?
It satisfied a need to do something, I could see that, but I didn't think it was my only motivation.
My real aims were to get through to John and to keep him alive in people's minds so that he couldn't be forgotten.
When Pat told me that he'd been pleased with what I'd said on Day to Day I felt better; I couldn't have coped with his disapproval as well.
The main problem was how to interest the media.
I wrote to the editors of all the major newspapers and television channels asking them to cover the anniversary.
Hardly any of them replied and Chris, Nick and I decided to follow up the letters with phone calls.
As soon as I heard a journalist say, ‘John McCartney?
Who's he when he's at home?’, any doubts I had about badgering them disappeared.
However, a few newspapers were interested and I found myself giving about a dozen interviews.
It was draining, but I was grateful to any journalists prepared to listen, even if it was obvious that some papers only felt it was a good story because of the ‘love interest’.
After a while, the numbness I'd experienced after the press conference set in, and I felt again as if I were talking not about John and me, but about two different people.
I repeated the story constantly.
It was hard to keep any freshness in my replies, and it was difficult to examine and display my feelings.
But it was encouraging that some journalists were genuinely interested in trying to help and did feel that what had happened to John could have easily happened to them.
One such person was John Curran, a producer at ITN, who had already demonstrated his kindness by giving me an answering machine so that I could screen any calls from the press.
John was keen to help in a practical way and it was he who came up with an idea for marking John's year in captivity.
‘What you need is a permanent display somewhere in London; perhaps John's photograph and the number of days he's been held.
You need something that can be changed every day as the number grows, somewhere people can see it every day.
That way the press will have something to photograph to accompany their stories.
You've got to feed them, make it easy for them, give them something visual.’
I could see that he was absolutely right, but where could we do that?
How would we change the numbers?
Would it need to be waterproof?
Suddenly, I thought of St Bride's, the journalists' church in Fleet Street.
‘We could try there,’ I said, tentatively.
‘I found out a few weeks ago that the canon there says prayers for John every day.’
Nick and I went to see Canon Oates and we knew after only a few minutes in his company that he wanted to help very much.
His interest and concern calmed me and sitting in his study at the back of the church I felt more at peace than I had in a long time.
Despite the phone ringing insistently in the background, I felt as if I could have sat there for ever.
‘I'd be privileged to help,’ he said, when we asked him about the display.
‘Why don't we have a prayer vigil here the night before the anniversary?’
Brushing aside our thanks he asked when the anniversary was.
‘It's 17 April,’ I said and then wondered if the church was booked because the canon suddenly looked preoccupied — he seemed to be somewhere else entirely for a minute.
‘That's Good Friday,’ he said in a hushed voice.
Good Friday, the day Jesus died, to rise again three days later.
I hadn't realized the significance of the date until now.
‘Yes,’ he said, shaking himself;, ‘we'll have the vigil here the night before and put up a permanent display inside the church.’
We thanked him and as we were leaving he added that we could leave all the press arrangements to him.
‘We have to nudge the politicians in the right direction.
Sometimes I think God needs a little help at times like this!’
On 16 April, the day of the vigil, I put on my smart suit for the last of the interviews and went into work to look through the papers.
In Beirut the siege of the Palestinian refugee camps by the Amal militia had just ended and the starving inmates were finally being allowed to leave.
A British doctor, Pauline Cutting, had returned home to a heroine's welcome and was featured on several front pages.
‘I wish that I had her guts,’ I thought.
I wanted to be in Beirut for the anniversary, to be near John, but the trip seemed too daunting, too frightening.
Instead, I had sent an open letter to John that I hoped to get printed in the Lebanese press.
It was just possible that the kidnappers might show it to him.
It had been difficult to know what to say.
I was terrified of saying anything that the kidnappers would view as a coded message or as offensive in any way, in case John should suffer for it, but how was I to put a year's worth of thoughts and feelings into a few lines?
Nothing  that I thought of seemed adequate, but in the end I decided to keep it simple.
I typed on to the telex: ‘Darling John, It seems unbelievable that you have been away from us for so long.
More than anything I wish I could be with you.
I am fine and your family is in good health and send their love.
All your friends miss you and think of you all the time.
We won't let you down.
Don't give up hope, my darling.
All my love Jill.’
I leafed through the newspapers, glad that I had done those interviews.
There were articles about John in several, including a two-page spread in the Daily News by Duncan Campbell, a former colleague of John's, and Martin Jackson, the editor of Broadcast , had even written an editorial urging fellow journalists and broadcasters not to let the anniversary pass unrecorded.
‘John McCarthy is one of our own,’ he had written.
‘Let it not be another year.’
Pat and Sheila had been busy, too.
Sheila had made another video appeal and they had sent letters, via WTN, to Sheikh Fadlallah and Sheikh Moussawi, both prominent members of the Shi'ite community in Beirut and leaders of Hezbollah, asking for them to help secure John's release.
It was a hectic day.
Friends rang round to remind each other of the vigil and colleagues rallied as many people as they could to come to St Bride's.
Chris and I delivered the display, which the ITN graphics department had made up as we waited.
Next to a photograph of John were a few words of text which Chris had just written off the top of his head:
John McCarthy was working as a journalist in Beirut when he was seized on his way to the airport to leave.
He is a colleague of yours; you may have worked with him; you may have met him; please, pray for him.
‘It'll do,’ he said, with his customary offhand modesty, as we stood admiring it in the church.
By the time everyone began to arrive the church looked wonderful.
An altar to the side had been decorated with flowers and large candles now lit up John's photograph.
A few TV companies came and went; it seemed very dark when their harsh lights had gone, but gradually my eyes got used to the gloom and I knew if I looked round I would see comforting, familiar faces, as people took their seats in the rows of chairs in front of the altar.
Pat, Sheila and John's brother, Terence, arrived, having driven up from Essex.
As they walked  towards the altar, Sheila stopped to say hallo.
‘I was so excited all the way up here in the car,’ she whispered.
‘I felt as if I was going to see John.’
They didn't stay very long.
The experience seemed to exhaust Sheila.
It was much too painful for her and Pat decided that they should leave.
After they'd gone, I sat near the front next to Nick and looked round.
I felt very tired.
Suddenly, a complete stranger jumped up and said an impromptu prayer for John, and then another.
It was a bit unnerving; they didn't even know John.
I stared at his photograph.
It had been taken by a colleague at a WTN cricket match and had captured his lovely f-ace and warm smile.
He had a slightly shy look in his eyes.
It was odd; I found it difficult to focus on the time that had passed since he'd been kidnapped; sometimes it seemed like moments, at others like years.
I wanted to feel warmed by the love and laughter in those eyes, to have all my worries reduced to nothing again just by seeing him.
It was so difficult to conjure him up at will now, to truly remember what he was like and bring him to life again.
I had to keep reminding myself that the plans we'd had weren't just a dream and that he had loved me.
I stared at the photograph again, concentrating hard.
After a while it worked.
John's face seemed to come alive and his spirit escaped the prison of the photograph releasing brief images of happy times; John dancing along the pavement, John tilting his head back to exhale smoke from a cigarette, John talking to a cuddly toy in a supermarket and making me laugh.
How could this be happening to him?
Sometimes I imagined that he'd sneaked back into the country and was leading another life.
Mad.
But how could life have changed so much that this was happening?
What was the use of this endless silence?
What was the point?
How could his kidnappers be so cruel and not explain their reasons why?
I felt a stab of hatred for his captors.
As I understood more about Lebanon I had felt sympathy for them, seen them as victims who had themselves experienced terrible deprivation.
Now I felt like bombing them, hurting them, kidnapping one of their own families and torturing them with their own tactics.
But what if they weren't tactics at all?
What if John was dead, as some people seemed to think.
What if I was fooling myself?
It was unthinkable that John could be dead, but it had been unthinkable that he would be held for this long and it had happened.
I wanted it to be over, to return to the innocence and freedom of life before the kidnap, for John to be safe, for us all to know some kind of  certainty instead of this constant doubt and anxiety, to be able to think of the future again.
I felt Nick's arm take mine as he saw my tears; I was grateful, but felt little comfort.
It was finally sinking in that if a year could go by, then so could two, or even three.
This silence could continue and we might never find out what had happened to him, never get any answers, never know for sure.
A friend's drunken voice from the back of the church interrupted this miserable train of thought.
‘It's a load of bullshit!’ the culprit shouted before being strong-armed out of the door.
I had to smile; the outburst was outrageous, but it was the type of thing that John would have laughed about.
For a moment it seemed to have broken the spell and punctured the mournful air of the church.
The vigil was very moving but some elements of it were a bit odd.
A few people got terribly carried away, leaping up to voice their guilt at John being kidnapped and saying that it should have been them.
Other people looked on in amazement.
I wondered what on earth John would think if he saw all this; his friends in church, many for the first time in years, strangers saying prayers for him, me weeping over his photograph.
Perhaps it would have been better to have organized an evening in the pub.
Nick and I got up and went outside, where groups of friends were gathered.
Some of them could not believe that they had found themselves in a church, and were only stopping off en route to a nearby pub.
For some people prayers were the obvious answer.
For most of us they weren't, but everyone had felt that they had to mark the day, and what else could we do?
We shared a laugh at the strange goings on inside, finding it hard to understand why life had taken such a bizarre turn for John and us all.
It was difficult to connect this with the vibrant person we all missed so much.
I found myself standing next to Ronnie Wood, John's ex-girlfriend.
We had met at parties previously, but had carefully avoided one another after exchanging polite hallos.
Ronnie had written to me a few months before, saying that she had hesitated to get in touch but wanted me to know how concerned she was about John.
Her kindness broke the ice and as we began to chat I discovered that instead of feeling awkward I was eager to talk to her.
Our thoughts and concerns about John ran along similar lines.
Ronnie had loved John too, and knew his vulnerabilities.
It was such a relief to share my secret worries with her.
The calm, thoughtful way she acknowledged them and talked them through with me made me feel that we had taken the first step towards friendship.
I thought back to something Barbara had said not long before, that John had been the glue that bonded all his friends together, the magnet which drew everyone closer.
John might be absent, but he provided the focus of the evening; he was the reason everyone was at St Bride's, sharing this strange experience — and even if it was strange, it had also been very moving.
If only John was here; I longed to talk to him, to laugh about the funny, surreal side of all this with him.
In Damascus he would have loved baiting Marwan, the AP reporter, with Nick; at the Comedy Store he would have laughed at the idea of the song someone had written for him —‘The Hills are Alive with the Sound of Bullets’;, and my début at live interviews would have provided another entry for his file of great lines.
I had met Chris and Nick at Bush House to be interviewed about the anniversary for the World Service; it was important because of the possibility that John or his kidnappers might be listening and I was very nervous, even more so when I arrived late to discover that the interview was live.
‘Live?’
I wailed to Chris and Nick as a BBC producer bundled me up the stairs ‘I've never done a live interview before…’
Seeing my stricken face the producer tried to offer some comfort and advice as he propelled me through the studio door.
Still hurrying along at a hundred miles an hour he leaned over towards me and lowered his voice.
‘Now,’ he whispered confidentially, ‘the thing to remember is that the Greek Orthodox priest is the one on the left with the beard,’and with that flung me determinedly into my seat.
John would have loved it.
Life was marching up such a strange road that it was sometimes hard to take it all in.
I'd even had a call from the Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runcie, who had been kind enough to phone to say that he had been greatly moved by the vigil and had wanted to let me know that the situation wasn't hopeless.
He told me that Lambeth Palace was pursuing its own contacts in an attempt to locate Terry Waite.
It was a heartening conversation and I was grateful to him for contacting me.
I was thrilled that someone as important as the Archbishop of Canterbury had taken the time to call me, although I couldn't help but think it odd that an Archbishop was now leaving messages on the same answering machine as my mum.
Building up to the anniversary had been the focus of my life for several months; now it was over I felt depressed and despairing again.
The way people had responded to it had been very encouraging, with news bulletins showing Sheila's appeal and a photograph  of the vigil even appearing on the front page of the Daily Telegraph .
Despite the huge amount of work that had gone into making the vigil a success, though, I was sure that the whole thing would be forgotten again — just as John's actual kidnap had been the year before.
I received a few letters from strangers which made me realize that people did care.
One lady had sent me a poem called ‘Wait for Me’ by a Russian poet, Konstantin Simonov.
It was obviously written as encouragement to the soldiers and families separated during the long years of the Second World War, but it seemed to express the yearning that so many young men must have felt when they were far from their families, desolate and frightened:
Wait for me, and I'll return
Only wait very hard
Wait when you are filled with sorrow
As you watch the yellow rain
Wait when the winds sweep the snowdrifts
Wait in the weltering heat
Wait when others have stopped waiting,
Forgetting their yesterdays.
Wait even when from afar no letters come to you
Wait even when others are tired of waiting
And friends sit around the fire,
Drinking to my memory,
Wait, and do not hurry to drink to my memory too.
Wait.
For I'll return, defying every death.
And let those who do not wait say that I was lucky.
They will never understand that in the midst of death,
You with your waiting saved me.
Only you and I know how I survived.
It's because you waited as no-one else did.
Because I felt that John would be relying on the people he loved not to forget him, I kept it.
It was a moving tribute to the power of the human spirit to overcome an experience which threatened to crush it.
I hoped that John would ‘defy every death’ as the poet said, secure in the knowledge that people loved him.
I felt drained and weary after the vigil.
Before the anniversary I had intended to try to mark every hundred days of John's captivity  in some way, but the prospect of battling through another summer of silence seemed impossible.
Throughout May and June nothing was heard from the kidnap groups at all.
As far as anyone could make out none of the hostages whose lives had been threatened earlier in the year had actually been harmed, but the stream of communiqués from the groups had dried up.
The newspapers said that this was due to the fact that the Syrian army was tightening its ring around the southern suburbs of Beirut where the French and American hostages were thought to be.
There was still no news of Waite, but I read that Archbishop Runcie's offer to help Iran locate four of its diplomats still missing in Beirut had received official welcome.
In return Iran was going to help Runcie find Waite.
More and more, ever since Irangate, Iran seemed to have a crucial role to play in the release of American and French hostages.
Not that that was much help; it still looked more likely that John was with a group backed by Syria and Libya.
We still had no idea why he had been kidnapped.
Chris, Nick and I continued with little bursts of publicity, setting up an organization called the Friends of John McCarthy.
Roby and Pat were behind us and we also had support from Nick Raynsford, Martin Jackson, David Nicholas, the editor of ITN, Harry Conroy, the General Secretary of the NUJ and several members of the House of Lords.
Our aim was to co-ordinate the various efforts being made and bring them under one umbrella.
We didn't really do anything with it and certainly didn't get much coverage.
The hostage issue only hit the headlines again when Charles Glass, a British-based American journalist, was kidnapped in mid-June.
Within a few weeks of Glass's abduction, a group calling itself the Organization of Good against Evil released video pictures of him allegedly confessing to being a spy.
The group had followed the usual procedure of a claim followed by proof of abduction.
There had still been nothing of that kind from John's kidnappers and for the first time I began to have serious doubts about whether he was alive; I began to feel less sure of it deep inside, where it mattered.
I decided to throw myself into buying a flat, and avoid thinking about Lebanon as much as I could.
I had planned to buy a flat with Geraldine but realized that if — no, when — John came back I would rather have a home all set up for him.
I bought something very quickly in the area where we had planned to buy before, and moved in in a matter of weeks, decorating the place with the help of my mum and dad and furnishing it with the family's cast-offs  and a sofa-bed which Nick gave me.
Brian had decided to move in with me and help pay the mortgage.
He was a professional musician now, still sensitive and happy doing something he loved.
As he regaled me with his adventures on the road, I began to feel more normal.
I was really touched when all the McCarthys drove up with a few bits and pieces.
We went out for dinner that evening and I asked Sheila why she'd brought an egg poacher.
‘John's always liked poached eggs,’ she told me.
Since John's abduction I had kept a diary, hoping somehow that I could capture the time John was missing, to keep things from fading so that I could share them with him when he came back.
I had even tried to record all his favourite television programmes.
Now I stopped.
Nor did I cut every article on Lebanon out of the paper.
I had decided that I had to face up to the fact that John might not come back or he might be gone for a long time and that when he did come back we might not love one another.
Even if he still felt the same it was no good if I was going to drive myself mad by becoming obsessive.
I had neglected my friends, family, job, social life, virtually everything to do with living a normal life.
I wanted it so much.
I was tired of trying to hold back time; it just swept ahead regardless.
Friends' lives were changing as they split up with old partners, found new ones, bought flats, changed jobs.
Colleagues, too, were moving on, leaving WTN, being posted abroad, getting married.
Everyone was adapting to the shifting landscape around them.
Even Britain seemed to have transformed itself.
The Thatcher revolution had got into its stride and in June 1987 had been given the right to power ahead in a landslide victory.
Any hope of the Government modifying its aggressive response to terrorism went out of the window.
Following the video from Charles Glass, there was much talk of the Syrians doing their utmost to release him.
His abduction had been a blow to their attempts to show that they were bringing Lebanon to order.
High-level American diplomats went to Syria to discuss the kidnapping, but one morning Glass appeared at a Beirut hotel looking tired and dishevelled, saying that he had escaped.
When Mary phoned to tell me he was free I was elated — he might have news of John.
He didn't, but experts on TV and in the papers set off flurries of speculation that negotiations were finally under way to release all the hostages.
Suddenly, everyone was talking about Syria and Iran — which country had more power over the hostage-takers, which  was leaning more to the West.
All in all, excitement reached fever pitch and it was confidently expected that there would be releases within the next few weeks.
I felt my spirits lifting even more; things were on the move at last.
Chris, Nick and I carried on working under the umbrella of the Friends of John McCarthy.
Canon Oates held another vigil to mark John's five hundredth day in August.
Sometime during the summer the media remembered that there was a British angle to the hostage story and contacted me more frequently for interviews.
Colleagues covered for me when I slipped out of work to do them.
I was still trying hard not to rock the boat, not to upset either the FO or WTN, and was desperate to find a way of making uncontroversial remarks sound interesting.
I had sleepless nights before every television interview — not just from nerves, but from the effort of working out what I was going to say.
A few minutes of television time was so precious.
I spent hours trying to come up with a brilliant argument that would demolish the ‘no deals’ policy in seconds and solve everything.
But all I could do was remind people of John's situation.
Perhaps, then, they would ask themselves and others if enough was being done to get him out.
Despite the amount of time I spent worrying about them, the questions themselves were usually the same: what happened to John?
How do you know he's alive?
What do you think should be done?
When asked, ‘How do you know he's alive?’
I would talk about the call to the WTN office in Beirut saying that John was OK, and tell them that Sontag's sighting of Brian showed that silence from the kidnappers didn't necessarily mean that a hostage was dead.
I could see interviewers thinking that, frankly, this evidence didn't add up to much.
Most of them, though, were sympathetic and some, like Jeremy Paxman on Breakfast Time , made the whole thing that much less of an ordeal.
‘You again,’ he would say, ‘what should I ask you this time?’
By the time the summer was over, the predictions that Syria was about to release all the hostages had come to nothing and the issue was dead again.
There'd been a repeat of the sensational reports about Waite — he'd died of a heart attack in an Iranian prison camp and his body returned to Beirut, or the island of Cyprus was on alert for his imminent release — and a three-day series on all the hostages in the Independent , but there was still no questioning of government policy nor a proper analysis of what was really happening.
I was disillusioned with all the experts  who'd been predicting one thing or another; they obviously didn't know any more than anybody else.
The only fact that now seemed beyond doubt was that Syria and Iran were obviously the two countries who were crucial to getting all the hostages released, whoever was actually holding them.
What was also becoming more evident was something that one of the experts had pointed out.
Amir Taheri, an Iranian author, said on television that all the governments with hostages in Lebanon — America, France, Germany, Britain, South Korea — were treating it as a bona-fide political problem — apart from Britain.
All these governments, despite what they were saying or had said previously in public, considered the abduction of their citizens as a political act and were negotiating over it.
According to Taheri, Britain regarded the hostage-takers as criminals and saw the problem largely in terms of policing, rather than negotiating, which was why British hostages were a low priority and would be bottom of the list when it came to any subsequent releases.
His words had the ring of truth about them.
The British government didn't seem to have a coherent policy for dealing with the hostage situation, they just wanted to teach the kidnappers a lesson.
I despaired when I heard Sir Geoffrey Howe, who was Foreign Secretary at the time, speak at the Tory Party Conference in October and heard him repeat the same old stock phrase: Britain will never make a deal over its hostages in Lebanon.
as if to mock us, Howe's remarks preceded the release of the South Korean hostage Do Chae Sung by just a few weeks and the liberation of two French hostages by just over a month.
Ironically, the two French hostages were released on John's birthday, 27 November.
We had decided to print birthday messages to him in the Beirut press and once again our love and thoughts went over the telex and into a vacuum.
My colleagues at work sent a message, saying: ‘Dearest John, on your second birthday in captivity your good friends at WTN send their love.
Their thoughts are with you.’
I wrote: ‘Darling John, I can hardly believe that your birthday is here again and you're still not home.
I wish I could tell you myself how much I love you and miss you.
We are all fine and Chris and Nick send their love.
Keep strong and remember that I'm with you every minute.’
John's mother wrote: ‘My Darling John, today is your second birthday away from home and our thoughts are with you every second.’
We had no way of knowing it, but those messages were to bring us the first concrete news of John for eighteen months.
The release of the Frenchmen, Jean-Louis Normandin and Roger Auque, by the Revolutionary Justice Organization on John's birthday took place against a backdrop of bombings and embassy sieges in Paris and Teheran.
There were allegations of a huge cash deal and changes in France's Middle East policy to accommodate Iran.
There had also been rumours that Germany had paid a ransom to get two of their hostages out a few months earlier, and what with Germany breaking ranks, Irangate and now this suspected deal for the French hostages, British newspapers were of full moral outrage at the weakness of other countries and their capitulation in the fight against terrorism.
It was the final straw for me as well.
When I watched the TV news and saw Auque and Normandin waving to the crowd on their release, something snapped.
How many more hostages were we going to see walk free while our Government still couldn't tell us if John was alive?
Three days after the French were released Joelle Kauffman arranged for me to see Normandin and I flew to Paris, with Mary, to see him.
It was unlikely, but just possible that he might have news of John.
Normandin was a precious link to that other world that held John and I was more excited than nervous as we walked to his apartment near the Champs-Elysées.
But when Joelle introduced us I realized that I hadn't really been prepared for the meeting at all.
In those days, it seemed to me that released hostages had come out of deepest, darkest Africa.
I knew so little about who had held them and how they had got out, it seemed as if they had come from a different world, a different time.
It was a shock to see the bare evidence of what that kind of captivity could do to a man, and feel the sense of despair at what he had lost.
He had a bad cold and was shivering inside his dressing gown.
I felt foolish that I hadn't been prepared for the fact that his skin would be so bad or his teeth so deteriorated.
I stammered in French that I was very happy to see him and very grateful that he had made time to see me.
He had no news of John, but once we had overcome an initial awkwardness, he tried to tell us about his experience.
He spoke without much prompting and I was encouraged by his composure.
He had never been kept in a cell, unlike Sontag and Jacobsen, but in various different apartments where the conditions were always similar: a comfortable mattress on the floor, books to  read, and occasionally, a television to watch.
He had been held with two other French hostages who had also now been released, and two Americans, Edward Tracey and Joe Cicippio.
The three men had established a routine of playing cards between breakfast and lunch, draughts between lunch and dinner and chess between dinner and lights out.
He said that he hadn't been treated ‘badly’, but had, like Jenco and Jacobsen, been chained by one or both ankles for most of the time.
He recounted all this without any anger or bitterness, but as he got up from his chair to go to the kitchen I had to turn away rather than watch him move around his flat as though he were still hampered by chains.
I asked him how he had coped emotionally with his captivity.
‘My spirits varied between depression, acceptance, and hope,’ he said, ‘although I found it easier not to think of my son, Antoine.’
There was a silence and then he added something that stayed in my mind more than the chains, more, in fact, than anything else he had said.
‘I didn't lose hope of being released eventually because I knew other French hostages had been freed and that the French government would be working hard to free me.’
I asked, ‘How much did it mean to you to know that people at home were working for your release?’
He looked at me as if the answer was obvious.
‘It saved my life.’
I was drained after meeting Normandin and when Mary and I got to Roger Auque's hotel, it was almost a relief to find that he was out.
Mary and I flew back to London, but did leave some photographs of John for Auque, just in case.
That evening he rang me.
On the last morning of his captivity, on 27 November, his guards had shown him a newspaper and in particular a photograph on one of the pages.
There was only one photograph it could have been — the picture of John that accompanied our messages.
‘The guards, they showed the paper to me and they pointed at the photograph and said: ‘He is with us’.’
‘What?’
I said, trying to stop my voice from rising several octaves.
‘And it was John, are you sure it was John?’
‘Yes, I am sure.’
I put the phone down and slumped in a chair.
John was alive.
It had taken a year and a half to find out, but now — at last— I was sure.
A few months later I was sitting at a table opposite three Foreign Office officials.
‘Roger Auque is an unreliable witness,’ said one.
‘He thinks he saw all sorts of things, including Terry Waite.
We can't take his testimony seriously.’
‘But why should he lie?’
‘Anyone coming out of a situation like that is very confused, their recollections change.
His story has many inconsistencies.
There are things that don't add up.’
‘But are you going to follow it up?
The same group must have John.
We could at least find out.
At least we know who to talk to and can ascertain why they've got him.’
‘We are not putting out any signals which might make the kidnappers think we are going to do a deal.
The moment we ask any questions they'll think the British government is going to do just that, and it's not.
They have to get the message that the British government isn't going to pay.
‘John has a better chance of being released if the kidnappers realize there is nothing to be gained by hanging on to him.
The moment they think he is valuable, the price on his head goes up, and it makes it that much harder to release him.’
‘Don't you think they'll have got the message by now?
It's nearly two years since he was kidnapped.’
‘As soon as we start asking questions the message goes out that the British government is prepared to deal and that's not going to happen.
It's better that they understand that than make demands that aren't going to be met.’
‘But this could go on for years.’
‘We really believe that this is the best way.
As long as he's unimportant, the kidnappers might release him.’
I looked across at Ivor Roberts, the Department Head, his manner was, as ever, supercilious.
He had an uncanny way of making me feel simple.
In the early days, I had tried to make a few suggestions about what the FO could be doing.
I knew that they had been on the point of shipping dialysis machines to Lebanon in an attempt to free Alec Collett just before the bombing of Libya.
I had wondered if we might not try something similar.
Coldly, he had dismissed the idea.
He seemed to have no interest in doing anything.
I left the FO feeling bruised and battered; they had really given me the works.
Why were they so negative?
Why did they want to dismiss positive news, potential proof that John was alive, and do absolutely nothing about it?
The Government insisted its policy was a straightforward ‘no deals with terrorists’, but the idea that ‘no deals’ could be accepted as a comprehensive response appalled me.
It was at best inadequate and, at worse, an excuse for doing  nothing.
I could see the attraction for the Government; a positive response was more difficult to formulate and meant more work.
But I could not believe that the policy went unchallenged when there still was scope for negotiation and diplomatic intervention; yet the Government seemed unwilling to try either.
It occupied the moral high ground and refused to budge.
It was spring 1988.
In Doncaster over Christmas, I had been thinking constantly about criticizing the Government.
Whenever I went home, my mum and dad had asked me what was being done for John and why there had been no news of him.
I was touched when my dad told me that every night he stood on the back doorstep and said goodnight to John.
I knew John's predicament worried my family, too, and that they were solidly behind him.
I had told them what others were saying to me: people were working hard behind the scenes and publicity could be dangerous.
They accepted what I said, but weren't happy.
At home people rallied round automatically; it was taken for granted that if someone was in trouble then it was everyone else's business to help.
I, too, was beginning to wonder why I wasn't speaking out.
Keeping quiet had not done any good.
I was haunted by Normandin's remark that knowing people were doing something had kept him alive.
John had no such reassurance.
I'd stuck to the rules arid nothing had happened.
The FO and the Government weren't doing anything effective and, worse, they seemed proud of it.
I'd pretty much made up my mind that they had to be forced into action, but it was such a difficult decision.
Was it right?
Did I really think I knew better than the FO, full of clever people who were experts on British foreign policy?
I had been left in no doubt that any other way of handling John's case might endanger his life.
Then there were Pat and Roby.
When Auque and Normandin were released the previous November, Pat and Sheila had spoken out about their frustration on television.
‘Jaw, jaw is better than war, war,’ Sheila had said.
I had been heartened by their performance, but Pat really thought that, in its basic approach, the Government was right.
I knew him well enough by now to know that he would never presume to tell me what to do.
He would just gently let me know his opinion.
‘You see, Jill, I see John as a sort of prisoner of war.
The British can't change their policy and negotiate with these terrorists, can they?
I mean what else can they do, dear?’
I like and respect Pat.
He'd fought in the last war and is a very  intelligent and basically optimistic person, like John.
He always looks for the best in people or in any given situation.
He seemed to be much better equipped to accept political realities than I was.
He was encouraged that, under the circumstances, everything possible was being done for John.
The FO telephoned him once a week, to keep in touch.
He spoke to Roby every day.
From them, Pat felt he had all the available information and that kept him going.
In addition, he used any contacts he had in the services, or the Government, in case they could be of help.
In the end, I was left with two voices in my ear, Normandin saying, ‘It saved my life’ and the Government saying that making a fuss could have severe consequences.
Who was right?
All we wanted was proof that John was alive and to know why he was being held, but government policy was so rigid that there could be no contact, no discussions.
What must John be thinking after all this time?
Nine hostages had been set free since John was taken.
In Britain people seemed to think that asking the Government to establish the most basic facts about the fate of our hostages was equal to asking them to ship arms to Iran.
The suffering of the hostages didn't seem to come into it.
In effect, the message being sent to John and the other hostages was that they had to keep a stiff upper lip and hope that, one day, the kidnappers might let them go.
It wasn't enough; it hadn't been enough for a long time.
I thought about the options open to us.
I had to consider seriously the potential risk to John, but if the hostages could be made an issue at home, at the very least the Government wouldn't be able to ignore their plight and might, consequently, be influenced in their dealings abroad.
The status quo was unbearable and the Government's lack of interest might also endanger John.
What was to stop anyone just shooting him if they thought he was worthless to them?
Pursuing this laissez-faire policy may have been in the national interest, but it didn't seem to be in John's or that of the other hostages.
I didn't know what I was going to do, but I had to do something.
If only more people were questioning the Government.
But it was difficult to see why they would, given that everyone seemed to agree with the current policy.
as if to underline how huge the task of changing public opinion would be, and of making people see that the hostages mattered, it had been spelled out in a television programme I had taken part in the previous November when Mary and I had been in Paris.
The passionate concern for their fellow countrymen shown by the French contrasted sharply with the stiff upper lip of the British.
Amid the furore over the French deal for Normandin and Auque, Joelle Kauffman and I had both taken part via satellite in The Time, The Place , which discussed whether the British Government was right to say ‘No deals’.
That the programme was taking place at all was an amazing thing in itself, but when I heard people in the studio audience talking of the need to sacrifice the hostages now for the sake of others in the future, just as they had in Day to Day nine months previously, I wondered why so few people seemed to share my view that we were being duped into believing that teaching the terrorists a lesson was the sole issue.
If the hostages were to die it would be because their government had failed, whether through lack of expertise or lack of interest, to find a solution.
It was a difficult case to argue, though, without sounding as if I were asking the Government to give in.
I talked about the conditions that Normandin had described and kept repeating that it wasn't a question of doing a deal, but of looking at other ways to get the hostages out.
I was given a sympathetic hearing, but it seemed as if the only people who really agreed with me were the relatives of the hostages.
Even then, we were not united in our approach.
David Waite, Terry Waite's brother, was in the studio audience in London, together with Brian Keenan's sisters.
I had never met David Waite and didn't know what he thought.
My heart sank when I heard him say he was in full support of the government's policy.
‘I want to send out a very strong message today,’ he had said, ‘one thing I learned when I was young is that you don't give in to the village bully.
The kidnappers have to realize that the British hostages aren't like bottles of pop,’ he went on.
‘You don't get money back on the returns.’
Sitting in Paris, listening to this through my earpiece, I thought, ‘It's hopeless.
No-one is ever going to listen to us and our appeal to the Government to start talking.’
Then Amir Taheri, the Iranian author, spoke, answering David Waite's point perfectly.
‘The British government doesn't want to talk about it,’ he said, ‘but every other country has broken the united policy.
Britain should either unite its allies or talk — it cannot leave its hostages undefended by standing alone.’
‘There are people out there who think the policy wrong,’ I thought, ‘we've just got to keep repeating ourselves until enough people change their minds.’
After the broadcast finished Mary and I thanked Joelle for coming on the programme and being a target for all the anti-French feeling flying around at the time.
As we said goodbye, her companion, Michel Cantal du Val, the president of Les Amis de Jean-Paul Kauffman , gave us some startling advice about how to convince the British public of the need for the Government to talk to the kidnappers.
Shaggy moustache and flamboyant bow-tie quivering in unison, he threw his hands in the air and cried, ‘Il faut dire, ‘Honte au  gouvernement  Britannique!
Honte au peuple Britannique!
Honte à la Reine Britannique !’’—‘You must say, ‘Shame on the British government!
Shame on the British people!
Shame on the British Queen!’.’
As Mary and I waved goodbye to him, I thought that I wouldn't put his advice into practice quite yet.
We had a long way to go and to start by knocking the monarchy wouldn't go down too well at home.
In some parts of the media, though, one or two questions were being posed about the Government's approach.
After the release of the two Frenchmen, Hugo Young had written an article in the Guardian that we seized on as if it were a lifeline.
All he did was throw up a question mark — was Britain doing the right thing?— but to us it was the first sign that someone out there thought that government strategy might be wrong.
His article sparked the interest of two Newsnight journalists, Gavin Esler and Martin Gregory, who asked the Foreign Office to give them a briefing.
They had been shocked to hear that the policy was to do nothing, and I was astonished that the FO hadn't even bothered to disguise the fact.
Esler and Gregory told us that they were planning a report on Terry Waite's anniversary in January and if we wanted publicity, they would interview us.
I was relieved that they were prepared to question the policy and agreed.
Over New Year I had been able to escape a constant anxiety that time was running out.
Knowing that John was alive, that fact was a spur to action of some kind.
The idea that he was alive crystallized the need to let him know that we were trying to help him.
Of John himself the picture was still vague.
I still had an enormous block when I tried to think of John as a hostage.
It was hard enough to stare at his photograph and make it come to life, but it was impossible to imagine the figure in the picture living in the sort of conditions which Normandin and others had described.
Even though I could now visualize a cell or a room, and a man chained to a wall, trying to occupy his mind and keep his fears at bay, when I thought of John it was like thinking of  him lost in an abstract painting which I didn't understand.
Before Auque's news, it was like looking at a huge, dark landscape whose features were indistinguishable from one another.
Now it was as if my eyes had glimpsed the windows of a dimly lit house.
The windows were obscured by curtains, but if I strained my eyes I thought I could make out the shadow of a figure standing behind them, never moving.
As I watched the figure the lights in the windows would fade and the house would dissolve into darkness again, always out of reach; all that remained was a certainty that the figure was there, waiting.
The helplessness of that figure and the hopelessness it conveyed was always there.
John's mother had been very ill over Christmas and over the New Year she had been admitted to hospital.
Over the past year she had had various painful illnesses and eventually it had been diagnosed as a recurrence of cancer.
It was unfair and wrong that life could be doing this to her; she needed her son and he needed to be here.
Sheila was the kind of person who always gave so much to other people.
Why was she denied this one thing now?
It was almost two years since John's abduction.
So much had changed.
I was upset about Sheila's illness, upset and angry.
But I was also angry for myself, because I felt desperate about my own future.
It had been my thirtieth birthday in November.
It may only have been the milestone of hitting thirty, but I couldn't help feeling that it was proof that life was passing me by.
I wanted to do the things John and I had looked forward to a year and a half ago, to travel as we had planned, to work abroad, have a family before too long.
But life was still on hold.
Outside events were in control.
I wanted John and I to have a chance together.
Two French UNRWA workers were released from captivity in Beirut at the beginning of the year and I had watched their press conference imagining how I would feel if it were John delivering the speech.
I knew I would want him to be coming home to me.
But the longer his captivity went on, the less likely that would be.
I told myself that I had to face up to things; John might have forgotten me, he might have been changed beyond recognition by his experiences; he would not want me to mope.
What I was holding out for hung on a pretty slender thread and I couldn't let my life be dominated by it.
But it was one thing to tell myself that and another to act on it with any conviction.
Up until then most of John's friends and colleagues had heard any news in rather a fragmented way at parties or in the pub, which  was frustrating for them.
I had discussed the possibility of a proper campaign with several friends over the past months and the idea had taken root in my mind.
It now seemed to be the time to put the plan into action; the frustration and anger following Auque's and Normandin's release was the final shove I needed.
I knew I could count on friends and colleagues to support a campaign.
John's absence was still keenly felt.
They were constantly asking me if there was any news of him and becoming increasingly anxious themselves by the lack of progress.
We wanted to change public opinion — we had the French campaign as an example — but other than that our aims were pretty vague.
Somehow we had to convince politicians that they needed to do something, by proving it was in their interests to do so.
The most obvious way to get through to them was via the media.
I wanted to grab people by the throat and confront them with this terrible situation that was being allowed to continue.
I saw a Greenpeace advert in the paper.
It was extremely effective, didn't pull any punches, but had caught my eye and made me think.
‘That's what we've got to do,’ I thought, ‘just make people think.’
Working in the WTN news room for the past four years had opened my eyes to how the media worked.
Like news rooms everywhere, it was WTN's business to have the latest information and pictures on any given story.
Even terrible disasters and news of death and destruction produced the automatic response, ‘Have we got pictures?’ before any compassionate noises.
It was part of the job, part of the thrill of working in the immediacy of a news room.
There were only a few occasions when I remembered the news room falling silent as news came in via satellite.
The Sabra and Chatila massacres in Lebanon had been one; the scale of brutality was ungraspable.
Even then, however, the pictures ran out, there was no new information and the rest of the world lost interest.
My own attitude to news changed with John's abduction.
I could still do my job, but my heart wasn't in the day-to-day scramble for the latest pictures.
I couldn't see the point of it any more.
It was a relief when I was moved on to the Sports Desk; these were gains and losses of a different kind and they didn't involve people getting killed.
I was still in the news room, though, and near enough to hear one of my own colleagues respond to a video of Terry Anderson in captivity with a dismissive, ‘We're not running that; it's not newsworthy’, as he tossed the cassette to one side.
The tape showed Anderson sitting, struggling to keep himself alive  and to communicate with the outside world, but the world wasn't going to see it.
Anderson had done it before and so, according to my colleagues it wasn't newsworthy.
When my colleague had said that, with me sitting right beside him, I felt like punching him in the face; it was that kind of attitude that any campaign would have to fight.
I was appalled that we should find it in John's own news room.
If that could happen at WTN, what hope was there that other news rooms around the country would publicize John's case out of sympathy with a fellow journalist, not to mention a fellow human being?
Right from the beginning I assumed that we were going to have to work at interesting the press in the story.
Just because John was a journalist we couldn't expect special treatment.
In early January 1988 about a dozen friends and colleagues, the same people who had been with me on the day John was kidnapped, met at my flat.
We agreed that the lack of action was an outrage and that we had to draw people's attention to it.
We decided to call ourselves the Friends of John McCarthy because that's what we were.
We couldn't claim to be anything else; we couldn't speak for the families of Terry Waite or Brian Keenan.
The umbrella group we'd formed in 1987 had fallen into abeyance, but the name still meant something.
We decided to move up a gear.
We didn't realize, as we sat around my flat being filmed by the Newsnight team, that it would consume so much of our time, and of our lives.
I went round all the departments at WTN, asking for support.
I hated speaking to large groups of people and normally would have avoided it at all costs, but I found that I had thought so much about this that telling other people was a relief.
Their reaction was so encouraging that it gave me the strength to carry on.
When we could find nowhere to meet at short notice, the WTN local, The Crown and Sceptre, said that we could use the kitchen upstairs.
Our first official meeting was round a huge kitchen table surrounded by dirty dishes and grimy ovens.
About fifty of us filed in, clutching our drinks.
Chris took the chair and I went through the list of things that needed to be done to get us off the ground: a bank account, an address and telephone number somewhere, an eye-catching logo.
At this stage, the urge to do something was unfocused, but it was extraordinary how people threw themselves into it.
They were coming up with ideas for advertising on London Transport, in newspapers, contacting people they knew with professional PR experience, people in the media.
We were virtually  aiming for the impossible: to launch the revamped Friends of John McCarthy complete with campaign logo, notepaper and T-shirts, by our target date of 17 February, in four weeks' time.
Once the touchpapers had been lit, everyone showed the same commitment and enthusiasm as before, organizing posters, T-shirts, mugs, a regular meeting-place.
In the past, I would have shared this kind of thing with Nick.
But the shock of John's kidnap and the strain of the subsequent months had taken its toll on him.
He really couldn't share the burden of campaigning any more arid took a back seat.
I found myself snowed under from the start.
I went to the NUJ to ask them to give us office space and the use of a phone.
In the early days I had been a bit disappointed that the NUJ hadn't immediately leapt to John's defence, but ever since I had first been to see the General Secretary, Harry Conroy, and his assistant, Tom Nash, the union had done what it could to respond to what was asked of them.
They had sent round a circular to all members asking them to mention John whenever possible in their reports on the Middle East; they had helped organize a petition among all members and accompanied Chris and me when we delivered it to the Iranian Embassy and Downing Street to mark John's six hundredth day in December.
Now, they consulted their executive committee, and agreed to give us the free use of an empty office.
Much of the initial cost of setting up the campaign was covered either by various committee members somehow doing things for free or came from the remainder of the money raised at the Comedy Store.
The finances were in the hands of one of our most scrupulous colleagues, but not even her careful accounting could alter the fact that if we were to survive beyond the first month we would need to raise some money.
In France Jean-Paul Kauffman's colleagues were paying a percentage of their salaries towards the campaign, and several colleagues at WTN had set up regular standing orders into our bank account.
But if we were to pay phone bills, postage, future printing costs and fund a minimum wage for someone to run the NUJ office, we would need to hold some kind of fund-raising benefit.
Gina, Barbara, Ronnie and Chris Jury, a friend of theirs from Hull University Drama Department days, volunteered to arrange something for the second anniversary of John's kidnap on 17 April.
From then on they met separately in wine bars, reporting back intermittently on the drunken evenings they had  had.
They guarded their independence fiercely and neither Chris nor I dared ask too often how much progress was being made.
I was busy doing interviews, as the media were beginning to pick up on the story.
The interest of the BBC's Heart of the Matter was triggered by Newsnight and that, in turn, caught the attention of a researcher on Wogan , Mandy Nixon, who asked if I wanted to appear on the programme.
It was a huge breakthrough.
Within weeks of forming the campaign we had a chance to advertise on a television show with a huge audience; Mandy even got Wogan to agree to display the campaign's recently acquired address and telephone number.
There was no way I could have refused even if I had wanted to, so a few days later I found myself shaking in the BBC's hospitality suite, very glad to have Mary and Chris with me for moral support.
I wore a suit that Mary had seen in a second-hand shop in Paris and insisted I bought so that at least I had one outfit I could put on for interviews without worrying whether it looked OK or not.
She was right, it was perfect, but what I looked like was the least of my problems.
Although I had now done a few television interviews, I was still a relative novice and there was so much that I wanted to get across to all the people watching.
I went through what I wanted to say over and over again, unable to respond to Mary's attempts to reassure me.
The only thing I could do was discuss with her yet again the best way to express our case.
Not for the first time, I was thankful that she was such a good barrister.
Wogan handled the interview very well, leading me gently through the facts of John's abduction and why we disagreed with the Government.
Broadcasting regulations prevent anyone appealing for money on a programme like that, but he sidestepped the rules very smartly.
‘You're not just asking for money, though, are you?’ he said.
‘It's people's support that you want, isn't it?’
‘Oh yes,’ I said gratefully, ‘that's it exactly.’
Once the programme was broadcast, the BBC received forty telephone calls and hundreds of letters poured into our recently acquired PO Box, many containing donations.
The letters were generous and heartwarming.
One came from someone in prison who ‘had nothing to give but enclosed stamp’; another from a pensioner who had sellotaped a pound coin to her letter and apologized for not sending more.
One young man of John's age wrote to say that the pointlessness of his captivity had struck a chord with him.
He said that John was the conscience of the nation and reassured me  that John would not be forgotten by people in Britain.
From another letter we discovered that a nun, Simone Donnelly, had already organized a mini-campaign by forming a prayer circle for John through the Catholic newspaper,The Universe .
The letters gave me enormous encouragement.
They were proof that the support we had been convinced was out there really did exist.
I called Pat to tell him what sort of response we'd had and he was thrilled.
Hearing him say, ‘That's marvellous, Jill.
I'll tell Sheila straightaway’ made me feel that, at last, I'd been able to give them some good news.
It gave us all the boost we needed to carry on to the launch and, after that, to the second anniversary of John's captivity.
On 17 February the campaign was launched with a press conference and a display of posters, T-shirts and other merchandise.
Chris and I ‘revealed’ Roger Auque's news.
We sold a few T-shirts, but otherwise barely caused a ripple.
We also appealed to the Government to respond to an extraordinary press conference given by the Iranian chargé d'affaires in London on the anniversary of Terry Waite's imprisonment a few weeks ago, but no-one took much notice of that, either.
The chargé had said that if Britain wanted Iran to help in the case of its hostages in Lebanon, then Britain would have to help locate four Iranians who had gone missing in Beirut several years earlier.
It was obviously a ploy on their part, because the Archbishop of Canterbury had investigated their disappearance and told the Iranians that these four men were dead.
The main point, though, was that Iran was now offering to help with the British hostages and seemed to be acknowledging that they were alive.
Roby was worried that through linking the four Iranians to the British hostages, the Iranian government was preparing the ground for announcing that the Britons, too, were dead.
I worried about it too, but wasn't prepared to accept it.
I didn't believe that John was dead.
The Iranians seemed to represent an increasingly important part of the equation.
In the run-up to the launch Pat and I arranged a meeting with the chargé at the Iranian Embassy.
We'd been trying to see someone there for months, but although I'd delivered petitions, I'd never managed to get through the front door.
Now, Pat and I found ourselves nervously waiting to be let in.
When we were shown into the chargé's office, I studiously avoided shaking hands or having any eye contact, determined to alert him to the fact that I understood and respected their religious customs, in the hope that it might make a difference.
He began to address us  and I found the way he spoke mesmeric.
He had a curious way of stressing words in the wrong place, sometimes swallowing them completely, but there was a hypnotic singsong quality to his voice which made it very hard to concentrate on what he was actually saying.
Needless to say, he wasn't offering much comfort.
‘Of course, the Islamic Republic of Iran condemns this practice of hostage-taking.
It is against Islamic principles.’
‘We do understand that,’ Pat replied.
‘We are simply appealing to you for help in the case of my son, John.
If Iran could help us in this we would be very grateful.’
‘Of course, it is not known who the kidnappers of Mr McCarthy are, so we are interested to know why you came to the Government of Iran for help.’
‘We understand that Iran may be able to influence some of the groups in Lebanon, some of the groups who follow Islam, and the teachings of Ayatollah Khomeini.’
I couldn't stand this ritual dance any longer and cautiously addressed the floor by the chargé's feet.
‘We are very anxious to have news of John, to know if he is alive.
We have had no news in almost two years now.’
He, in turn, addressed a spot two feet to the right of my head.
‘Of course, you will know that we in Iran have hostages, too.
Some of them are missing six years and their families do not know if they are alive.’
We went round in the same circles for half an hour and I left feeling a mind-numbing frustration, far worse than anything induced by meetings with the Foreign Office.
However, glancing at Pat, it seemed to have gone pretty much as he had expected.
After that kind of stonewalling from officials, it was an enormous relief to be doing something positive to help John.
The campaign was snowballing and life was getting increasingly hectic.
There was so much to achieve and I fretted endlessly about the work that was needed to co-ordinate it all.
After a month's frantic activity we now had an office, but we needed someone to run it.
Everyone was working full time and doing campaign work on the side.
It was obvious we couldn't cope, but who on earth could we rely on to sort us out?
Suddenly, at work one day, I thought of Cathy Comerford, an ex-WTN colleague who had left several years ago.
She had been one of WTN's best newsdesk assistants, extremely well-liked, very bright and good at the job, one of the busiest in the news room.
On impulse I picked up the phone and rang her, hoping I still had the right number.
She answered, but was obviously in the middle of scolding several unruly children.
‘Oh hi, Jill.
What's up?
Is there any news of John by the way?
Roly, will you stop that AT ONCE!
No, you cannot feed the cat again.’
She broke off to berate her son for a few minutes.
‘Now where was I?
Oh yes, I was asking you about John.’
‘There isn't any news,’ I said, ‘but that's what I was ringing about.
We've decided to set up a campaign to put pressure on the Government and we need someone to run the office.
I don't suppose there's any way you would be interested, is there?’
Cathy thought for about two seconds.
‘I'd love to,’ she said decisively.
‘I can't think of anything else I would rather do.
It's terrible what's happening to him, it really is, the Government ought to be ashamed of itself.
I'll have to arrange babysitters, but it shouldn't be too much of a problem.
To tell the truth I'll be glad to escape from the little horrors for a few hours!
I'll give you a ring when I've sorted it out.’
With Cathy working two days a week the office started to take shape.
I trusted Cathy, and Joan Willows, another ex-WTN colleague who offered to work back-to-back with her, as much as I was able to trust anyone.
Intensely pig-headed about everything to do with the campaign, I was overwhelmingly protective of it.
I had never been as stubborn or single-minded about anything else, or as insistent that things had to be a certain way.
Now, because everything we did or said might have had some effect on John, I found it hard to relax about any aspect and always felt that we had to do more, be more efficient, keep up the pressure.
I tried to keep my feelings under control and remember that all these people were mostly helping us out of the goodness of their hearts, but sometimes it was difficult.
I argued over the wording of the campaign slogan because I felt that ‘Don't Forget the British Hostages in Beirut’ was better than ‘Free the Hostages’or ‘Support the Hostages’.
Afterwards I felt ashamed that I thought I knew better than they did, especially when they were doing everything for free.
But every little detail seemed crucial and it was something I struggled with all the way through, but knowing that Cathy, Joan and I were all on the same wavelength and felt the same level of commitment was a great relief.
When it came to setting up the Friends, I found the words ‘realistic’ or ‘moderation’didn't have much meaning for me.
I had  a tendency to run around in circles getting more and more worked up.
It was therefore essential to have a co-organizer, someone who would keep a cool head.
I had asked Chris to be President of the Friends before the first meeting.
He says now that if he'd known what it would involve he would have taken the first plane out of town, but I was hugely relieved when he agreed.
He was a good friend of John's, and I knew he would be totally committed.
As he was a thoroughly professional journalist, he already knew the media inside out.
I trusted his judgement and was hugely relieved when he agreed.
Chris would talk things through with me, outlining all the possibilities and different lines of approach.
He always stayed calm, but he had a knack of turning things around so that you thought you were getting your own way when in fact you'd just agreed with him.
His other tactic was to agree with me and then stand well back from whatever foolish project I'd come up with.
I realized he was probably right very early on, although I couldn't always restrain myself.
Chris's laidback manner was also perfect at meetings.
After that first one in The Crown and Sceptre kitchen, Chris took the chair more or less every week for the next three years.
I was so obsessive about most things that we'd quickly have got bogged down in details if I'd had my way.
Chris avoided tedium very successfully; he resisted having an agenda for as long as possible and always refused point-blank to have a vote on anything, so meetings never got hung up on procedure, nor were they subjected to much prior lobbying.
Everyone who wanted to speak did so and everything was agreed good-humouredly, without a show of hands and without causing lasting resentments.
The pint glass of Tennants Extra that was always close at hand might empty rapidly, but it was the only outward sign that Chris was feeling the pressure.
The committee quickly provided everything that we needed.
One person spent illicit hours at Saatchi's designing our logo; WTN allowed a lot of things to go through the system — printing, photocopying, artwork; Gina got the entire staff of her office converted to the cause within weeks and it seemed that everyone else had done the same: soon members' colleagues, friends and relatives were all helping out.
In March we marked John's seven hundredth day by erecting a cell-like cage in Covent Garden and persuading as many famous people as possible to come and stand in it for half an hour while  the press filmed them.
A friend of ours, Ed King, built the cage for £250 and Alastair Stewart from ITN, Jeremy Paxman, Pattie Coldwell and Simon Groome from the BBC agreed to stand in it.
It was quite an act of faith; the Friends present were fired up with enthusiasm, but it was freezing cold, the media coverage was pretty disheartening and the public reaction was less than encouraging.
Passers-by were clearly baffled by what they saw and it was only when curiosity proved too much that anyone came near enough to be buttonholed.
Time and time again we would begin the long task of explaining who John was and what on earth we were doing.
Up in Doncaster my mum and dad had set up a stall in the car-park of the local Asda in an effort to raise signatures for a rolling petition.
They'd been itching to do something to help for all this time, and as soon as the campaign started they rushed into action.
They received much the same reaction as we did.
‘Who?’
‘Where?’
The majority of people were sympathetic, but we had a long way to go before people would be shouting ‘Honte à la reine  Britannique  ’ in the streets.
We knew, however, from the reaction to the Wogan show, that the support was there.
As well as the letters that poured in, the other guests on the programme had all said privately that they would do what they could to help; Ian Hislop, the editor of Private Eye , had already printed a Friends of John McCarthy ad for free, and Gerald Scarfe had agreed to design a programme cover for the upcoming Benefit.
I was doing interviews with any newspaper or magazine that approached me and some had printed contact numbers for the Friends.
The interviews were mostly with women's magazines, and many of the letters we received were from women, who felt an instinctive sympathy for John and could easily put themselves either in my position or that of John's mother.
The reality of what was happening to John either played on people's own experience of terrible loss and final separation, or the fear of it, which haunts us all.
By the end of the campaign, when it seemed that the whole country was willing him on, it was as if he was everyone's brother, everyone's son, everyone's lover.
Reading the interviews was weird.
I was getting used to the odd feeling of distance, which made it seem as if it was all about someone else, but it was alarming to see how most of the articles highlighted the love-story angle, rather than the conditions in which John was held or the reasons I'd given as to why the Government should be doing more.
It was hardly surprising that this was the case, and  it didn't stop me from giving interviews, but they seemed so far removed from what we were actually trying to do.
I sat in my flat and looked at the latest one.
‘Come back, John, I still love you’ alongside a huge photograph of me.
Was this really the right thing to be doing?
It was excruciatingly embarrassing to read the quotes and find myself coming over as a lonely, crusading ‘woman who waits’.
The interviewers always stressed the despair, that life was under a cloud, but the comradeship of the campaign and the fun we had along the way was just as real.
It was odd coming over as a tragic heroine.
I wasn't aware that I gave that impression.
What was also disturbing was that I found being the centre of attention quite attractive.
People listened to me, noticed me more, treated me differently.
It made me uncomfortable, but I found that I grew more confident.
I had the sense to realize that taking the publicity seriously would be dangerous, but none the less it was very seductive.
As ever, Mary made sure I kept my feet on the ground.
Nothing that was happening seemed to have anything to do with real life.
The most absorbing topic to me was what was going on in Lebanon and, increasingly, Iran.
It was vital that we understood the political infighting between the ‘moderates’ and the ‘radicals’there as it seemed more relevant to John and the other British hostages.
Auque's news appeared to point to the fact that John was being held by an Iranian-backed group, and in March Hashemi Rafsanjani called a news conference in Tehran during which he repeated his request that Britain should help locate the missing Iranians in Beirut if it wanted Iran to help with the British hostages.
Roby's fears of what that might mean weighed against the fact that John Simpson, the BBC diplomatic correspondent, reported that he had spoken to senior Iranian politicians and was convinced that the British hostages were alive.
There was no way of knowing if Simpson was right, but the report in itself was like an oasis in the desert.
At last news of the hostages was being reported as a serious story on television.
Simpson had broadcast a similar report nine months earlier, but the FO had dismissed it as media hype and not considered it interesting enough to follow up.
In April a Kuwaiti airliner was hijacked and flown to North East Iran.
The hijackers were Islamic Jihad, and they threatened to kill members of the Kuwaiti Royal Family on board and all the Western hostages in Beirut if their comrades imprisoned in Kuwait were not released.
I didn't think it likely that John would be killed — after all, he wasn't held by Islamic Jihad — but I felt the tension all the same.
It was unavoidable; I saw the story unfolding minute by minute at work.
Apart from anything else, we were terrified by what Mrs Thatcher would say; there were British people on board and her response might be crucial to their survival, as well as John's.
Chris rang me at work, sounding jubilant.
‘Have you seen the wires?
She's saying it's important to stand firm, not give in to terrorists, and the rest, but she's said, ‘That does not mean that you don't negotiate…
People will be talking to the hijackers very carefully and very closely.’
Thank you Mrs T,’ he added, ‘you've admitted that you've got to talk.’
We issued a statement pointing out that she wasn't talking to the kidnappers in Beirut, and sent a letter to that effect to every MP, but it was a busy time and no-one really noticed.
We felt the same frustration when a British Oxfam worker, Peter Coleridge, was kidnapped in Beirut by Abu Nidal and then released within days, after pressure had been brought to bear by the aid agencies in Lebanon and Mustapha Saad.
We tried to point out that the ‘no deals’ policy was obviously no deterrent to the kidnapping of Britons, but again, nobody really took much notice.
On the second anniversary of his kidnap, we made sure John was in the news.
We handed out a video which WTN colleagues had culled together.
It started with the terrible sound of a heavy door banging shut as a prison bar appeared over John's face, then Mrs Thatcher's voice could be heard saying, ‘The role of Government is to create individual freedom, not deny it.’
Another bar swung into place, another terrible clanging sound, and then Mrs Thatcher said, ‘The Government is the servant of its people, not its master’, her voice echoing over and over again.
This was followed by shots of John from some pop videos Barbara had made and then some footage that Nick and I had discovered in Damascus of John's farewell party in Beirut.
I had seen these images of John before, but then came a video report from Danish TV back in 1981.
Nick had unearthed it and passed it on.
Claus Toksvig, then a Danish broadcaster based in London, had been reporting on unemployment in Britain.
He decided to feature John, who was out of a job at the time.
This was the best; it was John exactly as I remembered him, walking down a road, waiting at a bus stop, hunched inside his big coat.
Suddenly, as I watched the video in an editing suite at work, I heard his deep, warm voice filling the room and was transfixed.
I realized that I had completely forgotten what he sounded like.
It was so weird it made my hair stand on end; it was almost as if a  ghost had walked into the room.
He was talking about what it was like to be unemployed and, typical John, was making his depressing position sound not too bad.
It was amazing to watch him walking and talking.
For the thirty seconds or so that the video lasted, John was alive, but I couldn't hold on to it for any longer than that.
The video ended and he was gone.
The anniversary publicity also involved a video of a young band called Sanctuary singing, ‘John, we want you Home’, which they had written for us, and a number of colleagues and others running in the London marathon wearing Friends of John McCarthy running vests, one bearing the number 17.4.86.
The pièce de résistance , though, was to be the Benefit.
It was held on the anniversary itself, and for me followed three days of interviews and other press events organized by Cathy and Chris.
I was exhausted by the time that ‘An Evening without John McCarthy’ arrived, but the venue, the Camden Palace, wasn't far from my flat and, prompted by nerves, I turned up early, about an hour before things were due to begin.
Arriving, I suddenly realized that I didn't have a job to do.
I hadn't been involved in the organization and knew very little about what was going to happen.
I felt rather at a loss.
Inside the ticket hall, a team of volunteers were putting up posters.
Ed King was busily erecting the cage we'd had in Covent Garden; it was proving to be worth every penny of the £250 we'd paid for it.
A friend of Gina's, Julie O'Dea, was in charge of the tickets; for the past few weeks, her flat had been a temporary box-office and she was running a tight ship; all committee members who took tickets were responsible for the money they owed.
Chris had already been given a severe ticking-off when he'd admitted to the box-office that he'd lost count of the number of tickets and cheques he'd stuffed into all his suit pockets.
I briefly saw Gina flit by talking into a short-wave radio and was momentarily stunned.
Gina was completely preoccupied, in formidable, super-efficient mode; she waved hallo and then disappeared again, radio crackling.
I picked up a programme, which had been designed by one of the committee members, Sue Brown; it was a work of art.
Gerald Scarfe's simple drawing of an empty chair was on the front and inside were pictures of John, information about the campaign, even a ready-to-send letter to MPs which you could tear out.
Sue had designed it in the shape of a dove and the message read: ‘How to give your MP the bird’.
I looked at the line-up listed in the programme and at the stop-press late additions: Everything But The Girl, two  of The Communards; Harry Enfield; The Oblivion Boys, the list went on.
Barbara had pulled out all the stops.
I walked inside the dance hall.
Chris Jury, who had masterminded the whole thing and was entirely responsible for what was happening on stage, was taking some musicians through a soundcheck and, like Gina, was completely absorbed in what he was doing.
At the back of the stage a huge banner made by the Hull University Drama Department read: ‘Friends of John McCarthy’.
It hit me for the first time that the bands and comedians were going to be performing here for free, for John, for us.
It was terrifying.
I looked around at the place; I had been here before but it had never looked so huge.
There was a big dance floor and several sprawling tiers of tables and bars.
I knew that we all had sold a fair number of tickets to friends, relatives, colleagues, in fact, anyone who would buy them, but it wouldn't be enough to fill one tier.
I walked up to the bar, passing several people I had never seen before who were obviously volunteers.
Someone gave me a pass.
Backstage passes!
It was amazing.
Once there, I saw that Gina's sister Juliette had organized food and drink for the bands, all mostly donated for free.
Drivers from the taxi firm WTN used were arriving all the time with equipment, food and people.
I saw a couple of people with TV cameras; Tony had persuaded some cameramen to film the Benefit for free so he could make it into a video afterwards.
Barbara and I were interviewed by one team upstairs in the top bar.
I stood there clutching a drink, feeling completely lost.
‘Would John enjoy tonight?’ an interviewer asked.
Barbara was confident that he would, it was just his sort of evening, but I wasn't sure if I knew what John would enjoy any more.
Chris arrived, notepad in hand, hair flying, and made sure I knew that we were both going out on stage at the end of the Benefit.
It was the last thing in the world I wanted to do, but I couldn't refuse, not after the work that had gone into a production like this.
I didn't know what I was going to say, but I would have to come up with something.
The idea of standing out there was too awful to contemplate, and the knowledge that the hour would eventually arrive sent me into a state of high anxiety.
Brian arrived, with his girlfriend and another friend, who seemed to realize that I needed to calm down and offered to walk around the building with me.
I followed him, gratefully, and we wandered down some backstairs and out on to another floor just as Ray Gelato and his Giants of Jive were starting up.
I looked over the balcony, first at the stage and then back at the dance floor and beyond.
There were people everywhere, rushing to the bars, crowding on to the dance floor, filling all the chairs and tables.
The place was packed.
A surge of adrenalin lifted me sky-high.
All these people are here for John, I thought, and for us, as well as to hear the bands.
It didn't seem possible.
I put a lot of it down to Harry Enfield; just this week he'd really taken off.
We'd booked him just as his catchphrases were being quoted by the entire nation, and all because Julie's mortgage broker knew someone who knew his phone number and he had agreed to appear.
We walked on, but now I had to stop every few yards because people were coming up to me; friends who wanted to introduce other friends, schoolfriends of John's, an ex-girlfriend, cousins.
They all wanted to say hallo and shake my hand.
I couldn't think of a single thing to say, but dimly realized that I now had my role for the evening; I had done nothing to bring this off; but I was to be the identifiable face of the campaign.
It was nice, people were so kind, offering encouragement and congratulations for what had been achieved; I almost felt as if I had done it all.
I felt quite heady; surely this overwhelming force of affection, compassion and concern must be able to produce something.
I couldn't really cope with meeting any more people and went to watch Everything But The Girl from nearer the stage.
Shivers went down by my spine when they sang, ‘Come on Home’ and again when Jimmy Somerville sang, ‘For a Friend’.
It was a moving song, and I could see people with tears in their eyes, but I kept wondering why I couldn't feel anything.
The extraordinary atmosphere was keeping me so sky-high that my private feelings for John seemed to have detached themselves and slipped out of reach.
It was such a collective experience that John wasn't mine any more, I had to share him with all these people, each with different motivations and reasons for being here.
He was special to me but here was evidence that he was special to a lot of people.
It was wonderful, but why did John not seem like an ordinary person any more, but a cause or a symbol to rally everyone around?
In my newspaper message to John I had said that hundreds of people would be attending a benefit for him tonight.
I had wanted to give him hope and reassure him that he was loved, but the reality was quite overwhelming and a bit scary.
The Benefit was  an unqualified success, which was the main thing, but asking for the support of hundreds of strangers inevitably meant that the focus of their concern would be on John as well as on the terrible thing that was happening to him.
I came down to earth a bit when Harry Enfield came on to thunderous applause.
‘I don't know who this John McCartney is,’ he said, ‘and I don't care.
You know why I don't give a monkey's? 'Cos I got loadsamoney, that's why!’
That would have made John laugh, I thought; I can imagine him here after all.
At the end of the evening Sanctuary went on stage and played their song for John.
Terrified, I stood by the stage, knowing I had to go on after them.
I clutched a drink and a grubby piece of paper.
My ‘speech’ was written on it.
Chris had insisted that if he was going to go out there, then so was I. I'd been searching for a way out all night, but nothing convincing came to mind.
All around me voices were saying, ‘Good luck’, as I walked on to the stage, but I was much too nervous to do anything but nod, grimly.
Chris took the microphone and launched in.
I can't remember what he said — I was too worried about what would happen when he stopped — but he looked supremely confident.
The response from the crowd was fantastic, but when he introduced me I was hardly conscious of their cheers.
Once I'd started, I felt less hysterical.
I went through a list of thanks and hoped I hadn't left anyone out.
I was astonished by the number of people there and grateful for their warmth and support, but I felt I had to convince everybody to take the campaign home with them.
I found it difficult to keep my voice steady.
‘I've never really felt before tonight how much John is not alone.
We've got 1,700 people here who have showed how much they feel about him.
If everybody here just rang up the Foreign Office, rang up their MP, or wrote to the Prime Minister — it's everybody's right to do that — and said ‘What's happening to John McCarthy?
We want him home.’
I didn't think we could possibly organize this evening, but we have.
There's no stopping us now, so let's get John home.’
Chris was looking a bit alarmed.
I was so high on adrenalin that for all I knew I was talking utter rubbish.
Afterwards he told me that he'd thought I was going to start a revolution there and then.
He took the microphone again and to renewed cheers raised his pint.
‘Before we go there's one thing I would like to do.
I want to propose a toast to an absent — and sorely missed — friend.
Tonight I give you John McCarthy.’
LEBANON, MAY 1988 — AUGUST 1990
THE SHOOTING STARTED ON 5 MAY.
IT SOUNDED SO CLOSE it must have been in the street below us.
At first there were just a few ‘pops’, perhaps from pistols, then other weapons joined in, from the familiar rattle of Kalashnikovs to heavier machine-guns.
By late afternoon, a full-scale battle had broken out with rockets and grenades exploding regularly and bullets thudding into the walls.
Mazzin came and told us to lie along the inside wall together.
We thought it would be more sensible to move to the other side of the apartment; if a shell hit the wall to which we were chained, we wouldn't stand a chance.
I was terribly conscious of just how vulnerable we were, in the hands of our untrained guards, who were probably just as frightened as we were.
They couldn't be relied on to cope with the situation and our safety at the same time.
‘Who's fighting who?’
I asked Mazzin.
‘It's nothing,’ he replied, ‘just a family quarrel.’
Some families, some quarrel.
Overnight, the fighting calmed down a little but it picked up again the next morning and raged on throughout the day.
We'd guessed that whatever local dispute had provoked the initial spat it was now a battle between much larger factions, probably Amal and Hezbollah.
During the day, there were visitors to the flat, one of whom came and spoke to me.
He spoke little English so I made ‘bang-bang’ noises and said, ‘Chou?
Amal boom boom Hezbollah ?’
‘Nam , yes.’
‘Not family!’
‘Non famille ,’ he laughed.
At least twice a week we'd heard the sermons broadcast from a nearby mosque and were both sure that  the preacher was Sheikh Fadlallah, one of the main spiritual leaders of Hezbollah.
With the fighting so close, we had to be right on the border between Amal and Hezbollah territory.
Despite this, Mazzin maintained that it was still a local feud.
His blind refusal to break the rules and give us any information was so bloody irritating.
It couldn't have made any difference to them if we knew what was happening.
On the evening of 7 May we were moved.
We weren't taped up this time, but we were blindfolded.
Being hurried down stairs, trying to feel for the edge of the steps, unable to see, was very unnerving.
I feared that at any moment I might fall and break my neck.
The sounds of gunfire and shelling didn't do anything to calm my fears.
We clambered into the back of a VW truck and drove for about five minutes, then waited outside an apartment block while the guards chatted with a woman.
When she'd gone, we were bustled in and raced up the stairs.
We must have climbed up eight flights.
I collapsed in a heap as did George, one of the guards from the Pigsty, who was puffing as hard as me.
That night we stayed in the guards' room with Mahmoud, but we had the feeling that other hostages were there, too.
The next day we were put in a different room and found brackets for the chains already attached to the wall.
Others had indeed been here.
We could still hear the fighting, but it was at a distance, while the sermons from the mosque were louder than ever.
Another Friday 13th was approaching so I was certain we could expect another move, maybe the big one.
We'd barely settled in when, sure enough, on 15 May, we were moved again.
Looking back I can see that some details of the various journeys have become confused in my memory.
While preparing myself for what was coming I also had to keep track of what was actually happening, trying to picture the scenes I was living through, but couldn't see.
Time was thrown completely out of joint by the instant transition from long periods of inactivity, when the most dramatic part of any day was a slow walk to the bathroom and back, to a chaos of orders, panic, delays and wild hurries, fear and physical discomfort.
Within minutes one was torn from reading a book to being gagged and trussed up in a sack, carried down stairs by running men, waiting for the bag to slip or rip and one's head or neck to smash against the hard stone steps.
We were bundles, lifted up and put down wherever it suited our captors.
We went in cardboard boxes, in fridges, in metal  coffins fixed like mummies, in sacks like animals for market.
We were turned, lifted, pushed, lowered, pressed and turned again in a direction that couldn't be guessed, only feared.
I know we were Wept in thirteen main locations and I recall most of the dates we moved, but the minutiae have begun to merge.
I don't remember how they got us out of the apartment, but I do remember that we stopped somewhere before leaving Beirut where we were taped up and transferred to a false-bottomed truck.
For the first, and last time a guard travelled with us in the box.
It was Mazzin.
He had a pistol with a silencer on it.
As usual we were advised that they were ready to do anything.
Presumably he was there as a special precaution because of the Amal-Hezbollah fighting.
Somehow I was relieved that a guard was with us because I thought that if there was an accident his friends might try to get him — and maybe us — out.
It was one less thing to hyperventilate about.
However, Mazzin was not the calmest of the guards and might easily panic and shoot us.
After an early start we were soon out of the city and climbing.
It soon got hot.
I tried to pass the time imagining the pleasant, and peaceful, countryside all around us as we drove through the mountains.
Although the move was probably inspired by the fighting, it didn't mean that we wouldn't be going home soon.
One of these months with a Friday 13th must come good eventually.
There were lots of good omens and I was still inspired by the news of Jill and her campaign.
Every now and then Mazzin would run his hands over me, checking that I hadn't somehow ripped off the bindings and wasn't about to attack him.
It took a great deal of effort not to wriggle about as much as I normally did, but I feared him panicking more than the physical discomfort.
The drive seemed interminable.
I knew that I always overestimated the time these outings took, but I was certain that we'd been going for over two hours, and still we were crashing on.
The heat was getting unbearable, our bodies soaked in sweat, aching, desperate for water and rest.
Mazzin started feeling my stomach again.
I could only imagine that Brian had managed to loosen his hands.
In the event Mazzin was after the notebooks we'd stuffed down the front of our pyjamas.
‘Why on earth should he want those now?’
I wondered.
Then he fumbled with the tape over my mouth.
I'd worked it down by moving my jaw as much as possible.
‘Don't cover my mouth, you bastard,’ I thought, ‘I'll lose control.’
He didn't.
In fact he pulled it further down making it easier for me to breathe.
On we went, it must have been three hours by now.
We'd been turning on and off roads all along, dodging checkpoints I guessed.
Then I realized that we kept returning to the same place and stopping for a few minutes, before moving off again around a similar route.
‘We must be near,’ I thought, ‘they're waiting to get the all-clear to enter a certain area, where, please God, we'll stop.’
I wanted to go to sleep, but was terrified of waking up in there, mummified, and going berserk.
‘Don't sleep, don't sleep.’
The heat, the fumes from the diesel engine, the physical and mental exhaustion were all dragging me down fast.
Suddenly Brian started shouting, ‘How much fucking longer?
Shoot me now and get it over with!’
‘Hold on, Brian, for fuck's sake,’ I thought.
‘This guy's scared enough, don't push him now.’
But Mazzin seemed unconcerned.
‘OK, OK,seulement cinq minutes, cinq minutes .’
He turned over to me and I felt the gun barrel at my head.
‘Marvellous,’ I thought.
‘Brian goes bonkers and the little sod comforts him but sticks a gun in my ear.’
I lapsed into a semi-coma, only vaguely conscious that we came round again to the familiar spot and waited, then headed off in a new direction.
We stopped.
The end of the box was unbolted.
Mazzin was out of there in a flash, laughing with his friends who seemed eager to know what it was like in the box.
We were dragged out.
I couldn't move.
As they stripped off the tape I just lolled about, unable to get my brain to focus, let alone co-ordinate any muscles.
After a few minutes I managed to get to my knees and use a pee-bottle, although after sweating so much, I can't imagine I needed to.
Then we were lifted down through a trap door and laid on a mattress.
My mind refused to clear and I felt delirious, like in a dream where everything slows down and you can't reach your destination.
Your legs are jelly, your mind sluggish, your will gone.
‘Brian, are they going to shoot us?’
‘Och no, John, we're going to a swimming-pool.’
‘Really, did they tell you that?
I'm not sure, doesn't sound right…
Brian, are they going to shoot us?’
‘No, we're going…’
I couldn't follow the words, couldn't appreciate the tone, light-hearted and reassuring.
They gave us an apple each.
The juice was  marvellous, cutting through the taste of dust and diesel fumes.
I felt a little better.
I asked for a cigarette.
Mahmoud gave me one.
I could barely smoke it.
Brian was lying down, dozing off.
After a while I calmed down enough to rest myself.
Some hours later we were off again, in the truck, but untaped.
A few minutes' drive and we were taken into a building.
There were no sounds of traffic or neighbours.
We must have been right out in the sticks.
Inside I was guided down a weird stairway and told at one point to watch my step carefully.
Below my blindfold I could see tiles and a toilet set in them.
Down some more steps and into a room.
We were underground.
Brian was right behind me.
Our mattresses were there.
We sat down.
Enormous chains were fastened to our ankles.
Then a guard said, ‘Kifak , how are you, Andy?’
‘OK thanks, Younis,’ replied an American voice.
‘Kifak , Abu Tariq?’
‘I'm good, thanks,’ replied another American voice.
Who were these guys?
There was another one with a name new to us.
Were they still kidnapping people?
‘Good-night,’ said the guards.
‘Please, no noise.’
A mixture of accents chorused ‘Good-night.’
A metal door banged shut, then a piece of wood was tapped into place, then silence.
I lifted my blindfold.
Brian was to my left.
In front of us was a row of three men, sitting on mattresses, chained like us.
They looked very familiar.
The one to the right of my feet, nearest the door, bounced forward, hand out, ‘Hi John, Terry Anderson.’
‘Hallo Terry, fancy meeting you here.’
We all shook hands and grinned stupidly at one another.
Terry, Tom and Frank all looked fine.
It was so strange to meet and talk to them in the flesh.
Hitherto we'd only seen their faces and spoken with our hands.
Brian and I recounted the awful journey, but, of course, all the Yanks had been through the same ordeal.
It turned out that Anderson had lived in the last apartment that we'd been in, moving out the day after we arrived.
Like us, he reckoned that there'd been another man there.
He said Fou-Fou agreed.
‘Who's Fou-Fou?’
‘Marcel Fontaine.
The guards called him Fou-Fou and me Andy.
He's gone home.’
‘He's gone home?’
There was a lot to take in here.
‘All the French have.
They went on 4 May,’ said Tom.
‘Are you sure?’
‘I saw them arrive in Paris on the television,’ Terry went on.
This was terrific news.
Before moving here, Terry had spoken to one of the big chiefs, whom he called the Haj, and had been told that everything was now winding down, that we'd all be going soon.
The fact that we'd all been put together was universally accepted as a sign that the end was so close that they didn't need to keep us apart any longer.
Allah Akbar !
We'd been certain that Frank had been kept with a Frenchman in the apartment we'd been in from February to early May.
He had -Jean-Paul Kauffman.
Terry had been with Fontaine in Beirut.
Tom had also been with Kauffman and the other long-term French hostage, Marcel Carton, in the place in the south, the one with the makeshift tent.
Then Kauffman had been moved to join Frank and Carton came here with Tom.
Tom confirmed our assumption that we were in the Beka'a Valley saying that Carton, an Arabic speaker, told him that some of the food wrappers had Baalbek addresses on them.
We talked for a while, catching up on our movements since we'd last been neighbours six months earlier, in November.
Eventually we dropped off to sleep.
For once we had definite news that things were looking up, and it was the perfect antidote to the gruelling journey.
The next day we started to get to know each other properly.
Tom and Terry, but especially Terry, wanted to know everything about us immediately: where we'd been to school; what we'd studied; the history of the British constitution, or lack of it from an American point of view; what the real situation was in Ireland; why didn't Brian hit me when I responded to a proffered cigarette with, ‘Fuck off out of my life, you wheedling Irish bastard’?
Brian and I noticed immediately that our three companions didn't have the same relaxed intimacy that we shared.
They thought that we meant the insults and couldn't initially figure out why the injured party would fall about laughing instead of going into a sulk.
Eventually they caught on and I think they enjoyed our banter.
We certainly all seemed to laugh a lot.
Tom told us his life-story.
He sat in the corner farthest from the door, a good-looking man in his fifties, with a twinkle in his eye despite three years' captivity, recalling incidents from his Scottish childhood in amazing detail.
He would play all the characters like a one-man theatre.
His memory was remarkable but it was often frustrating when an interesting story was interrupted  while he talked about the family background of a man he'd met once in Iowa in the early 1960s.
Tom was a kind and gentle man, so his coolness towards Frank Reed was rather surprising.
As far as I could tell Frank had recovered from the breakdown we witnessed in late 1986 and, despite the months alone and the awful beatings he'd received in the Pigsty, he still had a great sense of humour and told us hysterical episodes from his life, many of them against himself.
He explained the theory of Mastery of Learning, about which he'd spoken before.
It was an American teaching method that, Frank insisted, allowed students to progress through the stages of education confident that they had grasped all the basics of one stage before going on to the next.
This sounded excellent to Brian and me.
Repeatedly we had cursed ourselves and our schools for allowing us to think we'd grasped maths, physics and so on when now we couldn't remember any of the important or useful things.
Frank was convinced of his arguments and fought bitterly with Tom, another academic, when he mocked the whole system.
Frank was withdrawn much of the time, often sitting for hours with his blindfold down.
Bri and I assumed that he'd had enough of his countrymen and wanted to tune out.
It was, however, obvious that there was some deep sadness within him.
He spoke very warmly of his parents, but I felt that he'd been a lonely child.
His career sounded very hit and miss; he'd switched from one subject to another at university, studying for a PhD but never completing it, and then shifted from job to job, looking for status rather than satisfaction.
His first marriage had failed and, although his second, to a Syrian woman he'd met in Beirut, sounded disorganized, he talked fondly of his son Tariq.
Like Tom and myself, Frank was still proud of his appearance even in this hole in the ground.
Terry, like Brian, didn't give a damn.
Whenever we spoke about haircuts or what clothes they'd give us to go home in, Anderson would say, ‘I don't care what I look like, I'll go out stark naked, I just want to leave.’
Going home really did seem a possibility.
We had quite a few visitors over the next few days and Amin, particularly, was very encouraging.
For once his ‘soon and very soon’ seemed more than empty optimism.
Terry used his limited Arabic to have a long conversation with another visitor who suggested that an American would go home soon with the Irishman and then, after a little while, during which our governments were expected to ‘make the next  step’, another American with a Briton and so on.
This man also promised to see about getting us some magazines and a radio.
We talked endlessly about the possible timetable for release.
My numbers game seemed to have been happily outshadowed by reality, although Franky clearly had his own mysterious method of divination, saying portentously, ‘The number eleven, remember I told you that.’
He would become even more mysterious when questioned.
Tom believed that any day was the day.
Brian and Terry remained slightly more cautious, Anderson saying, ‘I'll give it a Ben,’ a reference to Ben Weir who'd always said, ‘I'll give it another month.’
And so we waited and continued to get to know one another.
It took quite a while to put the Americans in proper perspective.
They argued a lot, with Tom and Frank finally erecting an invisible wall between them.
They hardly spoke more than a couple of words in six months.
Terry was still talking to Frank, but Frank ridiculed everything he said to the point where they, too, hardly spoke.
Terry and Tom argued as well, and there often seemed to be far more serious undercurrents than a simple difference of opinion.
But maybe, having been on our own for so long, we were just oversensitive.
Both Tom and Terry had strong personalities, and Anderson, in particular, was very tough.
A bright schoolboy, he'd joined the Marines at seventeen and gone to Vietnam.
There, he'd worked for the Corps' news service, been wounded, gone home to study journalism at college and ended up with the Associated Press.
He'd worked in Japan and married there, been bureau chief in South Africa and then taken over as the AP's chief Middle East correspondent in Beirut.
He was no taller than me, but was very heavily built.
His physical presence was almost as much a part of his style of argument as his intelligence.
Brian and I both found this wearing.
We liked to talk about things, to search each other 's memories for information and sometimes to have heated discussions.
But the idea was never to defeat the other; we didn't want to score points.
The Yanks appeared to need to do each other down, which, under the circumstances, was counter-productive.
One day when I couldn't answer a question about the workings of the British Parliament, Terry said, ‘What's the matter, you dumb or what?’
I was devastated.
What could we possibly gain by undermining each other 's self-confidence?
Over the months it  became clear that Tom's aggressive arguing with Terry was founded on a similar slight two and a half years previously.
Soon after his kidnap Tom had gone into a serious depression — he suffered from them periodically.
He had been quite fazed by the guard-hostage situation and, feeling vulnerable, had decided that the other hostages, particularly Anderson and Jacobsen, thought him slow.
Terry had demonstrated his real worth by bringing Tom out of this decline.
Tom freely acknowledged this just as Terry acknowledged his earlier insensitivity.
Yet here they were needling one another as if the position of an aeroplane's wings on take-off; the true nature of Kennedy's presidency or the price of fish were matters that somehow impinged on their honour or real worth as human beings.
Having been deemed ignorant I dropped out of many of these discussions, finding them too oppressive.
Brian then had to face the full force of the Sutherland-Anderson fact-finding machine on his own.
They argued ferociously about Ireland, although neither of them knew too much about it.
One of Bri's great loves, literature, became a nightmare for him as he had to defend even the most off-hand comment.
He'd be stuck there with Terry and Tom sitting as close to him as their chains would allow, hardly letting him finish a thought before jumping in with an idea that took them miles away from Brian's original argument.
I was very dismayed that I couldn't enjoy swapping ideas with Brian any more without things turning into a do-or-die debate.
Late one night I whispered to him that I was worried that the Yanks were taxing him too hard, that his lucid arguments and eloquence were being weakened by constant niggling at everything he said.
He, too, felt enough was enough.
The next day he started quizzing Tom on the possibility of setting up a pig-farm where the object was not to produce meat, but milk and cheese.
I thought this was completely mad but became enthralled as Tom, Dean of Agriculture at AUB and an expert in animal science, outlined all the possibilities and problems — he even knew the average milk production of a sow.
The problem seemed to have been solved.
Talking over schemes like this was both entertaining and educative.
Tom was a brilliant teacher.
I found, through asking Anderson about his life, especially about his work as a journalist, that I liked the man much more when he wasn't trying to impose his intellectual will on the rest of us.
As I gained confidence in their genuine goodwill I found that my sense of humour returned and I enjoyed making them laugh.
I felt useful when, during exercise periods, I could have Anderson choking with laughter, hanging on to Brian for support, as I imitated one of the guards and his absurdly curious use of English.
Here, in this dungeon we nicknamed the Pit, we were all free to make fun of the guards, in particular Abu Salim, he of clicking fingers fame.
As a holy-roller he was something apart.
He'd come down and try to get us to translate his prayers into English, or would turn up and recite Koranic verses he'd half translated with Mahmoud or one of the other English-speakers.
He was such a two-faced little man that finding these hysterically funny didn't feel wrong.
In my God, the rope red.
Me in the ground, after, me in the rope, God.’
We all used to bite our lips and nod wisely at these theological conundrums, holding our breath until he'd gone back upstairs before dissolving into laughter.
Abu Salim was a pain, which is why it was such a relief to take the mickey out of him.
He got into the habit of coming down into our cell and asking an endless string of questions on vocabulary, which he normally directed at Terry.
‘Tirry, what the meaning…?’
Terry would try and work out something to keep him happy and get rid of him.
One night when Terry, Frank, Brian and I were playing cards as Tom nodded off to sleep, Frank exclaimed, ‘Incandescent, shit!’
‘What's that, Franky?’
‘When that boy was down here earlier he asked Tom what we call an ordinary light bulb if it isn't ‘flouress’.
Tom told him incandescent.
Sure it's true,’ Frank went on, ‘but how the fuck's the guy gonna remember that?’
We all fell about laughing at the idea of a man with virtually no English suddenly coming out with such a word.
‘You're right, Franky,’ I said, ‘maybe we should just tell him ‘cup’every time he asks, ‘What's the meaning?’
The next day Abu Salim was down again.
He asked Terry to explain a word.
Terry firmly said, ‘Cup.’
Abu Salim sounded perplexed.
He knew cup was what we drank out of, but he accepted it.
A few minutes later he asked another word.
‘Cup’ said Anderson.
‘Not cup!’ barked Abu Salim.
There was a long pause as we all tried to hold back the giggles.
Terry gave him a different word and he went off content.
The Pit was about fifteen by twelve feet.
The ceiling was so low that Frank could never stand up straight and even the shorties like  Brian, Terry and I had to be careful not to bang our heads when we were exercising.
Anderson, often eager to jump around and burn off some frustration, cut the little bald patch on the top of his head, and cursed himself.
‘God, why must I be so clumsy?’
He wasn't clumsy at all, at least not physically.
He made us some fine sets of playing cards and a neat Monopoly board.
On a personal level, though, Terry's enthusiasm was sometimes gauche.
He bombarded us in his zest for education, entertainment and, indeed, any intellectual exercise, but in the early days was oblivious to our hesitant reactions.
Yet, when he did notice somebody was down, he was always very concerned and would try to cope with it, as with everything, head on.
His strength of character was invaluable in dealing with the guards and his commitment to his fellow hostages was such that he would listen quietly and matter of factly on the occasions when we all had a heart-to-heart about the little ways in which we got on each others' nerves.
As with Brian, and I hope myself, Terry worked on these areas to try and even off the rough edges.
Tom, on the other hand, didn't seem to have any rough edges.
He was a gentle man by nature, but he would suddenly fall into a depression and lose all confidence in himself.
This often happened when he thought that one or all of us were laughing at him, especially if he interpreted our teasing as mocking his intelligence.
It was such a shame that he felt like that and couldn't recognize the true and deep affection that Terry, Brian and I had for him.
Sadly, when he went into one of his depressions, he sometimes seemed to punish us by deciding that he wouldn't go on any more — he'd stop eating and that would be that.
We all had the right to do this, but the rest of us would acknowledge the others' right to know what was going on and why.
On a couple of occasions, Brian had contemplated a hunger strike.
But he'd known that while I might accept his desire to get out of the situation I could not accept his withdrawing support from me, just shutting me out, without letting me come to terms with his thinking.
We had discussed the issue in great depth.
Indeed by this time we were so in tune with one another that explanations were unnecessary.
We were so confident of each other 's love that should one of us make that final, selfish decision the other would feel his friend's sense of loss even more keenly than his own.
It did not feel the same with Tom.
He had just turned away from us and read a book.
He'd be jolly with the guards, telling them, ‘It's  OK thanks, I just want to lose a bit of weight,’ and hold his belly, saying, ‘Look at all this fat.’
The guards knew full well what was happening and we knew that after a few days they were likely to get heavy about it.
But we didn't have the energy to deal with them, given that Tom wasn't prepared to share his thinking with us.
It eventually reached the point when one of us would simply talk to him about anything and everything until he'd break and say, ‘OK, you want me to talk.
Well, two weeks ago, John said something about AUB and Terry laughed.
I couldn't hear exactly what he said, but I knew from Terry's tone that they were taking the piss out of me.’
Then we'd try to remember the incident and painstakingly explain to Tom what had actually happened.
It was an exhausting process and it was hurtful to think that Tom was so unsure of us.
He was terribly concerned about getting old.
He was a good-looking man and was in good shape.
His hearing was going a little which bothered him and he was worried that his memory was weak which was crazy, given his astonishing recall of detail.
His stories were richly entertaining and his ability to remember whole courses that he taught became a very valuable source of information and entertainment.
Sometimes, if the lights had been left on, and I was unable to sleep, I'd look across to Tom and feel great sorrow to see that fine man lying on the floor in a bleak underground room, with a rough blanket over his legs and cockroaches crawling over him as he slept.
His curious insecurity would turn him permanently against some of his fellow hostages.
When he'd started regaining his confidence he told us that he'd taken over from Terry in the endless arguments with David Jacobsen.
Terry spoke evenly, if coolly, about Jacobsen, but Tom remembered him with something approaching venom.
This streak was obvious in his relationships with Frank, who was certainly difficult to live with, and later with Terry Waite.
One moment he loved them like a brother, then he'd turn away and never want to speak fondly to them again.
Looking back, I'm sure that Frank's comment about the incandescent lights and another occasion when Tom was threatening to recite some Rabbie Bums and Franky had stated bluntly, ‘We don't want to listen to that shit’, were the real basis for Tom's antipathy.
It hadn't helped that on both occasions the rest of us had laughed at Frank's remarks.
We all lived on top of each other and at any time one of us was probably irritated  in some way by one of the others, but Tom seemed to hold on to it for a long time, never expressing his resentment until he just flipped into despising somebody.
Brian and I weren't entirely sure how to deal with the Yanks' antagonisms.
Sometimes it was like a sit-com, where two characters refuse to speak directly to each other, always using a third party to pass on comments.
It was particularly odd as Frank was chained in the middle of the trio so when Terry and Tom were talking they would do so over Frank's head, almost as if he wasn't there.
In a sense this was true, although Brian arid I didn't appreciate quite how detached Franky had become until we lived alone with him late the following year.
He would sit for hours with his blindfold down, taking no part in the general conversations, or at best looking at Brian and me, shaking his head when his compatriots said something with which he disagreed.
But occasionally he did speak to us, telling more funny stories, offering encouragement and giving me advice and demonstrations on how to improve my golf stroke.
Terry had played a fair bit of golf so would join in these chats, happy to acknowledge that Frank was the expert.
I don't know what the guards thought when they looked through the closed-circuit television that was always trained on us here and saw three men, heads motionless, looking down fixedly at some spot on the ground, making curious, swinging arm movements.
Terry kept badgering the guards for magazines and a radio.
He did it automatically whenever a guard was in the room.
I often thought it was a pointless exercise, but, as he said, ‘If you don't ask, you don't get’, and he hoped that eventually they'd get so fed up with him that they'd deliver.
He was right — they did, in early June.
When Mahmoud came in with a radio playing and said, ‘Tirry, this is for you,’ there was a moment's hush while we all thought, ‘It must be a joke.’
We were like nervous children, unsure that they'll be allowed to keep the lovely toy a relative stranger has just given them.
We recovered our manners and began a series of, ‘Thank yous’, and, ‘You are a good man, Mahmoud’, and, within seconds, Terry had it tuned to the BBC World Service and its theme, ‘Lili Bolero’.
When Mahmoud left we were like children again.
‘Let me look, let me!’
It was a very basic little radio but it worked fine.
We could pick up the World Service, Voice of America (VOA) and a number of local stations which broadcast in English and French.
The fact  that our captors were confident and considerate enough to let us have the radio was almost as encouraging as the news we could at last listen to after two years of silence.
Britain was on the verge of restoring diplomatic relations, albeit only partially, with Iran.
The minor disputes between the two countries, over reparations for damaged embassies in Tehran and London and some other outstanding debts, seemed all but settled and a group of MPs were visiting the Iranian capital.
The Iranians, too, were making very hopeful noises that improved relations, which must include British support for a UN resolution blaming Iraq for the Iran-Iraq War, would encourage them to help secure our release.
With Britain getting closer to Iran and with the US constantly improving its rapport with Syria, we felt that now we were all together, we could be released without having to wait for all the governments to restore relations.
The only factor casting a shadow over all this was our concern, emphasized by Terry, that whatever governments might agree, Islamic Jihad would still insist on the release of the seventeen men held in Kuwait.
Assuming this to be true, I thought that Brian and I might be in a better position.
Our captivity had never been linked to theirs, as far as we knew.
We also thought that if Iran, and its ally Syria, which controlled Lebanon, insisted on our release, there wasn't much chance of our captors refusing to co-operate.
At last, things seemed to be moving in a very positive direction.
Listening to news from home on the BBC gave us a real sense of belonging again.
Hearing British voices talking about anything from politics to music, even listening to old comedy shows, felt like the first step home.
Tom was chief radio monitor.
From seven in the morning he'd sit there with the thing pressed to his ear; to preserve the batteries and to avoid alarming the guards, we always set it at the lowest volume.
He'd often hear a mention of hostages on the early news he picked up from Radio Monte Carlo or VOA that might not be repeated later in the day.
It was usually about Terry's sister, Peggy Say, and her efforts to get him home.
Terry was very proud of Peggy's achievement.
Terry's family, unlike he himself, hadn't had a great deal of experience of the world outside the States, so Peg had had an awful lot to learn.
From the letter Brian had received from the newspaper last November, we knew that his sisters and friends were working for him and we had also heard that Jill, Nick Toksvig and other  friends were active on my behalf.
Nevertheless, it was amazing to hear John Bullock of the Independent say on the BBC's Comment programme that the Friends of John McCarthy had actually altered British government policy on the Iran — Iraq War.
I was immensely proud of this, having no idea that ‘the Friends’ was now a rapidly growing organization which had moved far beyond my immediate circle.
In a strange way I felt almost embarrassed that such things were happening in my name.
How could I live up to them when I got home?
Frank and Tom were never mentioned, even on the anniversary of their kidnaps, beyond being listed with all the hostages.
I don't know what Frank thought, but Tom was clearly bothered, feeling forgotten and also angry that somehow he wasn't as important as the others.
We tried to reassure him that this wasn't the case, that newspeople were merely going for the stories with the biggest hook.
Doubtless his friends and family were working on his behalf and might well be involved with Peggy Say's campaign.
Frank had no real interest in the radio, beyond sometimes listening to the sports news.
Terry, Brian and I also soon lost interest in monitoring it around the clock, although we'd listen to programmes that sounded interesting, together with a couple of news bulletins a day and then VOA at night as Tom went off to sleep and the rest of us played cards.
We even enjoyed one of the local stations.
There was a woman newsreader, whose name sounded like Magda Tacker, and we soon called her Margaret Thatcher.
Her sentences were amazingly convoluted, verbatim translations from interminable statements by Lebanese politicians.
Nearly every broadcast would herald, ‘The minister said, ‘We are on the threshold of the doorway to the window of opportunity…’’
And then Magda would be off again explaining that, ‘The road to Damascus was busy again today…’
It was from Magda that we heard early in September that a British Sunday newspaper had reported that an Iranian with close links to Hezbollah had said in Beirut that I was to be released immediately.
For a couple of days I was extremely nervous.
At one point there seemed to be a lot of people arriving upstairs and we wondered if they were there to take me out.
Oddly I was uneasy about this, worrying over what I should do for my friends when I got home.
I had no right to be released before Terry, Tom or Brian as they all had been kidnapped before me.
Frank had suffered far more than me.
What would my friends at home expect of me?
Brian and Tom asked me to get in touch with people for them; Tom even gave me long phone numbers for his wife in Beirut and daughters in the States.
Terry wrote out messages for his girlfriend Madeleine and their daughter Sulome, his elder daughter Gabrielle and for his sister Peggy.
These messages I memorized and was surprised to be able to recall and pass them on when I was released, two years later.
This time, it was just another rumour.
None the less, throughout the summer, the news continued to be very encouraging.
Meetings had been held at increasingly high levels between Iran and Britain.
Both sides were making hopeful noises about the hostages, although Britain's insistence that whatever improvements in relations there might be, the hostages were not to be seen as a direct part of that process, seemed rather contradictory.
Despite obvious Iranian links with our captors, Britain appeared determined only to exploit the better relationship with Iran for British companies seeking contracts there, rather than using it to secure our release.
I couldn't see the logic of this except that it protected Thatcher from any hint of ‘doing deals with terrorists’.
No deals for hostages I could understand, yet the French had made future business and full diplomatic relations conditional on their hostages being freed and no more being taken.
I got the distinct impression that ‘no deals for hostages’ was a hollow posture that sounded tough but which really served to free the Thatcher government from the bother of exerting the influence it could, through diplomacy and trade.
In early July an American warship in the Gulf shot down an Iranian airliner.
Although our guards said it was irrelevant to our situation, we were worried that any hopes of freedom might just vanish.
What bothered us was the initial reaction by Reagan and Thatcher, both of whom seemed to think that condemning the Iranians for the accident was perfectly reasonable.
At a time when diplomatic relations between the West and Iran were looking so much better, how could they be so stupid?
Yet, despite Mrs Thatcher's resolutely ‘gung-ho’ attitude, it was increasingly clear that there had been a general shift in Britain's stance on Iran and the whole of the Middle East.
To what extent this was the result of Jill's campaign will probably never be known, but it may be that it coincided with and reinforced a growing feeling in the Foreign Office and elsewhere that intransigence was no longer in  Britain's interests.
By extending ties the country stood to gain in political and economic terms, as well as improving the chances for the release of Nicholas Nichola and Roger Cooper, Britons held without trial in Tehran, and indeed for those of us held hostage in Lebanon.
Iran, too, was shifting politically.
Power seemed to be moving towards Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani who was arguing that his country needed to mend bridges with the rest of the world in order to rebuild Iran, following the end of the long war with Iraq.
There were also repeated statements from Iranian diplomats that they would help on the hostage issue as things improved.
On 13 September, Rudolf Cordes, a West German hostage, and then, on 4 October, Mithileshwar Singh were released.
We were delighted for them and their families.
Yet despite the general improvement in relations and these two releases, we weren't confident that we would soon follow.
Singh, while holding a Green Card, was not a full US citizen and might simply have been released as a gesture.
There were also hints that the West German government had paid some sort of ransom for Cordes.
Small things still gave us hope and the rare glimpses of colour we saw took on an almost spiritual quality.
One day a guard came in with a bunch of roses.
They were a subtle pink, their perfume was wonderful, and, kept in a cup until they fell apart, they lit up the bleak, dark cell.
On another occasion they brought us a bowl of cherries.
It seemed a shame to eat them.
Their rich, warm colour was a powerful reminder of a world that was lost to us and I suddenly felt sure we would see it again.
Despite being held underground without daylight and with poor ventilation, we were able to relax a little in this place.
The guards were above us and we always had good warning of their approach down the little staircase to the iron door.
When the fans were going, we could talk in almost normal voices.
Our bathroom was inside the dungeon.
It was about three feet square and maybe five feet high.
There were taps for hot and cold water and a large plastic jug to flush the hole-in-the-floor toilet.
We were allowed in there once a day, although the guards would normally let us go again if we were desperate.
In the mornings we were let off the chains, four of us in pairs and then the fifth and last man on his own, to use the bathroom and to exercise for maybe half an hour.
Normally we could have a rudimentary shower, using the plastic jug, whenever we liked, although hot water wasn't often available.
Having experienced the agony of crotch rot the previous  winter in the Pigsty, I felt better for taking a daily douche, even if in winter the freezing water left everything numb for an hour or so.
Inevitably, hygiene was not the guards' top priority and we all got a dose of diarrhoea.
The guards' toilet was halfway up the stairs to their room.
The stench from it filled our cell, making us feel nauseous and apprehensive that we, too, might catch whatever it was they were suffering from.
Terry and I were worst hit and for a couple of days I was left off the chain so that I could use the toilet whenever I needed.
Abu Salim decided that a third day wasn't necessary so I had to grin and bear it.
In fact my chain was just long enough to let me get into the tiny bathroom, two feet from my mattress, to use the toilet.
When Terry succumbed Safi refused to leave him off the chain at night.
It was the only time I saw Anderson close to tears.
When the guard had gone he had to keep his blindfold on while he overcame his anger and humiliation.
Fortunately, being so close to the bathroom, I was able to rinse out the plastic waste-basket he was forced to use whenever his cramps got too bad.
One afternoon in late October we heard on a local radio station that someone, claiming to speak for Islamic Jihad, had phoned to announce that two Americans would be executed.
The caller had said the victims would be Anderson and Sutherland.
A moment later Safi came down and Anderson simply said, ‘Morituri te salutant ’— those who are about to die salute you — which under the circumstances struck me as being extraordinarily cool.
Safi was obviously excited by something, but his usual bonhomie was so much in evidence that we couldn't imagine that he knew of anything ghastly in the offing.
Then they came and took Frank away.
‘Fucking hell, surely they're not going to kill him.’
Terry was confident that they wouldn't, but the rest of us couldn't rule it out.
As far as we knew, Frank had never been claimed and, having been quite cut off in Lebanon for a number of years before his kidnap, had less ‘publicity’ value than the other Yanks.
It was also possible that they saw his state of mind as a potential liability, particularly if he got desperate and tried to escape again.
I was very apprehensive and the fact that they took away the radio at the same time made our suspicions worse.
A few days later, on 28 October, it was Terry's birthday.
We asked to have the radio back in case there was any news from his family.
We also said we were worried about Frank.
The guard said, ‘OK, for Terry and Abu Tariq, but just for one day.’
We listened, hearing a brief mention of Terry's birthday on VOA, but more importantly, heard nothing about Frank.
They hadn't killed him, at least not yet.
The radio was reclaimed the next morning.
We couldn't understand why and of course no reason was given by the guards.
We tried to hope that they were going to release Franky and that they simply didn't want the rest of us to get angry and depressed.
They could never understand that, whatever the news, it still helped us to feel less isolated.
Our depression over Frank's surprise departure and the loss of the radio deepened when ‘Trust me’ Ali turned up and wanted Terry to make a new video.
He had never had anything to do with Bri and me, but the Yanks said he was very smarmy and had told them he was Iranian.
He spoke fluent English and was always saying, ‘If you do this for me, I can make things better for you.
Trust me.’
He was, by all accounts, a bit spooky and seemed a little distant from the other guards, perhaps because he was a representative from Tehran.
Now, he wanted Terry to tell the US government to start doing something for the hostages.
Terry hated having to make these tapes and we knew how distressing it was for him.
After the last time, he'd vowed not to do any more, but we all found our firm stances weakened as soon as the blindfold was pulled down and our well-rounded arguments got vaguer and vaguer as our minds raced with apprehension.
Terry was taken out of the basement and, when he returned, said that he couldn't tell us what he was doing.
As he worked on his script he kept himself to himself.
He had to — they were doubtless watching him on the closed-circuit television.
He was clearly upset and simply said he was making a video.
Tom told him he shouldn't do it, should tell them he wasn't going to co-operate any more.
Tom's words struck me as unthinking and insensitive; Terry was so obviously unhappy about the whole thing.
The video passed.
But the depression didn't lift.
All the optimism of the summer had evaporated, and we now faced another winter and Christmas without our families in this cold hole in the ground.
We filled the hours as best we could.
Since Frank's departure, Tom had played cards with us more often and Terry and Bri started teaching me how to play poker.
Brian and I lost fortunes back and forth between us, but Terry usually came out ahead — I still owe him two hundred dollars.
We still had lively discussions about the books we read, although even the supply of those seemed to be drying up, and Tom was teaching Brian French.
Bri was eager to learn but frustrated by the idea of learning the verbs ‘parrot fashion’ and tried, unsuccessfully, to find a way round this.
Just before Frank disappeared, the guards had taken to making regular searches of our room, rifling through everything.
We thought they must be making sure we had no hidden messages and Brian used to mock them, saying, ‘The Kalashnikov is hidden in the bathroom.’
After Frank had gone, they continued with the searches.
It was an appalling invasion and drove us to fury.
‘Why are you doing this?
You know that everything in here has come from you.
What are you looking for?’
‘We are sorry, but this is orders.’
One day they got really excited.
Terry had written out a very detailed plan for a farm-school project for juvenile offenders that he had been working on for almost two years.
We had all enjoyed working through it with him.
Tom had been a great help in advising him on the farming aspects and, of course, on the teaching.
Frank had given more detailed advice on the educational side of things, as had Brian.
I'd been of less practical help, but Terry had encouraged me to make general criticisms of the scheme.
Terry had invested so much in the project that he was damned sure he was going to try and get it home with him.
So he kept the notes, in tiny handwriting, in a little plastic bag.
When we were moving or when he thought a search was in the offing he'd hide it in his underpants.
They found it.
They searched us all, probing every inch of our bodies.
It was horrible.
They found the picture of Jill that Sayeed had given me more than eighteen months before.
They took it.
Then they took all the old magazines and Terry's home-made cards and games, even the dominoes.
We were livid.
They thought they'd got something really tasty from Anderson, maybe notes on the guards or the various locations.
Terry was too angry to speak.
I tried to tell Younis that they were all wrong and to explain what Terry's notes were really about.
Needless to say, he didn't believe me.
Younis told me that they'd taken my picture because I'd hidden it.
I said it was mine to hide.
They'd taken my girlfriend away from me in the real world, why must they take away her picture?
No response.
This slide downhill continued for weeks.
On my birthday in  November we again lobbied the guards to have the radio for the day.
They wouldn't help.
What had gone so wrong that they wouldn't let us hear the news?
Was the word from on high that all plans for release had been shelved?
Had there been some awful dispute between London and Tehran or had the Americans done something unforgivable?
Shortly before Christmas I was taken upstairs.
It was the first time I'd been out of the cell since 15 May.
In the guards' room I was shown two videos.
The first was of my parents appealing for news of me and — of course— for my release.
I was really choked to see them.
They looked so dignified in the sitting room at home.
They even had their dog Emma with them.
It was two and a half years since I had seen them and it gave me a lot of hope just to know that they were still in good shape, although they both looked much older.
It reminded me yet again that our captivity was as much of a strain for them as it was for us, here in Lebanon.
Then there was a tape of Jill sending me a message.
She looked quite different from the way I'd remembered her.
Her hair was much longer and blonder, although I realized that the latter was probably due to the awful quality of the recording.
I felt oddly disturbed by the new hair-do.
Had she changed in other ways?
With the work on the campaign and the success we'd heard she'd had with it, would she find me too limited when I got out?
Would I be left way behind?
Here was the woman I wanted to marry, the woman I thought of every day as I looked beyond the cell to make plans for the future.
Yet the glimpse of her on that brief video hadn't brought her back with the sharp focus that I craved.
I wanted to see her smile, hear the little chuckle that so often bubbled from her as we spoke, and just watch her move about.
Making the video had probably been a tense experience for her, the situation and subject preventing natural expressions, let alone laughter.
Her message was one of love and support.
It helped, but left me anxious as to whether we could still really know each other after so long apart.
No matter how realistic and cautious I tried to be about changes at home, in my heart I only wanted reassurance that things would be as before.
When I got back to the cell the boys were keen to hear everything, but, tactfully, they left me alone to be with my thoughts.
I felt shy of talking about my feelings with Terry and Tom and wished I could have half an hour alone with Brian.
Once again the lack of privacy hit home hard.
It wasn't that I disliked, distrusted or in any way  doubted the sympathy of my friends.
I just wanted to be private, to be able to choose whom I talked to, let alone where and when.
It was Christmas Eve — our third in captivity.
Would there be cakes and ‘Happy Birthday, Jesus’ from the guards as there had been the previous two Christmases?
This year there were to be no festivities, however meagre.
It was to be one of the worst times in the whole five years.
And of course it was all Brian's fault.
At least that's the way Abu Salim and his cronies saw it.
That evening, Abu Salim came to chain Brian and me up after we'd been to the bathroom.
He did me first and, as usual, stepped over my mattress to Brian, who suddenly snarled, ‘Don't you pull my leg, I'm not an animal.’
The chain snapped on and there was a thump as Brian was hit, then some more noise and Abu Salim stormed out.
He returned a minute later breathing heavily.
He went straight over to Brian, saying, ‘So, you want escape?’ and started raining blows down on him with a stick.
Brian let out a hoarse screech at each cut.
I felt myself shrivelling up inside, knees drawn up under my chin, arms wrapped tight around them, my head buried in my arms.
I prayed as I'd done a year before when Abed had attacked Bri.
‘Please God, let it stop, stop it now!’
I could feel the same horror burning through Tom and Terry — the impotence, the rage, the fear and shame at doing nothing for our friend.
There was a vicious irony that it should be Brian, who always confronted the guards when they treated him subhumanly, who was now being abused like a dumb animal.
Bilal eventually called, ‘Hallas .’
Abu Salim stopped and left.
When the door clanged shut we all turned to tend to Brian.
He lay there, trembling all over, panting hard.
He said that he was all right.
There wasn't much to say.
We were all too shocked.
Both Tom and Terry decided to go on hunger strike.
Tom said that Brian's beating was the end as far as he was concerned.
He would rather die now than carry on under these circumstances.
Terry agreed.
I knew that Brian had already made the same decision, but, unlike the other two, he had no need to talk about it.
He needed no justification, no support, no-one's approval.
For the first time, I didn't feel I wanted to follow my friends.
Despite my anger and despair at what had happened to Brian, killing myself now wouldn't make amends for not helping him.
The threat of violence was always there and there might well be more beatings.
I knew that I wanted to survive, I wanted to go home.
The short messages from home, the frustrating glimpses of Jill and my parents on video still spurred me to hold on, for them as much as for me.
Although ‘real’ life was now so often only fantasy and incomplete memories, there were moments when people, events, sights and sounds came back into sudden, sharp focus.
These moments were so vivid, so powerful, that they over-rode the endless tedium and the despair.
I knew Brian understood my decision as I understood his.
I didn't have to explain.
We talked a little more, while Terry and Tom prepared themselves for the inevitable angry reaction from the guards and Brian lay down under an extra blanket as his body came to terms with the shock of the beating.
It wasn't a good night for sleep.
The next morning, Christmas Day, Bilal and Abu Salim came down together.
They dumped some bread and jam on the end of my bed and unchained me as usual.
Terry and Tom said that they didn't want any food and when they asked Brian, he refused to answer.
Then Abu Salim said, ‘No eat, no toilette !’
We argued, but they refused to let the others go to the toilet.
This indignity, on top of the beating, was too much for me.
I couldn't accept it; my resolve to carry on snapped and I said that if they were going to do this, then 1, too, would not eat.
The guards left.
I was still off the chain so could at least go to the little bathroom and fill the others' water-bottles and empty their pee-bottles.
Brian needed to shit so I gave him a plastic bag and then left it in the bathroom.
We sat and waited for the next move, which turned out to be a visit from Younis and Bilal, insisting that Brian was trying to escape.
In French and English we tried to explain.
How could he be trying to escape when he was already chained?
Why should he sit there when Abu Salim hit him for no reason?
Why should any of us carry on playing their game when they treated a man like that?
We tried to reason with them about the bathroom.
They would only say that we must eat otherwise things would be ‘very bad, not good for you’.
They went away.
Later they returned, unchained Terry and took him upstairs.
We heard him quietly talking to them, then a gun being cocked and a loud pop, followed by a moan.
The moan, we all knew, came from Bilal.
The pop was from an airgun, not a bullet, being fired.
Bilal came down and said that Tom would be next, which was, of course, meaningless.
I tried to make him understand that Brian hadn't done anything wrong.
But he wasn't listening.
Obviously, they had made up their minds that they would have to make us eat rather than tell their bosses what had happened.
Ten minutes later, Terry, in remarkably good shape for a dead man, was brought back down.
Younis explained that whatever had happened we must eat.
He left a plate of chocolate biscuits as a peace offering — at any other time it would have been a great treat — and went off with his friends.
We talked about how ridiculous things had become.
Eventually, Terry said, ‘Well, I guess John's right, we may as well carry on,’ and ate a biscuit.
After a while, I took one.
Later Tom did likewise.
We had been defeated by the surreal, mock execution and chocky bickies.
Under his blanket, Brian was silent.
I knew that this was probably the hardest moment of all for him.
My decision not to eat had been made on the spur of the moment and was based not, as I well knew, on the terrible beating, but on the pointless cruelty of not allowing the others to go to the bathroom.
I can't speak for Terry and Tom, but I imagine that as the night's anger and frustration ebbed away, their determination had been blunted by the morning's antics.
Brian, alone of us all, knew how difficult it was to go through with a hunger strike.
I was aware that he had been focusing all his will on this resolve and that to let go now would be an appalling submission.
He would need time and peace to prepare himself for whatever he decided.
The next day he started eating again.
Nothing was said, but we all knew he had gone against his own convictions to save us from the pain of losing his company and his vital support.
It was a great statement of friendship and I wanted to thank him, but appreciated he would be offended.
On New Year's Eve Mahmoud showed up with Ali.
They wanted to hear about the troubles.
We told them the truth and as usual when a panic was over they apologized but warned that we must be patient.
We kept our tempers, as if patience wasn't something we maintained at the expense of our fading energies.
By way of atonement they had brought us presents.
There were playing cards, the New Year issues of Time and Newsweek and some videos.
From the contents page of Time we saw that there was an article on heavy fighting between Lebanon's warring Shi'ite militias, Amal and Hezbollah, but the relevant pages had been cut out.
We  wondered if this had been going on since we were moved out of Beirut last May, but there was nothing else to indicate any serious set-back to our chances of release.
Even censored, the magazines were good to read.
I particularly liked the arts sections and noted that a caption under a picture of Salman Rushdie said that his new book The Satanic Verses had been badly received in many Moslem communities.
I thought he looked very smug.
January 1989 brought another Friday 13th so I was sure one of us would be on the move.
My companions nodded patiently at yet another of my silly predictions.
Yet on the 12th Anderson was moved.
Amin was there muttering things about his shoe size, trying to give the impression that he was going home.
After Terry had gone upstairs we heard the dreadful shriek of tape being torn and so, when Mahmoud came down and asked which was Terry's pee-bottle, we really couldn't believe that this was anything more than another move.
As usual there was no chance to say a proper farewell, just hurried ‘good lucks’ and ‘see you in New York’.
Nobody else was moved over the next couple of days so we talked endlessly about what it might mean.
Had Terry been moved out before being released?
Maybe they were holding him back in Beirut while the final details were worked out.
Maybe he'd gone to join Frank.
Speculating like this was always a pointless exercise but it occupied a portion of any day.
We had to find a way of convincing ourselves that any move, no move, any news, no news, good treatment, bad treatment were all indicative of imminent release.
Terry's move at least meant there was now more space and I moved across to where Terry had been.
Tom and Brian spent much of the time reading.
When I tried I found I couldn't, but Bri took pity on me and we spent hours playing cards.
I got very depressed — there was no particular reason, just a lowering of spirits as I realized again that, for the foreseeable future, we were going nowhere.
There was also a new guard working with Abu Salim, from whom the man got the impression that we had to be treated heavily.
The pair of them loved searches, making us face the wall and spread our arms and legs as they felt all over us for some exciting trophy.
This really sapped my energies — it was so obviously just a sport for them — and I began to question whether I could go on.
Tom and Brian saw that I was down and worked very hard to bring me back up.
They did it with such tenderness that I gained  new strength from their friendship, suddenly seeing the value in continuing, if only to deepen that shared bond.
On 3 February Amin appeared again and took Tom off.
There were more mutterings about shoe sizes as Tom anxiously asked where he was going.
This time, we were allowed to say goodbye and Tom hugged us, saying, ‘You're both towers of strength.’
We returned the compliment with feeling.
Then he was gone and it was just the Shilling-Taker and Bastardballs again.
Life took up its old monotonous routine.
Because we were so comfortable together, in a way it was pleasant to be alone again.
Tom's move reassured us that he, Frank and Terry were all right and were probably together.
We wondered about Islamic Jihad's reasons for splitting us up again, keeping the Brits and the Yanks separate.
It might suggest that all bets were off on the release stakes or, ever hopeful, it might be that they were planning on letting us go and didn't want us to be able to give any hint, however vague, as to the whereabouts of the Yanks.
As time wore on that hope faded.
We amused ourselves playing ever more card games, later and later into the night, using up our sometimes meagre supply of candles.
We carried on the French lessons and since I was really only one grade above Brian, we learnt together which was fun.
Our only textbook was a French edition of The Valley of the Dolls .
It was fairly easy to work out a translation.
I would read through a passage and get it sorted out as best I could.
Then Brian would sit by me and read it through.
I was an utter martinette about his pronunciation (he didn't know when I didn't know) and would make him happily furious insisting that he repeat words over and over again until I was content.
We had fewer books and, although one unfortunate batch was dominated by Barbara Cartland's idiotic romances and an informative, though only distantly interesting, tome on breast feeding, there were still enough to keep us occupied.
It was a pleasure to be able to talk about our reading without the combative air that our Yankee friends had always brought to such discussions.
The best book of the lot was, to my surprise,Jane Eyre .
I'd read it when I was doing my A levels at the crammer, but it was only now that I really appreciated it.
I was amazed that someone brought up in nineteenth-century Yorkshire could understand so completely the deprivation and frustration of being a hostage.
Now that there were just two of us we were often left unchained  for most of the day, certainly from breakfast to lunch-time.
I enjoyed this comparative freedom and spent a lot of time pacing around the cell.
Brian, also, went through frantic periods of exercising, often indulging in his favourite sport of shadow-boxing.
I derived a great deal of amusement out of this because he got so carried away, huffing and puffing, and once he unleashed a mighty kick with ‘Take that, you bastard’, sadly forgetting that he was still chained at the time.
When the agony abated he was prepared to laugh with me.
It wasn't just a joke, but a reflection of his need to fight back.
Often, this attitude had left him physically the worse for wear, but not mentally, for he managed to give even the vicious beatings a meaning by analysing his reactions and those of the guards without pride, certainly with no feeling of humiliation, nor indeed with bitterness.
He wanted to know what had happened, wanted to understand the dynamics of the situation and to store it away as part of his constantly changing, growing understanding of himself and of those around him.
But when he wasn't fighting shadows, he'd just spend the morning dozing on his mattress while I paced back and forth and sometimes did a few push-ups and other exercises.
The guards left us pretty much alone and, apart from the irritations of Abu Salim and his sidekick, there was no aggression.
There was another new man who seemed to mean well.
He'd first appeared a few months earlier for just a few minutes.
He'd picked up some cream that they'd given me for a skin rash, stuck it under my blindfold and said, in a curious high-pitched waver, ‘Champignons ?’
‘Yes,champignons ,’ I replied, thinking that he sounded as old as Noah and immediately I'd named him Grandad.
Now he was a regular.
He was, I think, a bit simple, but quite harmless.
He'd occasionally pop down to the dungeon just to say, ‘Aujourd'hui, c'est Vendredi, Mars quatorze, mille neuf cent quatre vingt et neuf ans .’
‘Merci beaucoup, mon ami ,’ I'd reply and off he'd scoot, giggling merrily.
His French aside, he was the first guy who understood immediately one of my pitiful Arabic sentences — so perhaps he wasn't that simple after all.
Late in March Mahmoud showed up for the first time since the Yanks had moved out.
He was his usual self, cheerful, sympathetic but totally vague.
‘What's happening with the negotiations, Mahmoud?’
‘I don't know exactly, but I think they are good.’
‘Mahmoud, are there really any negotiations?
As far as we've ever heard your group has never told anyone you have us.’
‘No, no, be sure they negotiate.
But your British government want all things secret.’
Reasonable but as ever quite uninspiring.
He brought a two-week old copy of Newsweek .
Like the last editions we'd had, it was censored, but enough remained to make it plain that all hell had been let loose over The Satanic Verses .
The agitation mentioned just two months earlier now seemed to be consuming the whole Moslem world.
There had been book burnings and riots from Bangladesh to Bradford.
Leading Moslem clerics had condemned the book as a vicious, sacrilegious attack on their faith.
Finally Ayatollah Khomeini had reclaimed his mantle as the most radical of the Imams by proclaiming a fatwa against Rushdie in February 1989, effectively condemning him to death.
Although most of the reports on the subject had been cut out, probably for the colour pictures of Imam Khomeini, we gathered that the EC countries had suspended relations with Iran and that the whole situation had grown completely out of hand.
One chilling line read, ‘The Rushdie affair cannot help but set back hopes for an early release for the western hostages in Lebanon.’
Rushdie was apparently ready to apologize, but it didn't look as if that would convince the Ayatollah to withdraw the fatwa and Rushdie was in hiding somewhere in England.
Lucky sod, we thought.
It was very hard not to compare his situation with ours.
Our captors took political and spiritual guidance from Khomeini, who had condemned Rushdie to death.
But we were in a dungeon in Lebanon and he was in a safe house in the Home Counties.
It was such a bizarre twist that we couldn't see how anyone would find a way around it.
The British government had to protect and defend Rushdie's right to free speech.
They had to condemn Khomeini's intrusion into the affairs of another state.
There was no chance that Khomeini would withdraw the fatwa .
The encouraging rapprochement between Tehran and London that we'd heard so much about the previous year was at an end.
The political shift between Iran and Britain seemed to have direct repercussions for us.
From this point on, there were to be no more magazines, nor any news of any kind — even on our third anniversary in April, until after Brian's release more than a year later.
We  were once more cut off from reality in our underground prison.
But we were not completely isolated.
From some time in high summer until we left the Pit the guards started bringing us a regular supply of videos.
They'd bring down a little portable black-and-white television and wire it in to the video upstairs.
There was an added pleasure to this as they used the cable that connected the spy camera on the wall, so, for a few hours at least, we had some privacy.
Initially we got the usual diet of karate and war films.
Yet, surprisingly, when we asked for something else they obliged with a number of better films.
Many were still about war, but they weren't quite as crass as before and were interspersed with some really enjoyable movies.
We got them to show us Moonstruck three times, enjoying it more each time as we anticipated our favourite scenes.
Even sad films took us back to a world that we understood, a world where people lived their lives, hoping for happiness and sometimes even finding it.
The one drawback to the Beka'a Video Club was that Abu Salim, who'd asked us to give him English lessons, would come down with a list of words and phrases he'd noted while watching the films and ask for an explanation, his main interest was obscene vocabulary.
Now that we were the only hostages there I had no reason to worry, or prevaricate, over the consequences of an escape attempt.
But even with the camera occasionally disconnected we realized that we would have to be incredibly lucky to overpower a guard in our room without alarming whoever was upstairs.
Although we thought very seriously about escaping, it was more a mental exercise than anything else.
And so another seven months went by.
We had been held for three and a half years and we still had no idea when we might be released.
Ever since the journey to this place seventeen months ago I'd had occasional panic attacks at the thought of being ‘mummified’ and stuck in the base of a truck again.
The attacks came without warning and didn't seem to be set off by any direct thought about being moved.
The feeling of panic, the inability to move, the hyperventilation and the terrible fear would suddenly come over me.
When I regained control, telling myself, ‘It's OK, you're not taped, you're not in the truck,’ I was always left with a residue of remembered fear, which built up in the back of my mind.
By this time I was so sure that any Friday 13th would mean a move that it came as no surprise when we left the Pit on Tuesday  10 October.
The confidence with which I looked forward to that week and its promise of change, if not release, was undermined by nagging anxiety over the move itself.
I was taken upstairs first.
Brian and I said farewell downstairs.
Neither was sure if one of us would be going home or if we'd be split up and put with other hostages as had happened before with the Yanks and the Frenchmen.
When I got upstairs I found Abu Salim, which did nothing for my confidence,
I was told to stand up straight and, as usual, one of the guards pushed my legs as close together as possible.
Another set of hands was pulling my arms straight down by my sides.
Other hands tightened my blindfold until it hurt and started fitting a cloth over my mouth.
I was breathing more and more heavily.
I knew I couldn't face it again.
I felt myself falling and begged them, ‘Please, don't put me in the truck.’
‘OK, John, no worry, just ten minutes.’
It didn't help.
I knew their ten minutes might last hours.
I asked again about the truck.
‘No truck, no problem.’
It wasn't until they made me squat down and then taped my wrists to my ankles and stuck me in a large sack that I accepted that it wasn't going to be a truck, but a car-boot move.
I was so elated and relieved I could have kissed them, but immediately felt ashamed that I'd let them see my fear.
I'd lost control.
If they'd known it, if they'd wanted to, they could have got me to do anything in those minutes.
After the truck, the car boot even with Brian sharing it, was relatively comfortable.
I managed to wriggle my hands out of the tape so I could pull down the gag, poke my head out of the sack and breathe more freely.
With free arms we could move more and brace ourselves against the bumps on the road.
Brian and I didn't talk, but occasionally gave one another a reassuring pat.
Despite the fact that it was October and cool in the mountains, the heat in the small space was stifling.
We stopped briefly a couple of times, presumably for checkpoints and, as on other occasions, the driver would sometimes get out and speak to the people manning them.
Looking back, it seems odd that, although this happened many times in the moves over the years, the cars and trucks were never searched.
When we came to a final stop we were carried up many flights of stairs, taken into an apartment and dumped on the floor.
There were mattresses but no blankets, only thin sheets.
Our pyjamas and  underwear were soaking with sweat after the journey in the boot and now, in the night cold, I was freezing.
But we were in an apartment, not a prison.
The guards gave us a cigarette each and then left.
The door closed and a deep American voice came out of the darkness.
‘Hi there, you guys, I thought you'd gone home ages ago.’
It was Franky.
He had been there since he left the Pit a year earlier and Tom had spent a week or so with him back in February.
He sounded pretty good.
I tried to imagine how I'd have coped with a year's solitary confinement.
It was unimaginable — ten weeks had been hard enough.
At dawn the next day we were awoken by the call to prayer from a nearby mosque.
I inspected the room in the faint light coming in around the shutters.
I realized that this was the same place Brian and I had been held in for a week in May 1988 before going to the Pit.
It was the first time we'd returned to any location and I thought it must be a good sign.
The last stay here had been brief; perhaps it would be the same this time.
As far as we knew, the only block to Britain's continued improvement in relations with Iran had been the Rushdie affair.
Maybe that, and any other lesser problems had now been sorted out and we might be on the verge of going home.
If we'd been put back with an American maybe it meant that at least one of us could expect to be released.
We asked the guards for news as soon as they appeared.
Big Bilal from the Scullery was here with a new man and, according to Frank, they were generally reasonably behaved.
Their opposite numbers were George, who treated Frank, or Abu Tariq as they still called him, well and Mazzin.
Mazzin's presence filled us with foreboding.
We knew him to be cowardly and because of that prone to bullying.
However, we also knew that we'd got rid of Abed.
We reckoned that we could probably deal with any nonsense from Mazzin, not that we wanted to waste our energies in a battle of nerves with him.
None the less, both Brian and I found the change in conditions a tonic.
Although we'd been left pretty much to our own devices in the last months in the Pit, the year and a half underground had become increasingly depressing.
Living in an apartment again, with a proper bathroom, the sounds of street life, good food and a glimmer of daylight round the shutters, felt wonderful.
Our meals now regularly consisted of hummus, salad, chips and often meat, chicken or fried steak (which George called ‘buffteak’ which was closer to the mark — and particularly apt when we were  trying to cut it with the inevitable plastic knife), and glasses of Pepsi.
It was not haute cuisine , but it was both edible and nourishing.
We were still hostages, but being better looked after took the edge off the horrors of captivity.
Now that we were being treated as human beings, rather than sorry creatures penned up in a basement, we could relax a bit, which gave us a chance to replenish our flagging energies.
Each morning after the bathroom run, the three of us were let off the chains for an hour or so to exercise.
Inspired by renewed hope, Brian and I pushed ourselves hard, doing umpteen push-ups and jogging round the cell.
Franky contented himself with strolling around with his blindfold still over his face.
Although in good spirits, Frank was even more withdrawn than he had been in the Pit.
He would speak when spoken to and would answer any questions we had, but would then drift off into some sort of reverie, usually with his blindfold down, sometimes talking to himself.
We knew that Frank got on better with us than he had with his fellow countrymen and hoped that being with us would help bring him back to himself.
After a few days he started telling us about the year spent in isolation.
Although, like us, he'd had no news, either from the guards or television or magazines, he somehow felt he had a lot of information that came to him through the ether.
He believed that he was the last hostage left.
This belief was obviously challenged by our presence, but he insisted that Tom and Terry had gone home.
Sometimes he would even say that Tom had not only gone home but had subsequently died of cancer.
When asked how he knew this, he would become very vague, saying, ‘There are things I can't tell you guys, you'll just have to take my word for it.’
So desperate were we for hard news on our fellow hostages, and indeed for ourselves, that Brian and I found this very trying.
We appreciated that long months of solitary on top of the awful treatment he'd received before must have put incredible strains on him.
Gently we tried to talk him round to looking at things in another way.
We understood his need to feel that he was special, that someone was looking after him, and wished he could draw strength from us, rather than locking himself in his fantasies.
We encouraged him to read books and watch some television.
We felt it was our duty to try and bring Frank back to himself.
This wasn't just altruism.
It was dispiriting to live with such an example of what might conceivably happen to us.
Frank's inability to stand up for himself was brought home to us by Mazzin's relationship with him.
It soon became clear that he had enjoyed having a free hand with Frank.
He would badger him about anything, often hitting him on the least pretext.
Mazzin tried to impose the same treatment on us.
He'd come and witter on about where, exactly, we should put this cup, that bag of tissues and just adored pulling down our blindfolds, even though they always covered our noses, let alone our eyes.
We were always neat anyway.
It was essential to be able to put a hand out for something in the dark without knocking over a jug of water, or sending a pee-bottle flying.
I had long found that keeping my own little area and few belongings in order was a vital way of keeping a hold of myself, keeping my mind and spirits in order.
Being told by Mazzin to be tidy was infuriating, but our anger soon dissipated.
However, his abuse of Frank was more serious and an increasing strain.
We told Frank that we would support him if he stood up to the little tyrant, that he would feel better if he did, citing our own experiences, mine in particular.
I now felt far more confident and comfortable knowing that I could refuse to go along with the guards' antics if they really upset me.
I reminded him of how we'd got rid of Abed without any unpleasant repercussions, but he couldn't accept it.
Things came to a head a few weeks before Christmas, when Mazzin decided it would be fun to frogmarch us to and from the bathroom.
Brian, furious, would huff and puff as Mazzin unceremoniously threw him back down on his bed.
Like Abed before him, I reckoned Mazzin was hoping for a violent response in order to have an excuse to beat us up.
So, when he treated me like this, I laughed aloud.
It provoked him to impotent fury, but there was nothing he could do.
I wasn't resisting, just showing a lack of respect for his ‘hard man’ image.
Doubtless he was trying to convince himself as much as us.
Brian and I put all Mazzin's power games down to repressed homosexuality and his next trick seemed to confirm that.
On shower day he made Frank strip off all his clothes before going to the bathroom.
When he told me to strip I refused, saying that I would change my clothes only if he left the room.
He wasn't happy, but could only agree when I said I was sure that he wouldn't want to look at a naked man.
We had no right to involve Frank in any battle of wills between Mazzin and his colleagues, so we had to avoid a confrontation.
We  simply had to tell Mazzin that his treatment of us and particularly of Frank was unacceptable to us and that we wanted to speak to his chef .
As my French was better than Brian's, we agreed that I would do the talking and that I'd choose a moment when Mazzin was in one of his camarade moods so that neither of us would be starting from a point of anger.
I spent a couple of days rehearsing my speech in my head, and checking various ideas with Brian.
This done there was no point in delaying the moment.
‘Mazzin, mon camarade, je veux parler avec vous.’
‘oui, monsieur John, qu'est ce que tu veux?’
I told him that if he didn't cut out the vicious behaviour, Brian and I were going to cut out the co-operation, we'd stop eating.
He would then have to tell his chef that two healthy, innocent and well-balanced hostages were killing themselves because of his idiocy.
Did he think his chef was going to be pleased with his achievement?
I hope this came across in calm, polite and unthreatening language.
Mazzin didn't lose his temper, although I could feel he was itching to have a go at me, but, as before, he knew he had no justification for doing so.
He tried to argue that Abu Tariq had to be forced to wash and exercise.
I said that wasn't the point, that Frank had lost his mind a little because Mazzin and the others in the past had treated him so badly.
I pointed out that Abu Tariq was an older man who deserved respect and that his desire for a quiet life didn't give Mazzin the right to abuse him.
Back and forth we went until Mazzin stormed out, clearly upset, but still under control.
We heard him talking, but heard no response, so we guessed that he was on the phone to one of the chefs rather than just moaning to George.
After a while he returned, came over to me and, though I half expected a smack, said, ‘Maintenant, il y a  un nouvel relation  entre nous.
Maintenant nous  serrons  camarades .’
We'd done it — but now we'd have to be friendly with the little swine!
A few days later Mahmoud showed up.
We hadn't seen him since March, nine months previously.
We asked him for news about our situation but as usual there was nothing he could, or would, tell us.
We asked him for general news.
He told us there had been a revolution in Eastern Europe and that the Soviet Union was finished, but he couldn't remember any more details.
Then he changed tack and asked us if we had any problems with his friends.
I told him that we had but that we'd talked about it with  them and now things seemed all right.
He wanted to make sure he knew who'd been the problem and wouldn't let me off the hook.
Eventually I told him it had been Mazzin, who was duly summoned.
After I'd explained the problems, Mazzin tried to wriggle out of it by going on about blindfolds.
Patiently, I went through the same arguments that I'd used with Mazzin himself, emphasizing that we didn't want any trouble but wouldn't tolerate abuse, and that we felt Islamic Jihad didn't want to cause us unnecessary distress.
‘Why you say Jihad Islami?’
‘Well, Mahmoud, isn't that who you are?’
‘No.’
‘But we've been with Terry and Tom who are held by Jihad Islami, yes?’
‘Yes.’
‘So then we're held by Islami Jihad, yes?’
‘No.’
‘But you were there and your friends, you're the same people, so you must be the same group now.’
‘No, why you think that?’
Baffling.
There was no point in quibbling over semantics so we went back to Mazzin.
Mahmoud assured us that there would be no more problems and said if we were upset we shouldn't get angry but must talk to a chef .
He went over to Frank who just said, ‘I'm OK, Mahmoud, we all just want to go home.’
‘But do you have problems with my friend?’
‘Oh, it's not important, Mahmoud, we just want to go home.’
Frank's first words as the boys left were, ‘There's no point in talking to these guys, they do what they like.’
Brian and I swallowed our anger.
‘Well, anyway, sounds pretty strange about Eastern Europe.’
‘You can't always believe what they say,’ said Frank, ‘nothing's happened there, believe me.’
Mahmoud came in again later on and when we asked for books he said that we could have encyclopedias.
He said there were about fifteen volumes.
We guessed that this was the same set we'd seen long ago on the journey from the Scullery when Abed had wanted to stop us reading them.
The Yanks had in fact had them for some months in the Scullery apartment.
At first the books came one at a time.
They were very welcome but it was frustrating not being able to refer from one to  another.
Eventually we had the lot, half an edition of the Encyclopedia Americana .
They were fascinating and it was wonderful to have them, even if most of the sections were forty or more years old.
We spent hours mulling over maps and descriptions of countries.
Although Peru in 1990 probably bore little resemblance to the place described circa 1948 in our tomes, we were immediately obsessed with an area sloping down to the Amazon Basin to the east of the Andes.
We decided we'd set up a farm there rearing llama and vicuna and corner the cloth market, assuming there was one.
As we read more and more of the encyclopedias Brian became convinced that the best animal for the terrain would be the yak.
He was confident that a letter to the government in Peking would secure us a gift from the People's Republic of a brace of breeding yaks.
We fell out slightly when he decided that Patagonia, rather than the eastern slopes of the Andes, was better suited to his purposes.
Closer to home, Brian decided that he would reforest Ireland.
Here he found Frank a great help as he had a fair knowledge of native North American trees and shrubs which, when checked with the big books, sounded as though they'd do well in the peaty soil of Eire.
My main interest was in travel.
At first, I wanted to take train journeys across the continents.
Then I discovered a section on sailing vessels and decided that travelling the world by schooner was going to be my main occupation post-release.
We learned that there were still, or had been in the late 1950s, a fair number of working schooners in Nova Scotia.
Frank confirmed that as a boy visiting relatives in the region there had been many of the old ships still about, so Brian and I decided we'd go there, then sail down the US coast to the Caribbean, through the Panama Canal and head west to the Revillagigedo Islands which Brian had decided were his.
At the same time, we were lucky to get a couple of novels featuring sailing scenes.
As neither of us knew anything about it we tried to glean as much information on the technical side of sailing as possible and build it in to our globe-trotting plans.
Some time in the spring we watched the Oscars ceremony on the television.
We were feeling rather disgruntled at how many good films we'd obviously missed when a man came on to the stage to read the nominations for one of the categories.
His opening remark was, ‘Who'd have thought six months ago that Nelson Mandela would now be free and that the Berlin Wall would have come down?’
I swivelled round, eyes wide, to face Brian.
‘Mandela's free!
Fuck!’
‘The Berlin Wall!
Mahmoud was right!
The world is going to be a different place when we get back to it, John.’
Without any more information to go on it was impossible to revise my image of the way the world worked or had done all my life.
It was only months later when I could listen to the radio and talk over the events with Terry and Tom, that it began to sink in.
Gradually, watching world powers responding differently as new crises emerged, it fell into place.
But in our news void that spring these dramatic changes could only be interpreted as an almost mythical message of hope.
Early in March we saw the film 55 Days at Peking .
As soon as the title came up I thought, An omen!
Fifty-five days to go!
I decided there would be a release at the end of April, on the 29th or 30th.
It was probably the idea of having to hang on for no more than two months that convinced me of the value of these silly prophesies, but I was a true believer.
The days went by, unchanging.
Frank spent most of his time with his blindfold down or under his blanket, Brian and I read and exchanged ideas, plans and insults.
The guards left us alone and we often watched television, although we were still denied the news.
At the end of April I had almost forgotten my prediction for a release when Bilal and his partner, for whom we had no other name than Frank's ‘Jerk’, excitedly started spring-cleaning both the apartment and us.
We could hear them banging about, shifting things and wondered nervously if we were in for another move.
But then they came in, rolled up the carpet, cleaned the floor, put plastic mats down, told us to have a shower and gave us clean clothes and clean sheets.
Jerk gave Frank a dressing-down for not having a proper shower.
Soon after they'd finished one of them returned, unchained Frank and took him out.
We heard them settling down in the next room which until then had been empty.
It was 29 April.
I reminded Brian that I'd predicted this and that Frank must be going home.
He reminded me that I'd predicted many, many things over the years and that so far nothing had come to anything apart from purely coincidental moves.
‘Unbelieving swine!’
Still, he was right.
We listened hard every time the door to Frank's new room opened.
We were almost sure that he'd gone.
But where?
That night we watched TV as usual, resisting the temptation to sneak a look at the news.
In any case, the guards kept popping in around  news time.
We asked them, ‘Has Abu Tariq gone home?’
‘No,’ came the only reply.
Later in the evening the film we were watching faded out and was replaced by scenes around a podium loaded with microphones.
The CNN caption read, ‘US Embassy, Damascus.’
It could only mean one thing.
Frank was out.
The mad old bastard had done it.
If only we could know for sure, but at that moment a guard came in and took away the television.
We were troubled at how Frank would cope back in the big world.
He would have to break out of his semi-catatonic state to be able to deal properly with his family responsibilities, let alone all the media attention.
We hoped that the US medical team whom we supposed would attend him at Wiesbaden, as we'd heard had happened with other American hostages, would recognize that he needed a long rest.
The year before in the Pit, we'd talked often about what would happen when we went home.
We realized that each of us would be a big story for a few days, but that would pass and then we'd be able to get on with the real work of getting to know our families and friends again.
Tom had been keen to take advantage of the medical facilities at Wiesbaden, if only to get his teeth sorted out.
Terry didn't want any truck with service medicos, he just wanted to get back to the States and see Madeleine, Sulome and Gabrielle.
Brian, although fascinated by psychology, always wanted to sort himself out, not put his mind into another's hands.
I'd been thinking for a long time that I'd welcome the chance to talk with a psychiatrist, although not about captivity — I felt I'd worked my way through that enough — but about my past and how I came to be the person I was when I was taken hostage.
It was hard not to think of life as it had been back in 1986, or in Terry's and Tom's case, 1985.
I still imagined returning to work at WTN in London, picking up with Jill as though all these years had not altered anything.
Of course, we all realized that everything might have changed.
Certainly Terry, Brian and I knew that close friends had been campaigning for us and that that experience could have changed them, just as we'd been changed by what we had gone through.
But it was hard for us to see exactly how we had altered, beyond having some rough edges polished off and getting a better focus on some of our ideas and ambitions.
So I tended to stick with how things had been; it was more comforting to think I'd be able to pick up where I'd left off.
Frank's departure was a relief in many ways: for the first time in two years someone from our group had gone home; Frank would now be free from fear while Brian and I could carry on together.
His vulnerability had put a terrible strain on us, our determination to survive had been badly dented by the constant spectre of emotional collapse.
We carried on using the encyclopedia to make plans, taking ourselves out of that room to beautiful, exotic places, places of joyful freedom, sailing oceans, crossing mountain ranges and doing something worthwhile.
All we had to do was get out of that place and our dreams would immediately be attainable.
A rather more down-to-earth plan was Brian's notion of rejuvenating Ireland (apart from reforesting it) by developing unorthodox uses for peat.
Every day he'd come up with some new scheme.
He started with making building bricks from it.
Then it was furniture and so on.
I'd listen, almost politely, to the latest idea, then do my best to knock it down.
Brian's enthusiasm was such that I couldn't keep up my negative stance and was soon busy designing peat-moulding machinery, marketing plans and discussing the number of people who could be employed in such schemes.
And, thus occupied, time passed.
Occasionally, we heard rocket fire and guessed, from the heavy propaganda on both the Christian television stations, that it was between Geagea's Lebanese Forces militia and the army of General Aoun, who was still apparently claiming to be the true President of Lebanon.
As far as we could tell the Moslem factions were out of the fray for the time being.
The Geagea-controlled television station, LBC, went so far as to show every film ever made about Hitler.
Commercial breaks were replaced with old clips of Aoun ranting from a balcony to adoring crowds, just like a Nuremberg rally.
One of the films was a three-part drama about Hitler's last months in the Berlin bunker.
Starring Anthony Hopkins, it was based on a book by an American journalist who'd been one of the first people into the bunker after the allied victory.
The film started with this character telling the audience how long the Führer had spent in the bunker that last time, just over one hundred days.
When the film was repeated a couple of weeks later I decided that this was another omen.
After the bizarre accuracy of 55 Days at Peking I was confident that I could predict when Brian and I would go home.
It was by then mid-May, so I calculated that the great day would be 23 August.
It seemed a shame that it couldn't be  in time for my mother's birthday on the 8th but at least it was a good target for which to aim.
We'd both been inspired by Frank's release to step up our fitness campaign.
Now I had an added impetus, although Brian's response to my prediction was, as always, ‘McCarthy, will you stop putting my head away!’
While waiting for the great day we watched nearly every match of the 1990 World Cup, particularly the progress of England and Ireland in the early rounds.
It was only now that I realized that Lineker wasn't Arabic for goal!
It was frustrating that any English commentary was usually blocked out by Arabic, although one of the commentator's forlorn attempts to pronounce Paul Gascoigne's name was a rich source of amusement.
He started out doubtfully with Gass-coh-een, moved on to Gass-kern and after half-time, when he'd obviously consulted with his equally confused colleagues, went for Jax-oh-in.
By the final whistle he'd done the sensible thing and switched to Gazza.
Whenever Italy played I couldn't help noticing that Brian looked remarkably like Salvatore Schilacci, but he didn't seem too pleased when I pointed this out.
Salvatore may not be the world's most handsome man, but it was the glint of ferocious determination in his eyes and the sweet smile he reserved for his team-mates in quieter moments that reminded me of Bri.
Football fever got to us and Brian fashioned a small ball out of an old pair of underpants and a defunct blindfold.
We tried football in the exercise periods, but soon developed a more entertaining and satisfying game, a variation on volleyball.
We stood at opposite sides of the room and scored points when one of us failed to keep the ball moving after the permitted single bounce.
The most heroic plays were made as we leapt to stop the ball hitting the wooden door to the hall or banging into the metal shutters over the window, which would have brought the guards running in.
Shortly after Frank's release our belief that there was another hostage in the apartment was borne out when he was moved into the room next door where Frank had spent his last day.
We never heard a voice, but one evening there was a tapping on the wall.
We tried to keep track of the number of taps and translate them into words.
The tapping was repeated and we ‘heard’ the words clearly.
‘My name is Terry Waite, I have been alone for over three years.’
But we couldn't respond as our chains were too short to stretch across the room.
The next day, while we were exercising, Brian  kept watch under the door for the guards' feet as I tapped out, ‘We are Brian Keenan and John McCarthy.
A Yank went home in April.’
Terry didn't respond, but we couldn't say any more.
It wasn't a safe time to communicate as the guards often popped in to see that we were still exercising.
At last we knew what had happened to the Archbishop's special envoy.
As we'd guessed the Jihad had nicked the negotiator.
As part of the improved conditions Bilal's partner started taking us through the kitchen once or twice a week to sit with them and get a bit of sun.
Initially he would remove the blindfold and tape a little tissue over our eyes.
There would be coffee and extra cigarettes.
To start with these outings on the ‘sun-deck’ were a welcome change, but they became an increasing strain as we really had nothing to say to the guards.
What we did say didn't encourage them to chat as we'd always turn the conversation round to why they were keeping us like this.
They couldn't answer and became huffy that we weren't satisfied with the good treatment we were receiving.
However, they didn't stop our excursions, they just got quieter.
They both jumped one day when the phone rang and I leaned towards it, saying, ‘That'll be for me.’
The feel of the sun on our skins again was wonderful and even with our eyes covered the brightness of the sunlight was dazzling after so long in the gloom.
It was only natural that we should interpret all this as preparation for release, that we would go home looking fit and not too pale.
Our exercise periods were indeed much longer now and I padded around the room as much as I could, but Brian would often get bored and go back to a book.
Once, as he sat cross-legged on his mattress reading, deep in thought, I grabbed both his ankles, and yanked his legs, saying, ‘Excuse me, but I have to take this wheelbarrow out to the garden.’
His eyes flashed Schilacci-like and he said crossly, ‘You are one agitating bastard, McCarthy!’
I backed off.
We lost our football when Bilal searched the room.
We'd hoped that such irritations were behind us, but then they started taking toothpaste and soap away from us after we'd been to the bathroom.
We guessed, wrongly, that Frank had been talking back home.
Then Jerk came in one night and tightened our chains.
Mine was so tight that it cut into the skin.
I was furious, but he wouldn't loosen it.
I fumed and later told Brian, ‘That's it.
If, after all this time, we're back to this sort of malarkey, they can fuck it, I'm going on hunger strike.’
Brian urged me to calm  down.
‘Let's see what happens tomorrow, they're probably just in a fit about something, take it easy.’
I did and the next morning the chain was loosened again.
We had changed a lot over the four years we'd been together.
At the outset of our friendship it was always Brian who exploded and damn the consequences.
Now I was ready to take on the guards and he was calming me, rather than me him.
We'd found a balance.
We had grown together not just in terms of affection but in our attitudes, in our views on personal dignity and in a mutual trust that helped us deal with the curious life we now shared.
In June or July we had a visit from ‘Trust Me’ Ali.
Or at least I did.
I was taken out to another room, sat down and then heard that thick voice, full of soft, sickly fruit.
I was terrified.
My mind raced, what does he want?
A video?
Let me be strong.
But I didn't feel strong, I was confused and he was being pleasant and solicitous.
‘Would you like coffee?
A cigarette?
If you help me I can maybe help you.
I want you to write a letter to your government.’
I tried to muster the arguments I'd arrived at with Brian nearly four years earlier, in the autumn of 1986, after having heard Jacobsen making a tape.
Only if they told us why we were being held, would we co-operate.
‘Here are pen and paper.’
I took them.
‘Write this.’
I wrote:
My name is John McCarthy.
I am OK, but I am living in very difficult and bad conditions.
You must understand the following.
My release with the others is impossible if the prisoners in Kuwait and in some European countries are not released.
You must keep this letter secret otherwise my life will be in danger.
So without any questions from me, we'd finally been told why we were there.
We'd known more or less since I'd heard the words Jihad Islami in the Land of Grey and Pink, but they'd never actually said it.
We'd always felt that the demands for the prisoners in Kuwait only affected the French and the Americans.
The guards had always said that they weren't bothered about anyone in British gaols, so we'd hoped it would be easier for us to get out than for the others.
But this didn't sound good.
It looked as if we'd travelled a very long way to get nowhere.
I faithfully promised not to breathe a word to ‘my friend’, went back to the room and sought Brian's opinion.
It was a nightmare, a warped nightmare.
Were they really going to use us, and for this?
After so long thinking that the reason for our kidnap had been bad feeling between Britain and Iran, and knowing that, before the Rushdie affair at least, fences had been mended, it was hard to believe now that it had all been a mirage.
Our high hopes were shattered.
It was a more fundamental problem after all.
I couldn't really assess how I'd handled Ali.
Had I stuck to my principles or had I simply followed orders?
I told myself that not only had I not had a choice, but that in fact I hadn't really needed to make one.
The letter was so clear.
Whether I'd stuck to my guns or not, it had been a harrowing experience and I felt abused.
As 23 August approached, I couldn't resist recalling my prediction for a release.
Brian would have none of it.
He didn't need me building up yet more false hopes which did nothing except try his patience.
Yet I was positive.
In the morning of the 23rd we went for our sessions on the ‘sun-deck’.
When we were both back I said, ‘Today's the day, boy, believe me.’
‘Roll it up and put it away, Snake,’ came the response.
‘Well, fuck you then.
I'll go on my own.’
It was really no surprise that Brian was taken out of the room that afternoon.
Usually I would have been very worried.
‘Where's he gone?
What's happening, are we moving again?
Don't separate us.
But this time I was calm.
I knew what was going on.
Then I thought, ‘The scheming little Irish bastard, he's bloody gone and he didn't even believe me.
There really is no justice!’