

17
The house stood in a leafy street in the southern suburbs.
Henry North opened the door to Dawson's knock.
‘Yes?’ he asked, then peered more closely, seeming to recognize Dawson.
Behind him, one of the girls floated past, completely naked, on her way to the bathroom.
She paused and looked towards the door with eyes fogged by sleep.
One hand dropped to her groin but she didn't move; she seemed to be trying to puzzle out who the caller might be.
Dawson looked at her while North looked at Dawson.
Finally she turned and disappeared down a short flight of stairs.
North took Dawson to the kitchen and started some coffee.
‘Carol's not here,’ he said.
‘Sarah's around somewhere.’
as if he'd temporarily mislaid her.
‘I'm not sure we can tell you anything new.’
‘Someone called Josh,’ Dawson asked.
‘A guy Susan was seeing.
North yawned.
Dawson felt as if he were the advance party for a dawn raid.
It was eleven-fifteen in the morning.
North repeated the name.
‘Josh…’
Sarah appeared in the doorway.
She was wearing warm-up pants and a Lynx T-shirt.
She said, ‘Josh Reid?’
‘Yes,’ Dawson replied.
How many men called Josh could there be?
Sarah collected some mugs from a cupboard and set them down close to the coffee maker; she looked impatiently at the level of coffee in the jug, as if the  slowness of the process was a familiar annoyance.
‘I wouldn't have said she was seeing him.’
‘What then?’
‘Well, they lived together, on and off.’
‘I thought she lived here.’
‘On and off.’
North was slicing bread to make toast, the mechanics of their everyday life going on round Dawson as he stood there.
He felt strangely inactive, as if he ought to offer to help in some way; pour glasses of juice perhaps.
Their casual acceptance of his presence made him edgy.
They had no work to go to, no schedules to keep.
Suddenly, Dawson caught a whiff of a life he would never lead:complex, relaxed, privileged.
It occurred to him that he wasn't equipped for such a life, and the edginess sharpened to resentment.
‘What does he do — Reid?’
North dropped the bread into the toaster, noticed that it didn't operate when he pressed the lever and looked round vaguely for the reason.
He snapped a switch on the wall socket.
Sarah began to fill the mugs.
Droplets of coffee sizzled on the hotplate.
Dawson began to wonder whether he was really there.
‘How do you mean?’
North asked.
‘What does he do for a living?’
Sarah smiled.
‘He's an actor.’
‘Would I know him?’
Dawson asked.
‘Possibly.’
She handed Dawson a coffee mug.
‘He's currently appearing in hamburger medium-rare, salad, no fries and a glass of house red.
Longest running show in town.’
‘And lives…?’
Dawson asked.
They gave him an address.
He drank his coffee while they chatted to one another.
Culley went with Dawson to talk to Josh Reid.
A small, battered house in a small battered terrace; the buildings appeared to be leaning on one another for support.
An array of dark, dusty windows, like mirrors that had lost their silvering.
Blistered and chipped paintwork.
Reid opened the door to them before they could knock.
‘I saw you from the window.’
He spoke in a light whisper as they stood in the hallway.
Through the living-room door, Culley could see a child asleep on a couch, an embroidered shawl covering all but one pale cheek and a cloud of blond hair.
Apart from the couch, there was a wooden armchair and a small drop-leaf table.
Nothing more.
The carpet was dark with wear.
‘Afternoon nap,’ Reid explained.
‘She's begun to be difficult about going to bed, so I let her sleep there.’
He looked around, as if uncertain about where to take them, then led the way into the bedroom.
A cheap, pine bed; an old-fashioned rail-sided cot alongside.
‘It's about Susan Court,’ Culley said.
‘I gather you knew her.’
‘Yes.’
Reid nodded.
‘That you were having an affair — had been for some time.’
‘Yes.’
Dawson added.
‘You lived together.
Is that right?’
‘Sort of,’ Reid said.
‘Sometimes.
Other times, not.’
They stood in a group in the middle of the tiny room, speaking in lowered tones, like conspirators.
‘Why?’
Culley asked.
Reid sighed.
He sat down on a small bedside chair, leaving Culley and Dawson no other option than to sit on the bed, which they did, side by side, like travellers on a train.
Culley watched Reid.
The man seemed sunk in his thoughts.
He had a beard that had got slightly out of hand, growing a little longer on one side: he twisted  the hairs into tiny Bluebeard curls; there was something in his face — a certain quality — that seemed ingrained, weathered in.
Looking more closely, Culley saw that it was kindness.
‘Well…’
Reid spoke without lifting his head.
‘We met about four years ago.
Four and a half.
We were together for — oh — three years?
Yes, about that.
I mean, together most of the time.
Susan kept a room in a house owned by a guy called Henry North.
She was worried about giving over her independence; it was a token you know?
But mostly she was with me.’
‘Here?’
Dawson asked.
‘Here?’
Reid spoke as if the notion offered a small puzzle.
‘No, not here.
We had a flat, quite a big one, more central.
Susan got an allowance from her father.
She sold the place more than a year ago.
Almost two years.
’ It seemed that time scales were important to him.
Culley said, ‘She never lived here?’
‘She used to come and see me.
She might stay over.
I wouldn't call it living here.’
Reid's eyes suddenly engaged Culley's.
‘I don't understand this.
She's dead.
The sniper —’
‘It's become necessary to go back.
To look at everything again.
We didn't hear about you first time round.’
‘To look at what?’
‘We don't know.
Anything.’
‘She left you,’ Dawson said.
Reid smiled at the abruptness, and Culley saw it again — kindness, gentleness; and tiredness.
‘It depends what you mean.’
‘For someone else,’ Dawson persisted.
You don't have to play that role, Culley thought.
We're not Mutt and Jeff.
The smile lingered on Reid's face.
‘Susan and I were still together in a sort of way.
We saw each other less often.
In one sense.
it was a bit like being married’
‘In what sense?’
Dawson again.
‘She was having an affair.
Had been for about eighteen months.’
He said this directly to Dawson, his tone level and low, as if countering a challenge.
Dawson responded with, ‘You didn't mind?’
‘Well, I moved out, came to live here in a rented house I can't really afford, Susan sold the flat, which seemed a bit more than a symbolic act, I continued to love her and miss her, I tried to understand what she felt and hoped it was something she'd eventually work through so that we could be together again.
What does that tell you?’
‘Did you know Susan's father?’
Culley asked.
‘No.’
‘Did Susan talk about him at all?
About his business activities and so forth?’
Reid looked interested.
‘Why do you ask?’
Culley didn't respond.
Eventually, Reid said, ‘All Susan ever said about her father was that he was a grade-A shit who'd ignored her for most of her life and thought money was a good substitute for love.
I've never met him.’
‘I have,’ said Culley.
He didn't qualify the remark.
Reid laughed softly.
He said, ‘Is that it?
I don't enjoy talking about Susan much.
I'm still in love with her.’
The baldness of the remark made Culley start.
He said,
‘Yes, I think that's it.’
When they returned to the hallway, the child was standing by the living-room door, looking as if she might be about to cry.
Reid picked her up and she put her face into the hollow of his shoulder, both arms fast about his neck.
Culley opened the front door, then paused to look back at Reid, who turned, seeming to be taking the child protectively out of Culley's vision rather than offering a goodbye.
‘You'll want to know who.’
Culley nodded.
‘Yes.’
‘Yorke.
Alex Yorke.
He's in the book: Dawes Road.’
‘And what's her name?’
The child squirmed closer to Reid.
It seemed to Culley that she was retreating from the sound of his voice.
Reid stroked her hair reflexively.
‘Daisy,? he said.
Dawson nosed the car out into the traffic and came to a halt almost immediately.
‘It would be a treat to get into third gear in this fucking town,’ he said.
Then, ‘I don't understand.
Did he mind?
About the other boy-friend — Yorke?’
‘What do you think?’
‘But he didn't do anything.’
‘Didn't do what?’
‘I don't know.
Kick the bastard's head off.’
‘That's what you'd do, is it?’
‘Well, something like it, I expect.’
Culley wondered whether he was hearing the tail-end of some old resentment.
Almost to his own surprise, he heard himself ask, ‘And would that have helped?’
‘Wouldn't have helped him much,’ Dawson said, ‘but it might have put me in a more relaxed frame of mind.’
Something else in Reid's face, beside the sadness and the kindness.
Culley thought back, wanting to identify it.
He heard Reid's voice:I tried to understand what she felt…
He saw the tatty rooms, the junk-shop furniture…hoped it was something she'd eventually work through, so that we could be together again .
Strength was the other thing Culley had seen.
The sort of strength that allows loss and confusion and remains constant.
‘And the kid,’ Dawson said.
‘That would be his and Susan Court's, would it?’
‘This traffic's not going to move,’ Culley observed.
‘You'd better break a few rules.’
Dawson flicked on  the headlights and swung out into the path of the oncoming cars.
After a moment, Culley said, ‘Yes.
Of course.’
Helen watched Culley's face while he told her about Josh Reid and the child.
She was suppressing a mild anger.
‘No-one knew?
That Susan Court had a daughter?’
‘No, it's not that.
I'm sure her father doesn't know James Court; but others must have.
The people at the house, for example.
Just — no-one thought to mention it.
as if the child wasn't very important.’
‘Except to Reid, whatsisname …’
‘Josh.
Josh Reid.’
‘None of which is relevant.’
‘That's right.
We'll see the other guy, Yorke.
He looks more promising.
Reid was useful for that; nothing more.’
‘But you liked him.’
‘Yes, I did.
She was seeing Yorke, you know, for a long time, sleeping with the guy, and Reid didn't…
I suppose he simply didn't feel he could prevent it.
Or should.
Or had any right to.
He looked after the child, Daisy, they live in this crappy house with matchwood furniture, he works at some hamburger place, and waited for Susan Court to come home.
Not weak,’ Culley half-raised a hand as if Helen might have been about to challenge his judgement in this.
‘Not weak, but not bluffing either — not pretending he'd never really wanted her, hated her, was better on his own.
He looked so good with the kid.
I mean, he looked as if he would cope without having to pretend that everything was fine.’
Helen's anger stirred.
She said, ‘I'm not sure what lesson I'm supposed to be finding in all this.
Is it Robin Culley, newly sensitive, newly observant of human foible?
Is it some sort of reference to your own noble persistence  in trying to restore our marriage?
Or are you saying I should have given you a child?’
Culley was taken aback.
‘Nothing like that.
Something I hadn't seen before.
Or if I'd seen it, I hadn't taken it in.
He was —’
‘Because my most enduring memory of you is late nights, or very early mornings, smelling of bars and gutters, still high from whatever dangerous moment you'd recently enjoyed.
You liked it.
I sort of assume you still do.
Dark places, dark motives.
The nursery is a new hang-out for you.
I'm having trouble picturing it.’
Culley felt the anger, but had little idea what he might do about it.
He said, ‘I'm sorry,’ knowing that it was a foolish response.
Helen half-smiled.
She said, ‘Promising in what way — Yorke?’
‘It seems likely that he was the radical charge in Susan Court's battery.
Workers’ Revolutionary Party, helped run a hand-out sheet called Arise ; that sort of thing.’
Culley wondered why she'd decided to let him off the hook.
If that's what had just happened.
‘He fits your theory better than anyone we've come up with so far.’
‘My theory?’
Helen said.
‘Is that what it is?’
‘Mine too.’
‘For that, thanks.’
She went to the fridge and rummaged round.
‘Cheese, eggs, pasta.
It's the rhythm of our lives at the moment, isn't it?
Deciding whether to eat in or out.’
‘I don't mind.’
‘Neither do I. What would you like to do?’
‘What I would like to do,’ he told her, ‘is lick you until you scream.’
Helen closed the fridge door.
She said, ‘It's not that easy.
‘Yes it is,’ Culley told her.
‘I've done it before.
It's a cinch.’
18
Two men had met in a London flat: customer and supplier.
Later, they had spoken again, this time on the telephone.
The supplier had a number of names and no-one who dealt with him knew, or cared to know, which was the real one.
The customer called him Francis: a first name, a last name, a man's, a woman's; it allowed the kind of vagueness the supplier liked.
The customer's name was Bernard Warner.
Francis knew that; in fact, he knew a good deal about Warner, though he avoided using the name, as if anxious to extend his own reticence to others.
Warner asked, ‘Will he do it?
What do you think?’
‘I don't know,’ Francis said.
‘I'll ask.’
‘Isn't that risky?’
‘Yes.’
‘So should we —?’
‘You want Ross stopped; it's the only possibility.’
‘All right.’
‘We haven't talked about a fee.’
There was a silence on the line that Francis waited out with complete confidence.
Finally: ‘You don't think of this as your problem?’
‘If he gets caught — yes.
Until then, he can leave London a ghost town for all I care.’
‘He was your choice.’
‘You asked for a particular service.
I supplied it.
You paid me.
Things didn't quite go to plan — which has proved annoying for you, and you're now asking for a second service; for which you'll pay me.’
‘How much?’
‘The same fee as for Ross.’
‘That's outrageous.’
It was Francis's turn to be silent.
He gazed at the view from his living-room window: a quiet square, plane trees, early-morning shoppers.
‘When will you go?’
Warner's voice was business-like, now, trying to mask the defeat.
‘We're agreed on the money?’
‘Yes.’
‘Today.’
You could smell it before you pulled into the yard — a hot, sour stench, heavy on the air.
It stung the roof of Francis's mouth as he got out of the car.
Fifty yards away, behind the house, was a series of corrugated Nissen huts; one of the doors was open.
As Francis approached, there came a noise to accompany the smell — solid bodies thumping against the tin walls, then a cacophony of squeals and snorts.
Inside the hut, a lumbering saddleback boar was trotting along the aisle between two rows of pens, nosing the bars and grunting rhythmically.
A man dressed in dungarees and a filthy khaki shirt was walking behind the beast, herding it towards the back wall.
Francis stood just inside the door.
The man sensed his presence at once and turned sharply.
Francis smiled.
The man said, ‘What in hell do you want?’
Then, without waiting for an answer, turned his attention back to the boar, which had begun to slam its shoulder into one of the pens.
He kicked it away from the bars, then continued to boot it as it shambled deeper into the hut.
He got alongside the creature to open a gate on the backmost pen, cracked a toecap into the fat flank, and heaved the gate closed as the boar ran in.
The sow was waiting there like an auction-block bride.
‘It's been a while,’ Francis said.
The man leaned on the topmost rung of the pig-pen, making it clear that Francis would have to approach.
Further in, the smell was thicker, rank with ammonia; the air seemed less breathable.
‘What do you want?’
‘Talk about old times?’
‘Go on, then.’
‘And about the news.
You watch the news, do you?’
Francis saw a light flicker in the man's eyes, like recognition, like pleasure.
‘It's Eric.’
Francis nodded.
‘Yes.
It is.’
‘Why?’
‘No.
That's not your affair.’
The sow rattled the bars as the boar nosed her round the pen.
From time to time, it made cumbersome leaps, trying to mount.
The man said, ‘Tell me about it.’
‘You know him.
You've worked with him.
We don't know what's gone wrong, but he's got to be stopped.’
‘I haven't seen Eric in years.’
‘You were close.’
Francis wondered if he'd pushed too hard.
The man's face stiffened; something closed down behind his eyes.
After a moment, he said, ‘It was never my job.’
‘We know that,’ Francis nodded.
‘A bit of freelance, though, a couple of times before Eric went pro; a couple of times after.’
He put a hand to his cheek and dabbed off a tear; the ammoniac fetor was crackling in his sinuses.
‘You say he's got to be stopped.’
There was a question in the remark that Francis chose to avoid.
He said, ‘Someone who can get to him.
So it must be someone who knows him well.’
Again, that shutter in the eyes.
Francis wondered whether he ought to mention money, then decided it was too soon.
No, play on the other thing — the thing they weren't quite mentioning.
‘You know there's no-one else who can do this.’
The boar gave a double hop, then lurched on to the sow's back.
She screeched while his rump heaved, her snout rammed between the bars of the pen.
Martin Jackson watched the mating for a short while, the boar's bulk shoving, the sow bearing him, as if he were seeing that savage, ludicrous event for the first time.
Then he looked up, raising his voice so as to be heard over the sow's din.
He said, ‘What's the money?’
Eric.
A low, scudding cloudbank was coming off the western horizon, purple with unshed rain.
Jackson took his Land Rover off the track and juddered over fifteen yards of moorland grass.
He cut the engine and got out, slamming the door but not bothering to lock it, then began to walk swiftly downhill.
The shallow valley was creased by a small stream that reflected the sky's dimming light.
Eric .
Not far from here .
It was …
After the chill of excitement, the ungovernable strangeness of the moment, they had waited for retribution, certain it would come.
No point in lying; no point in running.
But it hadn't come.
Halliday was dead.
The squaddies had gathered round the body and peered at it as rain sluiced the shattered face.
Ross and Jackson had walked off the moor and returned to base.
And nothing had happened.
They had completed their training, done their time, including a tour in Germany, left the Army and nothing had happened.
It was a bond between them, closer than the killing itself.
Eric .
Not far from here .
It was so strange .
And I knew …
Jackson crossed a stone clapperbridge and began to climb.
The cloudbank spread, seeming to soak up the light.
When he thought back to those years in  the Army, and the year immediately afterwards, it seemed to Jackson that he and Ross had scarcely been out of one another 's company.
Then everything had changed.
Now Jackson lived a solitary existence.
People in the village knew him by his dourness, by the distance he put between himself and them.
His days were barely distinguishable one from another.
He never visited the local pub; he shopped at an anonymous supermarket in the county town; he kept his house startlingly neat, but never invited anyone there.
Twice a week, he shot on the range of a gun club in a nearby town — turned up, shot, left.
He farmed his pigs with the help of a man from the village.
They said to each other only what was necessary.
Eric.
Not far from here.
It was so strange.
And I knew we were bound, whatever happened, bound to one another.
I thought…
He came to the rise that led to Bethel Tor.
The backdrop of sky was a dull gleam, like pewter, and the great rock reared against it, a black slab.
I thought you must feel the same.
Surely you knew.
How could you not have known?
If I touched your arm, if we smiled at one another, if we talked about that day and the rainstorm and the shock of the butts recoiling against our cheeks and Halliday dead on the moor.
Not that I wanted…
He reached the base of the tor and stood alongside it his smaller silhouette looking, from a distance, like an outcrop of the rock.
A wind plucked his hair and stung a tear from his eye.
Not that I wanted you to be my lover.
Not really Not necessarily.
We didn't even have to say…
But then I did.
I told you.
I said: I love you.
And then you went away .
Jackson lowered himself to the ground.
He looked out across the darkening moor, its becks and mires, its hills d bony ridges of granite.
He saw nothing.
I love you.
And then you went away .
19
Culley had never heard Susan Court speak, but it was clear from what was being said that the voice was hers.
‘…some fax messages.
And then I got lucky.
He'd recorded a telephone conversation — a call he'd taken at home.
I found the tape.
Obviously he'd been doing some kind of a finance deal; setting up a takeover; and he'd lifted some off the top for himself.’
‘How?’
Another voice.
Alex Yorke, of course.
‘Bought the right shares before the takeover bid was made.’
‘Insider dealing.’
‘Right.
But better still — he'd used the profits to fund an arms deal.
He doesn't usually do that; at least, it's not known that he does.
All his business is strictly table-top stuff.
Of course, the contacts he's made the circles he moves in — would make it possible to fund his own operation.’
‘And this one was under the table.’
‘Oh, yes.
The guy he spoke to was American.
They must have felt pretty safe, confident, you know, because they didn't bother to use much evasive language.
It was a very straightforward deal.
The American had used Father to set the financial wheels turning for the takeover; employed him, you might say; and he'd suggested the inside trade and how it might be made.’
‘How?’
‘Through a shell company somewhere.
They weren't specific about the route for the money.
Then he'd sweetened the pot —’
‘The American?’
‘Yes, by coming up with the idea for the arms deal and effectively trebling the amount Father would make in the process.
The thing is —’
‘Why was the deal clandestine?’
The two voices clashed, Susan's winning out.
It was clear that she was eager to get to the high-point of her story.
‘— that, I'm telling you, that the whole business had to be a secret.
Not just that the money came from insider dealing, but the weapons weren't coming from any official supplier or going to one of the usual customers.’
There was a short silence.
Culley imagined Susan's gleeful smile as she waited for Yorke to work it out.
‘An American.’
He'd made the connection.
‘Yes,’ said Susan.
‘Nor Aid.
The arms were going to the IRA.’
A longer silence.
Yorke would have been savouring the information; Susan looking at him, perhaps, with the smile still on her face.
‘What will you do — now that you know all this?’
It was Yorke asking the question.
Culley reeled the tape back a little and listened to the question again.
Puzzling — since it seemed that Yorke had been listening to information he'd specifically asked for.
Shouldn't it have been Susan asking Yorke how he intended to use the knowledge?
Then it became clear.
Susan hadn't known how she was being used.
She hated what her father did and made it her business to spy on him anyway; a daughter's revenge on a father who disappointed her.
Yorke was playing the role of the wide-eyed confidante.
It was pillow-talk.
‘I don't know.’
Susan gave a little laugh.
‘I ought to shop the bastard.’
‘But you won't.’
‘I'm not sure what to —’
‘I mean, you haven't in the past.’
‘I've never come across anything like this before.
A few shady deals, but —’
‘Does it make a difference?’
‘I suppose not.’
‘I mean, it depends how much you hate him.’
‘Hate him…’
A pause.
‘Yes.’
Then: ‘You won't say anything?
Won't tell anyone?’
‘No.’
‘Because, I mean, I'm telling you because we're —’
‘No.
Don't worry.’
A different kind of pause, while Yorke kissed her briefly, then more lengthily.
The kisses were detectable in a breathiness on the tape.
Culley listened to movements and small noises.
Susan's voice said, ‘No, there…
Just there…
Like that.’
Then she gasped.
Culley switched off the tape.
Then he crossed the room and switched off the light.
He sat in a rocking chair that faced the door.
Alex Yorke got back to his apartment a little more than an hour later.
He closed the door before reaching for the light switch.
The rocking chair creaked in the dark.
He said, ‘Who's there?’ and snapped the switch.
Culley smiled.
He said, ‘If it reassures you at all, I'm not Drugs Squad and I'm not Special Branch.
OK?’
Yorke stayed close to the door.
‘But you're not the fucking Easter Bunny, either.’
‘That's true, I'm not.’
‘Arise ’ is a registered newspaper; the publisher's name is under the masthead; you'll find me listed as assistant editor.
It's a democracy — at least, it was when I last  checked.
You don't have to like my politics, but you can't arrest me for them; not yet.’
Culley shook his head.
‘Not Special Branch.
I told you.’
‘OK.
What?’
‘Susan Court.’
‘Susan?’
Yorke looked puzzled.
‘Susan's dead.
She was one of —’
‘Well, I know that,’ Culley said.
‘How long had you two been lovers?’
Yorke moved away from the door and went into the kitchen.
He rooted round in the fridge, came up with a beer, and went back to Culley.
‘What's the problem?’ he asked.
Culley looked towards a sideboard where the cassette player stood.
Yorke followed his gaze.
He said, ‘You've got a warrant, I suppose?’
Culley's smile was almost a grimace.
‘When was the tape made?’
Yorke made a move and Culley added, ‘No.
Leave it where it is.’
‘About six months ago.’
‘Was it?’
Culley's near-smile came again.
‘I don't recall any press coverage of James Court's share dealings; I don't recall any banner headlines about arms for Sinn Fein for that matter.’
Yorke sipped his beer.
‘I'd've thought that Arise would have made something of a meal of all that — top financier in shares scandal; weapons mogul arms IRA; that sort of thing.’
Culley waited.
Yorke took another swallow of beer and glanced again towards the cassette player, but said nothing.
‘Well, listen,’ Culley's tone was low and unhurried, ‘one of several things can happen here.
You can tell me the things I need to know and I can go away.
Or I can charge you — withholding information, conspiracy, being an accomplice, possession of heroin, indecent exposure: anything that comes to mind, really.’
He paused.
‘Murder, perhaps; Susan was killed, after all.’
Yorke looked up swiftly.
Before he could speak, Culley continued, ‘On the other hand, I could take that beer can, ram it up your ass and kick it out through your teeth.
We call that resisting arrest.
’ He looked at Yorke appraisingly.
‘On the whole, I think I'd prefer the latter.’
‘Susan was killed by a maniac.
Nothing to do with the tapes.’
Tapes; plural.
‘How many are there?’
Culley asked.
‘Lots.
Nothing worth hearing,’ Yorke nodded towards the sideboard, ‘apart from that one.’
‘Tell me about it.’
‘In bed.
She liked to talk in bed.’
Yorke laughed through a cough.
‘Very convenient.
I knew when to put the tape on, I could start it while she was in the bathroom, she didn't wander off while it was recording, and the machine could be underneath and out of sight.’
‘Where are the others?’
‘Some I wiped.
There are half a dozen about the place — I could find them.
They wouldn't interest you.’
‘Then why did you keep them?’
As soon as he'd asked the question, Culley knew the answer.
Susan Court's voice came back to him:No there…just there…like that .
Yorke saw the recognition in Culley's eyes.
He said, ‘It was careless of me to leave that one in the recorder.
Still, I hadn't thought I was a big enough fish for this sort of attention.’
‘You're not,’ Culley assured him.
Then: ‘Have you used it?’
‘Yes and no.’
‘Meaning?’
‘Court knows that the tape exists.
He knows what's on it.
He doesn't know who's got it.’
‘Why?’
Culley asked.
‘You never had any intention of exposing Court — that would have happened at once if  you'd intended it.
The only cause you were interested in was your own.
So much for the radical conscience.
You were going to blackmail him.
What stopped you?’
‘I thought it would be useful to lay hands on the original tape — the conversation between Court and the American.’
‘And the idea was that Susan would get it for you.’
‘Yes.’
‘But she didn't want to.’
‘She wasn't…convinced.’
All at once, Yorke seemed alarmed.
‘Her death had nothing to do with this.’
He could see the possibilities: a need to kill someone; a spate of snipings; a convenient cover.
‘She wouldn't have shopped me; and she never gave me the tape.
If she had, I'd've used it.’
‘I believe you,’ Culley said.
Then: ‘Destroy it.
Now.’
Yorke walked to the cassette and flipped out the tape.
He unspooled it, ripped it from the plastic, then rolled it in his palms before dropping it into an ashtray.
He lit a book match and let it fall among the tangle.
‘The others?’
He was eager to do the right thing.
Culley shook his head.
‘I wouldn't want to spoil your fun.
It's no business of mine to worry about how sick you are.’
He got up.
‘Listen,’ he said, ‘I don't need you now.
But if there comes a time when I do, I'll have you then.
A trade-off, perhaps; a time when we need to bump-up the arrest statistics…
Don't call James Court again.
Don't try to use what you know.
Don't sell it; don't offer it in return for a favour.
Understand?
In the meantime, keep looking over your shoulder.’
‘The tape's destroyed,’ Yorke said.
‘Court would never testify.
What can you use against me?’
‘Anything,’ Culley told him.
‘Anything I damn well like.
Helen Blake laughed.
She poured Mike Dawson a Scotch and water, and when she handed it to him, the laugh was still there.
‘Why on earth ask me where he is?
I rarely knew the answer to that when we were married.’
‘He's been spending a lot of time round here.
I thought he might have told —’
‘It's a relative notion: a lot of time.’
‘More time than at his own place.’
‘Less time than elsewhere.’
‘Yes…’
Dawson shrugged.
‘He's got one or two things on his mind just at the moment.’
‘Don't be arch with me, Mike.
I know what's going on.
I watch the television, I read the papers.
I see people being frightened just because they're on the streets.’
Dawson nodded, as if to say:Well then …
‘I also have a memory.
I remember that if it's not one thing, it's another.’
‘Give him a chance, Helen.’
‘You came here half-expecting to find him, right?’
‘Yes.’
‘That's me giving him a chance.
Don't push.’
There was an edgy pause.
Finally, Helen said, ‘Someone wants him?’
‘Protheroe.’
‘Do you know why?’
‘We started with one murder: our patch.
Suddenly it was all over the place.
We're a Task Force, now.
Uniform, plain clothes, specialist advisers, researchers.
If we reconstituted the paperwork, we'd have a fucking rain forest.
Robin's nominally in charge of a large slice of the investigation.
I think Protheroe would like to get the occasional report.’
‘And Robin's being a bit eccentric.’
‘Nothing new in that.
This is different.
Basically, I don't think Protheroe believes his theory.
Your theory.
All the killings just to mask one killing.
Robin's avoiding a confrontation.’
‘What do you think?’
Dawson paused, then shook his head.
‘It's a nifty theory.
You have to remember that there are a lot of dead people.
It looks like a madman.
So it probably is.’
He swallowed the last of his drink.
‘I ought to go.
If Robin gets back, or calls in…’
‘I'll tell him,’ Helen said.
‘I know my role: secretary, housewife, mother.’
‘He's talking about re-marriage, is he?
And kids?’
Dawson made it sound like a pincer-movement.
‘I was speaking figuratively.
The war isn't over yet.
It's a little early to be thinking about the terms of surrender.’
‘Speaking figuratively,’ Dawson said.
‘That's what you think.’
Helen sounded waspish.
Dawson was aware that she'd been combating a bout of ill-temper since he'd arrived.
‘Well,’ he tried to make a joke of it.
‘You know what men are like.’
Helen smiled sweetly at him.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘I do.
Men are like toilets.
They're either occupied or full of shit.’
If Culley had been asked to guess a description of James Court's house, he would have been almost right.
Fashionable north London, six bedrooms, an acre of garden, a surveillance system, electronic gates, a road-to-house intercom.
Court's voice sounded inappropriately loud in the quiet street.
‘It's after midnight.
What in God's name do you want?’
‘A talk.’
‘Call my secretary, Culley.
Go away.’
‘I'm afraid it's rather urgent.’
‘Go away.’
‘Not possible.’
Culley was beside his car, facing the intercom grille fixed to one of the pillars that supported the gates.
The intercom issued a tiny electronic hiss, but nothing more of Court's voice.
Then it went dead.
Culley leaned on the bell push until the hiss returned.
He said, ‘I want to talk about a donation you made to Sinn Fein.
I can hold my end of the conversation from here, if you'd like me to.’
When he was inside the house, Culley noticed the characteristic he wouldn't have guessed at.
He'd imagined expensive good taste — big sofas, neutral carpeting, antiques, safe pictures chosen for their investment potential.
The place was chrome and glass, tiles and white paint, bare, functional.
It looked like a laboratory.
Court had decided to bluff.
He said, ‘I don't know what you're talking about.
What's more, you know that I don't.
I can't imagine what it is you want.’
as if he were telling the story to someone else, Culley gave him a full account of what he'd heard on the tape.
He ended by saying, ‘Susan found the recording of your conversation with the American.
She gave it to the person who contacted you.
I expect he asked you for money.
If he didn't, he was getting ready to.
I wonder why you didn't phone your lawyer before I ever got to the front door.’
They were in Court's drawing room.
Four steel and leather chairs, floor-lights that resembled test-tube supports.
Culley wouldn't have been surprised to see a rat-maze in the corner.
Court said, ‘There's no evidence for this.’
‘There's the tape of Susan's voice.’
‘An agitator, a troublemaker.
It wouldn't be difficult to show that she wished me ill.
Susan's activities must have been well known to the police.’
There was a long pause.
Eventually, Culley said, ‘She was your daughter.
Wasn't she?’
Court smiled.
‘Was that an attempt to shame me, Culley?
Was that supposed to cut?
Are you trying to  hint that blood is thicker than water?’
Culley watched him; his finger-ends were tingling.
‘Well, I suppose it might be.
Thicker than water — perhaps.
But then water's not much of a substance, is it?
Surely there are more testing comparisons to be made.’
The smile disappeared.
‘Thicker than money?
No.
Thicker than jealousy?
No.
Thicker than love, lust, power, pain, need, greed, ambition, possessions?
No.
Thicker than ideology?
No.’
He paused, offering a debater's courtesy.
Culley was silent.
‘I can't remember having cared for Susan.
I suspect I never did.’
‘You're being foolish.’
Culley spoke like a man biting his lip.
‘The American's findable.
The people you dealt the guns to are findable.
You imagine we don't know who they are?
Apart from the fact that you sold weapons to a terrorist organization, you dealt shares on the inside.
At the first whiff of something like this, you'd hear nothing but the sound of running feet.
Business friends, golfing partners, members of your fucking club, whoever's on the board of your companies, anyone you've made a phone call to, or had a confidential chat with, anyone who's asked for help, or given it.
Every friend you've ever relied on in government would have trouble remembering your name.
So bearing all that in mind, perhaps you'd like to stop talking shit.’
‘If you were going to use this,’ Court observed, ‘we'd be having a different sort of conversation.’
‘No,’ Culley said.
‘If I were going to use this now…’
Court was wearing a light robe over a pair of pale blue pyjamas.
He pulled the knot on the belt, then re-tied it, tighter, as if the gesture afforded him some feeling of protection.
‘Go on,’ he said.
‘A trust fund,’ said Culley.
‘To be set up in the name of Daisy Reid, administered through a lawyer named by me.
He'll have the details, but you won't get them.
Just  pay the money — five thousand a month, maturing in fifteen years.’
‘If I don't —’
‘Then I'll be talking to the fraud squad and to Special Branch.
They can take it from there.’
‘You're blackmailing me.’
Court sounded almost indignant.
‘I'm not asking you for a penny.’
Culley moved close to Court, who fought the desire to flinch.
It was like watching someone push at an invisible turnstile.
‘I'll make regular checks on the payments.’
‘Who?’
Court asked.
Culley walked to the door.
‘Who?
Your girl-friend?
Your daughter?’
‘She's nothing to do with me.’
‘Who then?’
‘No-one you know,’ Culley said.
‘No-one you'll ever know.’
20
Cityscape.
Rooftops, pillars, pylons.
Television dishes, cooling towers, skylights.
Tree-tops nickering in the breeze.
What was he if not the creature who circled that dark silhouette, sometimes letting a wing-tip brush the brickwork, sometimes soaring on an up-draught, better to look down, better to choose, better to fall on the prey?
He had arrived at this place, this vantage point on the hill, in order to become anyone, not knowing who; not knowing what.
The purpose had fulfilled him, allowed him to find himself.
Man-bird; dark an–el.
Eric Ross took the scope from the window-sill and looked down at his killing-ground.
He rolled the disc over segments of the city, the cross-hairs neatly quartering his domain.
‘Bustle, bustle,’ he said; and laughed.
He was imagining them as they scurried to and fro like rats, like rabbits, when farmers burnt the stubble off their fields.
He saw the daft circles they made as a wind lifted the flames and turned them; he saw their hysterical galloping back and forth, and saw the cherry-red line crackling across the stumps of corn, towing its apron of smoke.
A field of fire.
Yes.
And over the field, his vast, dark presence; shadow of a bird, shadow of a man; his laser eye, wings to soar, wings for the whiplash drop; a speck in the sun, or a broad, black, noiseless shape skimming  the flame-top, watching the little creatures go to and fro.
‘Bustle, bustle.’
He laughed.
Better to look down, better to choose.
Rabbits and rats.
It was dawn, a time he liked well.
He found a place to kill from and set down the leather case.
He took the gun components from the protective foam interior.
Night workers were making their ways home.
People on early shift were heading purposefully to work.
Bustle, bustle.
Just one — since the place he'd found wasn't as secure as some.
He would have to be fast, getting away.
He assembled the gun.
It took no time at all; ten seconds to have it ready, scope in place, the stock up to his shoulder.
Less time than that to break it down.
A man was running for one of the early morning buses.
A couple went by on bicycles, less hindered than usual because the roads weren't busy, the woman riding with one hand resting on the man's shoulder.
Three girls came into the line of fire, each wearing a student nurse's uniform, walking quickly, but gossiping as they went, and laughing, their heads constantly turning to whichever of them took up the conversation.
Bustle, bustle.
Ross laughed.
Just a chuckle at first, but then it grew, and the images in the scope jostled with the shaking of his shoulder.
He lowered the gun and got control of himself, then raised it again, but the laughter returned: a grimace, a flutter, and then a great stream of bubbles inside, floating up, jouncing his chest, until tears blurred the figures in the scope.
He dropped the gun from his shoulder again, and bent over as the laughter wracked him, all the more powerful for being silent, for being trapped inside.
His face was a rictus.
He bounced with mirth, one arm folded across his belly, the other dangling the gun.
He roared, he bellowed, he shouted with laughter, and never made a sound.
He braced the top of his head against a section of partly-demolished brickwork, and heaved with laughter, his face slick with tears, his limbs weak with the effort.
Eventually, he came back to himself.
He turned and leaned his back on the wall, gasping.
He was taken with little squalls of mirth that subsided, each more quickly than the last.
Finally, he wiped his face and brought the gun back to his shoulder.
Bustle, bustle.
A hiccup of laughter, a steadying pause.
Then he fired.
Culley came awake in the instant before the phone rang.
He said, ‘Sorry,’ and snatched up the receiver.
As he was bringing it to his ear, he remembered that he was in his own apartment, alone.
It took him five minutes to dress and leave the house.
Even so, Mike Dawson was there before him.
‘You live south of the river,’ Culley said.
‘Yeah.
I don't always sleep south of the river.’
They went behind the canvases and looked down.
It's like a scene from a play, Culley thought, and in each performance a different extra takes the victim's part.
He said, ‘Who's this?’
The name meant nothing and it never would.
Another performance, another stiff.
One more for the body-count.
They went to the place where Ross had stood, picking their way across a rubble of brick, concrete and roofing girders.
A road circled the site — an enormous roundabout that had once contained shops, pubs and a post office.
On one side was a deserted lorry park.
The  demolition was about two-thirds complete, allowing both access and cover.
Culley stumbled on a half-brick and Dawson caught his arm.
‘Susan Court was nothing, then?’
‘Nothing.’
‘You saw this guy Yorke?’
‘Yes.’
Culley made a duck-quack motion with fingers and thumb.
‘I don't see him storming the barricades.’
‘Champagne socialist,’ Dawson suggested.
‘Well…spritzer, more like.’
He changed the subject.
‘Where was she going?’
‘On her way to work — local hospital, only one street away.’
‘On her own?’
‘Yes.
Three of her friends — also nurses — had taken the same route a few minutes before.
They'd all got off the bus together; this one had gone into a truckers’ cafe for cigarettes and a carton of coffee.
Someone's talking to the other girls.
To no purpose of course.’
‘Anything different?’
Culley asked.
‘No.
Easy target; centre shot; no-one saw a thing.’
Dawson paused by a jagged section of wall some nine feet high.
A window space, devoid of frame, gave directly on to the road.
They could see the canvas screens, the white tapes, three uniformed men trying to keep traffic moving.
‘What do you think?’
‘Looks right.’
Culley turned and stared across the site.
A crane with a sledge-block attached stood in the centre; outside its scope, there were single walls, doors that opened on to nothing, ragged billboards.
A bathroom had been laid open like a film set.
The sun was up now, and strong; he could see a quiver of exhaust gases in the air.
‘What?’
Dawson asked.
Culley shook his head.
‘Can you smell anything?’
Dawson shrugged.
‘Brick dust; a whiff of carbon monoxide.
I don't know what?’
No, it wasn't a smell.
What was it?
Culley moved around in the small space close to the window.
‘I expect that's it,’ he said.
‘Petrol vapour.’
It was hot and muscular, not a smell but something in the air.
Culley thought of a gym after hours, a boxing ring when the bout had finished and the audience gone.
He thought of a cage after the creature had flown.
It was the fierce residue of energy and anger, once confined, but now free.
It reminded Culley of something he couldn't place.
The other end of day: an hour past dusk.
The canvas was down and the tapes gone.
The scene of crime team had done what they could, which wasn't much.
‘Have you tried dusting a brick wall for prints?’ one of them had asked Dawson earlier.
‘This bastard leaves fuck-nothing.
I'm not hoping for a shell-casing, you know, but if he'd just get a fucking nose-bleed or something, I'd be a happy man.’
Cars travelled the road round the site, a stream of red and white lights.
The demolition workers hadn't been in that day.
Martin Jackson was standing where Culley had stood.
He moved as Culley had moved, pacing the little platform of cement below the window space.
He sensed what Culley had sensed.
He looked out at the street, past the blur of headlights, and saw people going back and forth, moving swiftly and apprehensively, sometimes casting glances towards the hiding place.
Bustle, bustle.
Jackson sniffed the air like an animal taking a spoor.
He smiled.
The hairs lifted slightly on the nape of his neck and a rush of tingling spread on his scalp, then flooded his face so that he blushed in the darkness.
‘Eric,’ he said.
‘It was always the same,’ Helen said.
She stood by the foot of the bed and unbuttoned her blouse.
Culley lounged naked on the coverlet.
He turned to reach the two glasses of wine that stood on a bedside table; he'd brought them with him from the dinner table.
Helen had waited for five minutes, not knowing at all why, then followed him into the bedroom.
She tossed the blouse on to a chair, took the glass Culley was offering, sipped, set it down, then unzipped her skirt and let it drop.
‘No matter what happened, I'd always fall for this.’
‘Which means…?’
‘Which means it doesn't mean much.’
‘I never thought that screwing you would get you back.’
‘Not a pretty word.’
Helen unsnapped her bra, shook it off, and took another swallow of wine.
‘Why?’
Culley asked.
‘Would you always fall for this?’
‘You know how to fuck me.
You always did.’
Culley sighed.
‘Years of arduous practice.’
He grinned.
‘An exception to the rule.’
‘What rule?’
‘Familiarity breeds contempt.’
‘I hope this sort of familiarity isn't going to breed anything.’
She was naked now, and kneeling on the bed still holding her wine.
Culley took the glass from her and bit, gently, just under her breast, on the flat of her stomach, on the crease of her hip.
She licked his face while he stroked her thighs apart.
Presently, he heard the breath whistle in her throat, a gasp, a tiny groan.
She whispered, ‘Yes, there…just there…like that.’
Dark places.
A disembodied voice, a dead girl's voice.
There ,just there ,like that .
Helen's touch trickled down his ribcage, a way of using her fingernails that meant almost-pain.
He kissed her face, then dipped his head, lifting her hips with his hands.
His tongue flicked inside her thigh.
There ,just there .
He couldn't tell whether Helen had spoken or not, but her legs forked.
Dark places.
He felt her shake, a tremor that came from the root.
What was it she had said?
There's a darkness you like .
There's a taste you like .
There's a smell .
Helen's fingers were in his hair.
She drew him the length of her body, and he glided into her as she kissed his mouth.
He thought of the derelict site and the broken wall.
He thought of the window-gap with its view of the canvas screen.
There had been that heat, that fierceness like a scorchmark.
He knew, now, what it reminded him of.
It reminded him of himself.
21
It was Saturday morning and suburbia was busying itself with the tasks it likes so much.
You could hear the chug of lawnmowers; hoses snaked out to cars parked at the roadside; bonfire smoke snagged in the branches of fruit trees.
A terrifying place; a wilderness of venetian blinds and vegetable plots, of smiles and nodding heads.
When Angie Ross opened the front door, she was facing the sun.
She lifted a hand to shade her eyes and Martin Jackson's face appeared on the backdrop of light, as if he were looking at her from the sun's centre.
He said, ‘Angie…’ and she stood aside to let him in, lost for words, then followed him to the kitchen, as if he were showing her the way.
He sat on a stool by the breakfast bar while she made coffee.
‘It's been a long time,’ he said.
‘Years.’
‘Eric's not here.’
Angie took her time fetching cups and saucers.
Jackson had always unnerved her.
She glanced at the red, uneven features, the fair hair dusted with grey.
He sat very still, his large hands resting in his lap, one atop the other.
‘I know.’
Angie paused, the coffee pot suspended over a cup.
‘Do you?’
‘Where are the kids?’
Jackson asked.
‘It's two, now, isn't it?’
‘Swimming,’ Angie said.
‘A neighbour…’
She filled the cup and handed it to him.
‘If you know that —’
‘I had a phone call,’ Jackson told her.
‘Yesterday.
From Eric.
It seemed that he wanted to talk to me.
Then he hung up.
About half an hour later, he phoned again.
He sounded very distressed.’
Angie sat down.
She had filled a cup for herself, but made no attempt to drink.
She asked, ‘What did he say?’
‘Almost nothing.’
Jackson watched as she began to believe the lie.
He knew he'd convince her; he was offering all the best ingredients of a successful untruth — it was possible without being obvious, surprising without being mysterious.
Most potently, it was something she wanted to hear.
‘He didn't…’
Angie looked for something more or less neutral.
‘He didn't say what he wanted?’
‘Not directly.
I mean, it was clear that he wanted to talk, but we didn't really get down to what was bothering him.
He mentioned old times, the Army, you know, places we'd been to.
The first call was really brief — just ‘Hello, it's Eric’, not much more than that.
I asked a couple of questions he wouldn't answer, then he said, ‘I'll have to go.’
The second call was longer.’
He drank some of his coffee.
Angie's hands were trembling slightly; she laced her fingers.
‘I haven't heard from him for, well, it must be three or four days, but then often…
I mean, when he's on a trip, he doesn't phone every day.
He didn't say what he wanted?’
Jackson smiled.
‘You asked me that.
He didn't, no.’
Angie wasn't sure what she was supposed to know.
Eric and this man had been close.
At one time, when she and Eric first met, Jackson had been a part of their life.
She was aware of a past neither of them had spoken of much — at least, not while she'd been there.
At first, Jackson had seemed more or less at ease with her.
But as her relationship with Eric deepened, he'd grown wary, sometimes openly hostile.
There were things unspoken between the men.
There were things the men never spoke of to Angie; and she had known instinctively that Eric's job was something she and he would never openly discuss.
A web of silence.
But caught in that web were jots of evidence that Angie quite simply lived with every day.
He'd had a separate telephone line installed; she lived with that.
She knew that Eric's absences coincided with certain newspaper reports; she lived with that.
She knew the gun was there; she lived with that.
She never queried it; it existed alongside their domestic contentment.
She lived as a soldier's wife might.
Or a hangman's.
To Jackson, she said, ‘He sounded distressed?’
‘Very.
He wasn't making a lot of sense.
But he did say he wanted to talk.
To see me and talk.
I thought you might know where he is.’
‘No.’
A few seconds elapsed, then Angie shook her head as if to emphasize the denial.
‘No.’
Jackson seemed to pause for thought.
‘OK, well, maybe I could look round.
Does he have a room he uses, somewhere he keeps —’
‘The spare bedroom, but —’
‘Because there might be something in there that —’
‘I'm not sure I should —’
Their words ran over each other and they stopped.
Jackson said, ‘You must be worried.
Aren't you?’
Angie shrugged.
‘No, I —’
‘That he's running round London killing people and doesn't seem to want to stop.’
The silence between them was as bottomless as a dropped heartbeat.
Angie made a tiny, delicate gesture, her hand moving upwards and outwards, as if she might gather his words from the air and muffle them.
Eventually, Jackson said, ‘Aren't you?’
‘At the top of the stairs,’ Angie told him.
‘It's the second door on the left.
It's locked.
Eric's got the key.’
Jackson smiled at her.
He said, ‘I won't take long.’
The second phone line was connected to the room.
There was a small desk, a lined pad, a tea mug holding a pencil and two pens, a stack of train and airline schedules, and a few pieces of personal clutter that could have been in any room in the house.
The desk drawers were empty.
On a shelf was a pebble that had been polished by running water; it was ovoid, a piece of granite about big enough to hold in a clenched fist; a seam of quartz halved it on the diagonal.
Underneath it was a map of London.
Jackson picked up the pebble and held it until the stone warmed.
Then he slipped it into his pocket.
A talisman.
When he unfolded the map he saw it was completely unmarked.
Later, he phoned Francis.
‘I'm in London,’ he said.
‘I've started.’
Francis sounded remote, as if he were eating or reading.
He said, ‘And?’
‘I've seen his wife.
Nothing there.’
Jackson was in a small hotel close to the city centre.
He had the map spread out before him on the bed.
‘I wondered whether I ought to organize a tap on her phone.’
Jackson laughed.
‘Don't bother.
He's gone from there if you see what I mean.’
His eye roved over the diagram of streets and parks.
‘I'm just checking in.
I'll call if there's anything to report.’
‘Listen,’ Francis's tone sharpened; he'd remembered something he had to say.
‘Ross is the most important thing here.
But there's something else.
You're not the only person looking…’
‘Culley,’ Jackson offered.
The killer was faceless and nameless.
Denied that focus, the media had made Culley's face and name signatures to their stories.
‘Culley, yes; but anyone — anyone who's trying to track him down.
It's crucial to find him.
It's also crucial to stop someone else finding him first.’
‘I understand.’
‘We don't have long.’
‘I understand that too.’
Jackson put the phone down, swung round on to the bed and drew his feet up until he was sitting cross-legged.
He stared down at the map.
Lying beside it was a sheet of coloured adhesive markers and a handwritten list that noted the location of each of Ross's killings.
He spent ten minutes attaching markers to the map, then sat back to look at the result.
It appeared entirely random.
In truth, he'd expected it would.
He took a mapping pen and wrote on to the markers the dates when the killings had occurred.
This showed him nothing except that Ross had been skilful in the way he had chosen to combine places with times.
Random again.
He ran his eye down the list, looking at the column in which he'd noted the time of day for each killing.
Almost random; there seemed to be a preference for early morning.
It wasn't much.
He looked again at the scatter of markers, hoping that some system of lines might appear, some focal point.
There was nothing.
Finally, he peeled the markers off the map, leaving it blank once more.
Eric, he thought.
Eric…
I know what's happened.
Of course I do.
Kill one, kill three, kill nine.
Is that where you should have stopped?
Nine?
Twelve?
Fifteen?
Did they think you would?
Perhaps they did.
But how could they understand?
Kill one.
It's a job.
Or maybe it's a grudge.
Business or hatred, there's something that stays the same — it's just that person; just about him.
You know the name, you know the purpose: to kill one person and then go home.
You plan it for minimum trouble, minimum risk.
You look at the problem; you think it through; you find a way.
Maybe there's a slight fizz of excitement when the day arrives.
Everything's a little brighter, a little louder.
When you get to the spot you've picked — while you wait — you might notice the lick of pulse in your wrist is a little faster, a little harder.
Of course.
You might have time to savour the moment, while you watch him approach, while you pick your shot; but then it's all movement, whatever route you've chosen, whatever method for getting clear.
Then, when it's over, you won't think of it much.
The fizz, the pulse-beat, the moment slightly delayed…yes, that was good, but it's all part of the job.
And the job consists of being efficient, being careful being precise.
If you're good, you'll get more.
You'll remember not to be too greedy, to leave good intervals between them.
To pace yourself, doing enough to pay for a comfortable life and little enough to stay invisible.
Angie, the kids, the mortgage; nice holidays, nice car.
This is different, isn't it?
I know what's happened.
Kill one, kill three, kill nine, isn't the same.
A fizz, OK; a faster pulse, OK.
But somewhere, something happened.
Where?
Was it seven?
Was it eleven?
What was the crucial number when nothing was the same?
When you felt the fever, felt lightheaded, your hands trembling, your eyes hot?
I know what's happened.
You were doing the job.
Everything was fine.
Number…what?
You looked along the sights, just like before, just like the other times.
And what you saw there took your breath away.
Jackson stared at the map, half-focused, until the highways and streets and open spaces seemed to crawl and shift.
The city was a maze.
He let his fingers drift across the paper like a dowser; as if , somehow, among the fractured patterns on the page, he might suddenly feel the heat of Ross's madness.
22
No-one knew what to do.
There were daily statements by senior police officers, by the Home Secretary, by the Prime Minister.
Everything they said meant, ‘There's nothing we can say.’
Television specials were mounted in which psychiatrists offered theories that meant, ‘We know certain things that underline how little we know.’
Advice was given about how people might behave.
It added up to, ‘Don't go out.
Apart from that, there's nothing we can tell you to make you safe.’
Robin Culley was interviewed for the fiftieth time.
Among the things he said was, ‘Someone knows who he is.’
Angie Ross lay in bed and watched a spangle of light flicker and fuse on the wall as a breeze moved the curtain.
It was just past dawn and she believed she hadn't slept: not that night, nor the previous night, nor the night before that.
The truth was that she would doze now and then — ten minutes here, twenty there; but her dreams were so vivid and so close to her conscious fears that she might as well have been awake.
She thought, It can't go on.
Then: Why would it stop?
Then: How might it stop?
If I told them…
She banished the idea, and in the next moment brought it back.
What use would that be?
What would they have?
A name.
He's not here, and I don't know where he's gone.
How would his name help them?
In any case, they've got a name for him already.
They've got several.
Beast.
Maniac.
Fiend.
She was suddenly aware of the absence in her bed.
Of the absence in her life.
And knew that it would never be otherwise.
She thought it, then said it out loud: a whisper that broke up in tears.
‘He won't come back.
Eric can never come back.’
Five days had passed since Martin Jackson had arrived in London.
In that time, there had been two more killings.
He had nothing to say, but he phoned Francis anyway.
It was early — a countryman's time to wake.
‘Is there anything you need?’
Francis asked.
‘Just ask.’
‘Luck,’ Jackson told him.
‘A mistake.’
Helen Blake watched Culley as he slept.
She thought, It's too tough.
All this going on…it's lousy timing.
And apart from that, who knows if it can work?
Old patterns, old ways, old resentments still there to fuel the disagreements.
It's like being in a house where you used to live, but you can't quite remember its danger points.
Forget to duck —whack ; your head hits a lintel.
Miscount the stairs in the dark —crunch ; you're on your ass in the cellar.
Did I stop loving him?
Not sure.
Don't know.
Hard to say.
Sometimes.
Yes, sometimes I certainly did.
Then I'd start again.
It was all motion, always moving…so I suppose that must mean I didn't stop; not really.
I couldn't cope with his life, that's what it was.
Not the shit hours, the danger, the uncertainties.
No; I couldn't stay close to whatever it was in him that liked it so much.
Not liked it; liked it so much .
Something dark in him.
Something that liked dark places.
Now here he is saying, ‘Have me back.
I've changed.’
She moved the pillow she was leaning against, and when she turned back Culley's eyes were open and looking directly at her.
‘Were you watching me asleep?’ he asked.
‘Because that's definitely cheating.’
‘I need some kind of advantage.’
He sat up, twisting the heels of his hands into his eye sockets, and looked blearily at Helen.
She said, ‘I'll make some coffee.’
When she leaned forward to get out of bed, Culley reached under her arms, taking a breast in either hand.
He said,
‘Let's get married so we can stop fucking.’
‘A terrific offer.’
She made the coffee and brought it back to bed — a compromise.
Culley was lying with his hands beneath his head, gazing at the ceiling.
‘There's got to be something,’ he said.
‘Christ knows…’
‘For instance?’
Culley and Jackson didn't know one another, did they know the same thing.
‘He's got to make a mistake,’ Culley said, ‘or else we get lucky.’
Both happened.
The luck came through Helen.
23
You turned off a main road into a broad driveway.
There were ornate, wrought-iron gates fifteen feet high, maybe twenty; they were usually open.
Winged lions, sculpted in stone, crouched on the pillars at either side of the entrance.
A two or three minute walk would bring you to the house.
It was Georgian, a perfect balance of elegant windows, discreet pillars and pediments.
The brick was a warm, russet colour and shaggy with ivy on the west façade.
Inside were elegant hallways and high-ceilinged rooms.
The furniture was almost all antique of the period, though on one wall, at a corridor's end, a Louis-Quinze tapestry hung above an eighteenth-century pew.
The paintings were usually English or French, some oils, but watercolours for the most part— country scenes, portraits, and one strange canvas of a lady dressed in a ball gown holding a dead hare by the hind legs.
It was a curious lapse in carefully balanced good taste.
Nicola Hammond walked rapidly along the corridor, her heels making a rapid staccato on the polished boards.
She was young-old: a brittle blonde whose face had probably been beautiful but now sagged just a bit, was creased just a bit , and had grown a lip of wattle behind the chin.
She passed the lady and the hare with an indifference borne of familiarity.
A casual glance would have made it seem that her expression was stiff with anger.
She was angry, for sure, but a closer look would have revealed a  heaviness in the mouth, a darkness under her eyes: the face of someone who had cried a good deal recently, and had some crying yet to do.
Gunter Schmidt strode behind her, tall, white-haired, elegant.
He seemed exasperated, though well in control.
Nicola spoke over her shoulder —‘I'm a prisoner in my own goddamn home’— her voice made uneven by emotion.
‘Nonsense.’
Schmidt smiled patiently.
Although she couldn't see the gesture, he waved a hand as if to demonstrate the extent of her freedom.
‘We can go anywhere you like.’
‘Exactly.
We can go.’
‘It was agreed —’
‘Not by me,’ Nicola said sharply.
Then, as if to herself, ‘Not by me.’
She opened a door into a large, sunny drawing room, crossed its breadth, sat on a sofa, got up immediately to look for a cigarette, found a pack on a low table by the window, then sat down on a chair.
As soon as Schmidt settled, she rose again and walked to and fro in the room pecking at her cigarette.
‘I've given you an assurance…’
‘Yes, Nicola.’
Schmidt's tone was both apologetic and mildly patronizing.
‘But we feel you are upset.
You might perhaps change your mind.’
‘Like having a gaoler,’ she said.
‘Surely not.’
‘Like having a ball and chain.’
She went back to the window, crushed her cigarette and took another from the pack.
‘By day, it's you — eating with me, walking with me, waiting in the hallway while I have a shit.’
‘Nicola…’
‘By night, it's that fat idiot taking the night-shift, Goldman, sitting on a chair in the hallway with his flask  of coffee and a plastic tub of sandwiches.
Christ .’
‘Would it be a good idea, perhaps, if you went away somewhere?’
Schmidt modified the offer at once.
‘If we went away.
A holiday.’
Nicola looked at him steadily for a few seconds.
‘Don't patronize me, you bastard.’
Schmidt gave a wry smile; he shrugged.
‘Look, Nicola, you know what's going on.
I understand your distress.
I understand your need for’— he hesitated, finding a way round the word ‘revenge’—‘well, to have things straight.
But we don't live in that kind of a world.
When Jay died, it was necessary to conserve, to protect.’
‘When Jay died.’
The words turned her lip — something of a sneer, something of sorrow.
‘He was murdered; isn't that what you all think?’
‘Yes.
You know we do.’
‘A maniac,’ she said, ‘but a maniac with a purpose.’
‘It was unwise to have told you.
That should not have happened.’
‘Oh, really?
He was my husband.’
‘He was my associate in business.
There are some things that we simply have to…let go.’
Nicola started another cigarette.
She sat on the chair by the window and gazed out at the wide lawns edged by chestnut trees.
After a while, Schmidt asked, ‘Is there anything you would like to do today?
Anything in particular?’
She didn't respond, nor did she look at him.
She was thinking of a name: Robin Culley.
She was thinking of a way.
Jay Hammond had been Ross's sixth victim: the tennis player, taking time off for a game with a business contact.
They had stood at one set all, but Hammond held two service breaks in the third.
It wasn't necessary for him to throw the game in order to please  the other man — his particular business was a seller's market.
He'd been feeling good that day: finding the sweet-spot time after time, the ball coming off the racquet head with no sense of effort.
The game had stood at thirty-love when he tossed the ball up to serve and the man at the back of the opposite court had watched him hop and stumble, then fall, the racquet leaving his hand on the upswing and curving away.
His legs had buckled and knocked, a comic effect, and he'd gone down too soon for his partner to see the ugly roundel that had begun to form on the white tennis shirt.
Everything had been very still.
The ball had bounced on the court, then dribbled away.
Nicola Hammond had always been aware that her husband was a criminal.
It hadn't bothered her in the slightest.
She liked their life together, and her conscience had never been troubled by the knowledge of where their wealth came from.
It wasn't as if Jay might storm into banks with a shot-gun, or ram a wages van.
He was a dealer; his business was a civilized one, and legitimate for the most part.
Now and then, he was able to perform a special service for one of his clients and there was a little secrecy involved.
Something might be in Jay's hands for a short while — a certain item — then it would be gone.
Or, more likely, Jay would simply match a customer to such an item and negotiate a price.
Nicola and Jay were a rare example of people who had met in their early twenties, fallen in love, married, stayed in love, stayed happy.
Their marriage was nothing to Schmidt, nothing to Jay's other close business associates.
They felt no grief and experienced no real sense of loss.
In Nicola, these feelings were overwhelming; and alongside them was a fierce desire to see Jay's murderers punished.
Not so much the man who had killed him, though it would  have pleased her to know that man was dead.
No, the people who had ordered Jay's death — they were the ones who had to be punished.
She didn't know their names; she wouldn't have recognized their faces; but she knew they existed.
And someone would be able to find them; someone would be able to take Jay's name as a starting point and make a journey that would lead to those other names.
Robin Culley would be able to do that.
Nicola sighed, trying for the right combination of sadness and surrender.
‘It would be nice to go for a walk,’ she said.
‘I suppose there's still a world out there.’
She turned to Schmidt and pressed a smile on to her mouth.
‘Is it OK — to go for a walk?’
Schmidt nodded and smiled back at her.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘why not?
I would like that too.’
She would make it up as she went along — like a story told to a child at bedtime; like a clever lie that relies as much on the truth as on deception.
A chauffeur, someone she'd never seen before, brought the car to the front door.
Nicola and Schmidt sat in the back.
When Schmidt tapped the chauffeur's arm, the man pressed a button that raised a glass panel at his back.
He didn't start the engine.
‘There are certain conditions,’ Schmidt said.
‘We will walk for an hour or so.
Is that agreeable?
This man will wait for us in the car.
Should we meet other people, you will stay clear of them.
Please empty your pockets.’
Nicola laughed.
‘What do you expect to find?’
‘Paper, maybe, and a pen.’
She was wearing a linen jacket, underneath that a blouse and blue jeans.
Schmidt looked through the few things she brought out.
There was a lipstick, which he didn't hand back.
He leaned forward and slipped a hand into Nicola's jacket pockets, then gave her a brief look of  apology.
She slid forward on the seat while he patted the front and back pockets of her jeans.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said, then tapped the glass panel.
The car moved off.
A couple of little feints to begin with.
They drove through a town.
At one point, when they were baulked by traffic, Nicola touched the door, close to the handle and shifted in her seat.
She felt Schmidt's corresponding move, his hand dropping on to her forearm.
She pushed on the door as if for support, turning towards him and settling into her seat again as if that had always been her intention.
They stopped at a red light.
In the front seats of the car next to them, two men were talking business, the driver taking his hands from the wheel now and then to amplify whatever point he was making.
In the back a woman was looking out of the open window, her chin propped on the heel of her hand.
Nicola looked directly ahead, but pressed the button to bring her window down.
Schmidt's eyes went to the sound.
Nicola's face, at the open window, was no more than three feet from the other woman's.
She turned from Schmidt and said, ‘My husband…’ then immediately turned back, as if unaware of the other car, making it seem that her remark had always been intended for Schmidt.
Their voices clashed, his sharp with alarm, hers even and conversational.
‘Nicola.’
‘My husband was never a particular friend of yours, was he?’
Schmidt took a second to recover, then the concern went out of his face.
The cars drew away, a breeze from the open window lifting Nicola's hair.
He said, ‘We didn't see a great deal of one another, it's true; but I was fond of Jay.’
‘Yes,’ Nicola said.
‘Most people were.’
For the rest of the drive, she chatted about Jay, about how they had met, the things they had done together.
It seemed to Schmidt that even though the recollections made her sad, talking about them at all was the beginning of a means to recovery.
Once or twice, she knuckled a tear.
On one occasion, she asked his opinion and he was glad to give it.
‘It's not possible, is it, to start again?’
‘But of course it is.
Eventually.
You will discover a time for that.’
‘Just here,’ she said, ‘tell him to stop just here.’
Schmidt tapped on the glass and the chauffeur ran the nearside wheels on to a broad stretch of grass fifty feet from the fringe of a beechwood.
A couple of feints, and now a couple more.
They walked through a dapple of sunlight that shifted as the breeze shifted the leaves.
Overhead, a sound like distant surf.
Nicola had taken them off the path and into a dense part of the wood.
Three times she went one side of a tree when Schmidt went the other, emerging again without breaking her conversation.
On the fourth occasion, she paused leaving Schmidt to walk on alone.
She heard his voice, then heard it stop.
He backtracked rapidly.
She was close to the tree's bole, crouching down to examine something.
‘Just there,’ Nicola pointed, then glanced up, smiling.
‘A wild orchid.’
She saw the tension leave his shoulders as he hunkered down to look.
Halfway round the walk, they came to a chalk escarpment that sloped away from a ridge, falling about thirty feet to a small clearing.
Nicola paraded along its edge like a tightrope walker.
Schmidt was answering a question she had put to him.
‘It's simple: we can't win this time.
To do anything at all would be to risk exposure.
It's business.
There are no rules.’
Nicola listened as she walked the grass lip.
He said, ‘There will be other —’
Suddenly she was gone, off balance and tilting down the slope, running with windmill arms, sliding, running again, a plume of white chalk-dust under her heels.
She came off the slope at an uncontrollable pace that took her across the clearing and into the trees.
Schmidt went after her, falling twice before getting down.
As he started across the grass, Nicola was emerging from the treeline.
‘I missed my footing.’
She examined her hands, white with chalk, as if looking for the source of some small pain, then gave up on that and began to dust herself down.
Schmidt looked up the scarp.
‘We can find a way from down here?’ he asked.
‘Not really.
We turn in the opposite direction to meet the path.
It's not so bad.’
Nicola took a run at the slope and gained a third of it before dropping nearly to all fours to grab at little ridges and tufts of grass.
Schmidt laboured behind her; she could hear his grunts of effort.
When she reached the top, she turned and looked down.
Schmidt was watching her, but still climbing.
She crouched and put out a hand.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘Stupid of me.
Are you all right?’
He nodded, reassured, and searched for a foothold.
Nicola stayed put, her arm still outstretched.
When he was in reach, Schmidt grasped her hand.
She stood up, drawing him with her, and for a moment he was upright, his feet on the slope, his head just above the rim.
Nicola braced herself and kicked out.
At the same time, she wrenched her hand away.
Her toecap took him under the chin, close to the throat.
She didn't wait to judge the  effect of that.
Before he had disappeared, she was yards away, going at a dead run.
Schmidt went backwards off his heels, dropping his full length on the slope, head and shoulders slamming into the chalk.
His body leaped like a salmon, airborne, as he turned and crashed down again, then rolled off the scarp and on to the clearing.
Something had gone in his larynx.
The sound of his breath as it sawed and whistled in his throat mingled with the rush and whicker of wind among the trees.
He couldn't move.
His chest heaved atrociously.
He lay on his back and looked up at the leaf canopy as it stirred and turned, sifting the afternoon sunlight.
24
It rained that evening, a steady fall that kept people off the streets.
Two men walked through the downpour, their heads pulled into their coat collars.
One of them wore a hat that dripped water from the brim.
They went to a door and knocked.
A woman opened the door, peering into the rain, and they muscled through.
When she opened her mouth to yell, a hand caught her face, pinching into the angle of the jaw so hard that the cry died in her throat.
Although she was silent, the grip didn't loosen.
All three stood in the hallway, the woman backed up to the wall, a finger and thumb goring her cheeks.
The blood slipped from her face and she began to faint.
It seemed that a dark halo enclosed the men's faces and her head filled with a sound of the sea.
Her hands slapped the wall, like someone drumming a loose rhythm on a tom-tom.
They took her into the living room and put her down on a sofa.
One sat next to her, the other stood close by.
She looked at them dumbly.
The man sitting with her on the sofa said, ‘Are the kids in bed?’
He had a lisp.
The word ‘kids’ ended with a tiny hiss and the tip of his tongue flicked out between his teeth.
The woman nodded.
The man who was standing left the room.
She looked after him in alarm.
‘Where's he gone?’
‘He's just looking in on them.
Make sure they're asleep.
Don't worry.’
The man's tongue came back  to his lip and he made a series of little whispered sounds,huss ,huss ,huss ; his laugh.
‘Don't worry.
He's very good with kids.’
The woman half-rose and the man took her arm, pulling her back down.
He slapped her, swiftly and casually, his hand coming back to cover her mouth in case she might cry out.
He said, ‘No.
We stay here.’
His tongue left a bead of spittle behind.
‘What do you want?’
He didn't answer.
He was looking towards the door.
The other man returned and nodded.
He looked round for the phone, found it and took it to the woman, laying it in her lap.
She dialled the number they gave her.
A voice said, ‘Anne?’
It was her husband's voice.
Terrified, of course she was terrified; Michael Pope had expected that.
But when the moment came, when he heard her, talking in a fear-ridden whisper, it wrenched at him.
Seconds after he'd broken the connection, the phone rang again.
A voice said, ‘All right?’
‘They won't hurt her?’
Pope asked.
‘Of course not.’
‘They won't hurt the children?’
‘Not her, not the children; don't worry.’
‘She sounded so scared.’
‘Yes, well, she would.
That's the whole idea.’
A laugh, offering reassurance.
‘Let's get on with it.’
Pope climbed a flight of stairs to the main part of the house.
In the hallway, close to the door that led to the family's rooms, was a small, wall-mounted console.
He went to it and opened the hinged flap to reveal a series of numbered buttons, nought to ten, like a telephone dial unit.
‘We'll do it like this,’ they'd told him.
‘Two men will go to your home.
You'll get a phone call to say that unless you follow instructions your wife and children will be killed.
Your wife will be frightened, but nothing will happen to her, of course.
And because she'll believe it all, other people will believe her.
That's very important.
You say the house will be empty…’
‘For a month.
They cruise.
Fly to Brittany, take the boat down to Nice, go up and down the coast, then the Adriatic or other parts of the Med.
The Aegean.’
Pope had laughed.
‘It's a fucking dull life.’
‘OK.
After you hear from your wife, you'll hear from us.
Use the cell phone; let the caller know as soon as you've switched off the alarms.
How long will we have?’
‘When the alarms go off in the house, they'll go on in Central Station.
The response time can be as short as ninety seconds.’
‘Don't worry.
The men who'll come in know what they're looking for.
Someone will give you an injection.’
‘What?’
‘You'll be unconscious when the police arrive.
It's the best way — best for you.
What would you be doing otherwise?
Chasing the guys down the street?
Screaming ‘Help’ like some hysterical girl?
Phoning a description of the vehicle?
Also it looks good.
You've been threatened, you've been doped, you're groggy.
You won't have to act; you won't have to worry about the expression on your face when the squad car turns up.’
Pope had thought this through.
It seemed right.
He said, ‘What about the money?’
‘A little at a time.
Open an account somewhere in a false name and let us have the account number.
We'll make payments each month; that'll seem authentic enough.
A grand here, two grand there.
You'll have it all inside two years.
Listen, the only crucial thing is — don't tell anyone.
Don't get boastful; don't drop hints to your best friend over a bottle of Scotch.’
‘Are you serious?’
‘People do.’
‘Not me.’
‘Your wife will believe it, the police will believe it.
You kill the alarm, then go to sleep for ten minutes.
That's it.
It's money for nothing and danger-free as long as you keep shut.’
Pope had smiled and shaken his head.
Tell someone, he'd thought.
Christ, I don't want to know about it myself.
‘We'll need a sketch layout of the house; floor plan.’
‘Sure.’
‘And the precise position of the paintings.’
‘Yes.’
‘Fine.
That's fine.
It's all you have to do.’
Pope ran it in his head.
An image leapt up of his house, of the front door opening, of the men going in.
He said,
‘What about Anne?’
‘Who?’
‘My wife.’
‘She'll be fine.
We phone as soon as we're clear and the guys who're with her just walk out.
Goodbye.
She'll phone the police, but by that time, who cares?’
‘They won't hurt her?’
‘Don't worry.’
‘The kids…’
‘Don't worry.’
Still holding the phone, Pope opened the casing of the console.
He punched in a five digit code, then said,
‘Tell me when.’
There was a pause on the line of no more than thirty seconds.
A voice said, ‘Now.’
Pope pressed Enter , and the code registered.
He went to the door and opened it.
They came past him at a run, three of them, two heading straight for the room that Pope had indicated on the floor plan.
The third held back.
Pope had already removed his jacket and begun to roll back his sleeve.
The man hit him, left hand, backhanded; he was wearing a weighted glove.
Pope felt the vertebrae in his neck pop.
Everything clouded.
He'd bitten his tongue when the blow landed, and a splash of blood looped on to his chin.
‘Sorry.’
The man was tapping the barrel of a syringe.
‘It looks better — you know?’
He gave the injection.
In the same moment, the others came past.
Each was carrying a taped package, foam-wrapped.
Everything clouded again.
Pope backed up to the wall.
There was a booming sound in his skull that came in waves, and his vision was going at the edges, like burning paper dwindling and darkening.
The men had gone.
He slid down the wall and sat with a bump.
He was aware of shadows amid the gloom, then the darkness poured over him.
Five seconds later he was dead.
The man with the lisp said, ‘It'll put you out for ten minutes.
No more.
Time for us to get clear.’
Anne shook her head.
The man standing behind her grasped her left wrist and tucked the arm up behind her back; his other hand went into her hair, drawing her backwards.
‘It's nothing; I promise.’
A bubble of saliva lingered on his teeth.
He massaged the crook of her elbow to raise a vein and slipped the needle in.
After a moment, her eyes fogged.
The second man released her and went into the hall to collect two coats and a hat.
The man with the lisp joined him.
It was still raining.
They stepped out, dressed for the weather.
The children hadn't woken, so they'd let the children live.
25
The end of the day should bring good food, good wine, good conversation and, for perfect symmetry, good news.
Hugo Kemp took a mouthful of poached salmon and chewed slowly to get the flavour.
He cleansed his palate with a sip of iced water, then flooded it with the crisp, light taste of Veuve Clicquot.
An Indian, wearing a starched, white coat and a black bow-tie, stepped forward and refilled his glass.
The man had enjoyed a blip of peyote earlier in the day, and there was a mild, dreamy look on his face, a look of effortless tolerance; but his hand was steady.
Kemp said, ‘He was one of the true originals.
There are few, really.
Each in his manner, of course, and greatness is originality enough.
But there are some who appear to stand apart from their contemporaries in a particular way.
It has to do with a lack of influence.
They tend away from the school mentality.
Look at the Impressionists — all painting with the same palette.
But some…
Rembrandt, El Greco, Picasso.
Cezanne.’
He glanced sideways and his plate was removed from the table.
A cheese platter was brought.
‘Cézanne…
He felt the work of others, of course; no-one creates in a vacuum.
Veronese, Corot, Delacroix.
From them he took a notion of proportion and of colour-mass.
But he was his own man.’
Nina turned the fragments of food on her plate with all the delicacy of an archaeologist lifting a shard on to a  trowel.
The tines of her fork tapped the china, drawing a clear note.
‘He was single-minded, but broad-minded too — open to other disciplines.
He knew Zola well.
They would read poetry together, people like Hugo and Lamartine.
Cézanne liked it for its fierce romanticism.
I can't believe he would have taken much of its meaning.
‘A vision born of solitude’— that's what one critic said of his work.’
She let the champagne touch her mouth, then opened it slightly so that the clean coldness flushed the fatness of her lower lip and spilled from her teeth to her tongue.
She imagined it as a tiny surge welling over a dam and splashing into a parched valley.
Her mouth was very dry.
‘It's said he was a boorish man — moody, quarrelsome.
He lost friends.
Called Zola ‘vile’ when they fell out, and never spoke to him again.
He said, ‘Isolation is all I'm good for.’
He had a Catholic faith — strong to the point of bigotry.
‘I don't want anyone to get their hooks in me,’ that's what he said.
He moved around a lot, but his heart lay in Aix-en-Provence.
He lived to paint.
You can see his own contradictions in some of the landscapes — rich, placid greens, hot ochres.’
Nina broke a piece of fish into damp flakes.
The Indian emerged from his soft, stoned world for a moment and took her plate away.
He had to ease the fork from her fingers.
The expression on his face and the expression on Nina's were much the same.
Kemp's remarks drifted in and out of her mind, leaving strange images and textures.
What he was saying could as easily have been a lecture delivered to a silent class: the starchy language, the self-satisfied delivery.
She saw the greens and ochres, lushness in a desert landscape.
She saw a man picking little hooks from his flesh, each barb raising a blood-bead.
‘He was working one day, painting from nature, and got caught in a rainstorm.
He collapsed.
God knows how  long he lay there.
Someone driving a laundry cart found him.
He died a week later.’
Kemp reached for the cheese; in the same moment, the Indian stepped forward with a claret decanter.
Nina got up and smiled a smile that was meant for no-one.
She said, ‘I'm tired.’
During the time he'd been talking, Kemp had scarcely once taken his eyes from Nina's face.
He said, ‘Yes; you look tired.’
‘Perhaps I'll go to bed.’
She walked the length of the table and kissed her father.
He watched her approach and watched her as she went towards the door.
Henry Glinwood came into the room.
He and Nina passed without a glance.
Glinwood sat in a chair halfway along the dining table.
He said, ‘They're on their way.’
Kemp smiled and lifted his claret glass.
Good food, good wine, good conversation.
Good news.
26
You run an intersection, looking neither left nor right but simply slapping the gas and driving across.
The intersection is on your route home, and you do it every day, and nothing ever happens.
Whenever you take a trip to the sea, you like to swim.
You find a place to dive from, because diving is something you do particularly well — a ledge on a cliff, a boat pier.
Of course it's dangerous; there could be rocks or a killer current.
It's always the same — each time you dive, you find clear, calm water.
You know it's neither judgement nor luck.
It's meant to be that way.
You're invulnerable.
Eric Ross sauntered through the park.
Like everyone else, he was wearing weekend clothes: jeans and a light blouson.
He was carrying a small rucksack by one of its straps.
People strolled past without giving him a second look — couples hand in hand, families with pushchairs, groups of friends looking for a good spot to picnic.
Three young men in cutoffs had colonized a triangular space and were flipping a Frisbee.
Ross watched as it shuttled between them, going from hand to hand across thirty feet of air.
Maybe they all felt OK because no-one had been shot in a park.
Maybe, like Ross, they felt invulnerable, that it couldn't, wouldn't, happen to them.
Maybe it was nothing more than the statistical impossibility of everyone staying home all of the time.
As he passed them, Ross stifled an impulse to laugh.
Pick and choose, he thought.
It seemed so odd to think that they didn't know.
Animals would have known, would have caught his scent, or have seen him suddenly among them, and they'd have turned and fled as a herd will turn from a predator.
But no; they wandered by him, offering themselves like gifts — pick, choose; pick, choose.
He found a place in sight of one of the park's two lakes where a small plantation of young trees had been fenced off for protection.
It was thick with bracken and fern.
He hopped in and unzipped the rucksack, taking out only the scope which he pointed back towards the lakeside.
A man on horseback was circling the water, the reins slack in his hands to let his mount go at an idle walk.
Ross assembled the gun and found the rider again, swinging the cross-hairs past the Frisbee players, a man with a child on his shoulders, a woman throwing a stick into the water for her dog to chase and fetch.
For a moment, he took the scope back to the child perched like an Aunt Sally, then again to the horseman, who was coming directly towards the gun.
The woman threw her stick and the dog raced past to the water, going almost under the forelegs of the horse.
It shied; then, as the rider gathered rein, reared and skittered backwards on its hind legs.
It was the moment when Ross fired.
He saw the horse rise in the same fraction of a second as the recoil jabbed his cheek.
The horse screamed as the bullet scored its neck, and it seemed to leap with its hindlegs, making the rear a mighty buck that shipped the rider off and into the shallows of the lake.
Ross fished around with the scope, looking frantically for his target, but nothing would stay still.
The rider had managed to keep a hold on one rein and the horse was masking him — hopping and kicking out in an effort to break free.
People were in the water, helping the fallen man; others were staying to calm the horse; everyone was moving and milling.
The shot had been clearly audible and the activity by the water was energized by panic.
Ross knew he had already waited too long, but he continued to look through the scope, hoping for a clean shot at his chosen mark.
The man refused to come clear; he stood on the far side of the horse, soothing the animal and examining the fresh wound on its neck.
Now .
Go now .
Ross actually said the words out loud, even as he took the cross-hairs to and fro over the scene by the lakeside.
Go now .
A furious anger lay in him.
Not this .
Not like this .
Not fail .
Not lose control .
They die at my touch .
They die at my whim .
They must .
He broke the gun down and stowed it in the rucksack, slipped the spent cartridge case into his pocket, then jumped back over the fence.
A man was watching him from no more than ten feet away, standing still but looking backwards, as if his attention had been drawn to Ross's sudden appearance.
For a moment, they merely stared at one another; then Ross began to walk away.
The man came after him.
He said, ‘Hey…’
Ross continued to walk.
A couple of men rounded the plantation, going at a run towards the lake.
The man said, ‘Hey…’
The others glanced towards him, but didn't stop.
It was just a matter of time, Ross could see that.
He turned and walked towards his pursuer, smiling, his eyebrows raised.
He asked, ‘What's the problem?’ and in the same moment, struck at the man stiff-armed, a karate blow.
It should have come as a complete surprise, but the man swayed, taking Ross's fist on his shoulder.
He was young and fit, and had been half-expecting an attack.
As Ross followed in, the man swung, catching Ross solidly on the side of the face; he was wearing a  ring that opened a deep gash along the cheek-bone.
Ross ducked under a second punch and the man grabbed him.
They wrestled, grunting, Ross hampered by the rucksack.
The man kicked out sharply and connected just under the knee.
A weakening pain raced from the joint to Ross's hip and he staggered slightly.
The man stepped back in order to measure a punch.
Ross levered himself up, going against the pain, going fast, making his hand stiff from wrist to fingertip.
He slammed the straight edge into his opponent's face, taking him between top lip and nostrils.
The man fell to his knees.
His eyes turned up so that only the whites were left and he made an ugly sound deep in his throat, then he went forward, full-face on to the ground.
Ross turned and ran from the park.
When he saw or heard other people, he slowed to a walk until they were past, then he ran again.
He had chosen a place close to one of the gates on the western side, always knowing that his time for escape was limited.
Now there was no time at all.
They could close the gates and have him bottled up.
Not like this .
Not fail .
He was sobbing with effort and anger.
Wrong .
Wrong .
Wrong .
He made for a line of scrub between two gates and waited until the street outside was fairly clear, then climbed the railings and dropped down.
A few heads turned towards him — passers-by who didn't yet know what had happened in the park.
He walked quickly, getting three streets clear, then hailed a cab.
People had seen him in the park.
They were able to give a description.
Others had seen him as he jumped down from the railings.
They were able to give a description.
The cab driver had dropped him a couple of streets from the rented apartment.
He was able to give a description.
The descriptions varied widely.
Some had him with a moustache, others clean-shaven.
Some put him at average  height, others said he was a tall man.
He had brown hair, fairly short; he had dark hair worn long; he was dressed in a green jacket with jeans, a beige jacket with black trousers, a T-shirt, a polo shirt, sneakers, deck shoes.
But there was enough that married to provide a series of relatively accurate characteristics.
It seemed certain that the dead man in the park had attacked the killer and had left his mark — many people mentioned a cut and a badly bloodstained face.
For the police, it was a hell of a lot better than damn-all.
And they had other leads now.
A district, for one thing.
It was possible, of course, that their man had taken his taxi to a part of London far from the place he was staying in.
On the other hand, he'd been flustered.
For the first time, he'd made a mistake.
Maybe he wasn't thinking straight.
It was worth a try.
There was another thing.
Walking from the taxi to his apartment, Ross had felt the sting and throb in his face for the first time.
He'd put his hand to the place, amazed to see it come away bloody.
He felt even more exposed, as if the wound were shouting his identity.
He took a handkerchief from his pocket to hold against his cheek.
He was hurrying, he was distressed and angry.
Not like this .
Wrong .
Wrong .
The spent cartridge came out with the handkerchief and dropped on to the roadside verge.
Billy Knowle held a chicken and mayonnaise sandwich in his mouth in order to leave both hands free for the report.
Finally, he put the folder down on his desk, bit a mouthful from the sandwich and followed it with a gulp of lukewarm coffee.
‘Yeah, it's probably from his gun.
Anyway, it's a  308.’
He took another bite.
‘I'd proceed on that basis if I were you.’
Mike Dawson smiled.
‘We already have.
Culley ordered a house-to-house in the area.
He tried to keep it quiet, but there were people in the neighbourhood who were all too eager to be a part of the excitement.
Some of them were approached by the Press and television news reporters.
Had they been given the time, they'd've talked their faces off.
A day, thought Martin Jackson.
A day, if I'm lucky.
Longer than that and he'll be gone.
He's got to hole up.
He's angry and he's puzzled.
He probably isn't the only man in London with a cut on his face, but it'll feel that way to him.
It's Sunday night.
He'll hole up and move again tomorrow, after dark.
A man on a journey, who suddenly loses himself.
A man with a mission who suddenly loses his faith.
Where do you go when there's nowhere to go?
Go home.
27
In October 1987 the edginess that had been afflicting stock market dealings in London, New York and Tokyo grew steadily until it was a fully-fledged panic.
The smart money had moved some time earlier, becoming cash or commodities, anything that could survive the flash-fire of a market crash.
Other investors perished; or, at the very least, watched helplessly as their assets, like trees in the path of a firestorm, wilted, singed, then were consumed.
On 17 October, over fifty billion pounds was wiped off share prices worldwide.
Not everyone was ruined, though many were badly burned.
Some, for example, lost a couple of million, but had three or four other million to spare.
It's reasonable to think that a two million bite from a fortune of several million is a bearable loss.
For the multi-millionaire, though, it doesn't work like that.
It doesn't feel like that.
Bernard Warner had lost that sort of a sum from that sort of a fortune.
A number of his friends had been affected in a similar way; one or two had, in their terms, been wiped out — left with a million or less.
All of them had lost faith in the money market.
They would re-invest when things picked up, of course.
But they wouldn't be risking everything.
Six weeks after the crash, Warner had called a meeting of a dozen of his friends.
He had a proposition to make.
It involved an investment cartel in a commodity that always held its value, no matter what might happen in world affairs, no matter what the state of Third World debt, no matter who was at war with whom.
Money had proved itself flimsy in the face of those imponderables.
Fine art, Warner contended, would not.
Each of the men at the meeting was powerful in his own way.
And, in part, their power came from an understanding that they were not as other men.
They were among those few who controlled or owned the bulk of the country's wealth and influence.
It was plain to them that they were an elite.
They firmly believed that people should be given rules to abide by to ensure that society ran on an even basis; they didn't believe that the rules applied to them.
Warner, in particular, believed this.
He had been a Member of Parliament for more than two decades.
He helped to make laws, though it never really occurred to him that he should be governed by them.
When he hinted that some of their dealings might be — well —confidential , no-one at the meeting asked questions.
A mugger might go to prison for lifting a few pounds from his victim — and so he should.
It simply wasn't the same thing as an investment proposal from a friend.
If a few petty rules were bent, then so be it.
These were the descendants of the great families, the few buccaneers left in a drab world.
In any event, it wasn't necessary to know how Warner organized matters.
A fund was established, the money salted away in carefully disguised accounts abroad.
As long as the money grew, everyone was satisfied.
And the money did grow.
Many of the transactions were legitimate.
Warner went into the fine art business, using his friends and his influence to match buyer to purchase.
He didn't often actually handle a painting, but that mattered little to him.
Art was neither here nor there; money was the issue.
There was competition, of course.
One of Warner's principal opponents was a dealer called Jay Hammond; not least because Hammond was also happy to deal on the wrong side of the law.
There were times, too, when Warner was obliged to involve himself with people he'd sooner not have known.
One such person was the man who called himself Francis.
Their relationship had put Warner in the uncomfortable position of being a customer.
‘Well,’ Francis said, ‘he made a mistake.
That's what we were hoping for.’
‘It makes a difference?’
Warner asked.
‘In what way?’
‘He'll probably go to ground.
I just spoke to Jackson.
He's hopeful.’
‘Jackson knows where to find him?’
‘It's possible.’
‘Before the police find him?’
‘Jackson has the advantage; the police don't know who he is.’
‘Let me know as soon as there's any news.’
‘Sure.’
‘Francis —’
‘Yes?’
‘Before the police find him.
You understand?’
Francis's shrug came over the line.
‘They're no closer than they ever were.’
Warner broke the connection and re-dialled.
He said, ‘Sir Edward Latimer.
It's Bernard Warner.’
A phone rang and was lifted.
Warner heard Latimer say, ‘That's all for now.
I'll call you back in.’
A pause, then: ‘Bernard…’
‘Checking in,’ Warner said.
‘What's going on?’
‘I can't take these calls here.
’ Latimer's tone dropped to a near whisper.
‘If I make them,’ Warner told him, ‘you'll take them.
What's going on?’
Latimer sighed.
After a moment, he said, ‘They found the cartridge case —’
‘Jesus Christ, I know that.’
‘They've started a house-to-house.’
‘And?’
‘No.
The man had gone.
They expected that.’
‘They're sure?’
‘Pretty sure.
Nothing's for certain, is it?
They're checking places that are empty, or seem to be empty.
It's a long process in a big area.
No local sightings, at any rate.’
Warner paused for thought.
‘He could still be there simply not answering the door, or in a place they haven't checked as yet.’
‘He could be.
They don't think so.
The man's no fool.
He made a mess of things in the park, but it's the first time he's got it wrong.
He might be mad, but he's also methodical.
The obvious move would be get out of the district.’
‘And that's what they think?’
‘Yes = Bernard, I'll have to go.
I can't —’
‘Is Robin Culley still heading up the task force?’
Another sigh.
‘Yes.’
‘You're still getting his reports?’
‘Yes; from time to time.
His methods are a trifle eccentric.’
‘Bring him to heel.’
‘Not possible.
I'd need a reason.
I can't just —’
Warner's tone grew sharp.
‘He's dangerous — thinking as he does.’
‘I can't be seen to hinder things without cause.
Don't worry.
He's no further forward.’
‘He's got a theory.
It's a correct theory.’
‘Culley doesn't know that.’
Latimer's voice had grown louder; he dropped it again.
‘Bernard…this has got to stop.
I can't give you any more.’
‘You can,’ Warner said.
‘You will.’
He allowed a silence, not for Latimer's response, but to underline the lack of it.
‘Keep me informed about what Culley does.
I want to know his thinking.’
He paused again.
Latimer's voice came on an indrawn breath.
‘All right, Bernard.’
Warner heard him well enough.
He said, ‘What?’
‘All right.’
‘What would you like?’
Angie asked.
‘Something to eat?’
Ross didn't reply.
She went to the fridge and fetched some cheese and a chicken leg.
She put bread on the table.
When the kettle boiled, she made two cups of instant coffee.
He ate the food and drank the coffee.
She said, ‘We missed you.’
Then, riskily, ‘It's wonderful to have you back.’
Ross shook his head.
‘I can't stay.’
He went to the glass door that led to the garden and looked out.
It was dark, but he knew there was nothing to recognize.
It was 2 a.m.
Angie hadn't been asleep.
She'd heard him at the glass door — a double knock, very light.
He must have come across the low fences that separated the row of back gardens.
‘You'll be OK here with us,’ she said.
‘Me and the kids.
Or we could go away.
Sell up and go away.
What would you like?’
Ross peered out at the garden.
The faint glow from a street light showed him the outline of a hedge, neat flower beds, a black oblong of lawn.
Closer to his eye was a reflection of the kitchen, which seemed to hover in the darkness, a silent capsule, a moment from a time warp.
Angie was there, wearing a robe, hair tousled, her lips moving soundlessly.
‘We can talk about it in the morning.
Shall we go to bed, now?
What would you like?’
A place you try to find after a long absence…
Roads look familiar, landmarks seem to point the way.
‘This is it,’ you say, ‘I'm sure this is the place.’
But it isn't right — it doesn't recognize you.
‘You look tired.
Eric…’
Not tiredness.
Anger.
He wanted to go back and find that man, the horse-rider, the man he'd chosen to die.
Wrong .
He put a hand to his cheek and saw Angie's reflected image float up and drift towards him from the garden.
‘Let me see.’
He sat on a kitchen chair while she peeled back the plaster he'd stuck over the wound.
A puffy bruise divided by a clean slit rimmed with blood.
She fetched antiseptic and some cotton wool, then bent towards him and dabbed at the place, a pose that brought their heads close together.
When she spoke, her breath fell on him and his eyelids fluttered.
‘We could go away for a bit— a break; a couple of weeks perhaps.
Or you could just stay here and rest.
What would you like?’
The anger surged and dropped like an errant tide.
There was nothing here that belonged to him.
He thought of his vantage-point and the view through the scope; he thought of the way the cross-hairs quartered the scene, seeming to draw a victim on to the crux, dead-centre.
He heard the rush of wings.
Angie led him through the living room.
Tables, chairs, sofa, television.
And upstairs.
Carpet, bannister-rail, laundry basket on the landing.
And into the bedroom.
Dressing table, mirror, books and a clock-radio on the bedside cupboard.
He undressed and got into bed, switching off the lamp.
‘Eric…’
Her breath on his face again.
He gathered her under the hips as if he were lifting laundry, before she was ready, spending no time on her at all.
She whispered, ‘Wait,’ and he was inside her, abrasive, moving without the need of an answering rhythm.
In the light from the partly-opened curtains, she could see his head above hers, his neck stretched, his eyes open and staring at the wall above the bed-head.
She put a hand on his shoulder, to slow him, to make him think, and he  tightened his grip on her haunches, dragging her into the quickening thump of his hips.
He came — she felt the moment in pain and sadness — but he continued to move, banging at her, clutching just that part of her that he needed, as if he'd felt nothing, as if he didn't know when to stop.
His head was still up; his eyes were still fixed on the wall.
Wrong .
He should have died .
All wrong .
What would you like?
Not this ,not this ,not this .
The same dream — Eric walking through a throng and pausing, now and then, to touch someone on the shoulder.
Angie saw herself in the crowd.
She hurried towards her husband, pushing others aside.
There was nothing of recognition in his face as he passed her by.
She woke and found herself alone in the bed; a door closed and she identified the sound.
She thought: I should have told him.
But it might not have mattered.
I want him back.
Perhaps it doesn't matter.
Ross stood in the doorway of the bedroom.
He asked, ‘Who's been here?
Who went into my room?’
‘In your room?’
She felt foolish as soon as the words were out.
‘Who's been in there?’
Ross advanced on the bed.
‘Angie .’
It didn't sound like her name.
She said, ‘Martin Jackson was here.’
While he dressed, she cried, her face in her hands to stifle the sound in case she woke their children.
Eric…
Not in the house.
Not with her there.
Not in one of the rooms you've lived in together.
Our moment — it has to be our moment.
I want to see you and I want you to see me.
We don't have to talk, no, but we need a moment for ourselves.
It's been so long.
I said, ‘I love you.’
And then you went away.
Let's think this through.
Let's put our heads together.
I can cover the front of the house, or I can cover the back.
If I get it right, then I'll have you when you come out.
Unless she comes to the front door, and follows you down the path; or comes to the back door and follows you into the garden.
Kill her?
Yes, you're right, I could do that.
Kill the children, too?
I could, but look — I don't think that's the point.
I want it uncluttered.
I want it just for us.
Now, let's look at this.
She'll tell you I called.
She won't want to, but she'll have to.
It depends when you find the pebble gone, and the map.
If it's daylight, the best I can do is follow you, stay close.
But you'll be looking for that.
If it's dark…
Well, if it's dark there could be a chance.
A quiet neighbourhood; no-one about but the occasional delivery man.
All your neighbours dozing above their car-ports.
If it's dark, you'll probably go the way you came — over the gardens.
How do I know that?
Because I've been watching the front of your house long enough to know.
I'm sure you're inside by now and I didn't see you, so it must have been over the gardens to the back door.
Make sense?
OK.
Now, which way will you go — left or right?
More gardens to the left, so it would make sense to suppose that you'd come in from the right, leaving your car in the road at the end of the row.
Which is your car?
You don't want to tell me?
All right, that's fair enough.
Right now, you're probably making guesses of your own and, listen, I'm not giving you any help with those.
I checked the cars earlier.
I was looking for something fast and reliable, but not ostentatious.
A suburban road, suburban lifestyles and salaries.
You know how important it is not to look exceptional.
In the road to the left, two candidates; in the road to the right, two more.
Perfectly even odds.
So what else can we find?
Fewer gardens to the right — less ground to cover, less chance of being seen.
So why not bluff and come in from the left?
How does that sound to you?
It does?
Except that you didn't know about me when you went in, so there would be no reason for a bluff, would there?
All right.
Now we've worried at this, what have we got?
Your car is parked in the road off to the right.
The thing is, we both know that; after all, we worked this out together.
So you'll think: Martin knows where my car is.
And he knows I know he knows.
What are my options?
Isn't that what you're thinking?
If I go to the car, he'll be waiting.
Or —
He'll assume that I won't go to the car because he'll be waiting, so I'll go to the left, and that's where he'll be waiting.
Or —
He'll decide that I've worked that out — that I'll guess my best bet is to go to the car because he'll reckon I won't go to the car.
Or —
He'll think ahead of me on that.
He'll expect the double-bluff.
First I think that if I go to the car, he'll be waiting, so I won't go to the car.
Then I think: he'll think that too, so if I don't go to the car, he'll be waiting.
Then I think: he'll have worked that out as well, so he'll expect me to go to the car.
So I won't.
Eric…
Does that sound right?
Perhaps I'm a thought ahead.
Or one behind.
How badly do you need the car?
Pretty badly, I guess we're agreed on that.
Jackson went to the road that bordered the gardens on the left.
He waited for three-quarters of an hour, until the mottled grey of false-dawn had given way to a pink-and-pearl flush above the silent rooftops, then left, walking between the rows of drawn curtains and smiling at his wrong choice.
28
Before Nicola Hammond had gone for her walk with Gunter Schmidt, she had taken all the money in her wallet and lined her bra with it.
She had guessed it would look better — more disarming — not to be carrying a bag; as if she expected to be out only for a short time.
Her cache amounted to just over a hundred pounds.
She was living in a bed and breakfast place for thirty-five pounds a night, and paying each day — it wasn't the kind of hotel where you settled the bill as you left.
She'd been there two days and was running out of money.
Running out of time.
Protheroe and Latimer weren't the only people who had trouble tracking Culley down.
Nicola had phoned a dozen times, without luck.
It wasn't permitted to take incoming calls on the pay phone in the hallway of the hotel.
In any case, she couldn't have held a conversation there.
Dawson passed the messages on.
‘She doesn't say who she is; she doesn't leave a number.
She's phoned several times over the past couple of days.’
Culley shrugged.
‘She'll get me eventually, I suppose.
What do you think?’
‘Who knows,’ Dawson said.
‘Could be a nut.
On the other hand —’
‘She won't talk to you?’
‘No.
She asks when she's likely to find you in.’
‘Ah.’
‘And she's not the only one.’
‘No?’
‘Helen phoned a few times.
As did Protheroe.
Same question.’
‘What did you say?’
‘How deep is the ocean,’ Dawson said.
‘How high is the sky.’
The obvious route is often the last to be taken.
Nicola Hammond looked in the phone book.
There were listings for Culley, a florist, Culley, a bookseller, and Culley's, a restaurant; there were seven listings for other Culleys, three of them Culley, R. And there was a listing for Culley, Robin.
She got an answering machine and was pretty certain that she recognized his voice from the times he'd given a television reporter a few words at the scene of crime.
‘I'm not here to take your call.
Leave a message, or try me on…’
Then a number.
Nicola dialled and got Helen Blake.
She said, ‘I've been trying to reach Robin Culley.’
‘Stand in line,’ Helen told her.
Then her voice took on a tone of mild suspiciousness.
‘Who are you?’
‘I need to talk to him.
I've called his office; he's never there.’
‘That's right.
Well, I'm not sure I can be much help.’
‘Are you his girl-friend?’
Nicola asked.
‘In a manner of speaking.’
There was a pause.
‘Perhaps I could speak to you.’
‘Go ahead.’
Helen sounded intrigued.
‘Not on the phone.
Where do you live?’
Helen had been with Culley long enough to recognize a red light.
‘No,’ she said, ‘but I could come to you if you like.’
They met in the lobby, which was little more than a hallway graced by a couple of wooden armchairs.
Nicola led the way to her room.
‘There isn't much.’
she said.
‘I've got some Scotch.’
Helen shook her head.
They sat on the bed together.
‘Jay Hammond,’ Nicola said.
Helen raised her eyebrows and shrugged slightly.
‘My husband.
He was killed by the sniper.
He was a fine art dealer; paintings mostly, occasionally china.
There were occasions,’ she chose her words with care, ‘when his deals were confidential.’
‘The paintings were stolen,’ Helen offered.
‘He didn't —’
‘Cut them out of the frames himself; no, I'm sure you're right.
A customer approached him, he arranged the theft, someone else took the risk, someone else again arranged for transport, your husband paid them, of course, but he collected the fee from the buyer.’
Nicola looked at her, but said nothing.
Helen smiled.
‘I work for a gallery,’ she said.
‘Cork Street.’
‘Jay was arranging a sale.
I don't know who the buyer was.
He never told me those things.
But I do know that he was threatened.’
‘Why?’
‘Someone else wanted the merchandise.’
‘A buyer?’
‘No.
A dealer — a supplier.’
‘What happened?’
‘They tried to buy him off.
In fact they offered him a very large amount of money.
Jay was annoyed, I think.
He said no.
It sounded a bit like a little boys’ squabble.
You know: ‘I thought of it first.’
Next Jay told them he'd step aside but only for some ridiculous sum of money.’
‘How much?’
‘Oh, millions — he didn't expect them to accept.’
Nicola smiled.
‘He said he was making them an offer they couldn't accept.
It amused him.’
‘But didn't amuse them.’
‘They said that unless he backed out of the deal, they'd kill him.’
‘Did he?’
‘No.’
‘And the sniper killed him.’
‘Yes.’
Helen was hearing her own theory given circumstance and flesh.
She asked, ‘What are you saying?’
‘There's a man called Gunter Schmidt.
One of Jay's associates.
You said a moment ago that there'd be someone to organize transport.
That's Schmidt.
Jay had told me a certain amount — about the offers of money if he left the deal clear for someone else.
He made light of it.
Joked about how much they might pay.
He didn't tell me about the death-threat.
Schmidt did that.’
‘Why?’
‘After Jay was killed, the police called.
They didn't expect…
I mean, it was a routine call.
But Schmidt was edgy.
I was very upset.
I think he was frightened that I might unwittingly say too much — that if I knew everything, I'd be more likely to guard my tongue; be part of the conspiracy.’
‘If you knew everything…’
‘Schmidt — and one or two of his people — think they know about the sniper.
They think it was a means of killing Jay without making Jay's death stand out.
That way, it would seem like someone gone mad — everyone would be looking at the sniper, no-one would be looking for a motive.
If he'd killed only Jay, it would have been easy to make connections.’
‘It's a theory,’ Helen said.
‘What makes it believable?’
‘Someone told Schmidt.’
‘Someone…’
‘Yes.
I don't know.
If I did, I'd tell you.
He got a call on the day of Jay's death.
Just: ‘You've seen what happened to Hammond.
It could happen to you.
Call off the deal.’
That sort of thing.’
‘What did Schmidt do?’
‘Called off the deal.’
‘Why didn't you tell the police when they called?’
Nicola worked backwards on the bed until she was resting against the wall; she pulled her knees up and clasped them.
‘I didn't know Jay had gone.
Well, I knew he was dead…’
She looked beyond Helen, staring at the door.
Her look was so intense that Helen half-turned, almost believing that someone had opened it and was standing just inside the room.
There was no-one there.
When she looked again at Nicola Hammond's face, she could tell that the woman's eyes were fixed, but unseeing.
‘I knew he was dead, but I hadn't lost him.
Not then.
I couldn't quite work out what ‘dead’ meant.
He'd gone out to play tennis; then he had a lunch meeting in the city.
He'd said, ‘I'll be home about four-thirty.’
It was eleven o'clock when the police called.
Do you see what I mean?’
Helen said, ‘It wasn't time for him to be home yet.’
Nicola's look sharpened and her head came round slightly.
The vagueness had gone from her eyes, though she seemed a little startled.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘Yes.
You understand.’
‘And after four-thirty —’
‘It was later than that.
At bedtime, really.
When I got into bed alone.
I woke up in the middle of the night and took all of Jay's clothes out of the wardrobe.
I tried to make a bonfire with them on the lawn.
Schmidt found me there.
Whoever killed Jay, whoever ordered him to do it — I wanted them caught.
I didn't care about much else.
I still don't.’
‘But Schmidt does.’
‘Yes.
That's why I'm here.
They wouldn't…it was a bit like house arrest, really.
I managed to get away.’
‘What will you do?’
Nicola shrugged.
‘Can you lend me some money?’ she asked.
Helen looked round the room.
‘What have you got?’
‘What I'm wearing.’
‘Yes.’
They sat in silence for a few seconds.
Helen said, ‘I think we'd better go.’
Schmidt had been able to hear the chauffeur crashing round in the woods.
He'd tried to call the man's name, but it had emerged as a slurred gasp.
Ellut.
Ellut .
It had been an hour before Elliott had grown concerned.
It was a further hour before he found Schmidt.
It was a full day later before Schmidt had been able to form a coherent sentence, though his words still came in a low, wracked whisper.
He was able to write, though.
Elliott and Goldman were given instructions.
Get her back , Schmidt had written.
Need to know what she's said —who she's said it to .
Maybe she hasn't yet .
She'll hide .
Think it over perhaps .
She's implicated too .
‘We'd have had a visit if she'd gone straight to the nearest phone,’ Goldman observed.
Exactly .
She's deciding .
‘Deciding what?’
Who to talk to .
Whether to talk at all .
Doesn't matter .
Get her back .
Elliott said, ‘She'll talk to the police if she talks at all— who else?’
Police but only once —only one man .
One chance .
She'll want it to be her terms ,place she decides .
Try to make deal ,perhaps .
‘You don't think she'll simply go to the police station and ask to speak —’
Schmidt had shaken his hand, as if scrubbing the idea out.
No .
Too risky .
Talk to this person ,talk to that .
No good .
Then he'd written,Culley .
They'd staked out Culley's flat for half a day and most of the night.
Then they'd gone in for a look.
The tape on his answering machine had said,’…leave a message or try me on…’
They'd taken this information back.
Schmidt had made a phone call.
His voice sounded like chains being dragged through gravel.
He asked two questions and put the phone down.
If you know people who know people you can find almost any information you want.
Schmidt had phoned a dealer, the dealer asked his wife, a business journalist, who asked a colleague on the news desk.
He asked a policeman who owed him a favour that he wanted no-one to know about.
The phone calls had dog-legged back.
It had taken two hours.
‘Helen Blake,’ Schmidt had said.
‘Ex-wife.
Uses maiden name.’
He'd been sparing with words: it hurt to talk.
‘Possible.
Try that.’
He'd given the address.
Helen said, ‘I don't know what will happen.’
‘To me?’
‘Yes.’
Nicola smiled.
‘I'll talk to your husband about me…’
She seemed oddly lighthearted, a woman suddenly overtaken by good humour.
Helen wondered if she was seeing the first moment of a gathering hysteria.
She took her eyes off the road briefly and glanced at Nicola.
A calm face, bright eyes.
She said, ‘I wouldn't count on —’
Nicola's laugh cut her short.
‘There'll be a deal.
There's always a deal.’
Then she said, ‘But, in fact, it doesn't matter.’
Helen pulled in to a ground-level parking lot.
From there, a quiet backstreet led to the rear entrance of her apartment block.
She and Nicola walked past the delivery doors of a bakery and a Chinese restaurant.
A kitchen worker appeared, dumped two black garbage sacks, then disappeared.
Elliott moved the car along the street, staying a few yards back from Goldmam who was twenty feet behind Helen  and Nicola, his pace increasing as the distance narrowed, timing it nicely.
Car and pursuer would coincide before the women noticed that they were being tracked.
It was Helen who broke the rhythm of things; she delved in her bag, searching for her house keys, and when she didn't find them, stopped to search more carefully.
Goldman was no more than two paces back.
When Helen paused, he cannoned into her and she turned, offering a startled apology that turned into a cry of alarm as Goldman shoved her to one side.
Nicola had stopped also.
When she saw Goldman, her voice rose above Helen's.
She turned to run, but Goldman was on her, grabbing her arms, her shoulders, fending off the wild blows that she aimed at his face.
The car was alongside.
Elliott pushed the passenger door open with a foot as Goldman wrestled Nicola to the kerbside.
At one end of the street, a man turned towards the noise and began to walk slowly back; then he paused.
Goldman's push had sent Helen backwards over a low wall, hips and legs one side, torso on the other.
Her face struck concrete, dazing her, and a fierce humming started up in her ears.
When she put her hand out, trying to rise, she skittled a row of bottles.
Nicola's voice was coming and going like a tricky radio signal; she could feel a stinging dampness where her calves had dragged over the rough brickwork atop the wall.
The man was still a spectator, walking slowly towards the action, now, but without having made any kind of a decision.
Nicola had stopped trying to hit Goldman; she was wrenching her body sideways each time he grabbed her, turning away from him, away from the car, using her full weight against his and losing the contest moment by moment.
Goldman had his arms round her, trapping her at the elbows, his hands clasped across her breasts.
He kicked at her legs, tried to lift her, kicked at her legs again.
She tried to duck out of his grip, half-succeeding, and he went off-balance.
She spun out of his arms and he  grabbed, getting her shirt collar and yanking against her movement away from him.
The buttons popped and the shirt tore out of her waistband.
When the man saw this, he began to walk more quickly, then to run, as if triggered by some vulnerability in Nicola that he hadn't found before.
Helen had scrambled back over the wall.
She crossed to the kerb, looking for an opening, a bottle in her right hand.
Elliott was half-in, half-out of the car, trying to work out where he would be most use.
Still gripping Nicola's shirt, Goldman pulled her in and punched her, missing her face when she lurched away from the blow, but taking her on the body.
Her feet went; she scrambled and sat down, dragging him with her so that his body stooped in a low bow like some subservient courtier.
Helen swung the bottle, clubbing Goldman at the base of the skull.
He dropped to one knee and stayed there.
Nicola scrambled backwards on heels and hands.
She stood up and Helen went to her.
The man was standing just behind them, still watching.
They looked at Goldman, then at Elliott getting out of the car.
The man said, ‘What's going on?’
He was speaking to the women, but looking at Goldman who was kneeling, head lowered.
Elliott clutched Goldman's shoulders from behind and got him half-way to his feet before Goldman tottered backwards and sat down heavily.
He said, ‘What?’ and tried to look over his shoulder, as if not sure who was there.
His eyes were empty.
Elliott looked at the three faces watching him.
He lifted Goldman again, wrapping his arms round the man, but couldn't make him move towards the car.
Helen took Nicola's arm and began to draw her backwards.
‘Do you want me to do anything?’
The man was looking at Helen now.
She said, ‘It's all right,’ still retreating, still pulling Nicola with her.
The man took a step towards Elliott, then stopped.
He said, ‘What are you doing?’
Elliott got a shoulder under Goldman's arm, the other round his waist, and they shambled to the car.
He opened the rear door and folded Goldman on to the seat; his legs trailed into the road and Elliott tucked them up on the seat.
His eyes flicked to the man from time to time, making sure he came no nearer.
As the car moved off, the man strode into the road as if his intention to confront Elliott had simply been mistimed.
Helen and Nicola were moving along the street.
He went after them.
‘What was that?’
‘It's OK,’ Helen said.
‘Thanks for helping.’
‘Is she all right?’
Nicola was crying softly, held in the crook of Helen's arm, her shirt wide open.
‘She'll be fine.’
The man seemed reluctant to leave.
He stared at Nicola in silence, his eyes everywhere.
Helen looked at the man's face until she drew his gaze.
‘She's fine.
She's OK.’
‘You're sure?’
The man took a couple of steps backwards, then a couple more.
Helen nodded; she tried a smile.
Three more paces backwards, then the man turned and walked off.
Helen watched him until he rounded the corner, then walked Nicola the ten or so yards along the street that took them to the entrance to her building.
When they were inside, Nicola said, ‘I feel sick.’
She tried a smile, then her mouth turned down and she hiccuped; her cheeks belled.
Helen took her to the bathroom and held her hair back while she gagged and spat.
‘It won't come,’ she said, and sat back on her haunches.
Helen left her trying while she made a phone call.
A room had been set aside for the investigation.
A bank of phones, paperwork cascading over a long table, two  computers programmed to look for patterns, similarities, oddities.
There were twenty or so people in the room.
The law of averages had made one of them Robin Culley.
Someone held a phone up as he walked past.
‘Who?’
Culley asked.
‘A woman.’
He made a guess.
‘Protheroe's secretary?’
‘No.’
He took the call and listened for a while.
Finally, he said, ‘Yes.’
Then, ‘Now.
Of course, now.’
When he let himself into Helen's flat, Nicola Hammond was alone in the living room, naked to the waist, her back to the door.
She was standing close to an alcove filled with bookshelves, reading the titles like any visitor might.
She turned to Culley's arrival making no move to cover herself.
A large bruise coloured the upper slope of one breast; dark imprints striped her arms close to the shoulder where Goldman had gripped her.
Helen came in, carrying a shirt.
Nicola took it and turned her back while she put it on.
She said, ‘There's got to be give and take in this.’
Her voice was a little too loud — an attempt to cover her shakiness.
‘No deals,’ Culley told her.
‘I want something; you want something.
There ought to be leeway in that.’
Helen felt as if she were hearing Nicola for the first time.
She went through to the kitchen to fetch the coffee she'd put on earlier.
Cups, saucers, a small jug of milk; she made herself busy while they talked business.
A go-between, somebody's secretary.
A flash of anger rattled the cups.
‘All right,’ Culley was saying, ‘tell me.
What do you get?’
‘I get to be anonymous.’
Culley was still standing.
Nicola had turned and was leaning against the books, her arms crossed on her chest, hands over her shoulders like epaulettes.
She wasn't trying to look coquettish, but she seemed a little silly all the same.
‘What do I get?’
‘You get Schmidt.’
When Culley looked blank, she said, ‘Jay's partner.
The one who —’
‘Yes.’
Culley remembered.
‘And the men who came here…?’
‘Elliott drove the car.
And Goldman.’
‘Will they be with Schmidt?’
Culley was still ordering the information she'd given him, and the few things Helen had said on the phone.
‘Bound to be.
They're his minders.’
Helen came in with a tray.
Nicola dropped her arms and the shirt cuffs fell over her knuckles; it was a full size too big.
She rolled them on to her forearms.
Culley said, ‘Are you all right?’
Helen half-turned and tipped her toes to show him the grazes on her calves.
‘Otherwise, fine.’
‘I could simply arrest you.’
Culley's attention switched.
‘Arrest Schmidt.’
‘Not without you.
How do I charge him?
What with?
He didn't kill your husband.’
‘He knows who did.’
‘Does he?’
‘Well…he knows who ordered it.’
‘A different thing.’
‘I still won't be involved.’
Helen poured coffee but left them to take it from the tray.
Culley held his cup like a truck driver, hand wrapped round, handle outermost.
‘If it's to be unlawful restraint, I need you.
If it's kidnap, I need you.
If it's assault, I need you.
All ways to hold him for a while.
If I ask him about —’
‘Jay.’
‘Jay, right, he can not know what I'm talking about, say you're distraught, acting irrationally, suffering from bizarre flights of fancy.
I don't have anything.
Just you.’
‘Forget it.’
‘What do I charge him with?’
‘Forget it.’
Helen was trying to decide how much of Nicola's resolve, how much of her negotiating power, proceeded from fear.
Less than half, she decided.
The rest was innate toughness.
She thought, He'll get what she wants to give him, no more.
She's lost all she intends to lose.
Culley thought that too, but he made a last try.
‘It's not just me.
There are people I report to.’
‘Don't report.’
To Helen, she said, ‘I don't suppose you smoke?’
‘Not any more.
I've got some though.’
She went to a drawer and came back with her tough-it-out pack, unopened, and some matches.
Nicola lit a cigarette and waited.
Culley waited too.
She said, ‘I'm offering you something you didn't have this morning.
It's all I've got to give.
It's all I'm giving.
Whatever you do with it you do unofficially.
I don't exist.
You don't arrest Schmidt.
You can pull his teeth, smash his kneecaps, hammer nails into him if you like.
I wish you would.
But nothing that makes him public; because that makes me public.’
‘I could lie,’ Culley pointed out.
Nicola smoked, still waiting.
He said, ‘All right.’
She gave him an address in Highgate.
‘They'll want to leave the country, but they'll have to go there first — records of sales, addresses, phone numbers.
They held me at my house, but this is where Schmidt lives when he's in London.
Jay liked to keep a distance.’
‘Three of them,’ Culley asked.
‘You're expecting me to go without back-up.’
‘You tell no-one.
That's the agreement.’
‘I could have lied,’ he reminded her.
‘I can play mad,’ she told him.
‘Schmidt might say I'm distraught.
You wait till you see distraught.
Everything I've said will become fantasy, a need for revenge, hysteria.
You'll hear the words wrongful arrest from more lawyers than you can easily count.
And anyway,’ she drew on her cigarette and smiled through the smoke, ‘you never intended that.
You said you needed me; you don't.
You need Schmidt — just for a while.
Just for long enough.’
Culley put down his cup and left the room.
The women heard the front door close.
Nicola looked at Helen.
She said, ‘Isn't that right?
Schmidt — just for long enough.’
Helen took the coffee cups into the kitchen.
A little quake of delayed shock nudged her — breathlessness and a desire to sleep.
It was supplanted by a fist of anger.
This woman, dragging her in.
Putting her in danger, making demands, being a dress size smaller, trailing her grief, smoking when Helen couldn't, displaying her bruises, displaying her loss, winning her stand-off with Culley.
Reading him that well.
You can smell it on him, thought Helen.
A dark smell, violence and risk.
Or some people can.
Nicola was examining her bruise, her fingertips stroking the place and moving only in one direction, as if she might draw the pain down and away.
When Helen came back she closed the shirt and buttoned it.
‘You said you might lend me some money.
Is it possible?’
‘How much?’
‘Enough to get me home.
A taxi.
They'll be gone from there.’
‘What will you do?’
‘Spend the night.
Go away tomorrow.’
Helen fetched her bag and gave Nicola all the money she was carrying.
‘Go where?’
Nicola smiled, as if she were catching Helen out in some childishly transparent ruse.
‘I can't tell you,’ she said, ‘because not even I know that.’
The house was in a terrace backed by garages.
Culley checked the garage cul-de-sac.
Each house had its own wrought-iron gate hung in a brick arch.
A green BMW with the boot ajar stood outside the rear entrance of the fourth house; a man was loading boxes and files.
Sandy-haired, broad across the shoulders; Elliott, from Nicola's description.
He pulled the boot down and slammed it.
Big hands; a long-ish reach.
Goldman emerged from the wrought-iron gateway with a briefcase in either hand.
He tossed them on to the back seat and went to the passenger side of the car.
Elliott got in, arching in his seat to fish in his pocket for keys.
Culley went back to the street, passed the front of the house, then turned and retraced his steps in time to see the car pull out of the cul-de-sac and move away from him.
A solid front door.
with a narrow fan of glass in the transom; two elegant sashcord windows flanking it.
I hope I've got this right, Culley thought.
I hope she was telling the truth.
He stood off from the left-hand window and kicked the big bottom pane, pulling his foot back before it interrupted the fall of glass, then kicked again to clear the residue.
He rolled through the space, snapping a shard of glass that sliced his jacket and put a nick in his shoulder.
A door into the hallway, a door beyond that, and Schmidt going for the french window that let on to the patio.
Culley said, ‘Don't bother,’ but Schmidt had stopped anyway.
‘Who?’
His voice was rocks in a churn.
‘Move away from the door.’
Culley took a captain's chair that was standing by a wall and placed it just  back from centre in the room.
‘Sit there.’
It allowed him a view of the patio and put Schmidt between him and the door he'd entered by.
Schmidt sat.
Culley stood behind him like an invigilator.
‘There isn't much time for this.’
Schmidt began to turn his head and received a light slap.
He faced front.
‘Who?’ he asked.
‘I stopped the deal.’
‘Deal?’
Culley was tempting him.
Suddenly, Schmidt's shoulders tightened.
He remembered a face on the television screen; a voice saying, ‘…at this stage.
We're following a number of enquiries and hope…’
He'd been too frightened to make the connection immediately.
He felt a hand resting lightly on his shoulder as if in readiness.
‘What do you want?’
‘A name,’ said Culley.
‘Name.’
The word was spoken as if it were part of a mystery too arcane to be rapidly solved.
Culley laughed, then allowed a silence.
Finally, he said, ‘Really…
There isn't much time.’
Schmidt was making calculations.
He thought: Ten minutes?
Fifteen?
as if reading his mind, Culley asked, ‘Where have they gone?’
‘Gone?’
Schmidt's voice crunched the single syllable.
‘Two men, a green BMW, loading up at the back of the house, please don't fuck me around,’ Culley said, ‘because I'm becoming angry, and I want to know where they've gone.’
Schmidt waited to see how bad it would be to begin with — a gauge of how bad it might become.
Culley yanked the man's head back by his hair and cuffed him lightly across the throat.
Schmidt gagged and jerked against Culley's grip.
His mouth opened and pulled air in like draughts of water.
Culley waited for the spasm to pass, and loosened his hold a fraction.
Schmidt hunched his shoulders and  gobbled like a turkey.
Culley stretched the man's neck and cuffed it again.
‘A name,’ he said.
‘I can see you're having trouble talking at present, so I'll give you a lead.
You can do the rest.
I don't think you know who shot Jay Hammond, but I'm sure you know who paid for the job to be done.
I know about the deal on the paintings.
I know about the warning.
I know that Hammond told them to fuck off.
I know that you know who Hammond was talking to.
That's the name I want.
It's not difficult.
It's just a word.’
Schmidt's chest was crowning with effort, like an asthmatic in a sawmill.
Culley pulled on the man's hair as if it were a bell rope, backhanded him across the throat again, then clamped his hand over Schmidt's mouth.
‘One or two syllables,’ he suggested.
‘Three at the most, I suspect.
It's not much to ask.’
A crimson flush going purple spread on to Schmidt's forehead.
His body bucked off the chair with such violence that his knee joints popped.
Culley removed his hand.
‘Where have they gone?’
‘Filling.
Station.’
Air whined in Schmidt's throat like a siren.
‘The name.’
‘Kemp.’
He gulped the syllable, taking it down with a swallow of air.
‘Again,’ Culley said.
A door slammed and footfalls hammered the hallway floor.
Culley moved away from Schmidt.
He felt the wide gaze of the french windows at his back and the awareness put his timing out.
When the door opened, he was too far into the jamb to confront Elliott directly and his kick came off the wood, catching an arm and missing the ribs entirely.
Elliott backpedalled fast, then circled to Culley's left.
He didn't spare Schmidt a glance; his eyes held Culley's, waiting for the glint that betrays sudden movement.
Coming  through the door off — balance, taking the deflected kick — he'd absorbed that.
He looked competent; engrossed.
The other, Goldman, would soon arrive on the patio.
Culley's shoulders tightened, but he didn't glance back.
He feinted left, drawing a punch and slipping it, then played the bluff and went in fast, going left again.
Elliott saw the move at the last second.
He went back on his heels, but couldn't clear the punch entirely.
Culley felt a tooth cut into his fist.
When he stepped forward to use the other hand, something cracked into the small of his back, and he stumbled.
Schmidt had kicked him.
Elliott hit him on the rise, misjudging the blow slightly.
Culley heard a small detonation in his face, like a damp stick breaking.
He took another head punch before ducking under Elliott's arm and turning so that they passed one another, Culley clubbing with laced fingers.
He broke the nose.
Blood hosed over Elliott's chin and he backed off, looking for a moment's pause.
Over Elliott's shoulder, Culley could see Goldman wrenching at the handle on the french windows.
Schmidt started towards them, intending to throw the lock.
Culley went straight for Elliott, then sidestepped at the last minute, almost a leap backwards.
Elliott had stepped away, trying for the counter-punch.
Schmidt suddenly found himself in the space between them, his hand outstretched for the lock.
Culley swung at him, coming up on his toes for the blow.
His fist went into Schmidt's throat like a hammer into dough.
Schmidt took a short step backwards, then his legs went as if someone had pulled a string.
He unravelled.
His face smashed a pane low down in the french window and went through, stippling Goldman's shoes with blood.
Elliott stepped forward a pace, then stopped.
To get to Culley, he would have had to step over Schmidt.
Outside, Goldman was looking down at Schmidt as if he  were standing on a cliff's edge and peering at the drop.
Elliott palmed blood off his face and coughed.
Culley moved to the door, his eyes on Elliott.
He was watching through the door-space as he backed down the hallway.
They stood still, the man in the room and the man on the patio, looking down at Schmidt.
Culley opened the front door and turned back.
The men were in the same position, but now they were looking at each other.
Early evening, a rhomboid of sunlight mellowing on the wall, Brahms' violin concerto ripening towards its second movement, the pungent crispness of gin as it swamped her tongue.
Helen amused herself with the pretence that she always lived this way.
Very soon, someone would come in with uncomplicated news of the day; someone ordinary, a nuclear physicist or a brain surgeon.
‘Hard day at the cerebellum, darling?
By the way, the Nobel committee phoned.’
When Culley arrived, she was smoking a forbidden cigarette.
He poured himself a gin, sipped it, then added ice and tonic water as an afterthought.
His left eye had half-closed over a tight, blue bruise.
Across the cheek-bone was a thin line, strangely bloodless, where the skin had split.
Elliott's other score had put a graze on Culley's forehead, close to the hairline.
Helen looked at him.
She laughed out loud, but there was a downturn to her mouth.
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘that looks familiar.’
I must have killed him, Culley thought.
He must be dead.
Helen went into the bathroom and came back with antiseptic and cotton wool.
‘It's my day for this sort of activity.
Nurse Blake soothes another patient; to care is to serve.’
Her own legs were dappled with the pale primrose of iodine.
Culley lifted his face and sipped gin under her hand.
‘Where did she go?’
‘Christ knows.
Her only concern was to get clear.
Not a bad idea, judging from the state of your face.
Did that hurt?’
‘I think my cheek-bone's cracked.’
‘Oh.’
Her hand withdrew, then came back, gentler than before.
‘It just heals up, given time.’
‘Do you have to do anything?’
‘Smile a bit less often.’
She waited to be told, but he stayed silent, sipping, angling the damaged side of his face towards her.
After a few minutes, she thought to soft-nose him in.
‘The killings have stopped.’
It was old news, but they hadn't seen each other to talk of it.
‘Possibly,’ Culley said.
‘Too soon to say.’
‘The attempt last Saturday — his first failure?’
‘So far as we know.’
‘And nothing since.’
She capped the antiseptic, then walked through to the kitchen and dropped the cotton wool into the bin.
‘Now this.’
She meant, Now Nicola Hammond — and…?
He didn't take the hint.
‘Why did you go?’
‘What?’
She was carrying a fresh tray of ice; the cubes popped when she put them in the drinks.
‘To see the Hammond woman.’
‘Well, you're about as easy to locate as a politician's honour.
She wouldn't talk to your colleagues, but she'd settle for talking to me.’
‘It's not your problem.’
‘You mean, it's not my business.’
‘Look at what almost happened.’
Helen looked startled, then she laughed.
‘My God, that's not retrospective concern I'm hearing, is it?
It was just a few scratches.
I've got worse picking blackberries.’
‘Don't be fucking stupid,’ Culley said.
Helen shrugged; she felt mildly embarrassed, as if she had overstepped the mark.
Suddenly, she was aware of Culley as policeman.
‘If I hadn't seen her, it might have been days before…
I don't know.
They might have tracked her down.’
‘Yes.’
He glanced at her briefly, then reached for the bottle and topped up both their drinks.
‘I didn't say I was sorry that you'd done it.’
Dusk swarmed in the room, a galaxy of dark particles.
The window framed a deep blue square of sky.
When a breeze shifted the curtain, she could see a plump line of jet-trail and the flexing brilliance of a rising planet.
Culley's hands settled on her.
He was browsing, going slowly, while she watched the planet's pulse-light, imagining the fierce arcs of fire crackling in blackness.
Absentmindedly, she opened to him and his touch brought her head round.
She said, ‘I'm lazy.’
‘It doesn't matter.’
‘I'm a bit drunk.’
‘It's all right.’
‘Do that.
Just keep doing that.’
She drifted for a time, warm, letting the feeling build, her hips barely stirring.
The room darkened, and Culley's outline melded into blackness beside her.
There was just the touch he gave, disembodied, little rills of pleasure that seemed to be arriving from nowhere.
The sensation sharpened and she gave it more attention.
Her breathing became a tiny sound, a mew, and her hips rose from the bed.
Are you there?
Are you there in the dark?
So still that all she could count on was her own heat, her own response; so still that she was alone with the moment, her own delight, the sound of her own voice crying out.
Are you there in the dark?
She said, ‘What happened this afternoon?
Did you get what you wanted?’
‘I got a name.
I'll have to confirm it.’
‘A dealer?
The person who threatened Jay Hammond?’
‘I'm not sure.’
‘What happened?’
‘Somebody hit me.
I hit him back.’
She put out a hand and felt him wince as she found his injured eye.
‘You're a dangerous bastard,’ she said, and dropped her fingertips to his mouth to see if he might smile.
Do I want you? she thought.
And if I do, what for?
What's wrong with my life without you?
Is there anything wrong?
I bet I could find what all the others have; I bet I could track it down.
Evening, music, a drink, and someone coming home on the six-eighteen.
A meal, a chat, a cosy fuck sometimes.
Next day, the same again.
What have you got that I might want?
Is it something I shouldn't have?
You're dangerous.
People can smell it on you.
He kissed her, but she couldn't see him.
Are you there in the dark?
Are you there?
She swung up and straddled him, moving fast, one hand flat on his stomach, the other under the fork of her legs, gripping him while she sat.
Back bowed, she plunged, pulling her own knees to spread them, feeling the dig of her heels each time she dropped.
Are you there?
Her eyes were open in the darkness, but she could only see herself.
29
Culley looked round at the bare walls and smiled.
The cream paint was beginning to yellow; a couple of crusty, filling-station mugs stood on top of a metal filing cabinet.
The Art and Antiques squad had enjoyed a chequered history.
Once disbanded, then opened up again with two officers, it now consisted of eight men and all of them overworked.
Paul Binyon followed Culley's gaze round the bleak room.
‘What did you expect?
Hessian walls and a sprinkling of post-fucking-Impressionists?’
He was a little older than Culley, a beefy man in an out-of-date suit.
Even when he'd just shaved, you could see how his beard would look if he grew it.
‘Something like that,’ Culley said.
‘I've never been down here before.’
‘Don't tell me your man's been taking pot shots at a Rembrandt.’
‘It's just something we found.
Odd, probably nothing to it, but worth a look.’
Binyon didn't ask.
He said, ‘What do you want to know?’
‘When paintings get stolen, where do they go?’
‘Easy,’ Binyon said.
‘America.’
‘That simple?’
‘Pretty much.’
‘Why?’
‘Well, I expect there are least two answers to that.
One's in the realm of psychology, the other's a more  practical issue.’
Binyon sounded like a man settling into his subject.
He leaned back in his chair and laced his fingers over his paunch.
‘Try the practical.’
‘They're got a fuck of a lot of money.
No-one else can afford to buy stolen gear, really.
Well, a few.
One or two things end up in Holland or Tokyo.
The paintings can sometimes be offered at knock-down prices, given what they're valued at.
It's the organization that takes cash.’
‘What about the psychology?’
‘Oh, I don't know.
They like to own things, don't they — Americans?
I mean, they own the fucking world, more or less.’
‘What about shifting the stuff?’
Culley asked.
‘Getting it out of the country.’
‘Not too difficult.
Again, it all comes down to money.
Speed's important.
Something stolen in Europe will arrive at its destination within a couple of days.
The idea is to get it under lock and key, fast.
From Britain — you'd probably smuggle it to France, put it through a maze, you know, take it south, country roads; that's half a day with two drivers.
Then private jet.’
‘What about custom checks?’
‘What about them?
Dogs can take you directly to a few kilos of heroin welded into the chassis, but they're not too good at sniffing out a Renoir.
Same with a customs officer.
Sixth sense for smack; wouldn't know a Poussin if it moved in next door and fucked his daughter.
Do you want coffee?’
Culley glanced at the mugs on the filing cabinet.
‘No thanks.’
‘Me neither.’
Binyon took a hunting-flask from his jacket pocket and poured a couple of inches into a styrofoam cup.
Culley shook his head to the flask.
‘How does it work?’
‘Demand.
Supply.
No-one pops into a gallery and nicks a couple of old masters on spec.
It can be an insurance scam, of course; some owner who needs money more than he needs the family heirloom.
Or sometimes it's a kind of ransom — send money or we'll play noughts and crosses on your Leonardo cartoon.
Often, it's a custom job.
A painting by Brueghel the elder was lifted from the Courtauld a few years back.
No ransom asked for.
Never heard of again.
Obviously they had a market for it.
Stolen to order.’
‘I remember.’
‘Yes, you would.
We've got a reported-stolen list a mile long, but the media only cares about the sexy stuff.
Van Gogh's pretty much top of the list.
Poor sod.
Spends his life trading paintings for a glass of wine and a fuck; a hundred years later, some toffee-nosed clown at Sotheby's is knocking them out for upwards of eight million.
What can I help you with exactly ?’
‘Has anything gone recently?
I mean, stuff worth mentioning.’
‘Recently — this year?’
‘Recently — this month.’
Binyon looked at Culley with renewed interest.
He said, ‘If there's anything here for me, I want it.
I have enough trouble with the Serious Crimes squad pissing in my pot.’
‘I promise,’ Culley said.
‘Whatever I get.’
Binyon swallowed his drink, his eyes on Culley, and poured himself another.
‘Two canvases by Paul Cezanne.’
‘Worth…?’
‘Not eight million; not a piece of piss either.
Well over half a million.
But that doesn't matter.
Someone wanted them, someone else had them.’
‘Who?’
‘A guy called Throwleigh.
Part of a very nice private collection.’
‘How did they go?’
‘Well, that's a bit confusing.
The security guard died, so did his wife.
He was on-site, she was at home.
You'd have to suspect that they were holding the wife to ransom so that her husband would give them access.’
‘Did he?’
‘Must have.
The security system was flawless.
Heat-sensing passive infra-red detectors with a fifty-feet range.
You don't want to lock your pictures away in a vault, so you make a vault of the room they're in.
The sensors cover everything, wall to ceiling; they're amazingly sensitive.
The body heat from a bird would trigger them.
You switch them off with a button code.
If you've got more than one guard, each will have his own code.
He never tells anyone what it is.
So you know who disarmed the system.
The whole thing is connected to Central Station.
If someone punches in the wrong code more than three times, the alarm sounds automatically.
Foolproof.’
‘Why would they have killed the guard and the wife — if they'd got what they wanted?’
‘Who knows?
ID, probably.
Descriptions.
How does all this relate to your sniper?’
‘When I find out,’ Culley assured him, ‘you'll be the first to know.
I will have some of that.’
Binyon topped up and pushed the cup over to Culley, then took a swig from the neck of the flask.
He said, ‘Here's mud in your eye,’ and laughed.
‘What happened there?’
‘I fell going upstairs,’ Culley said.
Binyon laughed again.
‘Where are they, do we know?’
‘The Cézannes?
America, for sure.’
‘Who'd want them?’
‘I can think of a few names.
Our problem is we can't get at the buyers.
We're here, they're there; that's one drawback.
Another is that they don't shove the gear up on their dining-room walls; you can't have a cop or two  show up at some billionaire's apartment in Sutton Place and demand to go through the strongroom.
We suspect — strongly; we don't know.’
‘Who would you go to?’
Culley asked.
‘If you could.’
‘O'Connell,’ Binyon offered.
‘Ashe, Morton, Kemp —’
‘Who?’
‘Hugo Kemp.’
Binyon looked steadily at Culley.
‘You've heard the name before.’
‘It rings a bell.’
‘Does it?’
Binyon seemed thoughtful.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘Kemp would be a reasonable bet.’
Culley arrived at commuter-hour.
Helen stared at him, as if he'd read her mind.
He dumped a bag of groceries on the table.
‘Lobster bisque — not home-made, though it has the virtue of being imported.
Lamb chops, salad, cheese, fruit.
More than enough for two, so the limitations of your fridge needn't worry us for once.
If I told you what the wine cost, you wouldn't dare drink it.’
‘Are you being a husband?’ she asked.
‘Because you're making a fuck-awful job of it.’
‘You like lamb chops — I remember.’
‘And I remember you being a husband.
I'm not fooled.’
She picked up the wine and examined the label.
‘Very nice.’
Culley took the bottle from her and went to find a corkscrew.
He said, ‘Why do people collect paintings?’
Not fooled; not fooled.
In the dark she had hammered at him as if she were driving a spike.
Into myself, she thought.
Into myself.
She remembered well the way things had been.
Love into symbols of loss; passion into lust and regret; sad alchemy.
What was exciting about Culley?
A sense of violence, a sense of danger.
His civilized behaviour was something he'd learned to do.
But that was an affair.
wasn't it?
That  made him the perfect fling.
The beast by candle-light; the trip to bed where all the things you wouldn't do, haven't done, are things he'll make you do, and things you'll want; and then the beast's departure, out on his own, still smelling your smell but looking for fresh tracks.
I was married to that.
Sometimes he faked his role, and sometimes not.
Sometimes he'd come back, bringing a stink of the badlands.
Sometimes he'd bring lamb chops, salad and wine.
‘Well,’ she said, ‘let's see.
You can buy them as a hedge against inflation, or as a straightforward investment.
If you're the truckers’ union or whoever, they can underpin your pension fund.
You can buy them to sell on later at a profit.
They can beef up your status if you're a society hostess.
They're useful for bribing diplomats and other types who'd be embarrassed by a sudden influx of cash.
You can dish them out to visiting dignitaries at the end of a state visit.
There are those who like to hang them on the wall and look at them, but generally speaking that's taken to be pretty eccentric behaviour.’
A seamless delivery.
Culley looked at her curiously.
‘Have I upset you in some way?’
‘Yes.
You walk in here with a bagful of goodies and that preposterously expensive bottle of wine, looking like shit wouldn't stick to your shoe, and want me to pretend that we're married, we're happy, and that it's always happened like this.
I'm amazed that you didn't bring me a bunch of fucking flowers.’
‘Tried to.
Couldn't find any.
Should this wine breathe?’
‘What?’
He tilted the bottle to pour, and she said, ‘Yes, of course it should, you barbarian.’
He set the wine aside.
‘I thought so.’
‘Why do you want to know?’
‘I'm looking for someone who collects.
Not the investor or the salesman.
The customer.
He's at the end of the route.
I find him and start walking back.
Somewhere  along the way, I'll come across the man who organized Jay Hammond's death; then, further on, the man who killed him.
It's good to know something about the man.
This one collects paintings.
You work in a gallery; I thought you might have an opinion.
If we wait until I've made the salad and grilled the chops, will the wine be ready?’
Helen nodded and followed him into the kitchen.
‘Which paintings?’
‘Any paintings.’
‘We're not talking about any paintings.
Are we?’
‘Two Cézannes.’
‘Oh, yes.’
She thought for a moment, then said, ‘Well, well…’
Culley paused, knife in one hand, lettuce in the other.
‘What?’
‘Nothing, except they made a bit of a stir; their disappearance did.
Maurice Throwleigh owned them.
Unpleasant bastard, but a good customer for some.
Seriously rich.
He bought a Michael Ayrton engraving from us.
Mostly seen at the salesrooms, though; that's where all the heavy-duty stuff's on offer.
They went to America — the Cézannes.’
‘How do you know?’
‘That sort of work always does.
I mean, 90 per cent of stolen pictures end up there.’
Culley nodded as if to confirm the fact, and Helen gave a small start.
‘You knew that already.
You've talked to someone already.’
‘Art and Antiques squad.
A guy called Binyon.
Very handy with a hip flask, but didn't look as if he could tell a Renoir from a Renault.
Appearances can be deceptive.’
‘Then why ask me?’
‘Money — that's easy to understand.
Most villains take money, or whatever converts to money.
This guy whoever he is — he's paying .
And when he gets the painting, that's the end.
That's what he wants.
A picture salted away in some fireproof vault.
He can't display it, not really; he can't boast about it.
He can take it out and look at it.
I want to know about that.’
‘Do you know who he is?’
Helen asked.
‘Do you know his name?’
‘A name's not much.
That doesn't tell me who he is.’
She poured the last of the wine, distributing it evenly between their glasses.
‘How long will you be gone?’
The question was out before she could bite it back.
‘Gone where?’
‘Please,’ she held up a hand.
‘Why would you want to know about someone you're never going to meet?’
‘A week, I expect.
That's about as long as anyone gets.
You're assuming they'll let me go.’
‘Who will you ask?
Protheroe?
Latimer?’
‘Both.
Simultaneously.’
‘What reason will you give?’
‘Nicola Hammond.
Not all of it.
But some.’
‘You said you wouldn't.’
‘I lied.’
He drank his wine.
‘She's clear by now.
Someone else can chase her, if Protheroe wants that.’
Helen lifted the knuckle of lamb bone from her plate and grazed on it.
She'd tried to hold on to the anger she'd felt earlier, but it had slipped away from her, dissolving with the wine.
His betrayal of Nicola Hammond ought to have annoyed her — not for Nicola's sake, but because she was reminded of risks she'd taken; of risks she might have to take.
It didn't annoy her though.
She had been amused by the easy way he'd said, ‘I lied.’
‘That was it, then?’ she asked.
‘The Cézannes.
That's why Hammond was killed.
And all the others.’
Culley raised his eyebrows and shook his head — meaning, That's what I'd like to find out.
‘One was a landscape,’ she said.
‘A view of Aix-en-Provence — mountains and cypresses.
The other was a still life, part of a series painted during a prolonged stay  in Paris.
He didn't like Paris much.’
She nibbled a few more flakes of meat and dropped the bone back on to her plate.
‘I suppose it's got something to do with possession.
Wouldn't that be it?’
He nuzzled her.
He drew finger patterns on her thighs, and she opened her legs because she wanted to.
Not fooled, she thought, not fooled.
‘Why possession?’ he wondered.
‘You take a painting out of its vault and look at it.
It's yours and no-one else's…
That sort of thing?’
‘I don't know.
Ask a shrink.’
His hands were growing idle, his mind elsewhere.
You bastard, Helen thought.
You're already on the plane, already there.
You think I care?
You think I've lived like a nun since we split up?
She ducked her head and nipped the skin on his chest.
Do you think I-want-you-back is a game with only one set of rules?
Do you think the whole thing is fuelled by your needs, your ambition, your effort, your lust?
Her hair dragged across his belly.
She bit softly just below his hip and watched him stir.
Oh, no.
It's my.
rules, too.
Don't take me to bed then make me wait.
For my share.
For your pleasure.
She wetted her lips.
I'll make you understand, she thought.
I'll lick you into shape.
He wondered what made her laugh.
Protheroe lifted his moustache with a forefinger, as if getting air to his mouth.
He said, ‘I've spoken to Ted Latimer.’
He liked the familiarity; it made him feel one of the clan.
‘Thanks.’
The word didn't fool either of them, but Culley thought it was a reasonable indulgence.
‘I gather you've spoken to him as well.’
‘I thought it best.’
‘Where is’— Protheroe turned the corner of Culley's report to find the name —‘Nicola Hammond?’
‘I don't know.’
Culley shrugged, palms up, the whole business.
It felt like bad acting and he made a mental note.
‘It was a phone call, as I said in my —’
‘Logged?’
‘She called me at home.
I'm in the book.’
He shrugged again and thought, Enough.
‘The name she gave you —’
‘Schmidt.’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, that was all she gave me.
Art and Antiques are looking at her husband's business.
She's gone.’
‘You like this theory, don't you.
Mass murder to get one.’
‘I'm telling you what she told me.
After Hammond was killed, they got a phone call — you'll get what he got unless you pull the deal.
Why would she make that up?
How could she?
It has to be true.’
Protheroe looked at the report again, selecting a name.
‘Kemp is speculation.’
‘Kemp is a lead.
What did Latimer say?’
Protheroe sighed aggressively.
‘We've talked to the Police Department in Tucson,’ he said.
‘You can talk to them as well.
They don't mind that, it seems.
They've pointed out that there's no guarantee they'll talk back.’
‘Why?’
‘They've heard what Binyon's heard.
It's clear they're not impressed.
It's all rumour, so far as they're concerned.
It seems that Kemp is an important man.
Not too many people see him, but his cheques arrive when the local schools and hospitals are in need.’
‘Who's my contact?’
Protheroe lifted a memo from his desk, glanced, then tossed it back.
‘Beck.’
‘It was Beck you spoke to when you called?’
‘Among others.’
‘How long can I have?’
‘Talk to Beck before you make any plans.
Call him.’
‘If I go, how long can I have?’
‘A week — tops.’
Protheroe tossed the memo across the desk.
‘Talk to Beck.
Then talk to me.
There was a noise on the line like the sound of a clarinettist practising in a far room.
Culley tried to make a tune of it.
There was a lilt that reminded him of Ella Fitzgerald.
…had we thought a bit of the end of it …
Beck sounded as if his mind was on other business.
Checking the week's break-ins; adding up the traffic violations.
‘Forget it, Culley.
There's nothing here for you.’
‘Have you spoken to Kemp?’
‘Sure.
He's a wealthy man; he collects pictures.
They're all legit.
He's got the —’ He broke off.
Culley imagined him looking at his notes.
‘…provenances.
That right?
Provenances?’
‘You spoke to Kemp.’
‘His…this guy who works for Kemp.
Henry Glinwood.’
‘What's he?
A lawyer?’
‘Yeah.
Something like that.’
‘But not Kemp?’
‘I've checked.
Listen, don't come out here.
Don't spend the time.
We'd have to say we can't help.
I've spoken you know — everyone.
FBI — those guys.’
‘Do you know Kemp?’
‘Sure.
He's a nice guy.’
‘I'm told he's a bit of a recluse.’
‘Well, he likes his privacy.
He's entitled.’
‘What did the FBI say?’
‘They think he's a nice guy too.’
‘You know about —’
‘I know you've lost some paintings.
So what?
There's nothing that connects Kemp.
There's nothing.
You can't hassle a guy like that without…
I mean, you need to have something.’
‘OK,’ Culley said.
‘I'm sorry.’
‘It's OK.’
‘Sorry to lose you the trip.
It's a good time of year for Arizona.’
‘Some other time.’
‘Nice talking to you, Culley.’
…one of those bells that now and then ring …
Latimer had gone to his study to take the call.
‘Is this better?’ asked Bernard Warner.
‘Better than what?’
‘Than calling you at the office.’
‘Marginally.’
A voice laden with distaste.
Warner said, ‘You don't have to like me, Latimer.
It's not important that you should.
Just stay in line; that'll be enough.’
‘You expect too much.’
‘Do I?
Let's talk about what you expect .
I've read your speeches.
I've seen them reported in the papers and on TV.
They seem to be full of references to lofty things.
The moral high ground.
Cities on a hill.
Standards that ought to be raised.
Pinnacles of achievement.
But what I know about you isn't really very uplifting, is it?
I know about things you like to do and the people you like to do them with.
And you expect me to keep that confidential.
You expect me to keep that a secret — from your wife, your children, relatives, superiors — the world at large, in fact.’
Warner paused, but not long enough to invite a response.
He said, ‘Culley wants to go to Arizona.’
‘Yes.’
‘What's the response?’
‘I don't think he'll get much of a welcome.’
‘Does he know that?’
‘I imagine so.
They gave me a contact name for him — just a brush-off.
They really don't want to know.’
Latimer hesitated, then said, ‘Neither do I.’
‘I tell you enough; no more.
What you find out through Culley is your problem.’
‘Yours too.
I'm not the only one to know.
He reports to a man called Protheroe, not directly to me.
And there's his sergeant — Dawson.
Culley talks to him, I expect.’
‘It's becoming a problem.’
Warner paused.
‘What do you —’
‘Shut up,’ Warner said.
Another pause.
‘What will Culley do?’
‘He wants to go.
He'll try to persuade me that he should.
Lie about the response in Arizona.’
‘Can he do that, and expect to get away with it?’
‘He's a fairly senior officer.
We don't ride herd.
We read the reports and make judgements based on that.’
‘Let him go.’
‘I could.
It wouldn't be for —’
‘He's becoming a real nuisance.
Let him go.’
30
Francis gave himself a drink and raised the bottle questioningly.
Martin Jackson shook his head.
‘You missed him.’
‘Yes,’ Jackson agreed.
‘I was close.’
‘Close isn't good enough.’
‘I know that.’
There was a light frost of anger in Jackson's tone.
‘Do you know where he is now?’
Jackson was standing by a window, a little to one side, looking absently down into the street.
Now he turned, his eyes flicking from place to place in Francis's apartment.
A grandfather clock, a bow-legged sideboard, a silver tantalus on a polished, draw-leaf table, kilims on varnished floorboards.
Everything a little too-well placed, a little too obvious.
He turned back to the window, hiding a smile.
New money.
‘I know where he'll go.’
‘Where?’
‘Not an address.
A district.’
‘Can you find him?’
Jackson spoke softly, still looking out of the window, his head turned from the other man.
‘What?’
Francis strained to hear.
Jackson raised his voice a notch.
His tone was oddly gentle.
Francis didn't know how to read it, and the lack of insight worried him.
‘I think we'll find each other,’ Jackson said.
‘There's someone else.’
‘Oh yes?’
Jackson was either not surprised or not concerned.
‘A man called Culley.
Robin Culley.
A policeman, we spoke of him before.’
‘A policeman.’
‘Yes.’
‘Is this a contract?’
Jackson asked.
‘He's going to America for a short while.
When he gets back…’
‘All right.’
Jackson smiled; he still had his back to the room.
‘But it's Ross — you know that.
He's the priority.’
‘Oh, yes,’ Jackson said.
‘He's the priority.
I understand that’
The investigation control-room was full of cold technology; silent phones, blank screens.
Mike Dawson was sitting at a dead computer, strumming the keyboard and offering a toothy smile to an invisible audience.
He only knew one word in three of the lyric he'd chosen.
‘I give up,’ Culley said.
‘You'll have to tell me.’
‘Elton John.’
‘How could I forget?’
Dawson rolled his left hand for a boogie-woogie riff and paddled an arpeggio with the right.
‘The Count Basie of the personal computer,’ he suggested.
‘Is it something I've done?’
Culley asked.
‘Difficult to say, since you haven't been confiding your deeds to me.’
Dawson came down the scale and finished with a bass boom, index finger down heavily, thumb extended.
He walked over to Culley and stood close.
‘That's coming along nicely.’
The bruise was a dull, greenish sickle of shadow just under the cheek-bone and then a comma of purple on the side of the nose, as if Culley had been wearing ill-fitting glasses.
‘I got a name — Kemp.
Do you really need to know how?’
‘I imagine Protheroe asked.’
‘I told him I spilled someone's beer.’
‘He's a man of limited intelligence.’
Dawson grimaced.
‘Never mind.
No-one expects you to go by the book; it's not your speed.’
‘They're giving me a week.
They seem to think it's a waste of time.’
‘It probably is.
Kemp's a bit of a long shot, isn't he?’
‘He came to me from a very reliable source.’
‘The Hammond woman.’
‘Indirectly, yes.
I'll fax Protheroe, if I have to.
I'd like to think I can call you at home if there's something I need.’
Dawson laughed and slowly shook his head.
‘For God's sake, Robin; of course.
What did you think-I'd hang up?’
‘I thought you might be a little pissed off with me, yes.’
‘It'll pass.’
Dawson sat down in front of the computer and strummed the keys, a rapid clatter.
He looked at Culley, eyebrows raised.
‘These Foolish Things,’ Culley guessed.
Dawson sighed.
‘It's Beethoven's first piano concerto.
Couldn't you tell?’
‘Are we talking about someone in particular,’ Stuart Kelso asked, ‘or collectors of paintings in general ?’
‘Why?’
‘Because it's not much to go on, is it?
I mean, lots of people collect paintings.
I wouldn't suppose that a cross-section of their neuroses would give similar patterns.’
‘I think this guy's a bit of a hermit.’
‘Doesn't care much for his fellow man.’
‘So it seems.’
‘Shuts himself away from the world.’
‘Yes.’
‘Sounds like a sensitive and likeable fellow.’
They had arranged to meet at a pub in Soho, not far from Helen's flat.
Culley had the feeling that Kelso would be better value after hours and off police premises.
‘Can I get you another drink?’
Culley asked.
‘Definitely.’
‘A double.’
‘Definitely.’
Culley went to the bar.
A hand jogged his elbow and he turned.
‘Hello, Mr Culley.’
‘Make that three,’ Culley told the barman.
‘Hello, Stan.’
‘That's very nice of you, Mr Culley.
I don't suppose you could manage…’
He broke off, nodding as if to encourage, his smile rimmed with crusty spittle.
Culley took change from a ten pound note from the barman and passed it on to Stan, then carried the drinks over to the table where Kelso was sitting.
Stan had downed his drink and was leaving.
Kelso watched him go, then raised his glass.
‘There but for fortune,’ he said.
‘Stan Collins.
He used to deliver messages for a few club owners on this patch,’ Culley said.
‘One or two of the messages got to the wrong people.
Someone nailed Stan to a garage door.
He seemed to lose interest after that.
A severe deficiency of joie de vivre .
Every so often, he goes to a local hospital where they give him an injection of something, which cheers him up noticeably.
Otherwise, he relies on booze you could strip paint with.’
‘Did you find whoever did it?’
‘Find them?’
Culley laughed.
‘It wasn't exactly a mystery.
Stan wasn't eager to give evidence.
We used a wages robbery for a couple of them some time later.
I don't think it was theirs, but it served its purpose.’
‘Do you enjoy your job?’
Kelso was turning his glass and tilting it, to shift the ice.
‘Well,’ Culley said, ‘it beats going to the office.’
‘Collectors,’ Kelso said.
‘Collectors in general…
Anal types, perhaps, selfish, single-minded.
Probably obsessive, which can be interesting or dangerous or indescribably boring; sometimes all three.
The obsession can be a projection — the paintings or whatever stand for something else.’
‘Like what?’
‘Self-esteem, perhaps.
A love-object.’
He waggled his glass to indicate a quote.
‘Obsessional neuroses relate to a repressed sexual act performed with pleasure during childhood.’
‘Who's that?’
‘Freud, obsessive old bastard.
What did he know?
Your man might have tendencies towards ruthlessness, like to be in control of people and situations, make his own rules, be good at taking but not so good at giving.
I'm making this up as I go along, really.
It could be that he's a very poor loser.’
‘Doesn't sound to me as if you made it up,’ Culley said.
Kelso finished his drink and extended his hand for Culley's glass.
‘My turn,’ he said.
Then, ‘I collect snuffboxes, myself.’
The streets were busier than at midday.
A juggler was entertaining a theatre queue, turning an orange, a book and a saucepan in an incongruous circle.
He threw the orange to one of the theatre-goers, then stooped to pick up a glass jug, keeping the book and the saucepan going.
Groups of young men just off the tourist buses laughed at the pictures outside strip clubs, grabbing their own crotches and punching each other 's arms; then they filed solemnly in.
Helen said, ‘Let's go out to eat.
You'll have to get back, won't you, to pack a case?’
‘That's right,’ Culley agreed.
She had made a reservation at a restaurant next door to the pub where Culley had met Kelso.
They sat looking at menus; Helen said, ‘What do you want?’
‘Minestrone,’ he said, ‘calf's liver, saute potatoes, broccoli.’
‘That's terrifically funny.’
‘You.’
‘I know; you've told me that.
I'm asking about the terms.’
‘It sounds as if you want me to have a contract drawn up for signature by the parties of the first part.’
‘Not so far from the truth.
It's no small step, is it?
Do you move in with me?
No, my place is too small.
Do I move in with you?
Well, yours is a little bigger, but not much.
Where do I put my things?
More to the point, where do I put myself?
I used to live with you once.
We had a house, plenty of room for everything, really, except that there wasn't enough room for you and me, was there?
Not enough room for your life and for mine.
I've got a space, now, that takes my life, my things, and me.
You're saying, Let's go back, let's —’
‘No, I'm not.
That's not where I want to go.
Not back.’
Helen said, ‘It takes a lot of faith.’
‘Well, you have to want it, yes.’
He paused.
‘Do you?’
‘I think so.
I'm not sure.’
‘You're not sure that you want to be with me, but you're here with me to say it.’
‘I'd thought of that.’
She smiled and looked away.
‘There's a time limit on this, you know.’
‘Is there?’
She was startled, then annoyed.
‘Limited offer, is that it?’
‘Not like that.
Just…everything has its time.
What lasts for ever?’
The waiter arrived.
‘Minestrone,’ Helen said, ‘calf's liver, sauté potatoes, broccoli.’
A pleasure boat was moving upriver, ropes of coloured lights strung on poles from prow to stern.
Figures were moving about on deck.
As the craft came closer, Helen could see that they were dancing.
Gusts of music eddied across the water.
Culley stood by the door.
He said, ‘Are you coming to bed?’
She waited for the boat to pass.
31
In the middle of the crowd — people arriving, people leaving, lost children, tannoy announcements, people queueing at the cashiers' grilles, checking the airport shops, lugging their cases into the restaurants…in the middle of all that, Culley looked for someone special.
He didn't know who it was.
Someone who could draw your attention without being seen.
A watcher; a hidden eye.
Someone who could touch you from a distance — a tiny electric ripple across your shoulders, a pucker of muscle, a goose across your grave.
He turned and saw no-one.
Saw everyone.
He collected his boarding card and found a seat in the cafeteria that allowed him to look down on the concourse.
At one point, he'd half-turned, almost expecting to see Mike Dawson.
A little later, he'd looked down avenues of faces, hoping it might be Helen.
Then he'd realized that it was no-one he would recognize.
But that desire to turn, that need to look…
Someone was there.
Martin Jackson sat among the people waiting by the arrivals gate and read a journal he'd picked up at the news-stand.
He'd found an article on shoreline fishing and was engrossed in it.
There was a rather stagy photograph of the man who'd written the article casting on a shingle beach; in a companion photo, he'd set up a three-rod line and was gazing mistily over the breakers.
His equipment was state-of-the-art, though, and he knew how to write about sea-angling.
When Culley passed, Jackson gave him a count of ten, then followed him towards the departures gate.
He liked the look of the man — about Jackson's own build, a lean, slightly sallow face.
His walk was nicely balanced, arms swinging loosely.
The faint bruise under one eye was oddly exciting.
Someone, Culley thought.
Who?
As he reached the departures area, he swung his walk-on bag from right hand to left and took his boarding-card from a hip pocket.
A uniformed official checked it and handed it back.
He turned, just before going airside.
There were faces at the barrier, people craning for a last look.
Jackson smiled briefly and raised a hand.
Yes ,it's me .
Have a good trip .
See you when you get back .
Other passengers were queueing at the check-point, most of them looking back as if that glimpse was all they could carry with them to their destinations.
They passed through the barrier, waving, jostling Culley as they went.
Jackson turned and walked away.
He could have been smiling at anyone.
A thick scatter of cloud hung over the moor.
Sunlight washed through a valley, rain behind it.
A cross-wind batted Jackson's car and he twitched the wheel to correct the sudden drift.
The smile was still on his face as if it had never left.
Eric.
I am right, aren't I?
Where else would you go?
Where else would you go to find me?
Eric…
I was looking for you.
Now we're looking for each other.
Part Three
32
No smile, no handshake of greeting, no policeman called Beck.
You don't announce yourself when you know you're not wanted.
Culley went to his hotel and checked in.
He'd neither eaten nor slept on the plane — his method for defeating jet-lag.
He ordered a sandwich and a bourbon with a beer chaser from room service and sat by the window while he ate.
The hotel was a hollow square with a courtyard at the centre.
A fountain lipped water over five circular tiers into a marble bowl.
Birds ducked from the rim, sluicing their backs, then riffled their feathers like a pack of cards.
Everything in the sun was old gold; everything that lay in the shade was blue.
He stuffed a wedge of sandwich into his mouth, went to the bedside cabinet, brought the local directory back to the window.
He ran through the listings and picked out Carl Mathers because he liked the brusque tone of the ad: Enquiries.
Daily rate.
Helen's number was busy.
He put the phone down, intending to call again, and stretched out on the bed with the last swallow of his bourbon.
When he woke, the room was blue and white — moonlight and a glow from the courtyard.
Too late to call.
He opened his window and listened to the hiss and trickle of the fountain.
In a room across the courtyard, a noiseless television shed stabs of light, as if a vast torchbeam were being played around the walls.
His body was humming with fatigue and he shivered slightly, though the evening was heavy with heat.
He stripped his clothes off, peeled back the sheet, and climbed into bed.
There was music, soft, a slow rhythm, coming from some other room.
He thought: Tomorrow, I'll…
And: What the hell am I…?
And: That tune is called…
And then he was asleep.
He met Carl Mathers in a diner on Congress Street.
A skinny man who looked as if he didn't sleep nights.
Almost the first thing Mathers said was, ‘You're asking for something you can't get.’
‘Then why are you here?’
Culley asked him.
‘I didn't say you shouldn't ask.
I said you can't get it.
If you want to pay my rates, I'll try for you.
Just don't complain when it doesn't work out.’
‘Is Kemp that well protected?’
Mathers twitched a cigarette out of a pack in his shirt pocket.
He laughed.
‘How much do you know?’
‘Pretend I don't know anything.’
Mathers lit the cigarette and immediately plucked it from his mouth, a busy gesture.
‘He's got a small ranch, not far, forty miles maybe, but desert.
He grows roses out there, a couple of acres, maybe more, front of the house and back.’
‘In the desert?’
‘Yeah.
Roses.
Beyond the roses, a fence.
Between the fence and the roses, people with guns.’
‘Are they guarding the roses?’
Mathers twitched the cigarette from his lips again and laughed.
A rumble started, deep in his lung, like an old engine turning over.
‘What's your interest in Kemp?’
‘Do you need to know?’
A waitress brought coffee, and a plate-sized Danish for Mathers; raisins coated with icing, the whole thing under a bright glaze.
He lifted it with both hands to take a  bite, glancing wistfully at his cigarette in the ashtray.
‘It might help.’
Culley slid his warrant card across the table.
Mathers licked the thumb and forefinger of his right hand and opened the little wallet, then pushed it back.
‘You're not working with the locals.
Why's that?’
‘They didn't seem able to help.’
‘Who did you talk to?’
‘Someone called Beck.’
Mathers smiled around a fresh bite of Danish.
‘Tyler Beck.’
‘You know him.’
‘Well, I know them all.
Tyler and I go back a few years.
Good guy.
Big guy.
He works out, you know, skis up at Mount Lemmon, plays a lot of handball and tennis.
What did he say?’
‘Just that they couldn't help.’
‘So you're here on the fly.’
‘I suppose so.’
Mathers was halfway through the Danish and his needs had switched.
He dropped the pastry on to his plate, crushed the burning cigarette into the ashtray and lit another.
‘I can't believe Hugo Kemp put his head that far above the trench.’
‘No, not really.
Some paintings were stolen in London.
Kemp might have them.
I mean, they might have been stolen for him.’
‘No kidding.’
Culley waited, not sure whether Mathers was being wry or was genuinely intrigued.
‘Well, he's rich as hell; I'd heard he was an art lover.
You're here for the paintings, for Kemp?
Both?’
‘No.
There were two buyers for the paintings.
Someone was killed to leave things open for Kemp.
I just need some information.’
‘From Kemp?’
‘From someone; possibly Kemp.’
‘You're asking me to work round the police department here.’
‘Not really.
They didn't say no.’
‘They didn't say yes, either.
’ Mathers killed his cigarette and started the second half of the Danish.
‘Are you paying for this?’
‘Well, I get some expenses; I'll be making up the difference.’
Mathers twisted his head to pull off the bite he'd taken; he chewed for a while.
The waitress freshened their coffee.
‘Whatever you want, you want it pretty badly.’
‘Just information.’
‘How long?’
‘About a week.’
‘A week.
Yeah, I guess you can afford me for that long.
There's someone we could talk to.
A guy called Gerry Cattini — used to work for Kemp.’
‘How closely?’
Mathers shrugged.
‘I mean, did he work for Kemp, or with Kemp.’
‘Oh, right.
No, for him.
Used to walk the line with a rifle.
But he'll say what he knows.
Claims Kemp had him beaten up.’
‘Did he?’
Mathers delved for a fresh cigarette.
‘Someone did.
Gerry worked for me, just for a while — days I could afford help.
I smuggled his booze into the hospital.
They'd stomped all over him.
He lost the sight of an eye.
Told Tyler Beck he'd been hit by a truck.
Looked like that, too.’
‘What else can we do?’
‘What would you like to do?’
Mathers was amused.
‘I'd like to get a listening device into Kemp's home.’
‘Yeah.’
The rumbling in Mathers's chest was gravelly and deep.
‘Sure.
No problem.’
It became a coughing fit.
He dragged a handkerchief from his pocket and put it to  his mouth; dark sediment lifting in a subterranean cavern.
He folded the handkerchief carefully, keeping it in his hand ready for another attack.
‘I'll rush right out there and shoot a cable mike through one of the windows.’
He coughed twice more, but pushed the impulse back.
‘It would help a lot,’ Culley said.
Mathers smiled.
He restored the handkerchief to his pocket.
‘You said you were here for just a week?’
Culley nodded.
‘That's good.’
Three makeshift stalls had been set up at the entrance to a shopping mall.
They were draped in blankets, ochre and blue.
Necklaces, pendants, bracelets, rings; silver and turquoise glittered in the white light.
Three rows of tiny figures circled a Navaho basket, holding hands forever in the weave; black squares for heads, so that they seemed to be facing inward to preserve the sanctity of the dance.
Mathers stepped round a semi-circle of tourists.
‘Tomorrow, we'll drive out there.
Early morning would be best.’
He looked back to make sure Culley was still with him.
‘Really early?’
‘OK.’
‘I'll pick you up.
You tell me what Gerry Cattini said; OK?’
‘You're not staying?’
‘A couple of things to do.
I'll make the essential introductions.
Essential meaning I introduce Gerry to a few friendly drinks.
Don't worry; he won't get so loaded he doesn't make sense.
He's forgotten how that works.’
Culley's time clock was nagging him to eat.
When they got to the bar he ordered a sandwich and took a bowl of tortilla chips to the table.
Gerry Cattini arrived as soon as they'd sat down.
To Mathers, he said, ‘This the guy?’ then, without waiting for a response, looked at Culley and said, ‘You're looking to hassle Kemp.’
The dead eye was shuttered under a black patch held by a cord that went under one ear then reappeared, coming out of the hairline and down across the forehead.
A seam of indentation ran beneath it.
The good eye was green as a cat's.
‘I need some help,’ Culley said.
‘I'd be grateful for what you can give me.’
Cattini ducked his head, smiling at Culley's accent.
He said, ‘You sound like Sean Connery.’
‘I don't.
He's Scottish.’
‘You sound like him to me.’
Mathers had gone to the bar.
He came back with a clutch of drinks.
‘Not for me.’
Culley shook his head.
‘That's right,’ said Mathers.
He lined three glasses up at Cattini's elbow, keeping one back for himself.
Music welled in the bar, a samba with many guitars.
Cattini got up and walked over to the barman who was wiping glasses.
As he started back to the table, the music stopped briefly, then returned, a gentle country number.
The singer's voice was just audible.
Mathers was leaving; his glass was empty.
To Culley, he said, ‘Tomorrow morning.
Start paying me then.’
Cattini looked over his shoulder and lifted a hand as Mathers went to the door.
‘Carl's a good man,’ he said, ‘you couldn't do better.’
He sipped from the first glass.
‘Seen me through some things.’
‘You worked for Kemp,’ Culley said.
‘Is that right?’
He thought Cattini must be in his mid-thirties, though it was difficult to say for sure.
Whisky had made him heavy in the torso and puffed up his face so that the true features were blurred, as if permanently in shadow.
A patchy stubble blotted his cheeks and chin.
Culley used his imagination to refine what he saw, and a handsome man stepped out of the half-light.
‘Yeah, I worked for him.’
‘Tell me about him.’
‘What do you need?’
Culley smiled.
‘All I can get.’
‘Know thine enemy.’
The green eye flashed at Culley then settled on the next drink.
Was that showy, Culley wondered, or is he brighter than I think?
He said, ‘Something like that.’
‘OK.
There's not much to tell, but there's a lot to listen to.
Everyone knows that Kemp likes to keep his privacy intact.
He isn't seen much, and nobody thinks about him much.
He's rich.
He has a spread east of Tucson.
He spends a hell of a lot of money irrigating so he can grow roses.
You've heard about —’
‘Yes.’
‘OK.
Well, that's all right; I suppose people figure he can spend his money on whatever.
Rich people are like that, right?
He comes into the city now and then.
He gives money to local charities.
It's known that guys with guns patrol his land, but so what?
It's not illegal.
Who needs prowlers?
Some kid wanting roses for his girl; some Indian looking for jug-money.’
‘What are they really guarding?’
‘He collects pictures.’
‘How do you know that?’
‘Don't kid me.
Everyone knows that.
One of the best private collections in the country.
People bid for him at auctions, a guy called Henry Glinwood mostly —‘an anonymous buyer’— but his reputation goes before him.’
‘He could install a security system.’
‘Yeah.
It's not just the paintings.
He's keeping the world away.’
‘There are things in there — paintings — that he'd sooner no-one saw?’
‘Maybe.
Maybe.’
Cattini looked at the one full glass left on the table.
He said, ‘You're gonna have to buy me a drink.’
Culley half-rose, but Cattini put out a hand to stop him, and glanced back at the barman who lifted a bottle and dug a highball glass into an ice-container.
‘What happened with you?’
as if the question reminded him it was there, Cattini eased the eye-patch.
The cord rolled a little and found a new position.
A red weal lay across the lines of his forehead like a strawberry mark.
‘Paintings aren't the only thing he keeps out there.
He's got a daughter.
Nina.
If I told you she was a little flaky, you wouldn't be getting the half of it.
Most of the time, she seems to be asleep — that's when she's walking round the place.’
‘Drugs?’
Culley guessed.
‘Yeah, she takes, I mean not smack or anything.
Things to keep her level.
But that's not it.’
‘What, then?’
The barman arrived with Culley's sandwich and three drinks on a tray.
He set the drinks down on Cattini's side of the table and left the sandwich and the tab with Culley.
‘They come in threes,’ said Cattini.
‘Three's my lucky number.’
His sips were getting bigger.
‘You know the stories about the princess in the tower?
Locked up.
She looks out every day for a knight who'll ride by, so she can unbraid her hair.
He climbs up, rescues her, they ride off together.
That's it; except Nina stopped looking for any knight a long time ago.’
‘Why?’ asked Culley.
‘Check it out,’ Cattini told him.
‘If you come up with an answer, let me know.’
His hand went to the patch again.
He put a finger underneath and massaged the socket slowly.
‘I liked Nina.
Can't tell you why.’
He laughed.
‘Perhaps I come from a long line of knights and no-one ever told me.
We used to talk — nothing important, you know, just this and that.
She likes to read.
Sometimes I'd fetch a shopping list into one of the city bookstores.
I had an Indian wristband she liked, got  it from one of the reservation workshops, leather with turquoise beads.
I gave it to her.
She's a nice girl.
I don't know what I thought.’
He took a drink.
‘She started to get, like, fixed on me.
She started looking for me.
One day, she came out to the perimeter fence; another, she came into the kitchen when they were making me some food.
I didn't mind.
I guess I'd've fucked her, given the chance.
One of the other guys asked me about her.
We were just talking, you know, how she'd got a thing for me.
He asked me if I'd screwed her.
I said, no, but if she came out to the perimeter fence again, that'd be the time.
It was all locker-room talk.
‘That night, they took me out into the desert and beat me.
I don't know if I was supposed to live or not.
I don't think they cared one way or the other.
I caught a boot heel in the eye; apart from other places.’
There was a drink left; he turned to the barman.
‘You told Tyler Beck you'd been hit by a truck.’
Cattini laughed.
‘Yeah.
I was alive.
I wanted to stay that way.
Kemp could buy Tucson.
I don't know why he hasn't.
Tyler was OK about it.
He stopped by the hospital on his way to a tennis match.’
‘Does Nina come into the city?’
The barman collected the empties.
He set down three drinks and a new tab.
‘I wouldn't think about that.’
‘Does she?’
‘No.’
‘Does Kemp go away?’
‘Business trips; yeah, sometimes.’
‘When he does, who's Nina's minder?’
‘Her what?’
‘Looks after her; stays close.’
‘An Indian — Ira Sanchez.’
‘Can I get to him?’
‘Oh, shit, I don't know what you're looking for, but I'm damn sure I know what you'll find.’
The good eye, the green eye, scanned Culley's face.
A dab of bruising, yellow, now, on the upper slope of the cheek, a naevus of purple on the nose.
‘See here,’ he said, and his fingertip brushed Culley's eyelash.
Then, ‘See here,’ as he flipped up the patch like a lid.
Crumpled flesh, sunken and dark as fig-fruit; at its centre, a black hole, a tunnel-mouth to the place where dreams are stored.
Culley came back from the bar.
He'd paid the tab and organized another round for Cattini.
He said, ‘If I think of anything else, can I find you here?’
‘Maybe,’ Cattini lifted his drink.
‘Through Carl is better.’
‘Or if you think of anything else…’
‘Sure.
Through Carl.’
Culley nodded.
He said, ‘Thanks.’
‘Ira Sanchez likes going to the fights,’ Cattini said.
He took a good third of the whisky; ice rattled against his mouth.
‘You'll find him there if you look.’
‘Boxing?’
Culley asked.
‘Not exactly, no.’
The barman was standing behind Culley with a tray.
Cattini said, ‘Lots of luck.’
33
First light was pearl, a thin, almost transparent shell on the underside of the sky.
Then a buttery glow leaking from horizon to horizon, flooding the mesas and outcrop rock of the high desert.
A snake paid its length out of a crevice, seeming endless because its coils were out of sight in the niche.
It hung two-thirds of the way down a nine-feet drop and kept coming, then paused.
Shadows tightened to a hard outline as the light sharpened — seguaro, scrub trees.
Something moved in the brush and the snake dropped its length between two rocks.
When Carl Mathers's car pulled up in view of the rose garden, just a few golden trails were left on the hard blue, a threadbare tapestry.
The desert was alive, but you couldn't tell how or where.
They got out of the car.
Culley looked at the roses — a red flood.
He said, ‘It's ridiculous.’
‘Yeah, well, kind of extravagant ,’ Mathers said.
‘Monuments, you know?
Man's vanity.’
His cigarette burned his finger and he dropped it under a boot heel.
‘Like the  Pharaohs .
Who needs a tomb with a fucking door , for Chrissake?’
‘Where's the fence?’
‘All sides.
Tough to pick out from here.
Electrified.’
A thought struck him.
‘You weren't thinking of —’
Culley shook his head.
‘Just curious.’
‘What do you need,’ Mathers asked, ‘and for how long?’
‘Some sort of monitoring system.
And for as long as possible.’
‘Yeah…
Well, I can't let you listen to what's being said in the entire house without having access to the entire house.
I might get you a couple of rooms — but then again, at some point I have to be in the rooms to do that.’
Mathers opened the driver's door and fished round in the glove compartment.
He came up with a pair of binoculars and handed them to Culley.
‘So if you can come up with a way of going down there, past the guards, up to the house, into a room or two, and being left alone for a couple of minutes while I secure the devices — OK, you've got what you want.’
Culley levelled the glasses and the acreage of roses leapt towards him, fat blooms, close enough to pick.
A man wandered into the disc, then out.
Culley tracked left and found him again, startled by the way the image was drawn to stand before him, as if his voice must be heard, as if the man must see as clearly as he was seen — Levis, stetson, a loose shirt; a rifle cradled in one arm.
Beyond the perimeter, the house.
A rocking-chair on the verandah.
‘What are the options?’
Culley handed the glasses back to Mathers.
‘I could wait for dark, bypass the current in the fence, climb over, sneak up to the house, stick a bug on one of the windows and hope they wouldn't see it.’
‘Could you?’
‘No.
Or there's a laser device — you bounce a beam off a window; the window vibrates, acts like a diaphragm in a radio speaker.
The sound comes back up the laser beam to a modulator.
Costs a year's salary.
CIA might lend you one — or some big company that's recently completed a successful takeover and doesn't need it any more.’
‘What else?’
‘I could send in a fake mailing shot.
Kind of thing that advertises a new electronics package.
Free gift of a calculator enclosed.
Mike's inside the calculator.
Takes time.
You have to get letter heads printed, make it look good, have a fake box number.
Has to be authentic — something that Kemp would expect to receive.
Then you have to allow that Kemp probably doesn't open his own mail.
Someone else might keep the calculator, give it away, throw it away.
Seen all you need to see?’
Mathers asked.
‘I'd guess I'm not the only guy round here with a pair of field glasses.’
Culley got into the car.
Mathers span the wheel with the heel of his hand and they bounced back on to the approach road.
‘There's no sure way unless we get into the house?’
Culley asked.
‘You, me, someone,’ Mathers said.
‘Except it's not going to be me.
Hi, there,’ he was trying the role for size, ‘your telephone's been reported out of order.
Maybe I could come in and check it out while you wait in another room.’
‘The telephone's a good method.’
Culley was calling on a brief training in surveillance techniques.
‘The best.
On-site, undetectable, reliable.’
Mathers let go the wheel to get a cigarette from his shirt with one hand and press the dashboard lighter with the other.
‘Gerry Cattini mentioned a man called Ira Sanchez.’
‘Yeah?’
Mathers lodged the cigarette in his mouth and closed one eye against the smoke.
‘Works for Kemp.’
‘Well, I know Ira.
Don't know him well.
He's a bright guy.
Seemed to go back and forth between the reservation and the city for a while looking for the right place to be.
I guess it was neither.
Or both.
He wound up at Kemp's place a couple of years ago.
Foreman, I guess.
Looks after the guys with guns.’
‘And the daughter sometimes.’
Mathers took a long sideways look at Culley.
‘That so?’
‘Cattini said something about Sanchez liking the fights.
Is that right?
Fights?’
‘That's right.’
A silence grew.
Mathers held the butt of his cigarette in a pinched grip, drawing smoke through his finger-ends.
‘You could point him out to me,’ Culley said.
‘Sure.
I could do that.’
The pit was nothing more elaborate than a series of planks chocked up to make an erratic knee-high circle.
The handlers stood on one side, each holding his bird in a double grip, one arm underneath for support, the fingers of the other hand loosely grasping the crop.
There was a lot of noise; people were getting bets down on the first pair.
The birds were silent and still.
They had driven to the edge of the city, into the brittle mauve of dusk, lights starting up in buildings everywhere as if some vast signal beacon were slowly igniting.
Mathers had pointed from behind the windshield.
‘That's Sanchez.’
A stocky man, too much weight below the barrel chest, but power there, too.
His hair was tied back at the nape of his neck.
Someone collected five dollars from Culley and he walked into a roofless space.
Carbide lamps hissed on the walls; a few had been mounted on poles close to the plank circle.
Their glow bleached everything it touched and threw deep shadows beyond the circumference of the pit.
Two handlers stepped in and stood either side of a scratched line.
They held the stags by their waists and headed them, bird to bird.
A dun and a barred blue, both trimmed for the pit, combs and wattles scissored off.
Their necks stretched as they tried for a beak hold.
The handlers thrust them at each other, withdrew them, thrust again.
Both cocks were wearing full-drop American gaffs, curved steel, an inch and a half long.
The handlers stepped back and released.
The cocks went straight in, spring-loaded, their neck and saddle hackles up, trying short jabs to breast and neck.
Culley worked his way round the circle.
Ira Sanchez was looking at the birds; then he glanced up to where a man was taking bets on the far side.
He nodded and the bookie nodded back, his eyes everywhere as he scanned the other faces, looking for takers amid the din.
‘Ira Sanchez?’
The blue was a flyer, wings trimmed to prevent him from going too high in the action; he got up in a sudden whirr of fury, looking for a brain blow, but gaffing the dun bird in the breast.
The judge was midway round the circle, looking down the scratch line, a grey-haired man in a torn suit jacket and a homburg.
He called a handle and the owners clambered over the planks.
Sanchez didn't take his eyes from the pit.
‘Dangerous to bet a flyer,’ he said.
‘Gets too much height, he can be gaffed coming down.
Blue's gonna win, though.
Great wingwork.
I saw you looking at me.’
‘I wondered if we could talk.’
‘You Canadian?’
‘British.’
‘That right?’
The handlers were setting their birds again.
Sanchez caught the bookie's eye.
‘You should get something down on this.
Odds have narrowed some, but people don't like a flyer.’
The racket grew; ringsiders calling their favourite, arguing, laughing, laying bets.
Culley was having trouble hearing Sanchez.
‘How do I do that?’
Without turning, Sanchez put out a hand.
Culley gave him a ten dollar bill.
The bookie's head bobbed.
The dun stag stayed back, sidestepping like a boxer.
The blue rose on stubby wings, twisting acrobatically to slip the  blow.
The gaff raked one wing and the birds circled, necks stretched towards each other, then engaged at the same time, heels clubbing.
Their eyes were stark with fury.
The blue stood off for a moment, and the judge called another handle.
Angry shouts came from the pitside.
The dun's handler plucked a tail feather and held the down at the quill-end against a neck wound to staunch the blood.
‘See?’
Sanchez grinned.
‘Your money's safe.’
‘Can we talk?’
‘It better be good.
There's a naked heel fight after this.
I've got the inside track.’
He glanced across to where a fat woman in a braid shirt stood waiting, a big, slate-coloured stag tucked up beside her breast.
‘Leave a bet.’
‘That's not it.
Naked heel's a long fight.
That's a slow-starter.
I could double up on the first hit and get better odds.’
‘Take the risk,’ Culley said, ‘and I'll double your bet for you.’
‘Fifty,’ Sanchez told him.
‘Be your winnings on the gallo fino there.’
The dun strutted a circle, long-necked, long-backed, his eye mad with delight.
He went in fast, jabbing one-legged and made a hit.
The blue-barred stag twisted away from the steel and found height, dipping like a lapwing, and dropping for a head shot.
The dun cock went down as the blue followed through, landing full-flush and kneading the gaffs on the dun's heart as if he were working a treadle.
Sanchez collected the winnings, pushed half the roll into his shirt and gave the other half back.
He spoke into the bookie's ear, while the man stared at the ground, as if that might aid his concentration.
Then he glanced at the fat woman carrying the naked-heeler.
Outside, the sky was dusky-black and the air as warm as wool.
A shooting star fell towards the city's crown of lights.
Sanchez walked a way off, then sat cross-legged on  a piece of rough ground.
There were buildings with no-one in them, walls gone, roofs on the slide.
‘I'm taking a risk here, too,’ Culley said.
‘Longer odds; bigger stake.’
‘I figured you might be.’
‘You work for a man called Hugo Kemp.’
Sanchez reached into his shirt pocket and drew out a fat paper cylinder, stroking its length with pursed fingers to smooth the kinks.
‘That's right, I do.’
He put the joint in his mouth and brought both hands up to his face, palming a zippo.
The thick flame wavered in the breeze, rimming his lips, his nostrils, and his eye sockets with shadow.
‘I'd like it if you'd work for me.
Just a short while.’
Sanchez laughed on an indrawn breath, and held the laugh down for a count of three.
‘You're right.
About the odds.’
The words arrived on a long feather of smoke.
‘Am I wasting my time?’
Culley asked.
‘Could be.’
‘He collects paintings.
Sometimes he collects the paintings I want.’
Culley was improvising now.
He'd decided to tell Sanchez that something had come into the market, something both he and Kemp would want.
A little espionage would go a long way — that sort of thing.
He'd made the assumption that Sanchez wouldn't know one way or the other.
He was on bunkhouse duties.
Sanchez said, ‘You want the Degas.’
There was nothing revealing about Culley's pause — the surprise was genuine, as if Sanchez had come straight to a point that Culley had intended to arrive at slowly.
‘The Degas; yes.’
‘I'm not your man.
You should be talking to Henry Glinwood.
Except that Glinwood wouldn't do what you're asking me to do.
He's Kemp's man.’
‘Is he?’
‘Body and soul.’
‘Are you?’
Sanchez cupped the coal of the joint and took a long toke.
Smoke purled out of his nostrils, taken this way and that by the breeze.
‘It won't help you.
I don't get to hear about that stuff.’
‘You know about the Degas.’
‘We go horseback riding in the desert sometimes.
He talks to me.
Well’— Sanchez gave a brief laugh —‘he talks to himself.
I'm around while he does it.
But I don't know about the deals, you know?
Who from, when, how much.’
We've got this far, Culley thought, so I'm going to assume that you're for sale.
He said, ‘That's not what I'm asking for.’
Sanchez cocked his head — a parody of listening; he drew on the joint and held his breath.
‘I want to get a bug in there.
I want you to take it in for me.’
‘How would I do that?’
‘Should I tell you?’
‘If it's what you're here for.’
From the rectangle of hard, white light fifty feet away came a hubbub of shouts and catcalls.
Through the open doorway Culley could see activity near the pit, and shadows jostling on the walls.
It was all gamble now; all risk.
‘Check on the types of phone in the main room and in Kemp's bedroom.
Let me know what they are.
You go in with two identical phones; you take the existing ones out.’
‘That's it?
Switch two phones?’
‘Pretty much.’
Sanchez nodded thoughtfully.
‘Now let's hear what you do.’
‘I give you a third of the buy-price of the Degas.’
‘What?’
Culley plucked a sum from the air.
‘A hundred thousand dollars; maybe a little more.’
‘A third of the third up front.’
‘Not possible,’ Culley said.
Sanchez uncrossed his legs and looked towards the pit.
‘I could be making a week's pay in there.’
‘I'm not the buyer,’ Culley told him, ‘I work for the buyer.
He doesn't know I'm doing this.
I don't think he'd mind much, but I'd sooner not try him out.
Apart from that, it's my action, not his.
I get a commission on the sale, understand?
If I take this out from under Kemp's nose and present it to my buyer, I'm first choice when he needs an agent again.
Kemp's often in the market.
These bugs you're planting don't wear out.
I'll be able to tap into him any time.
That's worth a lot to me.
I can't pay you until I've bought the piece and sold it on.
I'll be giving you my commission; it's worth that much.
I've told you that it gives me a terrific edge in any sale where Kemp's a bidder.
We could talk about a proportion of that for you — each time I take him out of some piece of action, you stand to gain.
I can't pay you until I've been paid.
But if this works, if I hear something I can use and it works, then we both make money — you now, me later.’
Culley had no idea whether what he was saying was taking effect; Sanchez's face was turned to the light, his cheek deeply shadowed.
‘You're a gambler.
This is low risk, high reward.’
‘Low risk for you.’
Sanchez hadn't turned his head.
‘You can't do it?
Two phones in, two out?’
‘It's possible.’
‘You don't have to stay there.
Just the bugs.’
Culley laughed.
‘Take another job, move away.
I'll keep the money coming.
Think about it — I'm relying on your silence.
If I screw up, any time, you make an anonymous call to Kemp telling him what to look for.
All my advantage gone.
Christ, you could do it any time.
I'm in your hands.’
There was a full minute's silence.
Sanchez got up and they walked slowly back towards the pit.
The carbide lights fizzed in the darkness.
‘I said, ‘Is that it?
J’ You said, ‘Pretty much’.’
‘I want to meet the daughter.
Nina.
When Kemp's away, you look after her, am I right?’
Sanchez took a step nearer to Culley as if they should lower their voices.
His breath was sweet with dope.
For the first time, he sounded alarmed.
‘What do you need her for?
She's crazy.’
‘Just to talk.
She'll know what's in the house.
Gives me a better idea of what he's doing-how much he's spending, what he's spending it on.’
‘Too close.
You're talking about getting too close.’
‘For a few days.
Then I'm gone.’
When Sanchez didn't respond, Culley added, ‘We're not talking about a pay-off, here.
It's income for life.’
‘Where do I find you?’
At no time had Sanchez asked for a name.
Culley gave him Carl Mathers's office address.
In the snowlight and pitch-dark planes from the ruined door, the man's Indian features stood in hard relief: cheek-bones and square jaw, strong nose, broad upper lip.
A series of whoops came from round the pit, followed by a shout and a gabble of voices.
Sanchez half-turned, then looked at Culley full-face.
‘OK.’
He put out a hand.
When Culley did the same, he found himself holding a cold roach.
‘Peace pipe,’ Sanchez said.
It was the seventh handle, and the fat woman's stag was still eager.
As she bent to the set, holding the bird's waist and wheezing slightly, her big breasts tumbled into her shirt-front.
The heads of the two cocks banged at one another and their legs churned the air.
Ira Sanchez offered a bet and the bookie took it on the nod.
This time of year, Kemp liked to take his ride around eight in the morning, before the sun had gained height.
Three times a week, Ira would saddle a couple of quarter-horses and they'd walk between the banked roses, listening  to the zip ,zip ,zip , as water from fifty sprinklers fell among the blooms.
They'd lope out to a mesa two miles away and walk back.
Kemp would talk about the land as if he knew how to live there.
‘Ratany plant,’ he'd say, dismounting to peer at the tiny, magenta petals.
He'd tell how sandhill cranes migrated to Sulphur Springs Valley each fall, or deliver a short lecture on the vast dance circles and power rings in the tierra del muerto .
One time, he patiently informed Ira about the Navaho code talkers.
Ira would nod, neck-reining his horse away to smile.
It wasn't a fond smile.
It meant,Fuck you .
A job's a job, Ira thought.
Time to move on.
He thought,Anglos .
They want to own everything.
They want to own each other.
The slate-coloured bird had weight and pit-craft on his side.
He slashed at his opponent's head, wearing him down.
The office air-conditioning chugged like a two-stroke engine.
A scarf of smoke rolled in a cold shaft of sunlight.
Carl Mathers sat at his desk, a telephone on his lap, a small screwdriver in one hand.
‘He called in first thing.
Gave me the model name, number, colours.
Just that.
Be here to collect them in an hour.
What in hell did you offer him?’
Culley perched on the arm of a battered sofa and watched Mathers at work.
‘A new life.’
‘Will he get it?’
‘Who ever does?’
Culley asked.
‘A philosopher,’ Mathers observed.
The phone separated in his hand and he tweezered a one-inch diameter circuit-board from the top of his desk.
‘There you go.’
‘What happens?’
‘Kemp uses this phone like any other phone.
Well, it's the same as any other phone.
People can call him — no different.
Except this gismo is just for you.
An encoding  device.
You know when you bleep-in to your messages from somewhere else?
Like that.
You dial; you bleep in; same thing.
The phone won't ring because there's a two-second delay to get you into the device.
You can use any phone with a direct line facility — your hotel will have one; nine, then the number, whatever.
If Kemp's making a phone call, you'll hear both sides of the conversation.
You'll also hear anything that's said in the room, anytime, whether the phone's in use or not.
Just dial and listen, OK?
I hope that Indian believed whatever you told him.’
‘He gave us the details of the phones.’
‘He did.’
‘He's calling to collect them.’
‘He is.’
Culley shrugged.
‘What does that sound like to you?’
Mathers smiled.
He put a cigarette in his mouth and waited to light it until he'd reassembled the phone.
‘Poker player called Slim Preston — won the Crazy Horse Saloon game a few times.
Used to say, ‘Not all trappers wear fur hats’.’
‘Is there a way I can record what I hear?’
‘Sure.
Easiest thing for you would be a hand-held recorder with a suction-plug for the earpiece of the phone.
That's another thirty dollars you owe me.’
‘Do you always keep it this cold in here?’
Culley's throat was dry and itchy by the time Ira Sanchez arrived.
The Indian stood in the doorway, a duffle bag looped over one shoulder, and looked at the two phones on the desk.
Then he came forward and scooped them into the bag.
He behaved as if Mathers wasn't there.
‘The main room and the bedroom,’ Culley reminded him.
‘I'm not due back for a while,’ Sanchez said.
‘They'll be in by this evening.
Make it eight o'clock.’
He paused.
‘I need to know where to get you.’
‘There's a fight tomorrow evening?’
Culley asked.
‘I'll see you there.’
‘No,’ Sanchez said.
‘Where I can find you.’
‘Here,’ Culley said.
Sanchez shifted the duffle bag back to his shoulder.
He waited.
Culley gave his name and the name of his hotel.
Sanchez nodded.
‘Fine.
We can meet at the fight; that's OK with me.’
As he left, Mathers wafted a hand —‘'Bye, Ira.’
To Culley, he said, ‘Well, I'd've wanted to know that too, I guess.’
‘He didn't speak to you.’
‘He's not doing business with me.’
Culley's teeth ached slightly along the line of the gum; he imagined he could feel the air trickling through his lungs like snow-melt in a delta.
He wanted to be outside, but most of all he wanted a hunter's advantage, another look.
‘Can we drive out there again?’
‘To Kemp's place?’
‘Within view.’
Mathers lifted a shoulder.
‘What else is there to see?
You've seen it.
Christ, you'll be inside the fucking place — good as.’
‘I know that.
I just want to take a look.’
Mathers stood up and checked his pockets for car keys and cigarettes.
He switched on an answerphone.
‘Why not?’ he said, ‘I'm charging you by the day.’
Noonday patterns were blotches of yellow and umber; here and there, a column of pale green climbing a fault line.
And the sun like a terrible machine, pile-driving heat into the rock.
Culley had climbed a small bluff and crouched down on his heels to clear the skyline.
The roses swarmed in the heat-haze, seeming to flow and recede, seeming to peak and slide like waves.
The  house was quiet.
There was no sign of life.
Culley ducked his face into his shoulder and wiped sweat on to his shirt.
When he looked back, there was nothing more to see.
The house.
The red combers.
A rocking-chair on the verandah.
34
A girl was sunbathing on a lounger in the courtyard outside Culley's window.
Lithe, dark-haired, her waist deeply curved like a cello.
She was wearing a turquoise string-and-patch bikini bottom and had a technique, when she moved on to her back, of cupping the discarded bra to her breasts and nipping its sides with her upper arms as she turned, in order to cover herself.
It was late in the day and she was taking the last of the sun.
She had moved across the courtyard, flagstone by flagstone, to cheat the shadow; now she was boxed in to the last corner of light.
The fountain made a noise like Chinese chimes.
Mathers arrived with a hand-sized tape cassette machine and a sucker cup for the telephone.
‘This jacked into the recorder,’ he said, ‘and this on the earpiece of the phone.’
He checked a card on Culley's bedside table.
‘Yeah, dial nine, then dial out.’
While Culley examined the equipment, Mathers took his chair by the window.
The girl had about six feet of sunlight left.
She turned on to her front, dropped the bra alongside, and put her cheek on folded hands.
Mathers lit a cigarette.
‘They gave you a room with a terrific view.’
‘Especially for tourists and sightseers,’ Culley agreed.
‘Always sexier,’ Mather mused.
‘Whole ass in view apart from that scrap of cloth there; bare back, so you know she's got a bare front, but all you get's just a promise of something you never see.
They know how to do it all right.
’ His eyes were fixed on the hint of plumpness under the girl's armpit.
‘Give her a try,’ Culley suggested.
‘Maybe she waiting for someone to show her the town.’
Mathers sighed.
‘Time was,’ he said.
‘This one's waiting for a guy to come back from some big-shit business deal.
He'll be thirty-five, work-out pectorals, concertina of credit cards, stretch limo, company jet.
I hate the bastard.’
‘He might be lousy in bed,’ Culley offered.
Mathers laughed.
‘Think she cares?
What time are you going to try Kemp?’
‘In a couple of hours.
Sanchez said eight o'clock.
I'll give him some leeway.’
‘You need me for anything else now?
You've got the bug; you've got Sanchez.
I guess I could sign off.’
‘I'm not sure how secure that makes me feel,’ Culley said.
‘I'd still like to be able to call on you.’
‘I'll put you on retainer rates.
Half the daily fee.
I might not always be there exactly when you want me, but I'll check in from time to time.
Leave a message if there's a problem.
I have to spend some time with my kid tomorrow, but I'll be in and out.’
‘You're married.’
Culley hadn't pictured Mathers in the role — throwing a football to some kid with braces on his teeth, wearing a Snoopy apron at the barbecue, sleeping easily alongside the same woman each night.
‘Used to be.
Seven years, all told.’
‘What happened?’
‘I was a cop when we married.
She didn't like the life.
You know how it is.’
Culley stifled an urge to laugh.
He said, ‘Irregular hours, late nights,’ but didn't offer anything of his own situation because he wanted to hear more about Carl's.
‘Yeah, that…
The people you mix with — friends and enemies; the fact that it's often tough to tell them apart.
But mostly the loneliness, I guess.’
‘The kid's how old?’
‘Ten.’
It seemed that Mathers had closed the conversation down.
Then he said, ‘I quit the Department, trying to save the marriage.
First two cases I took were missing persons.
It's not unusual — kids from the northern cities growing a racial conscience along with their back teeth, inventing something called Real America, hanging round the reservations looking for the spirits of someone's goddamn ancestors.
Third case — straightforward fuck ‘n’ duck.
Guy screws his friend's wife; the guy doesn't know it, but he's got the clap.
The wife doesn't know it, so she passes it on to her husband.
Pretty soon they all know it.’
Mathers chuckled.
The chuckle grew into a fully-fledged laugh.
‘Jesus Christ, you never know what you're going to wake up with.
Anyway, the wife had a real cute idea.
She accused her husband of fucking around and retained me to prove it.
Maybe he had been, I don't know.
Before I could dig much out, the guy arrived at my house.
I wasn't there, but my wife and the kid were.
He was drunk and he was angry.
Looking at it, I can't blame him for that.
Broke a few windows and scared everyone shitless until Tyler Beck turned up and cooled him off.
Did more damage to my marriage than he did to my house.
She left a couple of days later, with the kid.’
Mathers had smoked five cigarettes since his arrival.
He lit the sixth and spoke a fluctuating stream of smoke.
‘Dumb thing is, she lives with Tyler now.
Go figure it out.’
The girl in the courtyard was on her back when she lost the sun entirely.
She sat up and reached blindly for the clasp of the bra, and just for a moment her breasts swung into view.
She ran a finger down either side of the bikini-bottom, smoothing it over her rump, then walked the breadth of the courtyard, heading for some double glass doors.
Her skin was a pale coffee colour.
Her narrow waist  swayed and her hips lifted and dropped with each step.
Mathers shook his head.
‘I'd better go,’ he said.
‘I'm beginning to hate my life.’
Culley dialled and was patched-in to a conversation straight away.
Thank you Ira Sanchez, he thought.
Someone else in search of a new life.
It took him no more than a few seconds of the exchange to decide which voice was Kemp's.
He was talking to a man with a sharp, nasal accent.
Culley imagined a suit to go with the voice — well-cut, expensive, unobtrusive.
‘…can be viewed, of course.
I should warn you, there are others who have the piece in mind.’
Kemp's tone was slower, deeper.
‘Three days’ time?’
‘Would be fine.
’ The man gave an address in Manhattan, then the name of his gallery, checking that Kemp had the details right.
‘Three o'clock,’ Kemp suggested.
There followed a pause and the riffle of pages being turned.
‘That's good for me.’
Another pause while a note was made.
The man said, ‘It might have to go to auction, you do understand that?’
‘You have a reserve price.’
‘Of course.’
‘We'll talk about that, Mr Bryant.
Most of all, I want to see the sketch.’
‘I understand.
Three o'clock on Friday, then.’
There came a rattle as the phone was hung up.
Kemp's voice was no less clear than during the phone conversation.
‘I'll go to New York on Wednesday.
There are other things to be taken care of.’
‘Back on Friday evening?’
Henry Glinwood, Culley guessed.
A light voice that dropped rhythmically on the syllables.
‘Yes.’
‘He didn't mention a price?’
‘No.
But then he wouldn't.
I've had dealings with Bryant before.
He made the mistake of letting me in on the ground floor when he was offering a Pissarro.
I guaranteed a starting price so long as I got last refusal — he was auctioning the piece.
Other bidders found out that I could top their bids, and no-one came to the party.
I bought the painting for my first offer.’
‘It was you let the others know,’ Glinwood said.
Kemp's laugh was unadulterated delight.
‘He suspected — couldn't prove it, of course.’
‘So he doesn't like you too much.’
‘He doesn't have to.
He likes my money; that's good enough.’
There was a pause, the sound of glass on glass.
Kemp said, ‘Don't put ice in that.’
Then, ‘That's fine, Henry.’
‘Friday,’ Glinwood said.
He suggested a flight time and Kemp agreed it.
‘I've some documents for you to sign.
Share transfers.’
‘Tomorrow.’
The sound of a glass being set down on a table, then a door closing.
Alone, Kemp gave a tiny groan followed by a breathy laugh.
The sounds said, I need Glinwood, and he bores me.
Footsteps on a wood floor; then silence as the feet stepped on to a rug.
And into the silence, sinuous and pin-clear, the first few notes of a flute concerto.
Culley put the phone down, then dialled Mike Dawson's number.
Dawson answered on the fourteenth ring.
He sounded as if he were underwater.
‘Please,’ Culley said, ‘don't ask me if I know what time it is.
‘I'm sure you know exactly what time it Is, you bastard.
‘Are you alone?’
There was a pause; Dawson was angry or amused, perhaps both.
‘I'm a personable fellow,’ he said.
‘I've still got all my hair and most of my teeth.
It doesn't follow that my life is a marathon of remorseless screwing.’
‘Rumour has it differently.’
Dawson laughed.
‘What's happening?’
‘That's what I was going to ask.’
‘Easy.
Nothing.
Hold on.’
A rumple of bedclothes, then silence.
Culley gazed out of his window.
A cloistered walkway bordered the courtyard on three sides, arches supported by white pillars, on each pillar a lamp.
Water belled from the crown of the fountain, a perfect, circular fall, and plashed from shelf to shelf, translucent in the lamplight.
Dawson came back to the phone two or three minutes later.
‘What was that?’
Culley asked.
‘You woke me up.
I had to go for a piss.
Nothing —’ Dawson picked up his earlier remark.
‘No more killings.
No more leads.
But that doesn't mean no more hassle.
The general opinion seems to be that since the bastard's decided to stop shooting people, he can remain anonymous, stay at large, enjoy life and freedom, and laugh up his sleeve at an incompetent police force until he decides the time has come for a little more high-velocity fun.’
‘Whose general opinion?’
‘Papers, TV, the rest.’
‘Protheroe?’
‘Well, who do you think they got the idea from?
When interviewed, he sort of wavers between apology and regret.
It's fucking pathetic.
Meanwhile, we're working fifteen-hour days and getting nowhere.
There's nowhere to get.
They've reduced the Task Force by more than half.’
‘The idea is that he's stopped for good.’
‘For the moment.’
‘Yes, that's what I mean.
Stopped.’
‘What about you?’
‘Not sure,’ Culley said.
‘Too soon to tell.’
‘And that's what you're going to put in the report that Protheroe hasn't had.’
‘He's mentioned that.’
‘Oh, yes.
He's mentioned it.
He tried your hotel; you're not there.’
‘Too expensive,’ Culley said.
‘A burden on the taxpayers.’
Dawson laughed.
He said, ‘You're not popular.’
‘Nothing's changed,’ Culley agreed.
‘Good-night, Mike.’
Dawson's reply came from a distance; he was holding the phone away from his mouth.
‘Say good-night to Robin.’
‘Good-night, Robin.’
The girl's voice was fruity with sleep, muffled, the syllables blurred like lipstick on a kissed mouth.
Culley dialled Helen's number.
It was busy.
He tried again ten minutes later with the same result.
He dialled Kemp and got silence, punctuated by the sounds of sleep.
He tried Helen again.
The phone rang, but no-one picked it up.