

15
The trial of Field Marshal Kesselring opened at ten o'clock on 10 February in the dark-panelled courtroom under the slogan ‘La Legge e Uguale per Tutti ’.
David and Julia and the other court personnel had been in their appointed seats for an hour and a half before the proceedings began.
The important visitors filed in after them, and then the members of the press corps.
When they were all settled, the President of the Court, the four colonels who made up the tribunal and the Judge Advocate General appeared, followed at last by the prisoner.
Kesselring, impressive and solid-looking with very short silver-grey hair, was unmistakably a very senior Prussian officer.
Watching him, Julia remembered Mark Heathwood's descriptions of the favourable impression Kesselring had made when he gave evidence at Nuremberg.
She was interested to know how his lawyers would conduct his defence since he had made no denials of his actions and ideals during his London interrogation, but the prosecution case would come first.
The prosecutor rose to give the opening address but before he could begin Kesselring's chief defence lawyer, Dr Hans Laternser, asked the court to grant an adjournment.
He had arrived in Venice from 
Nuremberg only the previous day after two nights' travel.
He had had no time to confer with his client and only twelve hours to study the charges.
After much discussion and with obvious reluctance, the court was adjourned for a week.
The trial was resumed a week later, only to be adjourned once more after the opening proceedings and the prosecution's opening address, setting out the charges.
The Field Marshal was to be tried on two counts: the first, that he had been responsible for the killing of 335 Italians in the Ardeatine Caves outside Rome and the second that he had incited his troops to act with unnecessary force against the partisans.
On Wednesday I9 February the trial at last began in earnest with the cross-examination of Lieutenant Colonel Scotland.
There was a light moment that morning, when the prosecuting lawyer asked his witness a question about the organisation of the German army.
Dr Laternser immediately rose to protest that the witness had never been in the German army and therefore could not properly be asked or answer any such questions.
Prosecuting counsel then said quietly to his witness:
‘Colonel Scotland, were you ever in the German army?’
To the astonishment of almost everyone in the court, the answer came in the affirmative.
Later, Julia discovered that the German army in question had been in South Africa and that Colonel Scotland's appointment had ended some years before the Great War.
His evidence was also remarkable for his insistence that Kesselring had exaggerated his own importance as Officer Commanding Troops in Italy, and was  therefore not in fact responsible for the atrocities of which he stood accused.
It was curious, Julia thought, to hear the chief prosecution witness speaking so forcefully in favour of the defendant.
It was not until the following Monday that the affidavits on which Julia had worked so hard and for so long were presented to the court.
It had eventually been decided to limit the statements to accounts of atrocities alleged to have been committed only between June and August 1944, so that they could be tied precisely to Kesselring's orders.
Very few witnesses had been found who were prepared to come to court to repeat their statements in the flesh, but some did and their words were translated first into English and then into German, causing some confusion as to the precise meaning of what they had actually said.
The translations were not the only technical difficulty: there were only two shorthand writers in the court and they were hard pressed to keep up with the proceedings, causing the court to be adjourned more than once so that they could transcribe their notes.
After the affidavits one of Kesselring's subordinates, a man named Krumhaar, was cross-examined about an operation in which he had had twelve men from the village of Burgo Techino shot because two of his men had been severely wounded by ‘terrorists’ during a parade through the town.
The bodies of the executed men had been left in the main square for twenty-four hours to serve as a warning to the rest of the inhabitants.
Krumhaar's examination was completed by Wednesday and on the following day the court was adjourned once again, leaving only one more prosecution witness to take the stand.
Julia spent that  Thursday very much at a loose end.
She was not accustomed to having nothing to do.
In London, even if a case were delayed because a witness had not presented himself or the judge was ill, there was always plenty of work waiting for her in chambers.
In Venice she had nothing beyond the one case except for learning Italian, teaching English, sightseeing and trying to be patient with, and understand, her increasingly morose husband.
By then she felt that she had seen enough paintings, churches, marble floors and medieval palaces to last her for a long time.
She could hardly descend on Giovanna Sassanta's house without an appointment, and Anthony had made it abundantly clear that he did not want her to cross the threshold of his hospital.
Comfort was due to arrive soon, but had not yet specified the day.
Deciding to use up some of the time writing letters, Julia wondered how married women without either little children or work managed to fill their empty hours.
For the first time she felt a faint stirring of compassion for her own mother, whose obsession with her appearance, shopping, flirtation and gossip Julia had despised for as long as she could remember.
When she had written to Mark Heathwood and to George Wilson, asking whether he had managed to find out whether Raffaella had any chance of getting permission to live in England, Julia pulled a new sheet of writing paper towards her and wrote a chatty, cheerful letter to her mother.
Just before she had finished it, Annunziata came into the salon with a telegram addressed to Julia.
Conditioned by the war to expect only bad news from those familiar yellow envelopes, she opened it reluctantly.
Comfort had sent it from Paris to say  that she would be arriving in Venice in the evening of the following Saturday.
The telegram ended with an unnecessarily extravagant extra three words: ‘Missed you vilely’.
When Anthony arrived spent and ill-looking from the hospital later that evening, Julia handed him the thin yellow sheet and was relieved to see a lightening in his dark grey eyes and a faint smile on his thin lips.
He made the effort to say something pleasant to his wife and they drank a glass of wine together for the first time in weeks.
The following morning Julia accompanied David to the gloomy courtroom again with a sense of relief.
After the last prosecution witness had given his statement, Kesselring's defence counsel rose to give his opening address.
Julia listened to it with professional interest, expecting the usual Nazi defence of obedience to superior orders.
In fact it became clear that a considerable part of the defence was going to be that of justification, that the laws and usages of war permitted reprisals to be taken against hostages.
When the proceedings were adjourned for lunch, Julia collected the notes she had been conscientiously making and pushed them into her briefcase, before looking for David to see whether he wanted to have lunch with her.
He seemed to have escaped before she had and so she made her way out of the court alone, trying to decide whether to lunch in the tea room upstairs or to go out to a restaurant.
‘Julia!’
David's familiar deep voice called out to her as she walked into the hall and she felt herself smiling involuntarily.
‘Julia, come and meet a friend of mine.
He and his wife have just arrived here.’
She walked a little reluctantly across the hall to where David was standing beside a thin, dark man in  civilian clothes.
As she got closer to them Julia thought that she had never seen a man with such brilliant dark eyes or so saturnine and yet handsome a face.
He exuded both power and a compelling attraction.
Julia wondered who on earth he could be.
‘Suvarov,’ said David, ‘this is Mrs Gillingham, who is here in Venice with her husband.
Julia, this is Peter Suvarov, whom I knew during the war.’
‘How do you do?’ said Julia, realising that she was shaking hands with the man who had sent David to fight with the Italian partisans.
She tried to remember the little he had said about Suvarov, but all she could think of was that without him neither she nor Anthony would have met David.
She often worried about her feelings for David, but the thought that she might never have known him made her feel almost ill.
‘Are you here for the trial?’ she asked Suvarov, trying to stop herself from thinking about those feelings.
‘Not really,’ he answered in an intriguingly accented voice.
‘I'm here on a belated honeymoon.
My wife and I are staying at the Danieli, but she's not been feeling well and urged me to take up the offer of an observer's seat here.’
‘I do hope it's nothing serious,’ said Julia politely, thinking that it was rather hard on his wife to spend her honeymoon feeling ill while her husband sat in on a war crimes trial.
‘No, no,’ said Suvarov.
‘She just feels rather under the weather sometimes.
David and I were wondering if we could take you out for a spot of lunch.
Will you come?’
‘You must have so much to talk about that you can't possibly want a stranger,’ said Julia.
‘Perhaps another time?’
‘I very much hope so,’ said Suvarov seriously.
‘What about this evening?
Perhaps you and your husband would come and dine with us?
David is coming and my wife would be so pleased if you would too.’
‘That's extraordinarily good of you.
I'd like to come very much,’ said Julia.
‘I'm afraid that my husband is often caught up at the hospital and so I simply don't know whether he will be free.’
‘Never mind.
We'll see him if he is and not if he isn't,’ he said with a relaxed informality that charmed her.
‘Until tonight then, Mrs Gillingham,’ said Suvarov.
‘Well, David, we'd better be off if we're to be back in time for this afternoon's session.’
After that the question of Julia's lunch was settled and she went straight back to the Campo San Maurizio to warn Annunziata that neither she nor David would be in for dinner.
Food was far too scarce for Julia to bear the thought of wasting any.
Annunziata agreed that Anthony was unlikely to waste time going out to dinner with the others even if he did return in time and promised to cook something quickly for him if he appeared wanting a meal.
‘Annunziata, are you all right?’ asked Julia when the question of dinner was settled, relieved to be able to talk to her at last with reasonable fluency.
‘Yes,signora ,’ answered the housekeeper, but the weariness was horribly evident in her voice.
‘Is there no news?’ said Julia with pity in her eyes.
‘No news.
They must all be dead,’ she said.
Julia took Annunziata's hand at once and said with desperate urgency:
‘No, that is not true.
When my husband was lost people told me he must be dead, but I would not believe it.
And he was not dead.
While there is no news, there is hope.
Please believe that, Annunziata.’
The woman clung to Julia's hand and broke down for the first time, weeping and pouring out a torrent of Italian that Julia was incapable of translating for herself.
She just waited until the storm was over, when she pulled a clean handkerchief from her sleeve and handed it to Annunziata, remembering with a tiny moment of irrepressible pleasure the time when David had done the same for her.
You are kind, Signora Giulia,’ said Annunziata, tidying her face and hair and standing upright again.
‘So kind.’
‘Hope is all any of us has now,’ said Julia carefully choosing her words to make certain that they meant what she wanted them to mean.
Annunziata looked directly at her then and nodded.
‘You are right to hope,signora ,’ she said as slowly.
‘The doctor will get well again soon.’
‘Thank you,’ said Julia.
Then, catching sight of her watch again, she added: ‘I must go, Annunziata.
Will you be all right now?’
Annunziata nodded her head gravely and held open the door for Julia, who returned to the court wondering how much else Annunziata had seen and understood in her unobtrusive way.
That evening Julia dressed for dinner with unusual care and even did her hair in a new style.
Giovanna had recently taken her shopping among some of the newly reopened antique shops in the city and had persuaded her to buy a pair of small tortoiseshell combs.
When Julia had washed and dried her hair, she borrowed a pair of old-fashioned curling tongs from Annunziata and curled the tips of her thick hair under so that it lay sleekly against her shoulders.
Taking wings of it back on either side of her face, she  anchored them with the combs and stood in front of the looking glass to assess the result.
It was not a style that she had affected before, but she decided that it suited her better than the severe chignon had ever done.
The fullness around her forehead balanced her square chin and the waterfall of glossy brown hair softened her angular bones and made her look younger than usual.
The only evening dress she had brought with her was the colour of well-polished copper, which added a little colour to her pale complexion, but it was not going to be warm enough and so she took the mink that had been part of her trousseau from the wardrobe and slung it around her shoulders.
The colour was not good with her frock, but warmth was more important than aesthetic perfection and so she ignored the clash.
She went downstairs to find David waiting for her, dressed in uniform, with his British warm over one arm.
‘No sign of Anthony?’ she said.
Not much to her surprise, David shook his head.
‘Never mind.
Annunziata's promised to make him something if he comes back hungry.’
They walked towards St Mark's Square together in comfortable silence, knowing each other well enough by then not to have to make bright conversation or comment on the weather or the buildings they passed.
As they were walking into the square, David did venture to ask whether Julia had yet got over her aversion to St Mark's itself.
She laughed.
‘Not really.
It just doesn't seem to be my idea of a church — so gloomy and full of galleries and mosaics and nooks and crannies and that horrible cold incense smell,’ she said.
‘I know,’ said David cheerfully teasing her, ‘you think a church should be like an English Gothic cathedral or a little whitewashed village church with moth-eaten Peninsular War banners fluttering from dry-rotted lances.’
‘I suppose I do,’ said Julia.
As an only child, she had had no experience of that kind of affectionate teasing and she rather enjoyed it.
‘Certainly it should be gentle and simple or a place of cold, airy silence.’
They set off across the square and as they were passing Florian's, Julia said:
‘Will you tell me a bit about the Suvarovs?
He seemed an interesting sort of man this morning.’
‘He is,’ said David with a hint of reserve in his voice.
‘That sounds as though you don't altogether approve of him,’ said Julia.
‘And yet you seemed to like him.’
‘I don't and I do, if you see what I mean.
He's a Russian émigré — came out just after the Revolution, although he had been part of it himself, and I don't think he's ever really settled down to ordinary life.
The war was just what he needed, and the kind of secret department he was given could have been designed for him.
He was brilliant, both at seeing what had to be done and at making people want to do it at whatever cost to themselves.’
‘Yes, I see,’ said Julia, thinking that he sounded positively dangerous.
‘And his wife?’
‘I've never met her.
He was married before-for a long time — to a woman who had an incurable disease.
She died last year, leaving him a considerable fortune.
Within a month he was married again.’
‘Hence the ‘belated honeymoon’ he talked about,’said Julia.
‘What sort of woman is she, the new wife?’
‘I know very little about her, although she worked for him in the war too.
She's said to be the daughter of a English general and apparently very beautiful…a good bit younger than him, of course.’
‘Do you know,’ said Julia, shivering in the cold wind as they turned into the Piazzetta, ‘that's the first time I've ever heard you sounding censorious.’
David acknowledged the gentle criticism and tried to justify himself.
‘They were obviously carrying on long before the first Mrs Suvarov died, and I…
No, you're right: it's not fair to judge when one knows nothing of the circumstances.
Let's just say it seems a bit questionable and leave it at that.’
‘What sort of work did she actually do?’ asked Julia, still surprised by David's unusual severity.
‘I'm not sure,’ he said in an oddly formal voice, ‘but there were some fairly odd stories going the rounds about her.
I think she mainly collected information for him on foreigners living in London…by slightly questionable means.
But she's said to be brave, tough, and very bright.’
Expecting to meet a hard-faced predatory bitch after David's warning, Julia discovered instead a delicately pretty fair-haired girl, who was obviously in love with her saturnine husband.
She wore very little make-up and a thoroughly modest frock.
It was not until she stood up to shake hands that Julia saw that she was pregnant.
Her dark violet-blue eyes looked tired to death, and from the way she moved it was clear that her back and her ankles ached badly.
She produced a smile of immediate friendliness as she shook hands with Julia.
‘I'm sure you ought to be sitting down,’ Julia said as soon as the introductions had been made.
‘I know I look a complete wreck,’ answered Felicity Suvarov with a mischievous gleam in her remarkable eyes, ‘but I don't feel quite as bad as I look.’
‘Just tired,’ said Julia, burying her immediate and very unfair jealousy in sympathy.
‘I must say,’ answered the pregnant girl, ‘that I had never expected to be as tired by anything as I was during those awful nights in the Blitz when sleep seemed something one would never have again — but this is worse!’
Delighted to find in her Venetian exile someone else who had spent the war in London, Julia sat down beside Mrs Suvarov.
‘Wasn't it hideous?’
Julia said.
‘I used to think sometimes that if I didn't have a proper night's sleep I'd never be able to work again.
Were you in one of the services?’
As Felicity blushed, Julia belatedly remembered David's disapproval of his chief's wife and wished that she had kept her questions to herself.
‘I was in the FANY at the beginning of the war,’ Felicity said, recovering her complexion, ‘and then I was seconded to Peter's department…a kind of research assistant.’
‘That must have been interesting,’ said Julia and then, because it was obvious that Felicity did not want to talk about her war experiences, began to swap anodyne reminiscences with her.
As they talked about the perils and amusements of the blackout, Julia became more and more intrigued by Peter Suvarov's ravishing bride.
She talked with all the unconscious confidence of a woman who has seen and understood the effects of her beauty on other people for years and yet there was an individuality about her that Julia had not expected, and a strange wistfulness.
When they went into dinner and she was sitting beside Peter Suvarov, Julia took pains to draw him out and discovered him to be quite as attractive a character as his wife.
The conversation between the four of them ranged from the trial and Venice itself to the difficulties besetting the people who were trying to build a better, more humane world than the old one on the wreckage left by the war.
Suvarov had much to say about the territorial ambitions of Marshal Stalin and David interrupted at one moment to ask whether Suvarov had ever met him.
‘Oh yes…but he was a bit of a joke in those days just after the Revolution: the Georgian peasant.
We all thought that Trotsky could have run rings round him, but it was Stalin who survived to wreck the last few hopes of the Revolution and now to swallow up Eastern Europe.’
Remembering that Peter Suvarov had, himself, taken part in that Revolution, Julia asked him about the Russians' probable intentions.
He did not think that their ambitions extended far into Western Europe but he thought it had been a serious error to let the Russians take Berlin and establish themselves there.
It became so clear that he was not optimistic about the possibilities of a peaceful settlement with Russia that Julia said:
‘Well, at least they haven't got the A-bomb.
Provided America doesn't pull out of the alliance completely, that ought to give us all some protection.’
‘It won't be long,’ said Suvarov gloomily.
‘And they'll never rest until they've caught up with the States.’
Julia noticed that Felicity looked towards her husband with an air of almost maternal concern, as though afraid of the effect of the conversation on  him, and it struck Julia that he probably still had many relations in Russia.
‘It must be strange,’ she said slowly, ‘to have been part of the Revolution and then to find yourself on the opposite side from people you fought beside.’
He nodded.
‘But even that is not as hard as recognising that the sum of human misery has probably been increased by what we did, incredible though that would have seemed to us then.’
‘Do you think that Socialism in itself necessarily increases human misery?’ asked Julia with conscious naivety, watching David from under her dark eyelashes.
He knew precisely what she was doing and made a face at her, but they both listened with real interest to what Suvarov had to say.
‘No more than any other creed,’ came the cynical answer.
‘As always, it depends on the motives of the leaders who operate it and the ability of the mass of the population to challenge them.
Any political system that refuses to allow dissent becomes a tyranny.
But if young David gets himself into Parliament, I expect he'll do as good a job on the government back benches as he would in opposition.’
Felicity asked David then about his ambitions and when he had admitted them, she said:
‘Don't your family disapprove a bit?’
David's lively face took on an expression in which regret and determination were almost equally mixed.
‘Yes, alas.
My father in particular loathes the idea, but…’
‘But one cannot rule one's whole life by what one's father thinks,’ supplied Felicity with considerable feeling.
Julia found herself wanting to get to know her better, quite certain by then that whatever there had  been between Suvarov and Felicity while his first wife was alive it had not been the kind of affair David had assumed.
‘Exactly,’ said David, grinning at her, ‘and I shall go on trying to show him that Socialism is a fairer and much more just system than Capitalism.’
Julia said drily that she thought that free Capitalism with an adequate system of social welfare for all those who could not make their own success in it was probably the fairest workable system, and then laughed as she saw David's expression.
‘You look as though you were going to be sick,’ she said.
David managed to laugh, too, although his mind was no longer on the subject of politics at all.
All he seemed to be able to concentrate on was the small dimple that appeared to the left of Julia's mouth whenever she smiled her rather lopsided smile.
He suddenly wondered whether she smiled like that because she could rarely allow herself the full release of a complete smile, but must always keep one side of her lips tucked under control.
He also wondered with equal suddenness what on earth was happening to him.
Liking Julia as he did, admiring her stringent intelligence, her honesty, the unexpected humility that would never let her give advice unless she was asked for it, and her unfailing reasonableness, it had never occurred to him that he might be falling in love with her.
The sudden recognition of his state horrified him.
Julia Gillingham was the wife of his best friend.
She showed every sign of being absorbed in her difficult life with her husband and would probably be…
David realised that he had no idea what her  reaction to his state would be.
She would never mock it, he was certain of that, and he could not believe that she would be shocked, because she was far too experienced and sensible to waste energy on such a useless emotion; but it would probably distress her, and she had enough distress to absorb without his adding to it.
He knew so little of women that he felt as though he had woken up to find himself halfway across a vast mountain in a blizzard without map or rope or compass.
His one serious love affair had happened in the first year of the war with a girl younger than himself whom he had thought he loved.
Only when they actually got to know each other had he discovered that it was the idea of loving her that he had fallen for and not the girl herself.
Since then he had been attracted to several women, and discovered both the intoxicating pleasures offered by some of them and the speed with which fulfilled desire died.
But never had he felt for any woman the things he felt for Julia Gillingham.
Watching her, he became aware of an extraordinary pain at the thought that she could never know how strongly he felt about her.
‘…don't you, David?’
Her kind, low voice broke into his thoughts and made him jump.
‘I'm sorry, I was miles away.
What were you talking about?’ he said, smiling involuntarily at the faint amusement in her brown eyes.
‘It doesn't matter,’ she said gently.
He seemed oddly distrait , she thought, and wondered whether their teasing about his political ideas could have upset him.
Wanting to protect him, she took charge of the conversation then, turning it to subjects that could have no personal connotations for him, subjects  like the efficient way that the British government had persuaded the Americans to take over responsibility for Greece and its defence against Communism, which they could no longer afford, and their less effective attempts to involve the Americans in the Palestine troubles.
When they had exhausted politics, Julia asked David whether he had seen the recent report in The Times about the Allied commission which had been investigating Italians who had helped escaping prisoners of war.
‘No,’ he said, a little puzzled.
‘I missed it.
Why?’
‘Apparently it's coming to an end,’ said Julia, ‘and the commissioners have found that a great many of the Italians they tried to reward for what they did have refused to take any money at all.
When you think what they risked that's amazing.’
‘Not really,’ said David.
‘We've come across the same thing all over Europe.
People risked everything to help escapers and want nothing in return.
It helps to remember that whenever one's faced with the horror stories about betrayal and collaboration and the black market.’
After that they ignored the war and its grisly aftermath and talked about nothing very important: new books, the latest films that had been shown in London since Julia had left and about the BBC's new Third Programme.
After a time David relaxed and joined in, complimenting Felicity, chaffing her husband and turning often to Julia to remind-her of earlier conversations they had had or to ask her opinion.
She enjoyed herself and acknowledged a disloyal thought that if Anthony had been there she would not have had nearly so much fun.
At last the party broke up when Felicity announced that her spine felt as though it were about to collapse and that she must go to bed.
‘We must go, too,’ said David, quickly standing up.
‘Court in the morning.
Will you be there, Suvarov?’
‘Unless Flixe needs me,’ he said, looking at his wife with a mixture of protectiveness and adoration that made Julia think back to her own honeymoon and wonder whether Anthony had ever looked at her like that.
‘Would you like to do a little gentle sightseeing one day?’
Julia asked her and was touched by the way Felicity's face lit up.
‘The court is endlessly being adjourned and I could easily come and collect you once we've been let out.’
‘I'd love to.
How kind of you,’ said Felicity and they agreed to a tentative appointment for the following morning.
‘Isn't that when your sister-in-law is due to arrive?’ asked David.
‘She won't get here until the evening,’ said Julia, ‘so I'll have plenty of time.’
They said goodbye to each other, and then Julia and David walked out into the freezing darkness.
Julia turned the big collar of her fur coat up round her face and David took her arm.
Despite the bitter weather they strolled slowly along the Riva degli Schiavoni as though neither of them could quite bear the thought of the evening's ending.
Looking across the lagoon towards San Giorgio Maggiore, Julia saw that the moon was almost full and hung, huge and round, just over the Palladian dome.
‘I know it's a cliche,’ she said, standing with David's hand in the crook of her arm, ‘but it really  does look as though it were floating, as though it might be washed away by the next tide.’
His hand tightened slightly as he agreed with her, and she longed to turn and face him, pull his head gently down and kiss him.
The impulse was so strong that she could hardly believe that he did not feel it too.
Her blood seemed to race through her arteries, and she knew that she was breathing more quickly than usual.
Exercising all the self-restraint of which she was capable, she pulled herself away from his hand and pointed across to the Giudecca.
‘I haven't been over there yet,’ she said.
‘What's it like?’
Relieved that he had apparently not betrayed himself and yet wishing that she had not moved away from him, David told her about the history of the old Jewish quarter of Venice.
The topic lasted them all the way back to the Campo San Maurizio and it was not until they were climbing the stairs up to their respective rooms that he let himself say:
‘I loved this evening.
Thank you for coming with me.’
‘Ah, David,’ said Julia, before she could stop herself.
Then she straightened her shoulders, smiled briskly, and went on: ‘It was fun, wasn't it?
Just a pity that Anthony couldn't be there, too.’
At that salutary reminder of her husband, David nodded and turned abruptly to climb the stairs to his bedroom.
16
The next day Julia woke with all the trivial but uncomfortable symptoms of a developing cold, and she wondered whether she had caught it dawdling by the edge of the icy lagoon.
She thought of staying to nurse it in bed, but then remembered her promise to Felicity Suvarov and made herself get up.
Julia felt better once she was on her feet and when she remembered that Comfort was due to arrive that evening cheered up even more.
Comfort had been in Paris for a fortnight, officially to sort out details of an exhibition of her paintings, and she had taken the opportunity to replenish her depleted wardrobe and see as many of her old friends as she could find.
There were still plenty, although some had not survived the Nazis' ferocity and others had died in the orgy of vengeance that had been unleashed after the liberation.
Comfort met some rebuffs from people she had counted as her friends, who resented their allies' safety from occupation almost as much as the damage they had inflicted on France as they pushed the Germans back after D-Day.
But most of the people she telephoned were happy to see her.
With them she talked, looked at the latest exhibitions, ate in tiny restaurants in the Quartier Latin  that smelled deliciously of garlic and wine and smarter ones in the Champs-Elysees, wandered about the city marvelling at how little physical damage the Nazis had done, and had a marvellous time.
Only a few of her friends had been active in the Resistance, but it was clear that neither they nor anyone else much wanted to talk about the choices they had all had to make.
That suited Comfort, because she was sick to death of war stories and all she wanted to do was forget the whole horrible business and somehow get her life back on to its prewar footing.
Buying her new clothes helped, with all the half-forgotten luxury of choosing the models in Dior's grey-and-gold salon and returning for fittings as the suits and dresses were moulded to her figure.
After the depressing makeshifts to which she had been reduced by British rationing, the sensation of wonderful materials against her skin was almost as pleasing as the vendeuse's comments about ‘Madame's wonderful figure’ and striking face.
The finished clothes were delivered to the hotel on her last morning in Paris only an hour before Bob Storrington was due to collect her for lunch.
Comfort tried on all the clothes and decided to wear the black suit.
It would be perfect for lunch in Paris and, although it was not really suitable for travelling, it would at least ensure that she looked as she ought for her reunion with Anthony.
Having seen herself properly dressed again, she could not bear the thought of confronting him in the skimpy, shabby, ready-made clothes of wartime London.
Sitting in front of the looking glass, making up her face, she hoped that Anthony was all right and not quite as heartbroken as Julia seemed to think he was.
It seemed unlikely that he could be as devastated by  the death of a single patient as Julia had made out in her letters, but then she had never really understood him.
Probably, Comfort thought, as she blotted her lipstick and bared her teeth to check that there were no lipstick smears on them, Anthony had simply not felt like explaining his feelings to Julia and she had misinterpreted his silence.
Certainly the letters he had written home had made no great fuss about the child's death.
There was a knock at the door.
Checking her face in the glass, Comfort smiled in satisfaction.
‘Entrez ,’ she called, still sitting at the dressing table, and turned her head with impeccable grace to welcome her guests.
The two men who came in were old friends of hers, rich American connoisseurs who had made their home in Paris before the war and left only just in time.
As far as Comfort knew, they had returned to the States for the duration, although in fact they had been in London for part of the time, working for the Free French, and back in France for most of the rest.
After the liberation they had found their old apartment undamaged, moved back in and set about recreating their old life of searching out young artists, arranging exhibitions for them and building up their own collection of European art.
To Comfort, they seemed as anxious as she to ignore the war and they had put themselves out to entertain her during her visit.
The previous evening they had insisted on taking her to the cinema, ignoring her protests that she would rather see the Molière play at the Comédie Française, to watch Jacques Prévert's film Les Enfants du Paradis .
It had been made in 1942 but had not been shown until the Nazis had been banished from  the country.
The two men had told Comfort that she would just love it.
Planning to despise the film as a poor substitute for classic drama, Comfort had actually found it touchingly romantic, but oddly disturbing too.
‘So what did you think of the film, Comfort?’ asked Bob Storrington, peering over her slim shoulders into the looking glass and repositioning his silk tie.
‘You refused to say last night.’
‘It was hardly a refusal,’ said Comfort, amused to see that the war had done nothing to reduce either his unfailing elegance or his vanity.
‘It was just too much to absorb straight away.’
She stood up to get her little-black hat, perched it on the side of her sleek fair head and skewered a pearl-tipped hatpin through the felt.
Long suede gloves and a new handbag completed her ensemble and she stood waiting.
Bob whistled.
‘You look beautiful!’ he said.
‘Doesn't she, John?’
‘Much more like herself than in those dreary London clothes,’ said his companion with an engaging smile.
‘Well, Comfort?’
‘Well what?
Oh, the film.
You were right: I loved it.
I loved the sadness of it and the staginess…and the tragedy of their loving each other so much that they could not be happy without each other or even manage to make anyone else happy, despite all their niceness and good intentions.’
She stopped and stared at her own face in the mirror.
‘And?’ said John, surprised that the usually articulate Comfort should phrase her approval in such pedestrian words.
‘And I loved the ending,’ she added quickly, turning back to face them with her familiar, brilliant smile in place, ‘with the hero playing himself for once in a  crowd of clowns, as though he could only be real in an unreal world and vice versa….
I think that's what I mean.
But you'd need Julia to reduce all that raw feeling to accurate words.’
We knew you'd like it,’ said John, satisfied.
‘I'm glad you didn't miss La Princess d'Elide too much.
And now to lunch.
I wish you could stay a bit longer.
We've hardly had time to do anything, and now that you're looking so wonderful….’
‘But I can't,’ said Comfort, her eccentrically beautiful face softening.
‘It's been too long already.’
They took her to a small, perfect restaurant, where she had never been before, and fed her on soup and fish and meat and cheese, all of a quality and in quantities she had only dreamed of during the war.
As she finished the last morsel of a perfectly running Brie, she said, sighing:
‘There have been times since it ended when I gave up hope of ever eating food like this again.’
‘Only the lucky rich can do it,’ said Bob.
‘But since you are just as rich as us….’
‘Richer probably,’ said John, raising a smile from Comfort, who liked her assets to be appreciated just as much as her talents and her looks.
‘…you ought to come and live here,’ Bob went on, ignoring his friend's interruption, ‘and leave your brother and his good, dull wife to their sober lives.’
Comfort put down her wine glass with a snap, her smile shrinking like a jersey boiled in washing soda.
‘Julia is not dull,’ she said through her teeth.
‘Oh my!’ said Bob, looking at her more seriously than his voice would have suggested, ‘you have changed your tune.
What's happened?’
‘Nothing,’ said Comfort, who had been unable either to forget or justify some of the things she had  said to Julia during the war.
She hunched one shoulder.
‘You've never properly appreciated her.’
‘And you have?’ said Bob, nibbling at the last of his cheese.
‘Not always,’ said Comfort, with rare honesty.
It would, she felt, atone for the things she had said and mean that she did not have to talk to Julia about them.
Much more happily she went on: ‘But that's because I'm not as sensible as she is — or as kind, or….’
‘'Sensible’, ‘kind’,’ said Bob as the waiter removed their cheese plates and substituted a wonderfully fragrant apple tart.
Tasting it, Comfort thought that it was as different from English apple pie as champagne was from soda water.
‘In fact dull,’ Bob went on, watching her with a cynical smile.
‘And as you well know you find dullness just as awful as we do.
That's why you love us so much.’
She laughed, half pleased and half resentful, and finished her apple tart.
‘You ought to move back here,’ said John.
‘Do think about it.
We need people to fascinate us.
And unlike some others, we understand you.’
‘I can't,’ said Comfort, liking the word ‘fascinate’.
‘And anyway Anthony understands me….
Needs me too.
Besides….’
She broke off, unaccountably reluctant to tell them the rest, although she had made no secret of it in London.
‘Aha,’ said Bob, twinkling at her, ‘so now at last we come to it.
There's a new man in your life, isn't there?
I told you so, John,’ he added in a stage whisper.
‘We heard that you've even got him in the house.’
‘Well, yes and no,’ said Comfort with a quick, almost self-conscious smile.
‘There is a painter, whose work I really admire….’
‘It's just his work, honestly,’ said John to Bob.
‘There's nothing naughty about it at all.
She'd never….’
‘Shut up, both of you,’ said Comfort, really laughing.
There were very few people who were allowed to tease her, but these two could just get away with it.
‘His work and him.
He's a charming Hungarian, who had such trouble with the Communists that he had to get out.
I've rented Julia's rooms to him while she's in Venice and he paints up in my studio.’
‘And…’ prompted John.
‘Come on, Comfort, tell all.
We're horribly short of gossip.’
‘Well, I don't want you two gossiping about me,’ said Comfort, her lazily amused voice sharpening until it sounded almost vicious.
The two men, who were used to her, turned and raised their eyebrows at one another.
Suddenly Comfort did not find their double-act funny any longer.
She looked at the gold watch that hung loosely on her thin wrist.
‘I'm going to have to leave soon if I'm not to miss my plane,’ she said.
‘Oh, you must wait for coffee,’ said Bob, sobering and turning to signal to the young waiter.
Comfort agreed and enjoyed it when it came, but the sparkle and fun had been taken out of their conversation by the unfortunate choice of the word ‘gossip’.
When they had all finished the coffee, Bob got up to pay the bill, leaving John to apologise for his misplaced piece of mockery.
‘I'll forgive you,’ said Comfort, ‘although considering the trouble you caused me with your wretched tittle-tattle in the old days, I ought….’
‘What do you mean, trouble?’ asked John, completely  serious at last.
Comfort looked at him, Surprised to see him without his mocking smile, and then she shrugged.
‘When you started prattling about that man I sometimes saw here before I ever went up to Oxford,’ she said.
‘Anthony got to hear the story and in the usual way of gossip heard a greatly exaggerated version and was seriously upset.
I never want to face that sort of thing again.’
‘Comfort, I-’
‘Don't apologise again.
I'll forgive you if you find me a taxi that will take me back to pick up my baggage and get me to the airport on time.’
‘Consider it done,’ he said, with a faint echo of his usual theatrical flourish.
He left the cosy little restaurant to reappear a few minutes later with the announcement that her taxi was at the door and that he and Bob would go with her as far as her hotel.
The head waiter opened the door and Comfort preceded the two men out, enjoying the way her long black skirt swung about her legs and showed off her slender ankles and new, high-heeled shoes.
She did not notice the raggedly dressed, exhausted-looking woman who was carrying a heavy basket across the road towards her, until she heard the bitterly articulated:
‘Salope !‘
Outraged, Comfort looked at the woman, drew herself up to her full height, looked down her beaky nose and began to cross the road towards the waiting taxi.
More obscenities followed just as the two men were hurrying to catch up with Comfort, and then the woman stopped dead in front of Comfort and spat in her face.
The disgust she felt almost paralysed Comfort for  a moment, before she started to fumble in her bag for a handkerchief.
Bob caught her by the shoulder and used his own to wipe her face, while John turned on the woman and let loose a volley of dismissive French.
She turned away and he, too, came to Comfort's side, urging her towards the taxi.
A sharp blow hit her between the shoulder blades and she wheeled round to see the woman who had spat at her leaning down to pick up another stone.
Without waiting for anything else, Comfort ran to the taxi, pulled open the door and almost flung herself inside.
‘Why?
Why?’ she said, her face bitter with fury, when the two men got in beside her.
‘It has been happening a bit,’ said John soothingly.
‘It's not you, Comfort; it's the clothes.
There's a pretty strong feeling that while materials are so scarce it's not fair for the rich and privileged to wear things like that when the rest of the population can hardly even get their shoes repaired.
It happens over food, too.
She saw us coming out of the restaurant and….’
He stopped, shrugged his shoulders and left the rest to their imagination.
‘She was vile,’ said Comfort, recovering fast as she took in the impertinence of anyone's venturing to question her expenditure or appearance.
‘And probably mad.’
‘Or desperate,’ suggested Bob, who knew rather more than Comfort did about the straits to which many Parisians had been reduced by the war.
He toyed with telling her a few home truths, but then decided it would do no good.
Truth had had to go by the board in the work he had been doing during the war and there seemed no point in insisting on using it again.
Comfort was Comfort, he reflected, and  no one had ever been able to change her.
As he had once said to John, you took Comfort as she was or you ignored her, and he enjoyed her enough to put up with her.
She caught her aeroplane easily and spent the journey thinking about Anthony.
It seemed outrageously unfair that after so long she could not have him to herself and she hoped that his lodger would be tactful enough to leave them in peace during her visit.
Anthony had written that Julia seemed to like him, and so perhaps she could keep him out of their way.
At the thought of Julia, Comfort's fine eyebrows contracted above her bony nose.
Ever since Julia had acknowledged that she needed Comfort's help to make Anthony happy, Comfort had known that somehow she was going to have to make it up to Julia.
At that moment, Julia herself was walking across Venice, thinking happily of Comfort's arrival.
Having escorted Felicity Suvarov around St Mark's cathedral, Julia had gone back to the Danieli hotel and shared some lunch with her.
As they talked about the war years and about what the future might hold for them both, Julia found herself liking Felicity more and more, although she was astonished at the freedom with which Felicity was prepared to confide in her about everything except her work during the war.
Julia, accustomed for years to keeping her own counsel, listened but did not reciprocate.
She learned among many other things that Felicity had known Peter's first wife quite well and admired her desperately as she struggled with her increasing disability and urged her husband to live as freely as he could.
‘She must have been an extraordinary woman,’ said Julia, trying to imagine living her life in a wheelchair and knowing that her attractive husband was falling in love with someone else.
It would take superhuman charity, she decided, to forgive, let alone encourage him.
‘She was,’ said Felicity, her beautiful face glowing.
‘The first time I met her, while I was working for him, I think she knew that I had fallen in love with him and yet she was kinder to me than anyone I've ever known.
D'you know, in a way I feel as though I have to take care of him for her.’
She laughed a little self-consciously.
‘I know that sounds revoltingly sentimental.’
Julia smiled.
enjoying Felicity's ingenuousness as well as her readiness to laugh at herself, but she looked at her watch and said:
‘I'm going to have to go and give my regular Saturday afternoon lesson to my refugees.’
Felicity hauled herself out of her chair, admitting that her doctor had ordered her to rest after lunch every day, and they said goodbye to each other.
Julia set off towards the Dorsoduro, beginning to feel really ill with a headache pounding behind her left eyebrow, smarting eyes, a rasped throat and a nose that felt as though it were stuffed with hot, wet flannel with a few pins in it, but even so she decided to give her lesson.
On her way to the house she stopped off in the Campo San Maurizio to see if Annunziata had everything she needed for the dinner she was preparing to welcome Comfort, and discovered that the English post had arrived with a letter from George Wilson.
Julia opened it and read it as she made her way towards the Accademia Bridge.
George wrote that he was not optimistic about the possibilities of getting Raffaella permission to emigrate to England.
There are so many cases of genuine, unbearable hardship [he wrote]that unless your protégée can produce some family connection here, I don't see how you'll be able to swing it.
Julia waited to give Raffaella the bad news until she had delivered her lesson, led a halting conversation in English about the future of Italy, handed out the previous week's exercises that she had marked, and set the work for the next lesson.
While the other women were packing up their books, she turned to Raffaella.
‘May I say hello to your son?’ she asked.
Raffaella's green-blue eyes sharpened.
‘Of course, Signora Giulia,’ she said, standing up gracefully.
‘Will you come now?’
Julia followed her to the private bed-sitting room, where her child was happily playing in his cot.
Raffaella lifted him out and turned him to face Julia.
‘He looks very well, Raffaella,’ she said carefully.
‘And getting bigger all the time.’
‘Have you news,signora ?’ asked Raffaella, dumping the heavy child on the floor at her feet.
‘Not very good news, I'm afraid,’ she said and read out what George Wilson had written.
She had to translate one or two words into Italian.
‘But I have a family connection,’ said Raffaella at once.
‘You have?’ said Julia, surprised.
‘But why did you not tell me that at once?’
A faint colour appeared in Raffaella's pale cheeks and the clever eyes were veiled.
When she looked up again, they were clear and slightly pleading.
She gestured to the child playing on the floor.
‘His father is English,’ she said.
‘Ah,’ said Julia, thinking that she understood why this particular piece of information had been withheld.
‘But not your husband?’
Raffaella shook her blonde head.
‘He was…no: he wanted to marry me,’ she said.
‘He said so.
But my brother made…was difficult.
And he had to went.’
Julia sat down on a hard chair beside the child.
‘Had to go,’ she corrected.
‘Well, I think you had better tell me the whole story.
It might help.’
Raffaella sat on the bed and proceeded to explain her history in a mixture of broken English and fast, graphic Italian to Julia.
Her headache seemed to be getting worse and worse, and Raffaella's command of English slipped as she grew increasingly excited.
Her voice seemed to get shriller, too, and her hands danced in front of Julia's painful eyes as she gesticulated more and more wildly.
After fifteen minutes or so, Julia thought that she had grasped most of the story.
Raffaella and her elder brother had had to flee to the mountains after some unspecified trouble with the Germans and had joined a local band of partisans.
He had found a niche at once with the men, but she told Julia that she had been unhappy for months, struggling with the other women to force local villagers to disgorge food, humping it back up to the camp and preparing it under extraordinarily difficult conditions.
There were days when the leaders of the band refused to let them light any kind of fire in case German patrols found them and yet they somehow still had to produce food that the men could eat.
She seemed to skate over the next part of her story, but Julia grasped the salient part, which was that one of the English officers who fought with the Italians had fallen in love with her, promised to marry her  and secretly made love to her.
It was clear that he made her life happier than it had been, but she still had to put up with the desperately uncomfortable conditions and go out on her terrifying foraging expeditions.
On one of them she was picked up for questioning by the Germans.
Julia flinched as she heard that and wondered how she herself would have stood up to the kind of life Raffaella was describing.
The Germans had no idea who she was and the villagers from whom she had been begging food had not betrayed her; she was allowed to go without suffering anything much worse than a slapped face and an hour's sarcastic, sneering interrogation.
After that, she told Julia, she was even more afraid of leaving the doubtful sanctuary of the partisans' camp, particularly as she had begun to feel rather ill.
When she belatedly realised that she must be pregnant she could not tell the Englishman, because he was away from the camp leading an action against an important German supply dump.
Unfortunately other people in the camp had by then also realised her condition and someone had told her brother.
Berserk with rage, he had called her a slut and worse and demanded the name of the father.
Frightened for the Englishman, because she well knew that her brother had an uncontrollable temper, she did not tell him anything.
Then he started beating her.
Raffaella described her injuries in indignant Italian, ticking each one off on her fingers, but Julia could understand only something about cracked ribs and something about her eyes.
Even that was bad enough.
‘Did you not tell him about the Englishman?’
Julia asked slowly, trying to imagine a world in which  an illegitimate pregnancy could provoke such a punishment.
Raffaella lifted her chin proudly and shook her head.
‘He would have killed him,’ she said slowly in English and then reverted to Italian again.
Struggling through the cotton wool that seemed to have been stuffed into her brain, Julia found that announcement of savagery almost impossible to believe.
While she was framing a question that would not sound insultingly doubtful, Raffaella went on telling her story.
She told Julia that she had put the blame for her child on to one of the Germans who had arrested her.
Her brother was disgusted and called her a filthy collaborator, but at least the Englishman was safe.
Only his return stopped the beating her brother gave her.
The Englishman had her carried to her makeshift tent so that her wounds could be attended to, and then he heard the story from her brother.
When at last he came to see her, he obviously believed in the story of the German and she was too proud to tell him the truth.
He gave her physical protection, but never showed her any affection again.
After the liberation he saw that she escaped her brother's clutches and got to Rome with enough money to keep her and have the baby safely.
‘And was it enough?’
Julia asked, trying to make sense of the story.
‘No,’ answered Raffaella and then went on to tell Julia with no self-consciousness at all that she became a prostitute in Rome, where the dollar-rich American soldiers were prepared to pay a small fortune to a good-looking, elegant girl.
All was apparently well until her brother followed her to Rome, discovered her whereabouts and threatened to kill both her and her ‘half-German’ baby.
To save both their lives, Raffaella had left her lucrative work in Rome and fled to Venice, where Giovanna had taken her in.
‘But why?’ said Julia, feeling stupid.
‘Why should he have wanted to kill you?’
‘He is mad,’ said Raffaella flatly.
‘The war was perfect for him: he could beat people and kill them and be proud of it.
He hated me because he had to be ashamed of me.
He called me a puttana …you understand?’
Julia nodded.
‘So he could not be proud any more.
They mocked him.
It made him mad and he wanted to kill me.
If he finds me again,’ said Raffaella at last, her greenish eyes dilated in apparently genuine fear, ‘he will try again to kill me.
I have to go.
And there is nowhere to go except to England.
Perhaps there I can find his father and we will be safe.’
She dropped a hand on the child's dark head and stared pleadingly at Julia.
Julia was not at all sure that she had followed all the details of the story, and did not believe everything she had been told, but she did accept that Raffaella was genuinely afraid.
‘Do you know where this Englishman lives?’ she asked.
Raffaella shook her head.
‘But I could find him,’ she said.
Julia did not feel up to assessing the likelihood of that just then.
‘I will write to England and ask,’ she said carefully, finding it increasingly painful even to speak.
She had had many colds during the last few years, but this one seemed much the worst.
It seemed to be affecting her brain as much as her breathing.
‘I must go, Raffaella.
When I have news I will tell you.’
Then she went upstairs to tell Giovanna that she thought she would not be able to stay for her Italian lesson, because she felt so ill, and took herself painfully back across the Grand Canal to her temporary home.
By the time she reached the Campo San Maurizio, she felt so tired that she was almost afraid she would have to climb the cold stone stairs to the first floor on her hands and knees.
There were lights in all the windows and as Julia slowly walked up the stairs, she could hear the sound of cheerful voices from the salon.
Mingling with that of David was Anthony's, sounding far happier and more relaxed than she had heard it for weeks.
Forgetting Raffaella's story, almost forgetting her headache and her cold, Julia pushed open the double doors to see the two men standing around the stove, glasses in their hands, laughing.
‘Hello,’ she said hoarsely, pleased to see them at ease with each other again.
‘Julia,’ said Anthony.
‘Good God!
Are you all right?’
She nodded.
‘I've just got rather a cold,’ she said.
‘Come and get warm,’ said David almost at the same time as Anthony was saying:
‘You ought to have a hot whisky and lemon.
I'll see if Annunziata's got any lemons.’
‘I'll go,’ said David, putting down his glass and hurrying out of the room.
‘Did you get her?’
Julia asked.
‘Is she all right?’
Anthony nodded.
He had promised Comfort that he would tell no one about the woman who had spat at her and called her filthy names.
‘Yes.
She's upstairs dressing,’ he said.
‘She wanted to impress you with some new clothes she bought in France.
‘Oh dear,’ murmured Julia, looking down at her baggy tweed coat and skimpy straight skirt.
‘I don't think I've got the energy to change.’
‘No, much better recruit your energies,’ said Anthony, just as David returned carrying a jug of hot water and two slices of lemon on a plate.
‘There's no sugar left,’ he said almost as though it were a major tragedy.
‘Don't worry,’ said Julia.
‘I'll just have whisky and hot water then.’
She lay back against the hard sofa, sipping the drink when David brought it to her and swallowing with difficulty.
She was roused only by the sound of the door's opening.
‘Comfort!’
Anthony's voice opened Julia's eyes and she saw her sister-in-law standing in the doorway wearing a most remarkable dress.
The tightly fitting bodice was cut quite low over Comfort's small bosom.
The waist was dropped, emphasising the long elegant lines of her figure, and the huge, spreading skirt fell at least six inches below her knees.
The astonishing garment was made of some smooth material in a mixture of very dark greens and blues which flattered her blonde hair and made her slate-coloured eyes even more ravishing than usual.
‘You look absolutely stunning,’ said Anthony.
‘Come and have a glass of wine and meet David Wallington.’
Julia glanced sideways at David, feeling very much at a disadvantage in her old brownish-grey tweeds.
She expected to see him gazing at Comfort with the admiration she deserved, but in fact he was looking down at Julia.
‘Are you really all right?’ he said with a seriousness that made the familiar question matter.
Julia nodded and pulled herself up from the sofa.
‘Darling Julia,’ said Comfort, sounding at her most American and her most caressing.
She held out her arms.
‘I can't kiss you,’ said Julia hoarsely, ‘because I've got a foul cold.
But it is wonderful to see you, Comfort.’
‘Never mind the cold,’ said Comfort, putting her arms around Julia and laying her smooth cool cheek against Julia's hot one.
She whispered: ‘You do know how much I really care about you, don't you?’
‘I know,’ said Julia, pulling herself back.
‘It's all right, Comfort.
There's no need for great drama.’
Comfort was hurt and showed it.
Julia thought that her cold must be softening her brain.
Nothing was more calculated to put Comfort in a bad mood than a piece of unnecessary criticism like that.
‘This is Anthony's David Wallington,’ said Julia, deciding to ignore her mistake.
‘David, this is Comfort, of whom you have heard Anthony and me speak so often.’
‘Yes indeed.
How do you do?’ he said, holding out a large hand.
Comfort shook it and murmured something formally polite, but she looked him over in rather obvious disdain, tilting back her small head to see his face.
It seemed that she was not impressed for, having completed her examination, she turned ostentatiously away to follow Anthony to the table where the wine stood.
They stayed there, talking quietly together until Annunziata came in to lay the table.
Anthony introduced Comfort, who immediately started talking in fluent, fast Italian, which made Julia feel as inadequate and insular as she had ever done at Comfort's university parties.
It also made Julia angry, pointing up the unnecessary rudeness of Comfort's dismissal of David.
Julia made no effort to talk then, because her throat hurt so much, but later, over dinner, she felt that she had at least to try.
It became obvious as soon as Annunziata handed round the soup tureen that Comfort was deliberately trying to exclude David from the conversation and show him how de trop he was.
Julia deliberately turned to him to explain the significance of Comfort's private jokes and fill in the background whenever she mentioned the name of one of their friends whom David could not know.
After a moment he unobtrusively laid a hand on her knee and said:
‘Don't try to talk.
It must hurt so much.
I'm all right.’
Julia smiled at him and then looked across the round table at Anthony as though to persuade him to get Comfort to behave better, but either he misunderstood her signals or did not care enough, for he sat, watching his sister, laughing at her jokes and joining in her reminiscences.
By the time dinner was cleared, Julia thought that she had never felt so tired.
When Anthony suggested that they all go for a walk to see St Mark's by moonlight and have their coffee in Florian's, Julia shook her head.
‘Honestly, Anthony,’ she said with a sigh, ‘I think I'll be better in bed.
This wretched cold is making me feel bloody.
Would you mind terribly if I stayed at home?’
‘No, of course not, Julia,’ said Anthony, smiling at her with more sympathy than he had managed to show for weeks.
‘I'll look in when we get back and see if you need dosing with anything.
David?’
‘I'll stay and keep Julia company until she goes to bed,’ David answered easily enough.
‘I've a stack  papers to read before the next sitting.
Next time perhaps, Miss Gillingham,’ he added, turning politely to Comfort.
‘Perhaps,’ she answered, smiling freely at him for the first time that evening.
When they had left, Julia wondered whether to say anything or not, but David seemed to have no such inhibitions.
‘Phew!’ he said.
‘What had I done to make her so cross?’
Relieved to have the matter out in the open, Julia took a sip of wine to ease her throat and tried to explain her wayward, difficult, fascinating, beloved sister-in-law to him.
‘She is probably afraid that if Anthony likes you too much she will be excluded,’ she said slowly through the pain.
It seemed far more important that David should understand and not be hurt than that she save her throat.
‘I still find some of the things she does difficult to understand even after all these years, but I have grasped her conviction that people have only a finite quantity of affection to give and her terror that if Anthony lets anyone new have any she will have that much less for herself.
She has always been rather possessive of him, except oddly enough as far as I'm concerned.’
‘Presumably because she's possessive of you, too,’ said David quickly.
Julia looked at him doubtfully.
For so intelligent and perceptive a man, that was an oddly silly thing to say.
‘I?
Oh, no, David.
You're wrong there,’ she said.
David got up from his chair and prowled around the room.
Julia thought that she had never before met anyone who exuded such restless strength and  yet could be so gentle in his dealings with other people.
Once again she wondered what it was that he had done in the war to make Anthony so angry.
The glass in the long windows rattled suddenly as a gust of wind battered them, and all the six candles on the round table guttered in the draught.
At last David came back and stood looking down at her.
He seemed to loom over her and she instinctively moved back in her chair with a jerk.
‘I am sorry, Julia,’ he said, withdrawing.
He found a chair and pulled it beside the sofa.
‘I always forget how overpowering my size can be,’ he added as he sat down.
‘Please don't misjudge Comfort,’ she said seriously.
‘Anthony and I both love her, and if you and she fight….’
‘I won't fight her-why should I?
But I'm afraid she may fight me.
I'll try and stay out of your way while she's here.’
Julia put the desolation that suddenly thrust itself into her mind down to her cold and said that she thought she ought to go bed.
David stood up at once.
‘I shouldn't have kept you talking.
I am so sorry,’ he said, holding out a hand to help her up.
Julia took it and tried not to cling.
‘I'll go and ask Annunziata to fill you a hot bottle,’ he said.
‘I don't think you ought to get into a freezing bed in your state.
I'll get her to bring it up to you.’
‘Thank you, David,’ said Julia.
‘Good night.’
‘Good night.’
She left him to pull herself up the bannisters to bed, thinking back to the inordinately exciting first summer when Comfort and Anthony had rented their house outside Oxford and she had fallen in love.
He had often been on duty at the hospital, and then  Comfort and Julia would lie on long cushioned chairs on the terrace, breathing in the lemon scent of the immense magnolia that sprawled up the old red brick of the house and talking about him and about what life might be like when they all left Oxford.
Julia had felt like a character in a fairy tale, whisked out of humdrum existence and given a glimpse of perfection.
‘Where did it all go?’ she asked herself 
17
Julia felt worse and worse all the next day, but managed to hide it from the others.
David left the salon straight after dinner on the excuse that he had letters to write and, half an hour later, Julia went up to bed early, leaving Comfort and Anthony alone.
After a poor night's sleep, punctured by weird dreams from which she emerged coughing and aching in every joint, Julia woke on Monday morning to a suspicion that she might be really ill.
She found Anthony eating breakfast alone.
He took one look at her and put his hand to her forehead again.
‘Back to bed, Julia,’ he said in a kinder voice than she was used to in Venice.
‘You're a clot to have got up.
You're ill.
Come on.
We'll bring your breakfast up.
‘I'm not sure that I want any,’ she said and inside her skull her hoarse voice grated against the pain.
Anthony put an arm gently around her shoulders and urged her upstairs back to bed as though she were one of his charges from the orphanage.
On the stairs they passed Comfort, dressed in filthy old trousers and a sweater from which floated festoons of draggled wool.
In spite of the squalor of her clothes she looked almost as superb as she had done in her ravishing French dress.
‘Are you all right?’ she asked, peering into Julia's half-closed eyes.
Before Julia could even shake her head, Anthony had answered for her
‘No.
I'm putting her back to bed.
Rout out Annunziata, would you, Comfort, and get her to bring up a tray of breakfast.
No,’ he added turning back to his wife, ‘you must have something.
Just an egg if we've got one and some coffee-the caffeine will at least cheer you up.’
Whether it was the caffeine or Anthony's taking so much trouble over her, or perhaps merely the result of laying her aching, pounding head back on the pillow, Julia felt slightly less uncomfortable in bed and she told Anthony so when he came back to take the tray away.
‘Now, will you feel safe enough with Annunziata?
I have to get to work and so must David.
Comfort can sit with you, if-’
‘Oh no,’ interrupted Julia, her voice still intolerably painful.
‘She's on holiday.
I'll sleep.
But tell David….’
‘Don't talk, darling.
It'll only hurt your throat worse.
I've told him and he will explain your absence in court.
I'll squeeze a minute or two to come back at lunchtime, and I'll bring some things for your throat then.
Meanwhile, have you got plenty of aspirins?’
Julia nodded.
Anthony bent down to kiss her hot, tight forehead.
She wanted to cling to his hands and say, tell me it's still all right between us, tell me you still love me, tell me we can have a child one day.
Even in her weakened state, she knew that her desperate need was irrational, but that made it no less important.
Why motherhood should have become such an obsession she could not imagine, but she did  understand that whatever was the matter with her was contributing to her misery.
She wondered how long ago it had begun and how many of her difficulties could be put down to whatever was the matter with her.
‘What have I got, Anthony?’ she whispered, trying not to betray any anxiety.
He watched her face carefully.
‘I think it's just a bad cold, my dear; but in this climate and with all the infections flying about, I'll keep a close watch on you,’ he said calmly.
‘Don't be afraid.
It's not too serious whatever it is.
You'd be a lot iller if it were.
All right?’
She nodded, her eyes locked on his, begging for reassurance and support.
He smiled at her with such confidence that she felt comforted.
‘Try to sleep,’ he said.
‘That's the best thing for you.
Sleep.
There's nothing to worry about.’
Julia laid her head back but did not shut her eyes until he had left the room.
The hours until lunchtime limped past.
Annunziata looked in to Julia's room at fairly frequent intervals to turn her pillows or sponge her hot face, but would not let her try to talk.
Sometimes Julia slept, dreaming of horribly twisted versions of real life so that it was hard to tell when she was awake and worrying and when asleep and tormented.
The pictures Mark had created for her of the Nuremberg trials figured in her dreams and so did the bomb sites of war-torn London.
Comfort was there, and Anthony.
There was terror and pain.
The ache in her head got worse and she began to imagine a pain under her breastbone.
Julia knew that it could not be real because it brought with it even more horrible visions, in one of which Comfort and  Anthony had her pinned to the ground and were hitting her with garden rakes with specially sharpened tines.
In the dream all three of them were in the garden of the house outside Oxford.
The occasion was an immediately recognisable lunch party, after which Comfort and some of the other guests had gone off to swim in the nearby river, while Anthony and Julia had sat together, digesting and beginning to explore the edges of the feeling that was growing between them.
On the real occasion, Comfort had arrived back from the river and had stood in front of them both, her blonde hair a mass of tangled curls, each curl spangled with water.
Water dripped off her hands, too, and her severe black bathing dress.
The sun lit the drops and sparkled in sharp bursts of white light; but some of the drops caught and fractured the light so that Comfort appeared to be the source of a million tiny rainbows.
The picture in Julia's dream was so vivid that she could feel the sun on her face, and even in sleep her eyes screwed up as though against the glare.
But suddenly reality was distorted and in her dream she was pulled to the ground and the two of them began digging at her chest with the rakes.
She woke at last, sweating and trembling, and struggling to breathe, one hand pressed against her chest, to see Comfort standing at the foot of the bed.
For a moment, Julia could not bear even to look at her, but at the sound of Comfort's voice, as gentle as it had ever been, Julia opened her eyes properly.
‘Wake up, Julia sweetie.
It's a dream.
Wake up.’
Comfort's hands were clenched over the carved, gilded footboard of the bed and her big grey eyes  were anxious when Julia could at last focus on them.
Her responsibility for Comfort brought her back to her senses.
Swallowing against the swollen tenderness of her throat, she tried to speak.
No sound came out and so she swallowed once more and tried again.
‘It's all right.
I'm awake now.
Thank you,’ she managed to say.
‘You're much worse, aren't you?’ said Comfort, her voice sharper.
Julia nodded, feeling a pain shooting up her neck.
She closed her eyes, too tired even to try to reassure her sister-in-law.
‘I'm going to send a message to Anthony.
Have you a fever?’
‘I think I must have,’ whispered Julia.
‘Don't worry him.’
‘You need him just as much as those orphans.
Don't be afraid of him.
He loves you,’ said Comfort, and Julia believed her as she had believed her all those years before when Comfort had been urging her to fall in love with him.
Julia tried to ignore the sensations of fear that her nightmare had left behind.
She lay back, exhausted, hearing Comfort leave the room and then speak quickly but very quietly in Italian, presumably to Annunziata.
Julia had no energy to do anything but wait.
She could not shake off the effect of the dream despite Comfort's kindness, and her muscles still trembled.
Her chest ached sharply, too, just as though someone really had been hitting into it.
A fat tear seeped out from under each of her eyelids, but she was too tired to wipe them away.
She just lay, sore and afraid until Anthony came back.
He touched her burning forehead with firm, cool hands, put a thermometer between her dry lips and  later pulled down her nightgown to tap her bare chest with two fingers of each hand.
Julia felt too ill to be interested in what he was doing, and in any case her mind came and went as the waves of fever rose and fell, but she heard Comfort say:
‘What is it?
I see you've reached some kind of diagnosis.’
‘Pneumonia,’ he answered softly.
‘Poor Julia.’
‘You'd better get her to the hospital,’ said Comfort.
Julia opened her eyes again and saw Comfort looking around her as though she expected to see men in white coats with a stretcher appearing through the walls.
To Julia's immense but unspoken relief, Anthony shook his head.
‘She'll do better here, Comfort.
There's Annunziata to look after her — and you, if you'll stay — and —‘
‘Of course I'll stay,’ she said impatiently.
She gripped his wrist.
‘It's not dangerous, is it, Anthony?’
For a moment he was very still.
Julia felt too tired and afraid to speak, but she lifted her heavy eyelids again and looked at him.
He saw her expression and smiled confidently.
‘No, it's not dangerous.
All right, darling?’
Julia slowly nodded her head once against the pillow.
He went on: ‘I'm going to collect some things from the hospital to make you more comfortable, but first I've got to lift you up.
There's some fluid in your lungs and you'll breathe more easily if you're propped up.’
Julia let them haul her up and stuff extra pillows behind her head, but the pain sharpened and she was hard put to it not to swear at them for hurting her.
The dream came back to her in all its horrible force and the tears re-emerged.
‘It's all right,’ said Anthony, stroking her face with  his fingers.
Their coolness was a relief on her burning skin, but the weight of even that light stroking seemed to hurt.
Anthony seemed to understand and he took his hand away.
He took Comfort out of the room with him and answered her question more honestly.
‘It is extremely dangerous,’ he said.
‘She's badly run down anyway — like most of us since the war — and has very little resistance.’
‘Isn't there anything you can do?’ asked Comfort, her slaty eyes darkening and her nose looking sharp as she absorbed the shock.
‘There must be.
You can't just leave her like that and wait.
Anthony, you must….’
‘Oh, yes,’ answered Anthony.
‘There are many things we can and will do.
And there's penicillin, which is infallible…but yet again the Medical Procurement people at UNRRA have delayed the latest delivery and we've none left.’
‘Well, you must get some,’ said Comfort at once, clutching his right arm.
‘Who's in charge?
Is there a telephone number?
Shall I call them?’
‘I'll deal with that,’ said Anthony, noticing that there were tears in Comfort's big grey eyes, ‘but I want you to stay here with her.
She ought not to be left, and if her breathing gets worse, prop her up.
If you're frightened, send a message for me.
All right?’
Comfort nodded, but her face was distraught.
Anthony had always known that she loved Julia, but after the things Comfort had said at Christmas he had not expected her to be thrown into quite such terror.
He did not know that her vivid imagination had given her a convincing picture of Julia's death.
‘Keep calm,’ he ordered.
‘You'll do no good at all to Julia if you get hysterical.
I'll be back as soon as I can.
Go and sit with her.’
Comfort obeyed and spent the next two hours sitting beside Julia's bed, watching her as she slept and bathing her face with cool water whenever she started to thrash about and mumble in delirium.
‘It's all right, Julia,’ she would whisper then.
‘I'm here.
Don't die.
We need you.
Don't die.
It's all tight.’
The monotonous litany sometimes seemed to soothe Julia, but more often made no impression at all on her obviously terrifying dreams.
Soon after three o'clock, she calmed down and seemed to be sleeping more naturally.
Comfort leaned back in her chair in momentary relief.
Annunziata opened the door quietly and checked to see that Julia was asleep before walking silently to Comfort's chair and whispering that there was a visitor for the signora downstairs.
‘I can't leave her,’ said Comfort, equally quietly.
‘Can't you ask them to go away?’
Annunziata shook her head.
‘He is a friend of the signora and of Signor David.
Please talk to him.
I will sit with her,’ she said.
Eventually Comfort yielded her place to the Italian and went downstairs to the salon, where she found a slim, middle-aged man with a lined face and grey-streaked dark hair, whom she had never seen before.
‘Annunziata says you're a friend of my sister-in-law,’ Comfort said rather abruptly.
‘Peter Suvarov,’ he said, holding out his hand.
Comfort shook it automatically and introduced herself.
‘I wouldn't have troubled you, Miss Gillingham,’ said Suvarov, ‘but that your housekeeper said that Mrs Gillingham is seriously ill.
Is there anything that I can do?’
‘God knows,’ said Comfort, having lost all her  savoir faire in the face of Julia's terrifying illness.
‘My brother is trying to get hold of some penicillin.
Apparently that's the only infallible thing for pneumonia, and….’
‘She's got pneumonia?’ said Suvarov.
‘Good God!
Poor Mrs Gillingham.
I mustn't keep you away from her, but will you tell her that my wife and I are very concerned?
We both liked her so much.’
‘Everyone does,’ said Comfort, forgetting the times when she had been driven to distracted cruelty by Julia's unfailing matter-of-factness — and by her concentration on other people.
‘How well do you know her?’ she asked aggressively.
Peter Suvarov looked at Comfort and recognised the shock and fear in her eyes.
He urged her to sit down on one of the hard, gilded sofas for a moment.
Shrugging her superb shoulders, Comfort sat down and waited for his explanation.
‘You look as though you need a bit of a rest,’ he said.
‘We hardly know her at all.
I knew David Wallington well during the war, and he introduced us.
We all four had dinner together one night while your brother was at the hospital.
That's all.
But when I heard from him that she was ill, I had to...’
‘I see,’ said Comfort more politely as she stood up again.
‘When she is well enough I'll tell her about your visit.’
And then to her suppressed rage she realised that she was crying.
She could not convince herself that Julia would ever be well again.
Peter Suvarov smiled, his eyes crinkling up at the corners and his bitter mouth relaxing, and handed her a handkerchief.
‘This is ridiculous,’ said Comfort, muffling her face.
‘I don't usually cry in front of strangers.’
‘This is hardly a normal time.
Cry away.
I'm not  one of those men who are terrified by female tears….
A lot of people wept over me in the war — and not women only.’
‘The war, the war, the bloody war!’ said Comfort, screwing up his handkerchief and giving it back to him.
‘I hate it.
It made us all behave like lunatics but no one except me seems to want to forget it.
Why can't you all shut up about it?’
‘I suppose,’ said Suvarov, paying no attention to her rudeness or the incipient hysteria in her voice, ‘because it was so important…not just fighting it, but being part of it, doing one's best and living more intensely over a longer time than one had before.’
‘Never mind.
I'm sorry.
I must go back to her,’ said Comfort a bit more calmly.
‘I've been away too long.’
‘Of course,’ said Suvarov.
‘My wife and I are leaving Venice next week.
May I call before then to see how Mrs Gillingham is?’
‘If you want,’ said Comfort gracelessly, already halfway to the door.
‘Can you see yourself out?
I can't….
I'll send Annunziata.’
She went out, leaving Peter Suvarov to wait for a more rational assessment of Julia's state from Annunziata.
He knew enough Italian to understand what she told him of Anthony's diagnosis and prognosis, and to ask her to tell David Wallington that he had called.
Annunziata nodded and said slowly:
‘The young signor will be very unhappy.’
‘I know,’ said Suvarov, adding in English as he picked up his hat.
‘That's why I want him to know he can talk to us.
That young woman won't be much help and the doctor is hardly a suitable confidant in the circumstances.’
Julia was dreaming again when Comfort got back  to her bedside and her skin felt hot and dry.
Comfort changed the water in the bowl she had filled earlier and sponged Julia's face and neck and hands and arms again.
But it seemed to worry Julia and she cried out:
‘No, Comfort, no, please,’ as though Comfort were actually hurting her.
Increasingly worried, Comfort dried Julia's face as gently as she could, threw the water away and went back to her chair to watch.
Anthony returned soon after five o'clock with the news that there was no penicillin in the city at all, but that he had telephoned everyone he could think of who might supply it and had sent a telegram to UNRRA headquarters.
Julia came round just as he was erecting a kind of tent over her bed.
A tall, brown iron cylinder with a wheel and a dial at the top stood beside him.
Really frightened, then, she tried to sit up, croaking his name.
‘Lie back, Julia,’ he said at once, coming to push her shoulders back against the pillows.
‘Don't be afraid.
It's just oxygen to help you to breathe.’
‘You won't go away,’ she whispered, clinging to his hand.
‘Only if I have to,’ came the reply.
‘Comfort is here and Annunziata.
They both know what to do.
Lie still, Julia, and try to breathe.’
‘It hurts,’ she said, sounding almost as surprised as complaining.
‘I know it hurts, but it will start to hurt less now.
Breathe slowly and carefully.
We're getting the stuff you need and there's nothing to be afraid of.’
A small conscientious smile lifted the left-hand corner of her dry lips.
‘Well done, Julia,’ said Anthony.
‘That's the stuff.
Keep your spirits up.
Now, I know you don't feel like food, but you must try some of the soup Annunziata has made.
She'll bring it to you in a few minutes and it'll help you keep your strength.’
Julia tried to obey, as she tried to do everything he demanded of her over the next few days and as she tried to keep her misery and pain and fear from all of them.
For much of the time she was delirious, but there were lucid intervals, during which she was slightly comforted to understand that the nightmares that had tormented her were products of the disease and not of reality.
Dreams of Comfort and Anthony and David mixed with memories of the war and became tangled up with the figures on the painted ceiling above her bed and the work she had been doing for Kesselring's trial.
Sometimes she dreamed that she stood in the dock of some great court, accused of terrible crimes, at others that she was having to use all her skill to free Anthony of a capital charge and failing.
Gallows loomed in the shadows of her dreams and dead babies and famine, and a blonde woman with sly green eyes.
Only the strong figure of David Wallington seemed to promise any kind of help and she called out to him.
But he never came.
Anthony spent as much time with Julia as he could, but there were patients at the hospital who were iller even than she and at times he had to leave her with Comfort and Annunziata.
Comfort's anguished determination to make up for her earlier coldness made her far more interfering than Annunziata, whose calm gentleness provided the only moments of real respite for Julia.
Sometimes during her lucid moments, she thought that Annunziata could not have been kinder if Julia had been one of her daughters.
Only David never seemed to come.
Julia knew that he might have been in the room while she was unconscious, but his absence during her times awake began to fret her.
They had become such friends that it seemed unnecessarily unkind of him to stay away.
One evening, when the pain of her laboured breathing had become very bad, she lay watching Comfort as she sketched something on a big white pad.
The intensity of Comfort's concentration was almost palpable and Julia lay as still as she could and breathed as carefully as her sodden lungs would allow so as not to disturb her.
Then Comfort looked up, her eyes narrowed and peering.
Julia tried to smile, but it was a poor effort.
Comfort bent her head again and added a few quick pencil strokes to her drawing.
Laying down both pad and pencil on the floor, she looked up again.
‘So you're awake.
How do you feel?’
Julia thought for a little while and then produced one word:
‘Bloody.’
‘You poor thing,’ said Comfort, leaning over to check the pressure gauge on the oxygen cylinder.
‘How —?’
Just as she said that, Julia had started her own question.
‘How's David?’ she croaked.
‘Very cross that Anthony won't let him in to share the nursing,’ said Comfort drily.
‘What help he thinks he could give, I can't imagine.
A great clumsy hulk like that in a sickroom!’
Julia closed her eyes, so that Comfort should not see the sudden dislike that she felt.
The emotion was so unlikely — and such a betrayal — that Julia wanted to believe that she had never felt it.
She heard Comfort  pick up the sketch pad again and simply lay, letting her draw whatever she liked.
There were no other distractions from the difficulty of breathing, the pain, the falling over chasms of unconsciousness, the dreams and miserable awakenings until Anthony appeared well after eight that night to give his wife an injection.
Julia was so far out of her usual self-control that she whimpered at the prick of the needle.
‘It's all right, my love,’ said Anthony, wiping the puncture with a spirit-soaked swab.
‘We've got some penicillin for you at last.
You'll be all right again in no time now.’
She rolled her head sideways on the pillow and murmured, ‘I'm so sorry.’
She had not meant Anthony and Comfort to hear, but something must have been audible.
‘Did you hear that?’ she heard Anthony ask.
‘She was mumbling so,’ answered Comfort.
‘But it seemed to be an apology.
She's always hated being a nuisance.’
Julia's shoulders tightened, and almost at once she heard her husband's voice:
‘Julia's not a nuisance, Comfort.
I only hope to God she's not in too much pain.
Pneumonia is no joke, you know.
But she'll be all right now.
With this drug it's only a matter of time.’
His shoes squeaked on the hard floor and Julia heard him walk towards the door.
Comfort, believing Anthony without reservation, knew that Julia was no longer in any danger and went back to her chair and her sketches with the anxiety draining out of her.
The penicillin injected into Julia's veins four times a day killed the infection inexorably, and within three days the oxygen tent had been removed and she was sitting up in bed waiting for her meals with real  hunger.
She no longer needed a constant attendant by then and Annunziata and Comfort came and went as they chose.
At last Anthony allowed David in to the sickroom.
He came, looking as he always did, huge, a little untidy but with a smile of great sweetness on his lean face, from which the tan had almost completely faded.
Julia was pleased that he did not tiptoe or whisper, but spoke in his normal voice.
‘So, the miracle drug did its stuff,’ he said cheerfully.
‘Thank God.
I hope you haven't had too beastly a time.’
Julia pushed the lank, greasy hair off her forehead and smiled up at him.
‘It could have been a lot worse; but I'm sorry about the penicillin.’
‘Good God why?’ demanded David, looking astonished.
‘Without it you'd…you might have…you'd have taken far longer to get well.’
‘I might have died, you mean,’ said Julia in the first lawyerly voice of her convalescence and then was sorry when she saw his face.
‘But, David, I might not have.
People do get over pneumonia, and….’
Her voice faltered, but then strengthened: ‘I hate the thought that my illness took Anthony back to the black market.’
At that David leaned forward and stroked her horrible hair.
Thinking of its dirty stringiness, Julia could not help flinching.
David quickly removed his hand and sat back in his chair.
‘There was no question of that, Julia,’ he said.
‘After what happened to Flavia, he would never have risked injecting illegal penicillin into you.
This came to Venice officially.’
Julia said nothing, but from the way she relaxed  into the pillows David realised how worried she had been.
‘Yes,’ he said slowly, still looking at her in that peculiar way, ‘you really are rather a remarkable person.’
‘Nonsense, David,’ said Julia, ‘there's nothing remarkable about me.
I'm as ordinary and self-interested as the next person.’
He shook his head, but did not speak.
After an apparently unbreakable silence, Julia decided that she would have to say something else and so with considerable truth, she told him that she had missed him.
‘Did you?
I missed you almost intolerably.
Not even being allowed to come and see you — if it hadn't been for the Suvarovs I think I'd have gone mad.’
‘Felicity,’ said Julia, suddenly remembering the morning they had spent together just before she fell ill.
‘Did she catch it?’
David shook his head.
‘She was fine when they left,’ he said, ‘and Anthony explained that pneumonia is very quick to develop.
She'd have shown symptoms long before they went.
They both sent their love to you,’ he added, remembering the day when he thought that Julia was going to die and had gone to them in despair.
‘What is it?’ she asked, seeing his face harden in front of her.
She held one of her hands out to him.
‘David, what's happened?’
He took her hand between both his own, turning it palm upwards and gazing down as though he were a fortune-teller, searching the damp pinkness of her flesh for answers to all sorts of impossible questions.
‘I wish to God I knew,’ he said, but he could not look at her, because he did know.
18
As she slowly regained strength, Julia began to be able to think of things beyond her own physical state, and whenever David came to see her she urged him to tell her what had been happening at the trial.
He took care never to stay with her for more than twenty minutes, obeying both the spirit and the letter of Anthony's orders, but he tried to give her a clear account of the eight days Kesselring had spent in the witness box, watching her face all the time for signs of boredom or exhaustion.
Julia's questions about the line the defence lawyers were taking were as acute as anything she had ever asked David, and they filled him with relieved delight.
The sharpness of the terror he had felt during her illness had revealed to him just how much he loved her, and once she began to recover he had been afraid that they would never again be able to talk simply as friends.
The easy, informed arguments they had about the Kesselring case proved him wrong: as they talked, the two of them might have been no more than friendly colleagues.
David began to think that it might be possible to go on living in the same house as Julia and Anthony without either betraying himself or suffering unendurable frustration.
One day he reported that the defence had claimed  that partisan warfare was contrary to the Hague Convention, that the Germans therefore had every right to take reprisals against the partisans, and that any excesses on their part were explained if not justified by their horror of what the partisans did.
‘'I am a hero of the resistance.
You are an irregular soldier.
He is a terrorist’,’ Julia suggested.
‘I know.
Double and treble standards.
And it is hard not to think of one's own horror at some of the things that the Irgun and Stern Gang are doing in Palestine, for instance,’ David said after a long silence.
‘True,’ said Julia, ‘but in Palestine the British army does not burn villages, hang hostages and leave their bodies in village squares for days at a time as a warning, whatever horror they feel at things like the bombing of the King David Hotel and the murders of those sergeants.
You can't deny that the Germans’ actions were excessive.’
‘Believe me, I don't,’ said David seriously.
‘Although if you read the American papers, you can see that they have been accusing our troops of committing ‘atrocities’ in Palestine.
No, I just have doubts about the legitimacy of some aspects of these trials.’
‘Such as?’ asked Julia, who had had her own doubts for some time.
‘Outlawing the defence of following superior orders, for one,’ said David, noticing that Julia was beginning to look tired.
He got up to go, saying: ‘But we can keep that for another time.
You ought to rest.’
Julia denied feeling the least bit tired and she pressed him to explain what he meant.
‘It is difficult to justify when you think of that British officer who was convicted for refusing to obey  orders to take part in the assault on Le Havre because his superiors had not allowed the German commander to evacuate the French civilians first,’ said David.
‘They say that twelve thousand French civilians were killed there in the preliminary bombing, let alone during the actual fighting.
The man who refused to take part was court martialled, cashiered and sentenced to a year's hard labour.
To me that puts us in a difficult position when trying Germans, whose crime was obeying their superiors’ orders, whatever our horror at what those orders led to.’
Julia nodded.
It was a piece of official hypocrisy that had often worried her.
She let her eyes close for a moment.
‘I really must go,’ said David.
‘I've worn you out and worried you.
Anthony would strangle me if I caused a relapse.’
‘No, he wouldn't,’ said Julia.
She had meant to be comforting, but even to herself the words sounded depressed.
David looked down at her as she lay against the white pillows, pale and thinner than ever, and thought how much easier it would be to keep himself in check if her husband treated her with the gentleness she deserved.
‘Tell me once how you're really feeling,’ David said, ‘and then I will leave you in peace.’
‘So so,’ said Julia, looking up at him from her pillows and smiling at the affection and the anxiety in his face.
‘Physically almost all right again, though a bit weak, but I get gloomy and exaggerate all sorts of minor difficulties into terrible tragedies.’
‘I expect that's just convalescence,’ said David, longing to take her in his arms and comfort her.
‘That's what Anthony says,’ she said sensibly.
‘Thank you for coming in.
It's cheered me up no end  to be reminded that I do have work and a brain and something to do when I'm allowed up again.’
David looked rather odd as she said that, but he left so quickly that she could not ask him anything about it and picked up her book to absorb the time until Annunziata brought in her supper.
It dawned on her as she was eating the liver and polenta an hour later that there was something different about Annunziata.
There was a light in her dark eyes that Julia could not remember seeing before her illness and yet there was sadness too.
When Annunziata came to collect the tray, Julia asked her tentatively whether she had had some news.
‘My son is alive,’ said Annunziata, her dark eyes gleaming in the candlelight.
Julia got out of bed, took the tray back from Annunziata, put it down on the chest of drawers and hugged her.
‘I'm so glad,’ she said in Italian.
‘When did you hear?
When is he coming home?’
Annunziata, who had accepted the hug, made Julia get back into bed and then told her the whole story.
Anthony's regular enquiries of his colleagues around Italy had at last borne fruit and Annunziata's son had been discovered in a Roman hospital recovering slowly from serious wounds to his head and spine.
He had been caught in an explosion at Monte Cassino.
His dog tags had been blown off in the blast and the head wound had severely damaged his memory so that no one had any idea of his identity.
Patient care had gradually restored his mind until he had been able to remember who he was.
‘And the spinal wound?’ asked Julia carefully.
‘Can he walk?’
Annunziata stood absolutely straight and with all  the dignity that Julia so admired in her shook her head.
‘I'm so sorry,’ Julia said, thinking of all she had read and heard about the battle at Monte Cassino.
The Allies had found their way to Rome blocked there by Germans who were using the ancient Benedictine monastery as their base and flung a series of attacks against it.
By the time the British, the Americans, and the ultimately successful Rifs from North Africa had made their assaults, the monastery was almost completely destroyed for the third time in history.
The first had been during an attack by the Saracens in the Middle Ages and the second during an earthquake.
Giovanna Sassanta had given Julia a rather different view of the fighting in the Cassino valley from the one she had gained from the British newspapers at the time.
Trying to explain her husband's loathing of the Allies and all they stood for, Giovanna had told her that there had in fact been no German or even Italian troops in the monastery and that its destruction had been unnecessary.
As she listened, Julia had not been able to escape the thought that Giovanna must have shared more of her husband's convictions than she had admitted.
Annunziata, who had so personal a reason for resentment, made no such criticisms.
She told Julia only that the doctor had been wonderful in finding her son and in promising to let him live in the Campo San Maurizio.
‘The hospital say he can't be moved for two months yet,’ said Annunziata, picking up the tray again, ‘but then il dottore will arrange everything.
He is a good man,signora .’
‘I know he is,’ said Julia.
‘I'm glad that he has been able to help.’
She looked forward to his usual visit that evening, but he did not come, and it was Comfort who appeared at half-past nine to remake Julia's bed and see that she had everything she needed for the night.
‘Is Anthony all right?’
Julia asked a little wistfully.
‘He's fine,’ said Comfort, ‘but he had to go back to the hospital after dinner.
So I'm his deputy.’
She sat down on the edge of Julia's bed and offered to brush her hair.
‘I can do that,’ said Julia.
‘But can you move over a bit?
You're sitting on my feet.’
‘Sorry,’ answered Comfort cheerfully, moving down the bed.
‘What would you like to do tomorrow?
Anthony left instructions that you could get up for a couple of hours if you felt up to it.
Shall I hire a gondola and take you up the Grand Canal to the sound of trumpets?’
‘Oh, Comfort, you are wonderful!’ said Julia, happy that Comfort was her old extravagant affectionate self again.
‘You know very well how I'd hate that.
Besides I don't think the gondoliers work in the depths of winter.
What I'd most like to do is go to the court to listen to what's happening in the trial, but….’
‘No.
Anthony said no work and no court for at least another week,’ said Comfort, relieved that she would not have to accompany Julia to anything so dull.
‘We could go and look at pictures, or walk to Florian's for a drink, or just sit downstairs and talk.
Whatever you like.’
‘I'd love to get out of the house for a bit,’ said Julia, plumping for Florian's.
The walk there took only about ten minutes and she thought that even with the frightening weakness in her legs that she had discovered the first time she got out of bed she ought to manage that distance.
She did, but only just, reaching the cafe breathless and with her knees trembling.
Comfort piloted her to the nearest seat and hailed the waiter to order a brandy.
Julia lay against the hard, red velvet back of the bench, staring up at the painted walls around her.
Before the brandy came a familiar American voice penetrated Julia's tiredness and she sat up straighter.
‘Why, Mrs Gillingham!
How good to see you up and about again.
I'd heard you were sick.’
‘Mr French,’ said Julia, holding out her hand.
‘Thank you.
I may say that my recovery is wholly due to your organisation's producing some penicillin just in time,’ she added.
‘Thank you for that too.’
She watched his heavy dark face and wondered why it looked rueful.
‘Yes, I heard about that too,’ he said.
‘Doctor Gillingham sure burned the wires between here and headquarters when he was trying to get it.’
‘And with reason,’ said Comfort, coming back with the brandy.
‘Ah, Comfort, this is Jackson French of UNRRA.
Mr French, this is my sister-in-law, Comfort Gillingham, a compatriot of yours.’
Julia watched in amusement as Comfort's spectacular looks and casual elegance had their usual effect on the young man.
She was also amused to see that Comfort was shaking his hand and even inviting him to share their table.
Her immediate antagonism to David Wallington had led Julia to expect her to display a similar hostility to Jack French.
During the course of their conversation, to which Julia listened with only half her attention as she sipped her brandy, she learned that Jackson French was likely to be posted to London to play a part in the winding up of UNRRA later in the year and that  Comfort herself was due to leave Venice in two days' time ‘now that Julia is getting well again'.
Comfort gave Jackson French her address and told him to be sure to call her when he got to London.
‘Is the black market conquered then?’
Julia asked him during a pause in the others' talk.
‘I don't suppose it'll ever be that,’ he said with resignation.
‘But supplies are beginning to get through in better order than before.
The new penicillin factory is almost finished and the Italians we've been training to run it are due back from Canada any day now.
Food is still a problem, of course, after last year's dire harvest.’
‘And presumably,’ said Julia, who had been reading the backlog of newspapers that had accumulated during her illness, ‘the appalling winter will have done for this year's as well.’
‘I guess so.
But the new organisation will have to handle that.
I'm heading Stateside when I've done my bit in London.
When are you going back, Comfort?’
‘I'll never go back,’ she said.
‘I've become too European.
Besides, the part of my family I care about is here now,’ she added, taking Julia's hand for a moment.
That evening, knowing that David was dining out, Anthony came home in time to have dinner with Comfort and looked in to talk to Julia before changing out of his hospital clothes.
‘Comfort says you took a walk today.
How do you feel after it?’ he asked, untying his tie and pulling the cuff links out of his shirt.
‘Rather feeble, actually,’ Julia admitted.
‘And absurdly inclined to self-pity.’
‘That's convalescence,’ he said.
‘And it'll last for a  while yet.
I've been thinking that you ought to get away from here for a bit, but I don't quite see how I could leave the hospital just now.
But….’
‘Please don't worry about it,’ said Julia, childishly hurt that he was not prepared to let her needs take precedence over his work, but struggling as usual to be reasonable.
‘But,’ he went on, ‘David has suggested that we should all borrow his mother's house outside Florence at Easter.
Would you like that?
You ought to be strong enough by then to cope with the journey, and I can try to organise things at the hospital so that my assistants can cope.’
‘I'd love it,’ said Julia, feeling more cheerful.
‘How kind of David — and his mother!’
‘He's a good friend,’ said Anthony.
‘Angry though he's made me in the past, he is a good lad.
Well, I'll tell him it's on then.
Good.’
He walked through the communicating door into his own room, leaving it open while he dressed.
When he was ready he came back into her room, shutting the door behind him on his way down to dinner.
‘You look very miserable,’ he said kindly, pausing by her bed.
‘Can I help?’
Julia manufactured a smile.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘You can give me permission to wash my hair.
I tried to get Comfort to help me and she refused without your say-so.
Please?
It feels unspeakable.’
‘Of course you can,’ said Anthony, laughing.
‘I'll ask Annunziata to bring you hot water and towels first thing tomorrow morning.’
‘Good,’ said Julia.
‘And you could answer a question, too, if you will.’
‘If I can,’ he said.
‘I've been wondering about David,’ said Julia casually, as though the question were not of the utmost Importance to her.
‘You reminded me a minute ago of your original warning about him.
What was it he did to make you so terribly angry with him before I came?’
‘It doesn't matter, Julia,’ said Anthony with a return of the impatience he had shown so often before she got ill.
He even pulled back his cuff to look at his watch.
‘No one who wasn't with us in the hills could possibly understand what it was all about and it's over now.
I've just about managed to forgive him.
Let's leave it there.
It really isn't any of your…concern.’
‘Fine,’ said Julia and watched him go.
She wished that she could ask David what Anthony had been talking about, but she obviously could not.
Everything David had shown her of himself had made her love him and yet she believed that he had done something unspeakable.
The two sides of the equation did not balance and she could hardly bear the implications of that.
Comfort left Venice two days later, promising to write to Julia every week and to do her best to put the house in order for their return.
Her departure left Julia depressed.
Seeing how low she was, Anthony decided that she needed to get out of the house and gave her reluctant permission to spend half of each day in court.
David escorted her there on her first morning and was touchingly concerned for her, insisting on taking a cushion for her to soften the hard seat on the press benches and urging her to promise to leave the stuffy, dark-panelled room if she felt faint or troubled.
‘A little faintness would be nothing,’ Julia said, ‘compared with the excruciating boredom of spending all those empty hours in the house.
How women who don't have professions manage to keep themselves sane I cannot imagine!’
‘You could never give up the law, could you?’ asked David.
‘I suppose I could,’ said Julia, thinking of the children she longed for, ‘if there was something equally important I had to do.
But to sit around in a house, organising bazaars, having my hair done, that sort of thing?
No, I couldn't do it.
That reminds me,’ she added, ‘I wanted to say how kind it is of you and your mother to arrange this Easter holiday for us.’
‘It is a real pleasure, believe me,’ said David, smiling down at her.
‘And Mama has written to say how grateful she is that we'll be able to see how the old house has stood up to the war and cope with any disasters for her.’
‘She must have missed it,’ said Julia.
David's smile faded.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘I think the war must have been hard on her…particularly while Italy was still part of the Axis; not least because there was a camp for Italian prisoners of war just beyond our gates in Scotland.
She never said anything about it when I went up there for my last leave, and she's never written about it since, but I can imagine a little of what she felt.
Fiesole has always seemed very like home to me too,’ he added with apparent irrelevance.
They threaded their way through the vegetable market, full of dull early spring vegetables instead of the mounds of tomatoes and aubergines and peppers and artichokes that Julia longed to see and buy, and  reached the Tribunale di Giustizia a few minutes later.
Julia was touched by the number of people who congratulated her on her recovery as she made her way with her cushion to her allotted seat at the end of the press benches, and gave several brief accounts of her illness to people who asked.
The court might be in a foreign country, there to try a citizen of yet a third nation, but it was her element and she was relieved to be back in it, even though she could take no active part in the trial.
The proceedings began in their customary stately way and then a Colonel Beelitz was called as a defence witness.
He was there to explain to the court that he and the other officers had tried to control the Nazi leaders' demands for gross reprisals for the deaths of the Germans in the Via Rassella.
Hitler had apparently demanded that fifty hostages should be killed for every dead German soldier, and Himmler had wanted whole areas of Rome to be cleared and their inhabitants deported.
Julia was so interested in the cross-examination that she almost disobeyed Anthony's instructions to go back to the Campo San Maurizio for lunch and spend the afternoon in bed, but, remembering how weak she had felt the previous evening, she did as he said.
Once she had taken off her black suit and was lying in bed dressed only in her underclothes and dressing gown, she admitted to herself that she was so tired that she might not have lasted out the afternoon in court without fainting.
She slept until Annunziata came to call her soon after five with a bowl of zabaglione , which Julia had never tasted until her illness.
It seemed to her a wonderful invention, making far more of a single egg  than any British concoction, easily digestible, tasting rich, sweet and thoroughly sustaining.
She insisted on sharing it with Annunziata, who looked even more gaunt than she had done before the news of her son's survival, and then got up.
For a miracle, almost boiling hot water poured out of the taps into the bath and Julia let herself have a really deep bath for once, lying there dreaming about the day when her life might be whole again and weaving plans to make it so, until the skin of her fingers and toes crinkled and the water felt cold.
Stirring it around herself, she looked down at her long body, noticing how her illness had removed the last spare flesh.
Her ribs were clear, her hipbones stuck out like mountains on a desert relief map, her thighs were straight and looked even longer than usual.
Remembering the struggles she had had in the early days of her married life to avoid putting weight on her waist and hips, she laughed.
Relaxed and without the miserable depression of the previous few evenings, Julia pulled herself out of the water, rubbed herself vigorously with the hard, thin towel Annunziata had left there for her and went to dress.
Twenty minutes later, wearing her grey flannel trousers and mole-coloured jersey and with her hair casually tied back in a velvet ribbon, Julia walked into the salon, only to be brought up short by the sight of David staring blankly at a yellow form in his right hand, a tumbler of whisky ignored and tilting in his left.
Pretending for a moment that she had noticed nothing wrong, Julia poured herself a glass of vermouth and then turned to face David.
His thin face was yellowish-white and his whole body seemed  somehow diminished.
His blue eyes stared at her blindly and when she gently said his name he gave a start, spilling whisky over the crumpled telegram.
‘David?’ she said again, just as quietly, putting her glass down on the table again.
‘Is it very bad?’
He made a tremendous effort to bring himself back into reality; his hands shook and he swallowed twice as he tried to speak; then he passed his right hand, still clutching the telegram, through his dark hair.
Feeling the strange texture of the paper in his hair, he brought his hand back in front of his face, and his dazed eyes focused on the telegram.
He could not bear to talk about what had happened and so he handed it to Julia and went to sit on one of the excruciatingly uncomfortable gilded chairs by the window while she read it.
Julia smoothed out the single sheet of paper.
Your father and Jonathan killed in motor accident yesterday stop Funeral tomorrow stop Desperate to see you stop Arriving Fiesole Maundy Thursday stop Mama.
Julia looked from David to the telegram and back again.
At first he sat looking at his feet, and she could not think of a thing to say.
All the obvious expressions of sympathy were wholly inadequate.
Knowing how much his brother had meant to him and how happy Jonathan's slow progress towards regaining his health had made him, Julia could hardly say, ‘I'm so sorry they're dead.’
Then David looked up and, as though the desperate misery in his eyes had called out to her, Julia went and knelt on the hard, icy floor at his feet, reaching up with both hands.
She put them on his broad, bony shoulders.
‘David,’ she said, ‘my dear, dear David.’
He looked straight at her, and she could tell from the way his lower eyelids were drawn up at the inner corners and his nostrils distended that he was trying not to cry.
He leaned forward until his head was lying against her shoulder.
His need for comfort overrode every other consideration and Julia cradled his head with one arm, stroking his thick, soft hair with the other hand.
His hands clutched at her back.
Julia could feel the cool, faintly bristly skin of his cheek against her face and she was bitterly ashamed that in the middle of his awful pain she was conscious of the pleasure of it.
When he rubbed his face briefly — against her shoulder, when she felt his warm breath against her neck, when his big hands pulled her closer to him, she felt all her senses responding and had to work hard to keep her breathing slow and even and her hand light as it stroked his hair.
Ashamed of her response though she was, she would not pull away from him while he needed her; that would be even worse.
At last he relaxed his grip on her back and pulled himself up to sit straight in the purgatorial chair.
‘I'm sorry, Julia,’ he said a little stiffly.
‘That was unforgivable.’
‘No, it wasn't, David,’ she answered kindly.
‘It was very natural, and I'm glad I was here.’
‘I must go and telegraph Mama,’ he said suddenly.
Julia removed her hand, but he did not stand up.
After a moment's pause, Julia asked if he wanted her to go to the telegraph office for him.
He shook his head.
‘No, the air will do me good.
Don't keep any dinner for me.’
‘You must eat, David.
I'll get Annunziata to keep something hot in the kitchen and then if you'd rather  not be bothered with us tonight, you can have it there — or in bed, if that would be better,’ said Julia, her heart feeling as though it were held in a tightening vice as she saw his misery.
He gripped her wrist suddenly, so hard that she almost cried out.
‘It's not that I don't want to be with you, Julia.
God forbid!
I don't want to eat, that's all.
Oh Lord, that must be Anthony,’ he said.
Julia had heard nothing.
‘Will you tell him for me, Julia?’ he begged, getting out of the chair at last.
‘I don't want to have to talk.’
He knew it was not fair to lay everything on her while she was still so weak, but he trusted her implicitly and there was no one else.
‘All right, David.
Go and send your telegram, and then come back and try to have some food when you can,’ she said.
He nodded, released her hand, and walked quickly to the door.
With his hand on the knob he half turned back to her.
‘I'm glad you were here,’ he said in a strangled voice and then went out.
Julia rubbed her eyes with a handkerchief and then went to retrieve her drink.
She had just taken a mouthful of the rather sour wormwood-flavoured wine when Anthony came breezily into the room.
‘I say, what on earth's the matter with the Boy David?’ he asked, seeing his wife.
‘There's been a most frightful accident,’ she said and Anthony stopped quite still just inside the room.
‘His father and his brother have both been killed.
He asked me to tell you, I think because he can't bear to talk about it.
He was reading this when I got here,’ she went on, holding out the telegram.
Anthony came to read it, then automatically folded it up and put it in the breast pocket of his black coat.
‘Poor boy,’ he said with more tenderness than Julia had heard from him since the crisis of her illness.
‘Well, that puts the lid on the Fiesole plan.
We obviously can't go thrusting ourselves on that poor woman now.’
‘Heavens no,’ agreed Julia, thinking about the Easter plans for the first time that evening.
‘Lucky that he's already got permission to go.
I wish there was something we could do to help him, though.’
Anthony put an arm around her shoulders and she looked at him, surprised but pleased that he had managed to touch her again.
‘You always did believe it possible to cure other people's unhappiness,’ he said.
‘But the truth is that however sympathetic or kind one is, one can't ever do anything to prevent someone else hurting.’
‘Except perhaps listen,’ said Julia, who believed passionately in the ability — and obligation — of friends to help.
‘I doubt if David'll talk.
He's a very private man, Julia.
Don't be too hurt if he shuts us both out now,’ said Anthony.
‘I'm old enough to wait without being hurt for people to let me in again,’ she said lightly, hoping that he had listened to what she said and understood its application to himself.
David did not in fact begin to relax his reserve until nearly a week after the telegram had arrived, when Julia judged it a suitable moment to say that she and Anthony would be making other plans for Easter.
For a second or two David looked stricken.
He said nothing, but just stared at Julia, the hurt twisting his sensitive mouth.
‘But, dear David,’ she said pitifully, ‘you can't want us interfering at such a moment.
We'd be desperately in the way.
Your mother will want you to herself.’
‘Would you really hate it so much?’ he said at last, and then hurriedly added: ‘Of course you would.
I'm sorry.’
He tried to smile, but it was a poor effort.
‘Of course you must go somewhere else.’
‘I shouldn't hate it, David; not if you needed me,’ said Julia, telling the unadorned truth.
Anthony, predictably enough Julia thought, decided that his patients needed him too much for him to take any kind of holiday over the Easter weekend, but he made no objection to David's formal request to take Julia away to stay with his mother.
19
Anthony escorted Julia and David to the railway station on the Thursday before Easter and while David went to buy the tickets, Julia seized the opportunity to ask her husband to do a small errand for her.
‘One of my Italian teacher's refugees has been badgering me to find out whether she could get permission to live in England,’ she said.
‘I've always thought it unlikely, but I've just heard from George this morning that it is impossible.
Her claims are just not strong enough.
Would you take her the message for me?
It seems very unfair to leave her hoping when there is no hope.’
‘All right,’ said Anthony, shrugging.
‘If it's that important, I might as well go straight from here.
Why not give me the letter— unless there's anything private in it— and the woman's address.’
‘There's nothing private,’ answered Julia, ‘although I would quite like the letter back when you've shown it to her.’
‘All right,’ he said, kissing her cheek as David came back towards them with the tickets.
‘Now, don't let poor David's tragedy wear you down.
You're still convalescent and you need to rest.’
‘I promise to follow all your instructions,’ said Julia with illusory meekness.
Anthony laughed and  touched her cheek briefly.
Julia smiled to see him happier than he had seemed before her illness.
‘I'll miss you,’ she said.
‘All right, David, I'm coming.
Goodbye, Anthony.’
He held open the train door for her and heaved their two bags up to David.
‘Take care of her, old man,’ he said and slammed the door shut.
‘Of course I shall,’ said David through the open window.
‘I'll see you both on Monday night, then,’ said Anthony, turning away.
Julia spent most of the journey between Venice and Florence trying to decide exactly what to say to David's Italian mother.
He had told her enough about his parents' passionate devotion to each other for Julia to feel desperately sorry for her.
They reached the railway station at Florence just after four.
David jumped down on to the platform and put up his hands for the baggage.
Julia handed it down to him.
When he had dumped their two canvas bags on the ground, he reached up again to help her down from the high train.
Once again the touch of his hands on her wrists made her insides lurch with pleasure.
‘How do we get to Fiesole?’ she asked and was pleased to hear that her voice sounded entirely passionless.
‘A friend of mine who's working in and around Florence said he'd meet us in his jeep if he could make it,’ David answered looking round.
‘If not, it'll probably have to be the bus.’
They walked out of the station and stood, blinking a little in the bright sunlight.
Julia was just thinking how wonderfully refreshing it was to be in the middle  of a real city, with town noises and roads and motor cars, when it dawned on her that her baggy brownish-grey tweeds and old felt hat were far too countrified.
She had put them on without thinking, because they were what she had always worn for travelling outside London, but she began to wonder what David's mother would think of them and to wish that she had put on her good black coat and skirt instead with one of her London hats.
A shout from David made her start.
‘Bill!’
She turned to see David waving.
‘There he is, Julia; so you won't have to walk to the bus.
Good.’
Julia looked in the direction of his waving arm and saw an equally tall man in UNRRA uniform striding along towards them.
When he reached them, David introduced him to Julia and she shook hands and then turned aside as Bill said something gruffly about how sorry he was.
David clapped him on the shoulder and simply said:
‘I know.
Thanks.
Have you really got transport?’
‘Yup.
Over here, and luckily it's almost legitimate.
I've got to get over to a village out on the Bologna road and I can easily drive there via Fiesole.
Seen Florence before, Mrs Gillingham?’
Julia answered civilly and resigned herself to half an hour's polite conversation.
She did not see much of Florence as they roared through it in the jeep, just a muddled impression of large buildings and a broad dark green river, but as they began to drive up the steep, swooping hill to Fiesole, David's friend said:
‘If you look back in five minutes or so, you'll see the best view in the whole place.’
From the back seat of the jeep came David's voice, as light and teasing as Julia had ever heard it.
She was so pleased that he was able to talk so frivolously  that she hardly distinguished what he was actually saying.
‘It's even better from the terrace of my mother's house and the bomb damage doesn't show too badly.
Don't you look back, Julia; mustn't spoil your appetite for views of Florence.’
She did turn her head then, but only to smile at David and marvel that he could look so happy; but even as she watched his face seemed to grow colder and he nodded.
Irritated with herself for reminding him, Julia turned back to face the front and said nothing more until Bill had dropped them outside a big yellow house on the edge of Fiesole.
She thanked him and waited while David invited him in for a cup of tea.
Julia was interested to see an expression of faint embarrassment cross Bill's face.
‘Thanks, David, but I've bent the rules enough; I really ought to get on to the village and see to this wretched food distribution.
So much goes missing that we've got to find out why.
It may simply be inefficiency at this level, but it could be worse.
These damned black marketeers are everywhere; they siphon the stuff off as soon as it comes into the country, at the various stores and again at the local distribution points.
They're even sending it out of the country to Yugoslavia and France.’
‘Really,’ said Julia.
‘But that must be in huge quantities to make it worth their while.
How do they get so much out of the country?’
Bill looked at her for a moment.
‘It's not certain, but there's a suggestion that they have stolen British army trucks and uniforms and, with forged documents, pass themselves off as official convoys.
It's not generally known, but they've got at least 60,000 tons of grain away like that,’ he said.
‘Profitable business,’ commented Julia.
‘Yes indeed.
The profit is roughly ten or twelve thousand lire per hundredweight,’ Bill said drily.
‘Whoever put up the money for the scheme has made a fortune.
We've got to stop it before UNRRA is wound up.
So long.
Goodbye, Mrs Gillingham.’
David hauled their luggage off the back seat and Bill drove off.
‘That scale of operation does make Anthony's black marketing seem quite trivial, doesn't it?’ said Julia as they watched the jeep disappearing in a cloud of dust.
‘I've always thought so,’ said David.
‘And after all he's done it for the most altruistic of reasons-unlike Bill's quarry.’
‘Yes,’ Julia said with an expression on her face that he could not quite read, ‘but the law is the law and one can't decide to apply it only to those whose motives and characters one dislikes.
It has to apply to everyone equally, however ‘good’ or ‘bad’or else...’
‘It becomes a very bad joke,’ David said.
He smiled at her and picked up their luggage.
‘Come along and meet Mama.’
Julia followed him through a tall, wrought-iron gate and waited on the weedy gravel in front of the pale yellow walls of a large square villa as he pulled a long, iron bell.
Within a very short time, she heard the sounds of bolts being drawn back.
The heavy, dark double doors opened and in their shadow stood the most striking woman Julia had ever seen.
Dressed in comfortable-looking tweeds that were as old and baggy as Julia's but did nothing to disguise her tall slimness, Allegra Wallington had David's smooth dark hair and elegant hands, but there was no other resemblance between them.
Where his face was angular and spare, hers was a flawless oval, and  her round eyes were very dark.
The lines that radiated from their corners did nothing to detract from their brilliance, but in some curious way made her look approachable, despite her immense style.
To Julia's eye she seemed to wear no powder or lipstick, but then she hardly needed any.
Her skin was a pale olive colour but absolutely clear and her magnificent eyes gave her face all the definition it needed.
She looked desperately tired, but there were no obvious marks of grief on her face.
‘Mrs Gillingham,’ she said in a voice that carried only the faintest Italian accent, ‘how very good of you to come and stay with me.’
She held out her hand and Julia shook it, saying:
‘It is charming of you to have invited me, Mrs Wallington.
Particularly now.’
Julia wanted to say something more direct about the accident, but could not imagine how to approach the difficult subject in the face of such easy courtesy.
All she could think of to do was to step aside so that David and his mother could greet each other.
‘David,’ said his mother, very gently, and then added a sentence in Italian.
Julia heard the name ‘Jonathan’, but she made a determined effort not to translate the Italian words, knowing how much the two of them must need privacy.
David answered in the same language and then reverted to English.
‘Is much of the house habitable?
Where have you put us, Mama?’ he asked cheerfully.
‘Upstairs,’ she answered, linking arms with Julia.
‘Come on up, Mrs Gillingham, and I will show you your room.
It's not been too bad, David.
Germans were billeted here, but they seem to have treated the place with considerably more decency than they did the people.’
There was no easy way to answer the bitterness in her voice, and Julia remembered what David had said about his mother's probable feelings during the war and tried to imagine what it must have been like for Mrs Wallington, stuck in Scotland, knowing only a little but guessing all too much of what was happening to her own country — and to her two sons.
‘It's over now, Mama,’ said David gently.
‘I know that doesn't make what's happened any better, but it is finished...
We just have to rebuild and make sure that it can never happen again.’
‘I know,’ she said.
‘Forgive me, Mrs Gillingham.
You must be so bored with war talk.
Here we are.’
She opened a door and ushered Julia into a shadowed room on the second floor.
Unlike the apartment in Venice, this room was decorated in the English style and furnished with two plump single beds covered in chintz counterpanes.
There was even an armchair that actually looked comfortable.
Julia had difficulty in suppressing a sigh of relief.
David dumped her bag on the floor by the bed and then went to open the shutters, letting some real light into the room through the yellowing lace curtains.
It allowed Julia to see the glowing rose colours of the chintz and also to notice the shabbiness of the well-washed paintwork and the cracks in the ceiling.
‘I promised her the best view of Florence from here, Mama,’ he said over his shoulder as he wrestled with the catch.
‘Ah, that's better.
Julia?’
Julia went to stand beside him on the minute balcony and stared down across the valley.
There, spread out below her in the late afternoon sun, was Florence.
In the foreground were small green fields dotted with clusters of red-roofed houses and the dark spires of cypress trees; further back was the  great mass of the city itself, with the cathedral's rust-red dome rising unmistakably above the ruins of the bombed houses.
Julia could make out dark green stretches of the river as it wound between the ochre and terracotta of the buildings.
Beyond the city rose a line of gentle hills, looking blue-grey in the distance.
‘It's wonderful,’ she said, turning back into the room.
‘Mrs Wallington, I can't tell you how amazing it feels to be here — in all this space-instead of shut up in Venice.’
David's mother smiled then and her lovely face looked suddenly young and for a moment hardly tired at all.
‘Haven't I always said it was a dank, sinister, unhealthy place, David?’ she said.
‘I think our guest is very intelligent.’
David responded to the teasing by walking over to his mother, putting an arm around her thin shoulders and dropping a kiss on to her smooth hair.
‘Yes, Mama, she is; and yes, you have always said so.
But Venice is full of wonderful things, and even for you I won't pretend to dislike it.’
‘You always were a stubborn creature,’ she said with a charming tenderness in her voice.
‘From the moment they told me that you were a breech baby I knew I'd have trouble with you.’
Turning to Julia, she went on, smiling still: ‘Haven't you found him stubborn too, Mrs Gillingham?’
Julia, delighted to see that the affection between them was solid enough to allow such teasing, said, as though she were considering some knotty legal problem:
‘Stubborn?
I wonder….
I've certainly become aware that I wouldn't like to cross him, particularly on a matter of principle.’
Julia looked at David then  and was a little surprised to see that he was not laughing as she had expected.
Instead he was standing with his head on one side, looking seriously at her.
Mrs Wallington laughed.
‘I said you were intelligent,’ she commented.
‘But this is all irrelevant.
Mrs Gillingham, I've become Scottish enough to need my tea and I'm sure you'd like some after that horrid train.
I think it's just warm enough to have it on the terrace.
Will you come down when you're ready?’
‘Thank you,’ said Julia.
‘Tea would be wonderful!’
They left her to unpack and she was pleased to find a jug of warm water wrapped in a towel on the washstand.
Having scrubbed the train's grime from her face and hands, she searched for a comb to deal with her hair.
It had been far easier to keep it tidy, she thought, in the days when she wore it pinned up; the style she had taken to suited her better and made her look and feel years younger than she was but it was a terrible nuisance.
Amused by her burgeoning vanity, she dawdled over the unpacking to give Mrs Wallington plenty of unencumbered time with her son.
It seemed to Julia to be the height of good manners to have greeted a stranger with apparent pleasure under such circumstances and then to have included her in the family teasing, but she wanted to make certain that they could forget their manners and talk freely to each other without having to bother about her.
When at last she made her way downstairs towards the terrace, she could hear their voices speaking in English.
Slowing down, she listened in case they were in the middle of a talk too personal to be interrupted; but it soon became clear that they were discussing the house and the various improvements that might be  made once Europe had reached some kind of normality again.
Much relieved, Julia walked out through the open French windows on to the terrace.
At the sound of her step, David pulled himself out of his chair and smiled at her.
His mother turned and smiled too.
‘Mrs Gillingham….’
‘Oh, please call me Julia-if you wouldn't mind,’ said Julia.
Mrs Wallington inclined her head in an extraordinarily graceful gesture of acquiescence.
‘Julia, come and sit down and have your tea,’ she said, pouring another cupful.
Julia sat down and took her tea and a small almond biscuit.
‘David tells me that you have been very ill,’ said Mrs Wallington.
‘It's that terrible place, you know.
How anyone could have expected you to get properly well there I cannot imagine!
And David says that your husband is a doctor: he ought to have sent you straight up to the mountains.’
‘I wasn't as ill as that,’ said Julia, laughing slightly.
‘And he has so many patients with much worse ailments that he took quite a robust view of my case.’
‘Well, now that you are here, you must stay until you are really well, mustn't she, David?’
David leaned forward to replace his tea cup on the table and then he straightened up.
‘I think she ought to do exactly as she wishes, Mama.
After all her husband is in Venice- and she hadn't seen him in all the war years,’ he said.
Julia was horrified, thinking that the last thing David's mother would want to hear just then would be about another woman's wish to be with her husband.
Her sympathy for Mrs Wallington helped her to ignore the realisation that it was an enormous relief to be away from Anthony and with people who  produced an atmosphere of such calm and ease that she felt immediately at home with them.
‘Of course she must, David,’ came the gentle reproof, ‘but she will get well much more quickly in Fiesole than in Venice.
And I want her to know that she is welcome in my house for as long as she wishes.’
David put a friendly hand on his mother's knee, and Julia thanked her.
‘There are many things to see in Florence, too,’ said Mrs Wallington.
‘David will take you about and show them to you: he knows so much about it all.’
‘He was certainly the most wonderful guide in Venice,’ Julia said, smiling at him.
‘You flatter me, both of you,’ he said, and again Julia was amazed that the pair of them could appear so cheerful.
‘Julia, I hope that you will let me take you down into Florence for dinner tonight; if we went early, we could stroll a little first and look at one or two of the best exteriors.’
Julia looked from one to the other, strangely at a loss.
She wanted to say that she would quite happily go and dine on her own in Florence so that they could be alone together, but Mrs Wallington pre-empted her.
‘Unfortunately I cannot join you, because I am expecting a very old friend of my family, who has been here all these years,’ she said.
Julia smiled her thanks and then turned to accept David's invitation.
Her conscience at peace, Julia set off for dinner in a mood to enjoy herself.
She and David decided to catch the bus down into Florence and then try for a taxi home.
As they were waiting at the bus stop in the main square of Fiesole, about five minutes' walk from the house, she said carefully:
‘David, I hope your mother didn't think me dreadfully insensitive-’
Before she could complete her sentence, he interrupted her.
‘Why on earth should she have thought anything like that?’ he demanded, sounding almost angry.
Julia touched his forearm lightly.
‘Hush,’ she said.
‘Sorry.’
David sounded much more like himself.
‘But what do you mean?’
‘It's very difficult.
I just…. it's just that I wanted to tell her how sorry I am about…about what happened to your father and brother but, not knowing her, I didn't want to say it in a way that might upset her.
And so I didn't say anything.’
Julia ended her little speech looking at her feet.
When David said nothing, she waited and then at last looked up at him.
There was an expression in his blue eyes that she did not completely understand, ant so she lifted one eyebrow.
‘You are kind, you know,’ he said rather helplessly.
‘I don't think I realised quite how kind until they were killed.’
He seemed to be trying to pull himself together and just as the bus appeared at the mouth of the square, he murmured: ‘Don't worry about Mama; she will have understood what you were thinking, and in any case I can tell her if you'd like.’
‘Would you?’ said Julia over her shoulder as she climbed up into the bus.
‘That would be awfully good of you.’
They found seats side by side and silently agreed to talk no more about the tragedy.
Instead, David pointed out landmarks they passed and eventually Julia led him on to talk about his childhood holidays at Fiesole.
The first time he had to include his brother's name in an anecdote, his voice hardened a little, but soon he was talking much more easily, telling her of picnics and expeditions and even fights they had had with each other and with the Italian sons of their mother's friends and relations.
‘Was it difficult getting to know them?’
Julia asked, as the bus creaked round a particularly sharp hairpin bend.
‘Didn't they treat you as strangers?’
‘I suppose they might have done at the beginning,’ he said, ‘but by the time I can remember we had become part of the place really.
Mama had brought us every year, and we somehow fitted in.’
‘Did your father not come?’ asked Julia, curiously.
He shook his head.
‘Partly because of the estate; there was always too much to be done.
But mainly because he didn't like the place and believed that he didn't like Italians.
How he thought he could love Mama so much and dislike her friends and relations on the grounds that they were Italian, I don't know.
And he did love her,’ said David and then was silent.
‘How did they meet?’
Julia asked, not sure whether he wanted to talk or not.
It seemed that he did want to, for he answered her question far more fully than he need have done.
‘It was quite funny in fact,’ he said, a real smile lighting in his eyes.
‘Some neighbours of ours in Scotland had unnaturally cosmopolitan views about the best way to bring up their daughters and they had all been sent to stay with family friends in both Paris and Florence when they were about seventeen.
‘One of the daughters, Fiona, who was always known as ‘the pretty one’, had struck up a great friendship with Mama, who had been invited back to Scotland.
Now, Fiona was thought to be a suitable bride for my father-just the right age, pretty and vivacious enough it was thought to appeal to a man  who was beginning to be known as a confirmed bachelor.’
He stopped then and Julia supplied a prompt.
‘And he caught sight of your mother and fell desperately in love,’ she suggested.
‘Not at all,’ he answered, the grin coming back to his lips.
Julia smiled back, not sure what she was about to hear, but very much enjoying his pleasure in the tale.
‘No, he had been toying with the idea of proposing to Fiona, whom he had known all his life and whom he liked.
But just before he could get the words out, she begged him to do her a tremendous favour.
My father was a generous man, and so he cautiously agreed to do what he could.
After a while she explained that she was in love with someone else — not hopelessly ineligible, but not nearly as suitable as my father- and her parents had refused to allow her to see the man.
She therefore proposed that my father should pretend to fall in love with her difficult and very homesick Italian friend so that it would be clear to her parents that there was no hope of getting him for Fiona.’
‘Pretty rough on your mother if it hadn't worked out,’ said Julia.
‘Oh, no, Fiona had already squared Mama, who had agreed to play her part.
What no one had expected was that my xenophobic father should find himself first sorry for the poor little foreigner and then gradually — but quite irreversibly — falling in love with her.
She took much longer.’
‘What a nice story,’ said Julia.
‘But what happened to Fiona?’
‘That's where everything gets especially satisfactory!
She grew tired of her less-than-suitable young  man just as quickly as her parents had predicted and then in no time at all fell in love with and married the elder son of a duke.’
‘And so everyone was happy,’ said Julia, smiling again and not giving voice to her suspicion that perhaps the young homesick Italian might have been happier if her besotted husband had managed to forget his dislike of foreigners and their countries.
It seemed very hard that she should have had to uproot herself completely while her husband could not even be bothered to accompany her on holidays to her own country.
‘Here we are,’ announced David as the bus pulled up outside the cathedral.
‘Come on — and don't worry too much about Mama.
She got over her homesickness pretty quickly and he used to come over here with her every year until we were old enough to come instead.’
‘Ah, David,’ said Julia, sighing as she waited for him on the pavement.
‘I'm not used to having my mind read, you know.’
‘No,’ he agreed, swinging himself down beside her.
‘Do you mind?’
‘Not really,’ she said without thinking about it.
‘In fact it's rather restful.
Provided that,’ she added as though drafting a contract, ‘you don't do it all the time.’
He laughed.
‘I can only do it when we're in the middle of a conversation and you look at me speculatively and then say something anodyne in a voice that is so deliberately empty of judgment I can practically feel the strength of will you are exerting to keep it so,’ said David with the hint of a laugh in his deep voice.
Julia wrinkled her nose as she looked up at him.
‘I didn't know I was so obvious,’ she said, and he answered quickly:
‘Well, you are used to living with two very self —‘
‘Careful, David,’ she said.
‘Self-absorbed people,’ he finished.
‘But I love them,’ said Julia.
It was an article of faith.
‘And they are — and always have been — very good to me, even if they can't read my mind.’
They were walking along a smallish road to the left of the extraordinary green-and-white-striped cathedral and David suddenly stopped and put both hands on Julia's shoulders.
She felt the familiar shivering pleasure at his touch.
‘Would you rather I simply agreed or told the truth?’ he asked.
Julia closed her eyes, partly because that was a question she did not want to answer and partly because she thought it might help to stop her flinging her arms around his neck and saying, kiss me, oh please kiss me.
‘Julia?’ he said softly.
Correcting her instinctive move towards him, she made herself open her eyes and slightly shook her head.
‘I don't know, David.
I love them.’
Her voice sounded exhausted even to her own ears.
With an expression on his face that suggested he could not fight any longer, David pulled her towards him and slowly stroked her head and back.
Julia let herself lean against him.
She heard the steady beat of his heart under her cheek and felt his hand stroking her hair again and again.
‘I know you do,’ he said at last and with an obvious effort.
‘And they love you, too.
Anyone would.’
No longer sure that she could believe it, but still determined to make the best of her marriage, Julia managed to pull herself away from David.
When they were once more walking side by side in the dusk, Julia said gently:
‘You said I was kind, but so are you.’
‘Not really,’ he said, sounding very sombre.
‘I just find myself getting so angry….
I'm sorry.
I'm a bit stirred up just now and find myself unable to control those feelings that ought to be controlled.’
‘Don't be sorry,’ Julia said with an effort.
‘But hadn't we better eat?’
‘Yes.
Bill recommended a restaurant-it's just round here.’
She followed him into a tiny, brightly lit room that was suffused with the most delectable scents of cooking.
They were shown to a little table, where they would have to sit side by side.
Julia pushed her way to the further chair and sat down, wondering how to make herself small enough to avoid touching David every time she moved or breathed.
As soon as he sat down it was clear that there was no room for modesty.
His arm lay against hers from shoulder to elbow and there was nothing they could do about it.
Julia sat, listening to his carefully controlled breathing, feeling his arm tense against her.
She made a deliberate effort to relax: they would both have blown up if they had had to sit like that all evening, she thought.
As soon as her muscles had slackened, she could feel a corresponding movement in him, and his voice was almost normal when he asked her what she would like to eat.
‘Something light, I think,’ she said, looking blindly at the menu.
‘I find I'm not terribly hungry.’
‘Nor I,’ he said, and called the waiter.
20
Later that night, when they had returned to his mother's house, David suddenly said:
‘I lost control a bit this evening.
I won't do it again and I'm awfully sorry.’
‘For nothing, David,’ said Julia, knowing that it was her fault and not his that they had got so near the brink.
‘So long as you aren't angry with me,’ he said quietly.
‘I don't think I could bear that.’
It was all Julia could do then to wait until she could be certain of her voice.
‘I'm not angry, David,’ she said at last.
‘Far from it.
I wish-’ Before she could find an expressible desire, he interrupted.
‘No, it's all right,’ he said quickly.
‘I know.
I'm just sorry that my absurd….
No, never mind.
Good night.’
He left her so abruptly that she could not have stopped him even if she had known what to say.
She stood looking after him as he strode down the corridor towards the opposite end of the house.
At last she turned into her luxurious, English-style bedroom and lay down, fully dressed, to try to decide what to do about David.
If only there were some way in which she could let him know that his feelings for her were not something for which he needed to  apologise without landing them both in a situation from which they could not retreat.
She was married and that was that.
There could never be any resolution of her love for David, but she did not want him to think that his feelings were unwanted or unreciprocated.
The next morning, having hardly slept, she went down to breakfast feeling dreadful.
Her head did not precisely ache, but it felt hollow and somehow precarious; and she found it hard to make her muscles work so that she felt as though she might trip over her own feet or walk into the furniture.
Mrs Wallington took one look at her and put down her own coffee cup.
‘Julia, you look terrible.
I knew that they had not given you enough time to recover from the pneumonia.
I think you should go straight back to bed and I shall bring you a tray of breakfast presently.’
‘You're far too kind to me, Mrs Wallington,’ said Julia with real feeling.
‘But I'm quite all right really: I just didn't sleep very well.
I'll be fine as soon as I've had some breakfast.’
Her hostess looked carefully at Julia's face and then pressed her:
‘I don't want to nag, but I do think you ought to take better care of yourself.
You are very pale and there are huge bruises under your eyes.
Would you hate a day in bed so much?’
Tired to the point where she felt that her eyes might fall out of their sockets, Julia could not repress her instinctive relief at the prospect of a day's rest and Mrs Wallington saw it.
‘Go on.
Off with you.
I'll tell David when he comes down so that you don't need to worry about whatever plans you've made with him.
Breakfast in five minutes or so.’
‘Thank you very much,’ was all Julia could say.
She walked heavily upstairs again, relieved to have a chance to think through her options undistracted by David's physical presence.
Reaching the haven of her bedroom, she stripped off her clothes again, wrapped herself in her dressing gown and got back into bed.
She had hardly settled herself against the pillows and let her thickened lids slide back over her aching eyeballs when she heard a knock on the door.
Wishing that Mrs Wallington had not staggered up all the stairs with a heavy breakfast tray when her guest was unlikely to be able to eat anything very much, Julia called out, ‘Come in.’
The door opened and David stood there, a tray in his hands.
Without a word he brought it to the table beside her bed and put it carefully down.
Straightening up, he took a deep breath and.
without looking at Julia, said:
‘I am desperately sorry to have upset you so.
Mama thought you were just tired, but it's more than that isn't it?’
‘A bit,’ she said, and she watched him walk to the end of the bed.
There he turned, looked at her and gripped the bedstead with both hands.
‘I am sorry,’ he said again.
‘I've tried to stop it, but I haven't been able to.
I know it's unfair of me and horribly troublesome for you, but please believe that I'm not going to start importuning you — or anything like that.
I ought never to have hugged you last night or said any of those things.’
‘Oh, David,’ she said, her voice quivering with the very effort needed to keep it calm.
‘I've tried too.’
‘Yes, I know,’ he said, and at that she looked directly at him.
His eyes looked so unhappy that she could hardly bear it, but before she could say anything  more he had plunged on: ‘It must have been obvious and I'm sorry for that too.
You've been very gentle with me, which makes it even worse; perhaps if you'd been more brutal I could have managed to stop…but then you would never be brutal.
I know that.’
He attempted a smile, but it was a poor effort.
‘David, stop, please,’ said Julia, getting out of bed.
She stood about four feet away from him in her ungainly dressing gown.
‘You mustn't think….
Oh, Lord!
This is so difficult.
I'm not usually stuck for words,’ she went on, thinking of the successful extempore speeches she had made in court when her clients had led her into all sorts of impossible positions.
‘Please don't think that you are the only one who has been trying to suppress your feelings,’ she said at last, plumping for simplicity.
For a moment she was afraid that David was going to ask her what on earth she was talking about and tell her that she had completely misunderstood his elliptical declaration, but he did not.
Instead he silently walked the few feet between them and put his arms round her.
Once again she leaned against him and felt his hands clasped at her back.
Then she felt him laying his cheek on her hair.
His heart was banging against his chest wall so hard that she could feel it thudding into her as well.
‘Do you mean that?’ he asked at last, his voice astonishingly gentle in contrast to that violent physical sensation.
‘Yes,’ she said simply.
‘I've tried not to, but I can't help it either.’
His arms tightened on her back for a moment and she felt him raise his head.
She looked up at him and before she could say anything else he had kissed her.
With her battered instincts singing ‘At last, at last , thank God!’,
Julia kissed him back.
‘We need to talk about this,’ he said when at last they broke apart.
‘I know,’ she answered.
‘And it's almost impossibly difficult.’
‘Yes, my dear, dear love, it is,’ he said with a tiny smile on his lips.
‘I think probably we ought to leave it until you have had some sleep.
You look exhausted; Mama was right about that.
Do you think you could sleep?’
‘Now?’ she asked, her own lips curling into a smile.
‘Yes, I think I could now.’
He left her and set about smoothing the sheets of her bed with touchingly serious clumsiness.
Then he turned back the top sheet and blankets.
‘In you get,’ he said.
Julia obeyed, amused at his fatherliness, and lay back on the pillow.
He stood, looking down at her until she reached up to lay one hand on his thigh.
‘I'm so glad that you know at last,’ she said.
He covered her hand with his own.
‘Yes.
Astounding though it feels, Julia…
But I mustn't start now.
Try to sleep, if you can.’
He closed the shutters and, leaving the breakfast tray behind, crept out as though she might already be asleep.
In fact she lay in the warm, dark grey shadows of her room quite at peace for the first time since she had come to Italy.
Whatever was to happen in the future, she loved and was loved and for the moment that was enough.
Hours later she woke to the same sensation of calm fulfilment.
After all those months of fighting the knowledge that Anthony did not want her much, it was a heavenly feeling.
She and David could not do anything about it, of course, but it was wonderful.
Moving with extraordinary ease, as though all her  muscles and sinews had been somehow loosened, Julia got herself out of bed and into her clothes and then went to open the shutters.
It was not until she saw the colour of the light — deep warm gold — that she realised how long she must have been asleep and looked at her watch.
It was half-past five.
Too happy to feel ashamed of being such a poor guest, too relaxed to worry about anything at all, she found her shoes and went downstairs to the terrace.
There was only David, sitting at ease in one of the basket chairs, in front of the tea tray.
‘Is your mother out?’ asked Julia, standing in the French windows.
He turned his head lazily and smiled before standing up and explaining that as it was Good Friday his mother had gone to church with some old friends and was likely to have dinner with them as well.
Julia sat down in the chair next to David's and let him pour her a cup of cooling tea.
‘No, no, this is fine,’ she said as he suggested making a new pot.
‘Did you sleep?’
‘For a while,’ he answered, ‘and then I went out to have lunch with Bill.
I don't think I was quite as tired as you….
Ah, Julia.’
‘I know,’ she said, answering his tone rather than his words.
‘You see,’ he went on as though they had been talking all afternoon, ‘I had no idea until this morning that you were in the same state as I.’
‘You must have,’ said Julia, reaching across the space between their chairs to touch his hand.
‘I felt as though I was announcing it the whole time: by the way I watched you, and talked to you, and could hardly manage not to touch you — stroke your head, brush your arm, hold your hand….
I was horribly  afraid then that you must know and hate me for my disloyalty to Anthony.’
‘Anthony,’ he said and brushed a hand across his face.
‘Yes, we must talk.
Do you feel up to it?’
‘Yes,’ answered Julia.
‘I think so.
But I'm not quite sure what there is to say.
I am his wife and you are his best friend, and neither of us could…
I can't leave him, David.’
‘No, I know that,’ he said at once.
‘I'd never ask it of you.
And in any case, I'm in no position to…to marry.
I have no idea what I shall be doing even this time next year; I haven't any achievements or even firm plans that I could offer you.
I may have to spend a lot of my time in Scotland now — perhaps even look for a Scottish constituency — and your work is in London.’
Julia was relieved that that was out of the way and that David's announcement had been so definite.
‘And neither of us could be happy deceiving him could we?’
David went on.
Julia got up from her chair so fast that the basketwork shrieked.
She walked to the edge of the terrace and leaned on the balustrade, looking out over Florence.
The roughness of the lichened grey stone under her hands and wrists helped her to keep her mind under some sort of control.
The city spread out below her looked so calm, almost as calm as she had felt such a little time before.
She stared down at it as though the pattern of domes and towers and roofs could tell her what to do.
‘No, I don't think so,’ she said at last.
‘I should never have….
But then why not?
Isn't it rather a waste of all we feel to ignore it?
Anthony once told me that he thinks ‘bodily fidelity is wholly irrelevant’,’ she quoted bitterly.
She turned back to face David and hated to see a reflection of that bitterness in his blue eyes.
‘I ought never to have kissed you or let things get to this stage,’ Julia admitted.
‘Older than you, married, female: it was up to me to keep us on the straight and narrow.
But I couldn't bear you to think that you were feeling all that on your own.
I wanted you to know how important you are; how much I care about you — value you; and….’ her voice quivered and stopped, but then she took another breath and finished her declaration steadily enough: ‘and how much I want you.’
David poured himself another cup of tea and drained it, although it was quite cold by then and horribly tannic.
‘That makes it much more difficult, you know, than when I thought it was only me,’ he said.
Julia looked up at the cloudless sky and felt the last of the day's sun on her face.
‘But more honest,’ she said, still gazing upwards.
‘And I hope that there's some good in that.
Is it so important that we become more than platonic lovers?’
David was silent for so long that she had to look at him in the end.
‘Half of me says ‘no, of course not’,’ he said, smiling a little.
‘And the other half?’
‘Minds like hell and has the most appallingly prehistoric instincts,’ he went on.
‘But that's absurd really, because as soon as I've…made love to anyone before — and it hasn't been that often — I've lost most of the feeling that led me there straight away, if you see what I mean.’
‘Yes, I think I do,’ said Julia sadly.
Anthony had  once seemed to want her badly, but that had hardly lasted even through their honeymoon, and he seemed to have seized on any excuse since Flavia's death to avoid sharing her bed.
David saw the effect his words had had on her and quickly tried to take away the sting.
‘But I have never loved anyone as I love you,’ he said, truthfully.
Julia was about to say something else when they both heard the sound of his mother returning.
‘Perhaps it's just as well,’ murmured David and then in a quite different voice he said: ‘Mama!’
Julia took one look at her hostess's face and decided to make some more tea.
Picking up the tray, she carried it out to the kitchen and put the kettle on the small bottled-gas stove that stood beside the huge, cold, black range.
When the water boiled she made more tea in the silver pot, refilled the milk jug, found clean cups and a plateful of almond biscuits, and carried the tray back to the terrace.
She was surprised to see the two Wallingtons sitting opposite each other, about eighteen inches apart, apparently concentrating hard on something that lay between them.
Moving towards the table to lay down her load, she almost laughed when she saw that they were playing cat's cradle.
She put down the tray, poured out three  cupsful of tea and sat watching them.
‘Pound of candles, Mama!’
David exclaimed.
‘Well done!’
Mrs Wallington's tight face relaxed a little as David leaned forward over the criss-crossed string that her hands held taut between them.
David's long fingers plucked carefully at two of the lines, swung them over the outlying strings and took the whole pattern  back from her hands to form a new one within his.
She gazed at the new arrangement, absent-mindedly reached for the tea Julia had placed near her elbow and drank.
As though the heat of the liquid burning her lips reminded her where she was, she looked away from the cat's cradle and made her eyes focus on her guest.
‘Julia,’ she said, as though she were just waking up.
‘How good of you to make tea.
Thank you.’
‘It was a pleasure,’ she said, a little worried by both the intensity of Mrs Wallington's earlier concentration and her current vagueness.
‘You're both a delight to watch at that,’ Julia went on.
‘I've never got beyond the first two or three rounds.’
‘My husband taught me when we were first married,’ said the elder woman, licking her burnt lower lip.
‘The concentration always helped when I was feeling homesick.’
She released her lip from between her teeth and Julia was horrified to see a speck of blood on it.
As though aware that her control was slipping again, Mrs Wallington turned back to the disciplined criss-cross of string and concentrated with almost palpable force.
David looked up then and Julia nodded her head in the direction of the drawing room, meaning (as she knew David would understand) that she wondered whether she should leave them alone.
He answered with a minute shake of his head and she obeyed, sitting on to watch the fantastic skill with which they wove and rewove their patterns, each keeping the strings taut and symmetrical even as they transformed them into a completely new shape.
Neither spoke and Julia understood that David's mother was on the very brink of breaking down; any little thing might tip her over into outright despair.
Julia, who had come to understand a little of  Allegra Wallington's character in the short time they had spent together, was as anxious as David to prevent that happening.
David had obviously always known and Julia had learned that, whatever feelings were churning around inside his mother's mind, it was vital for her that they remained private.
David was holding the strings in a pattern Julia had never seen before.
His face seemed to show nothing except benevolent interest, but Julia could tell from the way that he was carrying his head and a certain tension in his body that they were approaching a crisis point.
Allegra leaned forward a little and delicately laid her fingers and thumbs on either side of the cradle.
She performed a complicated manoeuvre, which Julia could not follow at all, and brought her two hands up between the strings held by her son.
At once the carefully constructed cradle collapsed; there was no longer any pattern, merely an ugly mass of tangled string hanging from his hands.
Allegra leaned even further forward, tears waterfalling down her thin, pale olive face, until her head was resting on top of the string in her son's hands.
Julia got up from her chair as quietly as she possibly could and left them alone.
As she reached the French windows into the drawing room she heard Allegra's voice, ugly and distorted by an immense sob:
‘How can I bear it without him, Davy?’
Hating the thought that she was eavesdropping, Julia still could not force herself away and half turned to see David gently pushing his mother upright again.
Julia watched him take a handkerchief from his trouser pocket with one hand while shaking the debris of the cat's cradle from the other.
Instead of simply handing his mother the handkerchief, he held her  chin with one hand and wiped the tears from her cheeks.
Only when she had managed to stop crying and he had dried her face completely did he even attempt to answer.
‘I don't know how, Mama, but I think you will.
And….’
He broke off and Julia knew that he was trying to decide how far to let his honesty take him.
His shoulders were taut under his jacket.
‘And terrible though it is, Mama, isn't it better to feel like this now than never to have known what it was like to love someone so much?’
Tears starting into her own eyes, Julia waited, not wanting to walk away while they were both silent.
‘Wouldn't it be better to love like that for a little while than never to know what it is like?’ she asked herself silently.
She had spent most of her own childhood trying to persuade her parents to fall in love with each other and known how little they really cared for each other or for her, but until recently she had not realised how little real love there had been in her own marriage.
‘E vero, mio figlio ’, said Allegra at last in an aching voice that seemed to express both infinite sadness and acceptance.
‘Yes, that is true.’
Julia went to sit in the kitchen, trying to stop applying what she had just heard to her own situation.
It seemed very important just then to remember exactly what she had felt for Anthony at the beginning.
The difficulty was that the memory seemed to be inextricably linked to her friendship with Comfort.
Searching through her mind the only emotions she could recreate from that time were a dizzying pleasure that someone as sophisticated, cosmopolitan, successful and confident as Doctor Anthony Gillingham should  appear to want anyone as dull and provincial as she had been and a kind of a triumph that she could present Comfort with Anthony's declaration of love.
Comfort loved him so much herself that his admiration of her friend was a kind of justification of the friendship itself.
That was it, Julia said to herself, as she sat at the big scrubbed table in the Florentine kitchen, all those years and a thousand miles away.
A heavy step on the stone-flagged floor made her start.
‘It's only me, Julia,’ said David as she turned.
‘I've been looking for you all over the house.’
‘Sorry,’ she said, smiling at him.
‘I just thought I'd better keep out of the way.
How is your poor mother?’
‘As you saw.
I've given her some of the Veronal her doctor prescribed and she's gone to bed.
Are you all right?’
‘Why?’
‘Your eyes have gone dark, and your mouth looks thinner and you're pale again; I've noticed that that always happens when you're unhappy,’ he said.
‘I suppose that I've just been recognising that the sort of feeling your mother had for your father is…she paused as she searched for as unemotive a word as possible.
‘It is so very different from what I feel for Anthony.
But I'm sorry, David, I oughtn't to be bothering you with all this at such a time.
You must be missing them both so much.’
‘Yes,’ he agreed.
‘But it's in a different compartment from you and me.
I don't ever want you to think that what I feel for you is a response to —‘
‘Don't, David,’ she said, getting up from the table.
‘I know it's not.’
He stood looking at her in silence for a few moments  and then gave a funny little smile, ruffled her hair and said:
‘Now, you haven't had anything to eat all day — except for that biscuit- and you must be starving.’
‘Not really,’ she said with a rueful smile.
‘All this emotion seems to be doing instead of food.’
‘Nevertheless, we must both eat.
Mama made me promise to feed you before she agreed to go to bed.
She said that there was pasta, a couple of eggs and a little ham,’ he said, looking around the big, empty kitchen.
‘And since neither of us is Catholic, there's no bar to any of that.’
‘I'm afraid my cooking doesn't extend to much more than scrambled eggs or sardines on toast,’ said Julia, feeling thoroughly useless.
‘Don't worry,’ he answered with the first real amusement of the day, ‘mine does.’
Watching him finding the food and preparing and cooking it with deft and practised skill, Julia marvelled at his practicality.
When they had eaten, sitting companionably at the kitchen table, she told him how impressed she was by his unsuspected talent.
‘It is time that someone began to look after you for a change, Julia,’ he said seriously.
‘You've done a long, long stint, haven't you?’
They managed to part that night with no more than a friendly kiss, but the following evening when Mrs Wallington again went early to bed was more difficult.
Once again David and Julia ate together in the kitchen at the scrubbed wooden table.
David had lit two squat candles stuck in pottery sticks, and they provided the only light in the room.
The rest of the great kitchen was huge and empty around them; the small oval of warm candlelight seemed to hold them together.
At first they talked easily about David's chances of demobilisation, and the kind of law he would practise when he eventually got back to London, and his prospects of fighting a reasonably safe seat at the next General Election, but inevitably that led on to Julia's plans.
‘I don't know, David,’ she said at one moment when they had finished their pasta.
‘One thing these workless weeks in Venice have taught me is that I need my profession.
I should go quite dotty without work, and there is none for me in Venice now.
I am going to have to go back to London pretty soon.’
‘And Anthony?’
‘God knows.
Do you think he can be persuaded to leave his orphans?’ said Julia.
When David did not answer, she went on: ‘After all, I suspect that you know him far better than I have ever done.’
David sat looking down at the empty wine glass that he was turning round and round between his hands.
He wanted to tell her the whole story then, but he was afraid of what she might think.
‘I don't think I do,’ he said instead without looking up.
Julia, not wanting to have to think of Anthony any longer, got out of her chair and prowled about the big dark kitchen.
David watched her in silence for a while, wondering what she was thinking, longing to persuade her to forget her husband, longing beyond everything to make love to her.
Julia stopped by the cold range and ran her fingers along its surface.
Suddenly she lifted her hand and examined the brown, greasy deposit that her fingers had picked up and grimaced in disgust.
She went to the stone sink, scrubbed her hands under the single cold tap and set off on her perambulations again, slowly circling the big pine table, moving in and out of the gibbous pool of light shed by the candles.
‘What I can't understand,’ she said at last, coming to a stop again behind David's chair, ‘is why he married me at all and why he….’
‘I suspect because he loves you, even though he doesn't always show it,’ said David, trying to be fair.
‘And….
Oh Lord, Julia, I'm finding this desperately difficult.’
The raw, rough feeling in his voice was so obvious that Julia forgot all her determined restraint of the previous evening and put her arms around him as he sat at the table, laying her head on his.
‘Oh David, my darling,’ she said.
‘I'm sorry.’
He twisted in his chair so that he could look at her, and she leaned down and kissed his forehead.
His skin felt very soft and cool under her lips.
He turned back and put his hands over hers as they lay across his chest.
‘All my most prehistoric instincts are coming to the surface,’ he said at last, his voice breathless and the words coming out syncopated.
‘I don't think I can talk any more about your husband.
I need you too much.’
Julia's own needs rose to answer that despairing cry so powerfully that all her carefully nurtured detachment melted away.
With her conscious mind telling her what to say and do, her emotions rebelled and she heard herself say something quite contradictory to its orders:
‘David, I think we'd better go to bed.’
‘Do you mean that?’ he said.
Standing up, he examined her face with extreme care.
‘Yes,’ said Julia.
‘What harm can it possibly do anyone if we don't let it invade our lives?
Tonight, here, now, we can't hurt anyone by making love.’
In all her suppressed longing for David, Julia had never imagined such gentleness as he gave her that night or such freedom.
When he had shut the door of her bedroom behind them both, he came to stand in front of her and stroked her face with one finger, tracing her eyebrows, the semi-circular curve of the bones under her eyes, the diagonal lines of her cheekbones, and her lips.
Light though his touch was, she found it infinitely exciting and when his fingertip reached the centre of her lips, she opened them and felt his finger on her tongue.
Through his increasingly deep, ragged breathing, he said her name once, twice.
She felt his other hand cupping her head and, releasing his finger, she leaned forward until she lay against his chest.
‘Yes, David,’ she said, answering his unspoken plea.
‘I'm here.’
Putting both hands on her head so that he could tilt it up towards him, he said:
‘I can hardly believe it, Julia.
Are you really sure?’
‘I'm sure, David.
Come to bed.’
Taking his hand, she led him to the bed and lay down.
‘Julia,’ he said, dropping on his knees beside the bed.
Before she could do more than smile up at him, he had kissed her eyes, her lips, the soft skin of her neck just below her ear, and then he began to unbutton her clothes.
The delicacy of his touch as he stroked her was such that Julia could hardly feel it at all, and yet it aroused in her a longing for him that she had never before experienced.
His face was so unguarded that if she had not loved him as much she would have been afraid for him.
Gradually, as her need became overwhelming and his stroking intensified, she lost all her feelings of  protectiveness for him, forgot that she was older than he, forgot everything except his touch, his strength, his love for her and her passionate longing to give him everything.
In that giving she found completion and happiness beyond all expectation.
Afterwards, as she lay curled in the crook of his arm, with her head tucked underneath his chin, he said:
‘I won't be able to regret this, whatever happens.
It's meant too much’
Hardly able to move at all for the blissful heaviness of her limbs, Julia tried to make her mind work enough to answer him.
‘We shouldn't either of us have anything to regret, David,’ she said at last, and found that it was true.
What they had given each other, dramatic though it had become at the end, had been the inevitable physical manifestation of what had happened between them weeks earlier.
It was both an acknowledgement and an easing of the exquisite — almost intolerable tension that had been built up between them.
They slept then, tucked up around one another, waking several times during the night, but rarely for long enough to do more than acknowledge the other's presence.
It was not until soon after six o'clock that David carefully uncoiled his long body.
Julia woke, smiling.
‘Go back to sleep, Julia,’ he said, very quietly.
‘I'm just going back to my own room.’
‘Must you?’ she said, still half asleep and not thinking of anything at all except David.
She brought her right hand up out of the bedclothes and held it out to him.
He took it in both of his and smiled down at her.
‘I think so…
It seems important not to worry  Mama with this just now,’ he said.
Julia loved him for that protectiveness, too, and pulled her hand out of his to let him go.
‘Try to sleep a bit more,’ he said.
‘You look very tired.’
He stood looking down at her as she lay with her hair spread out on the pillow, her eyes still half shut by the heaviness of sleep and her lips smiling.
‘I know that we can't let this mean anything more than itself,’ he said at last, ‘but it has made…you have made me very happy, Julia.
Whatever happens, don't forget that…please.’
‘I won't forget,’ she said.