

Suragai
At first only the Simonova 's lights betrayed her presence amid the blackness of space.
But when the barge was closer, the survey ship's resemblance to a floating junkheap became more apparent.
Although he had been forewarned, Rostov eyed the vessel with disfavour.
That, he reflected, was what happened when the Navy was persuaded to hand over operational as well as administrative control of a ship to a pack of civilians.
The scientists and technicians who were responsible for running the vessel were all ranking members of the Imperial Survey Service; but that did not mean that they had the slightest notion about running either a tight or a tidy ship.
As the barge swept silently towards the docking bay, Rostov noted the clusters of scanners and other unidentifiable telemetry which appeared to have been attached at random to the hull.
It was not unusual for the configuration of a deep space vessel to be unbalanced.
The Infinity Drive exerted exactly equal stress — which was to say almost none — on all parts of the contained structure, and a ship like the Simonova was never likely to be required to approach even the outer atmosphere of a planet, far less to land.
As he examined the clutter, however, Rostov was inclined to wonder if it was entirely the result of essential additions to survey gear.
More probably it was the product of the average scientist's well-known unwillingness to get rid of anything if he thought that it might come in useful at some time in the future.
Rostov keyed his writer, about to make a note to ascertain the exact function of each of the assorted  external mountings.
Then he stopped, remembering that his status aboard the Simonova carried with it only a limited amount of authority.
The other occupants of the barge's acceleration couches were reacting in a predictably more vocal manner.
‘— a collection of scrap metal —‘
‘— typical of civilian operation —‘
The two technical lieutenants who had been attached to Rostov's staff were providing a running commentary for those who were not placed adjacent to a viewport.
But it was Zukov, the Master-at-Arms, who summarised the survey vessel's appearance with typical force and economy.
‘By the Sack!’
He examined the Simonova's outline critically.
‘She's a repair-dog's bad dream come true!’
The panel in front of the barge pilot flashed red as the survey ship's watch- keepers belatedly demanded recognition codes.
Rostov experienced a moment of irritation.
They were already well within the shield zone and, had the barge been hostile, it could have inflicted untold damage.
Rostov forced himself to remember that the planet on his viewport's horizon was Knossos, capital of the Imperium, and not some rebel outworld.
Perhaps the Secretary of the Navy Board was right — he had spent too long on active service.
‘Reception party, Admiral.
Starboard side of the docking bay.’
The Navy pilot indicated with a nod of his head.
His hands were busy shutting down controls.
Rostov nodded acknowledgement, but when the barge settled he remained seated.
Cabin pressure equalised with a hiss of air.
Rostov reached for the flat permahide envelope which contained his orders and for a moment he brushed absently at the crisp new admiral's stripe on his sleeve.
‘Captain?
Sir?’
It was the familiar title, rather than Zukov's voice, which recalled Rostov to the present.
Half a universe away there had been another tunic cuff, the gold braid scorched and burned so that its imprint was fused on to the skin of his arm.
He pushed aside the recollection and stepped out on to the dock.
If the pilot's warning had not prepared him to recognise them, Rostov would have been unable to distinguish the Simonova's reception party from the deckhands working around them.
Like others in the area, the three ship's officers were dressed in drab coveralls.
Only one wore discreet jewellery.
Rostov waited patiently while they arranged themselves in order of precedence and then touched hands with each.
‘Rostov.’
He introduced himself economically.
‘Sergei Alexeivitch.’
He could not help it if his use of the colonial patronymic sounded like a challenge.
Let them know from the start that they were dealing with a kulak, not a noble.
If there was a reaction in the eyes of the trio's leader, Rostov was unable to discern it.
‘Admiral.
Allow me to welcome you.
I am Surveyor Scientist Bock, administrator of the Simonova .
I present to you my deputy, Surveyor Scientist Markov; and this is Surveyor Scientist Grigoriev.
The noble Grigoriev is the Imperial Adjudicator.’
Rostov bowed.
As he had expected, Grigoriev's skin was tinted faintly golden, the result of prolonged use of Longivex.
Rostov saw the Adjudicator's eyes widen in surprise as he recognised the same colouring in the skin around the admiral's high cheekbones.
Let him wonder.
It was true that the longevity drug was available as a rule only to nobles.
The substance  upon which Longivex was based was scarce — located so far on only two worlds of the surveyed systems — and it had proved impossible to manufacture a synthetic substitute which did not possess deadly side effects.
Rostov was one of a very few special exceptions to the Imperial edict which excluded commoners from access to the bi-annual treatment which was necessary for administration of the drug, but he saw no reason to apprise the Adjudicator of the fact.
Almost as a reflex, he smiled grimly to himself.
Kulaks who joined the Imperial Navy, even in the commissioned ranks, did not normally expect to enjoy a long life.
‘Gentlemen.’
Rostov employed the outmoded form of address without thinking.
‘These are the officers of my staff.’
He indicated the group which had now assembled beside the barge and made brief introductions, so as to permit the officers to pay formal respects.
‘Yuan, pilot commander, senior aide —‘
The Manchu's half bow and the response of the surveyors to it were equally cold.
Of all the human races which inhabited the Imperium, Yuan's had been isolated perhaps the longest before re-integration.
Probably for that reason as much as any other, the Manchu appearance seemed impossibly alien to the eye.
Rostov was accustomed to his aide's height — no Manchu was taller than one hundred and fifty centimetres — his colour, a unique golden yellow which was almost metallic in skin tone, and his oddly lengthened features.
Everyone pretended to ignore the reaction of the surveyors to the fact that the senior administrative member of Rostov's staff was a member of a race which could be expected to have little respect for the Imperial establishment.
‘Antonov, pilot major, sailing master —‘
‘Sandor and Kubitsky, technical lieutenants on temporary attachment —’
All three officers executed the approved additional formal full bow in Grigoriev's direction.
The noble seemed to relax visibly, and Rostov concealed sour amusement.
‘Zukov, Master-at-Arms; Mubarak, Marine Gunnery Sergeant; and Vorontseff, Corporal, my personal servant —‘
From a practical point of view it was probably unnecessary to name the non-commissioned officers.
They stood to attention, but it was clear that both the administrator and his deputy were unsure of the proper response.
Rostov used the moment to search for a formula which would ease his passage through the final introduction.
Finally he settled upon a blunt statement of fact.
‘Rostov, Alexei Sergeivitch, lieutenant, flag officer.
The lieutenant is my son.’
It was clear that the ship's officers spotted simultaneously the gold caste mark which was imprinted on the lieutenant's cheek.
Their nods of acknowledgement became full bows which were held uncertainly while they attempted to adjust to the fact that they were, unexpectedly, in the presence of a member of the Royal Family.
Rostov saw that the Adjudicator was covertly comparing the obvious physical differences between father and son.
He cleared his throat.
‘Hrrrm.
Thank you, gentlemen.
But for the duration of his stay aboard this vessel, you will pay only the respects due to the lieutenant's Navy rank.’
He did not look at the still bowing surveyors as he spoke, but at Alexei.
The eyes which met his were a stranger's and Rostov was unable to interpret the expression which he found there.
The addition of Navy personnel to the Simonova 's regular complement had clearly brought about a certain amount of re-allocation of accommodation.
Rostov was not sure what purpose his stateroom had served previously but it was obvious that it had been occupied by at least four persons, all of whom had been possessed of diverse tastes with regard to the minimal decoration which was permissible aboard a ship designed for deep space exploration.
Rostov decided that it was easier to go in search of what would pass in the Simonova for a command bridge than it was to remain in his quarters, while Vorontseff attempted to eradicate within the space of an hour the accumulated disarray of several years of civilian occupation.
He was carefully tactful about his appearance in the ship's operational areas.
For the moment, at least, they were the exclusive preserve of the survey vessel's planetside watch-keepers.
The reaction of the midshipman who first observed his approach was predictable.
‘Attention on deck!’
‘As you were.’
Rostov acknowledged the salutes, and the officer of the watch and his two assistants relaxed into their couches once again.
‘Surveyor pilot Zarubin, Admiral.’
The ship's officer bowed from his place in front of the command console.
‘These are Cadets Ostrakov and Poliakov.’
‘Ah.’
Rostov examined the two juniors.
They were both small in stature and their complexions were dark and swarthy.
‘Sp'kochnoi Kulaki?’
Rostov addressed them in colonial argot and they grinned in response.
‘Da, polkovnik Admiral!’
Rostov nodded approval.
Few citizens entered the survey service, and for a kulak to obtain the equivalent of Navy commissioned rank required exceptional ability.
He sat down in a vacant chair and at once the younger cadet hurried to serve him with tea from a spotless samovar.
‘Sp'seba.’
The bridge of the Simonova was far larger than the Navy pattern to which he had become accustomed.
Even so it was crowded, and there was little excess space.
It was apparent that the compartment had a survey as well as a command function.
Most of the control surfaces were inlaid with sets of viewscreens which were linked, when they were in use, to cloaked survey drones.
The unfamiliarity of his surroundings reminded Rostov of the ambiguity of his status.
Although his orders placed him in theoretical command of the Simonova 's mission, in practical terms he was a guest of the civil servants who operated the vessel.
Survey ships were carried on the Navy List, but Navy personnel remained aboard on sufferance only.
The conditions attached to Navy participation in survey visits to quarantine planets were always the same.
Not for the first time, Rostov reflected that the situation was the typical result of the Imperial bureaucracy's solution to any conflict of interest between the Civil Service and the Navy Board.
The orbiting platforms which maintained the isolation of a quarantine world were a Navy responsibility.
Their sophisticated plasma weapons required regular technical inspection.
However, the location of planets not yet released from survey classification was information restricted to members of the Survey Service.
Thus the Simonova , which was technically a Navy vessel, was crewed by  civilians and carried its Navy complement as passengers.
A Navy sailing master was permitted to take over command only for the duration of the brief period when it was necessary for the Simonova to be manoeuvred to allow technical officers to service the weapons and telemetry mounted on the platforms.
Rostov's authority was limited at all times by the secrecy requirements which surrounded every incomplete survey, and he had already concluded that his presence on the mission was actually of questionable value.
His blind musing was interrupted by the sound of footsteps on the companionway.
Rostov turned.
‘Attention on deck!’
‘P'jalst.’
Alexei was wearing undress blues.
His gesture acknowledged the salute which was probably a compliment to his Imperial rather than his Navy rank.
Rostov raised an eyebrow.
He had not expected colonial argot from such a source.
‘Svedanya .’
He spoke the word softly.
Alexei flushed and bowed.
‘Sir.
Admiral.
Your servant said I would find you here.
Surveyor Scientist Bock sends his compliments.
He — er — requests the pleasure of your company at a reception in the crew lounge.
Fourteen hundred, ship's time.
Sir.’
Rostov nodded.
He supposed that a certain amount of p'vestrannyoi — fooling around — was unavoidable under the circumstances.
Briefly he wondered if it would do any good to tell the ship's administrator that the presence of the newly appointed Admiral of the White on an ordinary survey mission was not an occurrence of special significance.
In fact it was the Secretary of the Navy Board's answer to the new admiral's heated demand for an end to sick leave.
Rostov grinned at the memory of a recent face-to-face  encounter.
Orders assigning him to the Simonova 's mission were make-work, a temporary solution at best.
They had removed him from the stifling atmosphere of the Court, but already he was finding that Civil Service protocol could be just as oppressive.
‘Sir?’
Rostov was troubled by the knowledge that he had been wool-gathering again.
‘Ah.
Yes.
Thank the administrator, with my compliments.
I will be pleased to attend.’
‘Yes, Admiral.’
Alexei saluted and turned away.
Rostov pursed his lips.
They were strangers, it was true.
He had not seen any of his children for ten years; but he guessed that Alexei knew that he hated to be treated with formal courtesy.
The crew lounge of the Simonova apparently doubled as a recreation hall.
It was too large and too brightly lit, and Rostov decided that the colours hurt his eyes.
‘Admiral.
Welcome.’
The administrator's greeting made everyone else in the room turn round to look.
They bowed and a group came forward to be introduced.
Rostov thought that it was undoubtedly Alexei who was the attraction, especially for the women.
One of them dropped into a formal curtsey, revealing both her cleavage and her undergarment, and he smiled grimly.
A crewman served him with a cup of mediocre wine, and he sipped at it cautiously.
Bock was trying to introduce the senior members of his staff, but he was hampered by the constant movement of people.
They all wanted to touch hands with Alexei.
After a while Rostov allowed the press to carry him into a corner.
Grigoriev was already standing there.
‘Your son is popular, Admiral.’
The noble raised his wine cup and Rostov could see  only his eyes.
He guessed that a reaction was expected and shrugged.
‘He has the social graces, as befits his rank.
I, on the other hand —’ Rostov lifted his free hand in a dismissive gesture, and then let it fall again.
He waited to see what Grigoriev would say next.
The Adjudicator nodded.
He was thin, and there appeared to be dark patches growing in through the grey of his beard.
Rostov wondered if he had been isolated from the longevity treatment at some time in his life.
‘Indeed, yes.
A most personable young man, if I may be permitted to observe.’
The noble was not trying to be condescending.
‘I myself am of only minor nobility, you understand.
But your son's true excellence of breeding is recognisable at once.’
Rostov hid a smile.
It was not the first time he had been the recipient of an undiplomatic reference to the absence of colonial genes in Alexei's physique, manner and appearance.
‘Your son's relationship to the Exalted —’ Grigoriev paused delicately, ‘— is it close?’
Rostov shook his head.
‘Not especially.’
It was clear that the Adjudicator had hoped for a more detailed explanation.
‘Ah.
Yes, I see.
Your pardon, Admiral, if I have given offence.’
Rostov's mouth twitched, then he showed his teeth.
‘Not at all.’
He concentrated on producing a matter-off-act tone.
‘My wife is the Emperor's niece.
My son was brought up at Court, where she remained while I was on active service.’
‘The Federated Systems Wars.’
‘That is correct.
My son joined my staff only two days ago.
He has just completed a year with the Praetorian Guard.’
It was an unemotional summary; Rostov thought  that it hid well the bitterness which he felt towards Irina's kin for their concerted opposition to her marriage, for the years of separation which had been achieved by her father's influence with the Navy Board and, not least, for the extent to which Alexei's upbringing had been influenced by the rigid infrastructure of the Court.
With only half an ear for Grigoriev's response, Rostov stared across the room.
Alexei was the centre of a circle of fawning civil servants.
He looked up, and their eyes met.
After a moment it became clear that Alexei was excusing himself.
Rostov watched as he made his way through the crowd.
‘Who are all these people?’
Alexei's tone was light, amused.
‘They're all mad.’
Grigoriev was watching avidly, and Rostov pretended not to have understood the remark.
‘I believe you have been introduced to the Imperial Adjudicator.’
He indicated the man.
A light seemed to die from Alexei's eyes.
‘Oh.
Goodness, yes.
How are you, sir?’
The enquiry was accompanied by a courteous smile.
The expression of good-humoured contempt had vanished as quickly as it had appeared, and suddenly Rostov realised that he had missed an opportunity to relax the tension which existed between them.
‘Noble Born.
An honour.’
Alexei waited until Grigoriev was bowing, then smiled sardonically.
Rostov watched expressionlessly.
‘We were remarking on your sudden popularity,’ he said.
Alexei's face shuttered warily.
He said nothing.
‘Yes indeed.’
The Adjudicator's agreement was swift.
‘Although of course the majority of these people are provincials, unused to the presence of a member of the Court.
It is something of a treat for them, you understand.’
The observation was made dismissively.
Rostov realised that the noble was unaware of the crosscurrent which had passed over his head.
‘But not for you, sir.’
If Alexei understood and absorbed the derogatory allusion to Imperial subjects from the colonial outworlds, he ignored it.
He touched hands briefly with Grigoriev.
The man flushed with pleasure.
‘Of course, I am used —‘
But Alexei had captured his hand and was examining a signet ring on one finger.
He looked up.
‘Your family and title, sir?’
‘House of Andreeyev, Noble Born.
A cadet branch only, and so —’ Grigoriev shrugged, ‘— I am untitled.’
‘Andreeyev.
Andreeyev.
Ah, yes.’
Alexei's eyes seemed to stare for a moment into the middle distance.
Now he focused once again.
‘Your family was associated with the development of the Manchu worlds, is that not so?’
Grigoriev flushed.
‘I — that is, yes, Noble Born.’
‘Yes.’
Alexei appeared to be unaware that he was causing embarrassment.
‘The problems connected with the keeping of slaves are of interest to me.
Discuss them please.’
The tone was peremptory and the voice suddenly louder.
Rostov saw the heads of people in a nearby group swivel, and he smiled grimly.
‘Oh, well.
You must understand, Noble Born, that I was not —’ The Adjudicator's smile was sick.
‘Your pardon.
You kept no slaves?’
Alexei raised an eyebrow.
‘Only Manchus, Noble Born.
Only Manchus!’
All other conversation had ceased, and the protest seemed to echo across the room.
Rostov looked at the faces of the people who were now staring at Grigoriev.
Only two were Manchus, but the rest provided an excellent sample of the width of the spectrum of variations of species homo which inhabited the worlds of the Imperium.
‘It was not thought —’ Grigoriev's voice faded with the realisation, ‘— that they were human.’
‘An opinion not supported by the Court of Adjudication,’ Rostov observed smoothly.
‘No, Admiral.’
The noble's agreement was subdued.
Rostov was well aware of the scandal.
The House of Andreeyev had purchased the right to exploit the commercial potential of the Manchu system.
Taking advantage of its remoteness from the administrative centre of the Imperium they had enslaved the native inhabitants.
A survey record had been falsified to show that the Manchus were not entitled to the protection of citizenship — that in fact they were aliens possessed of only minimal intelligence.
Only when a Navy vessel had force-landed on one of the Manchu worlds had the deception been uncovered.
The Manchus had been full citizens with diplomatic privileges for more than thirty years now, but there still existed between them and other humans a coldness which could not be explained simply by xenophobia.
‘You were connected with the original survey?’
Rostov spoke curiously.
The Adjudicator was pale, and it took him a moment to formulate a reply.
Quite clearly he was torn between his desire to excuse himself from further cross-examination and his obedience to the protocol which kept him in the presence of a member of the Royal Family until he was dismissed.
‘I was a junior member of the earliest survey party.
I was exonerated by the Adjudicator's Court.’
‘Naturally.’
Alexei's tone was frosty.
‘Otherwise you would not be here.’
He turned his back.
Grigoriev bowed and hastened out of the room.
Suddenly everyone began talking again.
Rostov found it hard to feel sympathy for Grigoriev's predicament.
He watched the man leave.
Then he turned back to look at his son.
‘An interesting exercise.
How did you make the connection?’
‘I'm not sure.’
Alexei considered.
‘The crest on the ring was familiar.
Then there was the fellow's appearance.
It was obvious that he had been under house arrest at some point in his life.’
Rostov nodded.
Accused persons were automatically excluded from longevity treatment, and, since the Imperial law courts often took years over a complex case, the effects of the irreversible ageing process were usually apparent.
He remembered the dark patches in Grigoriev's beard, and thought that he should have realised their meaning.
‘You embarrassed him.’
Alexei shrugged.
‘He annoyed me.
You may not react to a casual slight about colonial manners, but I do.
The more so since I possess your well-known restraint only in small measure.’
Rostov showed his teeth.
‘I see.
Well, I suspect that you have made an enemy, though I doubt if he will ever be in a position to offer repayment for your treatment of him.
Tell me, child —’ he concluded mildly, ‘— is there a chance that we might find some alternative mode of address towards one another, or does your capability for restraint exclude all the intimate forms usual between parent and child?’
Alexei seemed to consider once more.
‘I had it impressed upon me that my posting to your staff was a matter of strict duty.
However, I believe  that I could manage to call you father if it is appropriate to the circumstances.’
Rostov hid his irritation.
He understood now the reason for Alexei's remoteness.
Irina's brother was a member of the Navy Board, and he must have taken pleasure in sowing any seed which was likely to grow into a further barrier between father and son.
‘Very well.’
Rostov drank the last of his wine and held out the cup.
‘Then while you are considering what those circumstances may be, you may allow your regard for your duty to sustain you while you fetch me another of these.’
It was clear that Alexei was startled.
He accepted the cup.
Rostov looked at him levelly for a moment, then he turned away.
Rostov knew that the Simonova was underway only because he had been advised of the fact by the voder of the ship's information system.
He would have been surprised if it had been otherwise.
The effect of the Infinity Drive was to accelerate every particle within its field so that the transition from rest to motion was not discernible.
Although the survey vessel was now travelling at a speed faster than light, its occupants experienced no sense of progress other than that which was fed to them through the navigational telemetry.
The Simonova 's sensors were geared to respond to the presence in her path of any mass approaching planetary proportions.
The occurrence of such an event would have the effect of reducing her motion relative to contiguous space to zero.
It was not that collision with anything of that kind of size was capable of damaging the field: indeed it had been established that it would require the power of several suns to put even a dent in the electric blue haze which now  surrounded and protected the vessel and its contents.
But it had been proved to the satisfaction of all but a few sceptics that such an event would result in an effect similar to the collapse of a dwarf star.
The Simonova would hurtle unchecked into a black hole of its own making, emerging perhaps eventually in another universe, or even another space-time continuum.
Viewed from space, the normal progress of the survey ship was like the passage of a comet.
What was visible to the eye or to the sensor, however, was a path which had come into existence long after the Simonova had vanished along its trajectory.
The constant impact against the field's rim, of everything from showers of meteors down to stray molecules of gas, resulted in a cosmic fireworks display of spectacular proportions: a long tail of deteriorating matter stretched out along the path which the ship had taken.
As the external surface of the field collided with the elements of space, an explosive force was generated which was the equivalent of that produced by an ion bomb.
Inside the protective envelope, however, there was no hint of this maelstrom.
The survey vessel's crew and passengers were able to follow their daily routine undisturbed.
‘Guard!’
Rostov kicked off from the wall, twisted awkwardly in mid-air, and parried Mubarak's assault.
They were wielding modified Shen-sei swords with hologram blades, and he grunted with satisfaction as his reverse registered on the Gunnery Sergeant's body shield with a yellow flash of discharge.
Somersaulting before he reached the opposite side of the recreation room, Rostov flexed his legs and allowed himself to come gently to rest.
The whole area was under zero gravity.
He hung in the air for a moment, then kicked again, tuck-rolled, and came out level with the combat-master's waist.
Mubarak's sword swept down, and Rostov parried two-handed, catching the blow on his cross-guard.
‘Ho!’
With an explosion of breath Rostov straightened his forearms, attempting to gain the momentary advantage which would permit him to disengage and then to cut at his opponent's unguarded left.
The force of their exertion against one another pushed them apart.
Rostov's feet touched the floor and he kicked hard.
‘Touch!’
As he rose he somersaulted, circled his sword down, and slashed at Mubarak's neck.
The sensors in the Gunnery Sergeant's shield flashed and his head was encased in a yellow glow.
Unshielded, and with real blades, the stroke would have decapitated him.
Hanging in mid-air, Mubarak reversed his sword and bowed.
Rostov grinned, brought his sword back in a fancy two-handed reverse, bowed, then somersaulted exuberantly.
Yuan was anchored beside the control panel at the entrance.
He adjusted the gravity delicately and Rostov dropped lightly to the floor.
He sheathed the hologram blade, then, with a hand pressed against the bunched shoulder muscles, swung his left arm in a wide overhead circle.
The laser injury which had damaged the tendons was months old, but it still ached after violent exertion.
Mubarak unclipped his shield belt and held it out.
‘Who wants this?’ he demanded.
‘He's unbeatable today.’
Rostov cocked an eye at Yuan, but the aide shook his head.
The expression in his yellow eyes was unreadable and, since his oddly lengthened features  were incapable of displaying an emotion which would be understandable to other humans, it was impossible to know what he was thinking.
It was unlikely that he thought that he would be beaten.
Shen-sei was a Manchu cult, preserved during the centuries of their isolation from the Empire.
Around it they had developed a rigid code of honour — Shen-sei-go — which contained the principles according to which every Manchu male was expected to live and die.
‘So desu ,Sei-sen .’
Rostov spoke briefly in Manchu and bowed ironically.
‘So desu ’ was a courtesy phrase.
It could mean ‘oh well’, ‘really’ or ‘so what’.
It was neither a question nor a comment.
Yuan's eyes flickered at the vocative title ‘sei-sen ’—‘sword bearer’.
‘So desu ,Sama ,’ he responded flatly.
Rostov grinned.
His aide had employed the only Manchu equivalent for a recognition of higher rank ‘sama ’— the word which meant ‘lord’.
He unclipped his shield belt and slung it over his shoulder.
‘Oh, well.’
He stretched lazily.
‘If no one else wants to fight me —‘
Mubarak offered his shield belt to Alexei.
‘How about you, lieutenant?
Maybe you'll get lucky today.’
There was a suggestion of insolence in the observation.
Alexei flushed.
After a moment he took the belt.
His eyes were on Rostov's face as he strapped it on.
Rostov showed his teeth.
He backed off into the centre of the room.
When Alexei had taken Mubarak's sword, he nodded to Yuan.
The gravity started to alter as he was clipping on his shield.
He kicked gently and rose at an angle towards the ceiling.
‘Well?’
Alexei's face was set.
He flexed at the knees and  rose slowly.
Then he executed a half-somersault and twisted so that when he had stabilised he was level with Rostov, but inverted.
It was a permissible commencing position.
They unsheathed together and brought their swords forward two-handed into guard.
Alexei revolved his blade once and then attacked.
‘Ha!’
Rostov's breath exploded in a shout as he parried.
Alexei was cutting consistently towards the left quarter, striking three or four blows on each assault before reaction force repelled him backwards.
As soon as his feet touched part of the wall or ceiling, he launched forward again.
Rostov's left arm ached and he realised that Alexei was trying to exploit the weakness of his healed injury to make an early touch.
He allowed himself to be driven towards one wall by a new series of attacks, then kicked, rolled, and dived forward under Alexei's guard.
‘Touch!’
He completed a circular slash as he descended and Alexei's shield was bathed in yellow below the waist.
In real combat he would have lost at least one leg at the knee.
Rostov rolled again as he reached the floor.
Then he kicked and came to rest against the far wall.
Alexei dived towards him and their shields flashed angrily as they collided, sword arms locked.
‘Give up.’
Rostov strained to gain the advantage.
He was amazed that Alexei was so strong.
‘Never!’
Alexei was attempting to put two-handed pressure on his sword to break Rostov's grip.
He kicked out wildly.
Still locked together they tumbled across the room.
Rostov brought his knees up.
He kicked hard  against Alexei's abdomen.
The force of the blow pushed them apart, and they arrived at opposite walls simultaneously, kicked again, and met once more in the centre.
Alexei's sword blade swept round in a great circle and Rostov turned it off with one of the best parries of his life.
Jabbing with the point he kept off Alexei's attack until the reaction of their mid-air collision made them drift apart again.
Rostov knew that he was going to be able to kick again long before Alexei was in contact with a surface.
He looked up.
Behind the slight distortion of the shield, Alexei's face was like a stranger's.
His sword was extended in two-handed guard and suddenly Rostov knew that he would never admit that he had been beaten.
He signalled to Yuan, and with the change in gravity he was at the entrance with his belt slung over one shoulder before Alexei started to cross the floor.
‘Why did you stop?’
Alexei's voice cracked with the discharge of emotion.
Rostov turned to face him.
‘You were beaten.’
‘Beaten?
By one touch?’
Rostov ignored the implied denial.
He tossed his sword belt to Yuan and walked out into the companionway.
Alexei was shouting something, and he quickened his pace so that if it was abuse or a challenge, he would be able to pretend that he had not heard it.
He wondered if Alexei was angry because he had been beaten again, or if maybe he was beginning to realise that there was no way, short of an accident, that he was ever going to be allowed to win.
Rostov kneaded the muscles of his left shoulder in an effort to relieve the soreness.
He reflected that he would be glad when the Simonova reached her destination.
The daily combat practice sessions were starting to have an interesting effect on Alexei's ability to control his  temper, but since it was essential to beat him every time, they were also very hard work.
‘It's called Tarvaras.’
The projection was a holographic recording and Rostov watched as the planet's revolving image expanded to fill the centre of the viewing well.
‘How large is it?’
The room was like a small amphitheatre.
A voder commentary accompanied the recording, but Rostov had switched off the auditory input to his chair so that he could converse with the Manchu technician who was running the session.
‘About one third the size of Knossos, Admiral.
The diameter is just over twelve and a half thousand kilometres.’
The Manchu obligingly keyed a console display and Rostov grunted acknowledgement.
Privately he thought that the precautions which were being taken to protect the identity and location of the survey ship's destination were unnecessary.
The secrecy which surrounded the location of a world under survey evaluation was essential in most instances.
Freelance trading cartels competed constantly to obtain advance knowledge of the assignment of new commercial concessions by the Court of Adjudication, and this alone was sufficient to justify the elaborate security measures which the Survey Service employed.
Tarvaras, however, would never be opened up to trade.
It was in strict quarantine, and the Navy weapons systems stationed around it in space ensured that no one would ever achieve a landing there.
Even the duly authorised activities of the Simonova were going to be undertaken at a respectable distance.
‘Two moons, I see.’
‘Yes, Admiral.’
The technician tapped a series of keys.
The image of the planet receded and Tarvaras was suddenly a component of a larger system.
‘There are seven planets altogether.’
The Manchu's tone was prosaic.
‘Several of them have more than one moon.
The sun around which they orbit is thought to be quite old.
It appears to be in the early stages of transition into a red giant and normally we would not have expected to find intelligent life anywhere within its field of influence.’
‘And yet Tarvaras is inhabited.’
‘Quite so.
In fact it is probable that it has been repopulated several times.
There is evidence to support the theory that the whole system was disrupted at some point, either by the passage of a comet or else by an encounter with an interstellar storm.
One of the moons is in fact the remains of another planet, and it is one of the conclusions of our survey that this is a world which was resettled during the Second Empire.’
‘The present phase of degeneration is fairly recent then?’
The question was Yuan's, and the technician bowed from his chair.
‘So it is thought,Sei-sen .
Our records of the Second Empire are far from complete, of course, but it is certain that Tarvaras has been isolated for thousands.
of years.
There is some residual radiation, indicating that atomic weapons were in use approximately five thousand years ago.
No civilisation under Imperial influence would have developed in such a direction; it must be concluded therefore that they discovered the technology for themselves.’
Rostov watched as the image of the planet was expanded again.
This time a tiny replica of the survey  vessel was circling the equator inside the orbit of both moons.
A number of other small objects suddenly popped into view.
They were following a similar orbital path, but they were at a slightly lower altitude.
‘Your platforms.’
The technician pressed a key to bring the view into focus.
‘There are sixteen altogether, all in synchronous orbit.’
‘That's a lot for a world of this size.’
Rostov was surprised.
‘Yes.
But we take the threat potential of this world fairly seriously.
There is no doubt that the inhabitants once possessed space travel.
One of the moons has been mined extensively.
Their present stage of development is primitive, it is true; but they appear to evolve quickly.
There is always the chance that they could —’ The Manchu expanded his hands outward as if to indicate the idea that the population of Tarvaras might explode out into the galaxy.
On the basis of the information which had been contained in the briefing, Rostov was unimpressed.
He looked at Yuan and raised an eyebrow.
‘Of course.’
Yuan's natural impassiveness made his response appear innocuous.
‘But you spoke of a threat —’ He prompted the other gently.
‘Oh.
Yes,Sei-sen .’
The technician's reply came after a brief moment of hesitation.
‘It was my understanding that you knew.
You see, they are mutants.’
‘Aaah.’
Yuan nodded.
Looking at Rostov he made a slow, palm-up gesture.
Rostov recognised the Manchu method of indicating intense sadness.
He nodded agreement.
Ten thousand years earlier the Second Empire had fought itself to collapse against a race of genetically altered super-beings.
The possibility of an encounter with their descendants, and the inevitability of the  conflict which would follow, was the recurring nightmare which disturbed sleep at the highest levels of the Imperium.
It was the reason for the formation of the Survey Service and was at the root of its policy.
Rostov understood why the precautions which had been taken to quarantine Tarvaras were so strict.
But, like a minority of Imperial subjects, he was not sure that fear was sufficient justification for the isolation of whole worlds from the rest of the universe.
Alexei was barring his progress along the passageway and Rostov sighed inwardly.
He guessed at once that his son had been talking to Yuan, and even though the casual disclosure of information had been prearranged, he regretted the unavoidability of the confrontation which was about to occur.
‘Is it true?’
Alexei's voice rang with angry intensity.
‘Is what true?’
‘That I was posted to your staff because you asked for me.
Is it true?’
Rostov considered his reply only briefly.
His eyes were on a level with Alexei's and he smiled unpleasantly.
‘You have learned some strange manners at Court, child.
Do you always speak to your betters in such a fashion?
Or is this another example of what is appropriate to circumstances?
Get out of my way.’
He started to push past, but Alexei caught at his arm, swinging him round.
‘Answer me, father!’
The last word was stressed insolently.
Rostov looked down at the hand which was holding his arm.
He grabbed Alexei's wrist, then used his other hand to unclamp the fingers.
‘Make me,’ he invited.
Alexei's right hand clenched into a fist and Rostov  tensed to receive the attack which he was sure he had provoked.
But after a long moment Alexei stepped back, his hands loose at his sides.
He laughed bitterly.
‘No need,’ he said.
‘I have my answer.’
Rostov was disappointed.
He had expected to fight.
Alexei seemed to search for words and Rostov waited to see what he would say next.
The noise of a lock operating somewhere made them both look along the companionway.
Rostov cursed the interruption silently.
He turned as if to walk away, but Alexei spoke at last.
‘What was in your mind?
Did you imagine that I would be grateful for the attention?
Did you expect me to fall on your neck in some touching display of filial affection?’
Rostov pretended to consider the question seriously.
‘Oh, hardly that, I think.
It's been ten years, after all.’
‘Your awareness of the length of the interval amazes me.’
Alexei made the observation tartly.
Rostov grinned.
He found it hard to take the superiority in Alexei's tone seriously.
‘You thought perhaps that I had forgotten about your existence?’
He shook his head.
‘No.
Blame your grandfather and your uncle for the extent of my absence.’
Alexei gave a snort of disbelief.
Rostov met the accusing eyes squarely, then he shrugged.
‘Believe what you like then.’
‘Thank you.
I intend to.’
Rostov was determined not to be the first to turn away.
He stared hard.
Finally it was Alexei who made a noise, which might have indicated either disgust or anger, then brushed past.
He strode off along the companionway and Rostov turned to watch him.
After Alexei had walked about fifty paces, he  stopped and turned.
When he saw that Rostov was looking, he raised one arm in some kind of gesture.
Rostov guessed that the sign was rude, but he was too perturbed to pretend anger.
Everything had gone wrong.
When Alexei was out of sight round the curve of the companionway, he turned and walked on.
In the first place it was clear that it had been a mistake to let Alexei know that his transfer away from the Praetorian Guard had been requested — because if the boy was looking for an excuse for his antagonism, then the one with which he had just been presented was perfect.
Rostov thought about Alexei's behaviour and wondered if it was human nature for sons to hate their fathers, even when they did not know them very well.
If that was the boy's only motivation, then he could deal with it.
But the possibility of another reason troubled him.
Rostov thought about the warning which he had received before leaving Knossos — an anonymous permafax which indicated that one of the members of his staff had been commissioned as an assassin.
It was impossible, surely, for Alexei to be the one.
He considered that assumption, and then frowned.
Even though it was unsupported by evidence, the conclusion would have been allowable were it not for the second piece of information contained in the warning message.
The text had been unequivocal; it specified the involvement of a member of the Imperial Court.
Rostov sighed.
There had been a strong element of pretence contained in his behaviour towards Alexei thus far and, for the moment at least, the subterfuge was going to have to be continued.
Yuan was a lotus, suspended impossibly motionless in the null gravity under which he tended to maintain his quarters when he was alone.
Rostov thought about  adjusting the controls, but he hesitated to disturb the state of kerei — contemplation — in case the period was one of the five which were the daily requirement of the Manchu code of belief There was a foot clamp beside the door panel, and he engaged it.
The Manchu opened one eye, then closed it again.
His position altered subtly and Rostov knew that he was listening.
Before he had entered Yuan's quarters, he had known exactly what he was going to say.
Now he hesitated.
He wanted Yuan to ask what had happened, so that he could relieve his feelings.
But even if the Manchu was curious, his adherence to the code of satori — a system of behaviour which defined what was right and proper for every situation — would prevent him from giving the feeling expression.
Rostov took a breath, and decided to wait until good manners forced his aide to behave in an approachable fashion.
He would count slowly to a hundred.
After that, slowly again, a hundred more.
And if that wasn't enough…
Yuan opened his eyes, emerged from the lotus, and then seemed to stretch effortlessly until he was in contact with the nearest bulkhead.
‘So desu ,Sama .’
He greeted Rostov.
‘Konnichi wa ’
‘Konnichi wa ,Sei-sen .’
Rostov responded automatically.
‘Ikaga masu ka ?’— Is everything well?—
The Manchu's hand gesture reduced the words to the level of polite enquiry.
Rostov shrugged.
‘Domo .
Wa genki desu .’
— Thank you.
Well enough.
—
‘Oh ko .’
—Oh dear .
—
This time the hand movement expressed the Manchu equivalent of sympathy and Rostov grinned in spite of himself.
Manchu features were incapable of displaying emotions which were understandable to other humans, which was why they accompanied normal conversation with a series of gestures similar  to mime in ballet.
But their ability to detect the feelings of others was close to infallible.
Rostov shook his head.
‘Shigata ga nai .
Karma ,neh ?’— It can't be helped.
That's how it goes.
—
Yuan nodded gravely.
‘Hai ’ he agreed.
‘Karma ’
Rostov knew that he did not believe that his failure to resolve matters with Alexei was due to karma, or fate, any more than Yuan did.
He had misjudged the situation, and if he had added to his problems, it was his own fault.
Yuan rolled economically, kicked the bulkhead with one foot, and glided down to Rostov's level.
‘What will you do now?’
He reached past Rostov for the gravity control panel.
‘I don't know.’
Rostov bent to release the foot clamp.
When he straightened again, Yuan was watching him.
‘I don't know,’ he said again.
They were speaking in Anglic now.
Rostov guessed that Yuan had decided that the emotional shield which was provided by conversational Manchu was no longer necessary.
‘For a son to be involved in a plot against his father —’ Yuan paused delicately, ‘— is surely unthinkable.’
‘For a Manchu son,’ Rostov observed, ‘but mine was brought up at Court.’
He thought about the decadence which existed at the centre of the Empire.
A few hundred years of Imperial rule and already a coterie surrounded the throne which, by its very nature, endangered the survival of the Imperium.
Suddenly, Rostov was troubled by a recollection.
If the historians were to be believed, there had been another Empire once, on long-vanished Terra.
And the generals who had grown too popular had been commanded to perform one last service by falling upon their swords.
There was no similarity of course; Rostov's service in a dozen frontier system wars posed no threat to the succession — rather the reverse in fact — but for a moment he found himself wondering if the convoluted nature of the Court infrastructure made the most devious method inevitable.
He put the thought aside and met Yuan's eyes steadily.
‘As to my son, I cannot be sure.
And so for the moment I must be watchful, and patient.’
‘Yoku.’
Yuan spoke the word softly and Rostov nodded.
There was a subtle difference which Anglic could never have expressed.
Manchu patience was inexhaustible.
‘Hai .
Taihenyoku .’
— Yes.
Very patient.
—
Rostov thought of asking if his aide had a better idea, but Yuan only nodded again and stepped aside.
‘Coming up on orbital track, Admiral.’
The Survey Service watch-keeper indicated the data which was flowing across the screen at his side and Rostov nodded.
He raised an eyebrow at Sandor and the technical officer plugged a Navy pattern Personal Data Unit into the main transmission bank.
‘Ready to transmit recognition codes.’
Sandor's tone was prosaic.
‘Very well.’
Rostov turned in his chair.
‘Mr Antonov?’
The sailing master was corpulent and red-faced, a civilian professional who held honorary Navy rank while he was employed on contract with the Fleet.
Normally he was a member of the Special Piloting Crew which was stationed at Knossos refit yards.
Not for the first time Rostov wondered why he had been selected for this particular mission.
Antonov's uniform was old and ill-fitting.
He rose and addressed the Simonova 's officer-of-the-watch, his salute a travesty.
‘Sir, I relieve you.’
The Survey Service pilot rose also.
He stepped away from the command console and bowed.
‘Sir, I stand relieved.’
The statement and the response were simply a formula, but Rostov still experienced a feeling of satisfaction.
For the next four standard days at least, the Navy was running the ship.
‘Entering orbit, Admiral.’
‘Very well.
Terminate drive — five, four, three, two, one, mark!
Auxiliary thrusters to standby.’
Rostov watched his own screen as it duplicated the information which was being relayed to the sailing master.
He addressed Sandor.
‘Lieutenant, you may commence transmission.’
‘Aye, sir.’
Sandor keyed the PDU and at once Rostov sensed the relaxation of tension which went round the bridge.
He grinned.
The manual operation of broadcasting a recognition signal to the platforms in orbit around Tarvaras had been duplicated simultaneously by four automatic sending stations which were situated at various points along the Simonova 's mainframe.
Under the circumstances, however, there was not a man who cared to place absolute faith in mere machinery.
The survey vessel's signal not only identified her, it also disarmed the platform-mounted weapons which otherwise would have reduced her to vapour.
The technical officer was verifying that all platforms within firing range were accepting the signal.
Then he rose to his feet.
‘Admiral?’
‘Carry on, Mr Sandor.’
The lieutenant left in a hurry.
Inspection and servicing of each of the platforms was to be carried out in the survey ship's main docking bay.
Rostov was well able to appreciate Sandor's desire to be on hand when the first of the series was tractored in.
At the forefront of his mind, no doubt, was an awareness of the relative inexperience of the civilian docking crew, coupled with a knowledge that accidental triggering of plasma weapons while they were inside the shield was guaranteed to be instantly fatal.
‘Coming up on the first platform, Admiral.
Serial number seven.’
‘Engage tractor beam.’
‘Aye, sir.’
Rostov located the controls which linked his viewscreens to the ship's external sensors and switched the selector to the vision receptors which were concentrated below and ahead of the Simonova 's path.
He knew that the platform was there, but in the nightside blackness he could see nothing at first.
Then it was drawn into the light cast by a battery of exterior spot lamps.
The platform was dead black — an ovoid perhaps a hundred metres long by fifty in circumference.
It was perfectly featureless and reflected none of the light which was being directed on to its surface.
‘Bojemoi!’
Rostov expelled breath in an involuntary hiss of awe.
The survey briefing had included only a verbal specification.
There had been no videofax, and as a result he was unprepared for the sensory impact of the image on his viewscreen.
The ovoid seemed to project a kind of deadly aura and, as Rostov compared the black egg shape with his memory of the framework structures which he had encountered previously, he  wondered if the designers had been striving consciously for the visual effect which they had achieved.
The power of the platform's weapons and the threat they posed was enough to give anyone pause for thought, but now they appeared somehow more lethal because they were unseen — concealed behind gunports which had been engineered to such fine tolerances that Rostov could detect no hint of them anywhere on the curved metal skin.
Ten hours and two platforms later it seemed that at least a few members of the Simonova 's crew were still suffering from the emotional impact of the brooding menace which was represented by the presence of each platform in the docking bay.
The Simonova was in almost perfect space equilibrium — like the platforms it was following a geostationary path almost thirty-six thousand kilometres above the equator of Tarvaras.
And since that state of stability had been calculated so that it would not commence deterioration until the next inspection had been completed, Rostov had delegated command of the bridge to Yuan, and had elected to watch the performance of his technical officers at close quarters.
Everyone else who was not engaged in either survey data collection or ship handling seemed to be doing the same.
The upper catwalks above the bay were crowded, and even the lower levels were occupied by small groups of senior survey staff who could have no excuse for their presence other than curiosity.
‘Admiral.’
The Simonova 's administrator and the Adjudicator were performing stiff little bows in his direction, but Rostov only nodded.
Alexei was standing immediately behind the men.
When Rostov had noticed them first, they had been deep in animated conversation — a  conspiratorial group of people who were the least likely, considering all the circumstances, to be found in close and apparently friendly contact with one another.
Alexei alone returned the nod.
His face was closed and empty of expression.
He bowed briefly to the two surveyors, and then walked away.
The embarrassed silence which followed was broken only when everyone turned to watch as the Simonova 's bay tractor beams started to draw the most recently captured platform through the force field.
At this level of the bay there were small promontories every hundred metres or so along the main catwalk and Rostov walked out onto one of them.
When a ship of any size was docked, they were capable of being extended until they formed bridges across which stores or personnel could be transferred.
Now they were simply handy vantage points.
The passage of the black ovoid through the ion screen which permitted the docking crew to work in breathable atmosphere, even though the main bay doors were open to vacuum, caused an electrical imbalance which crackled across the curved surface.
As it was passing Rostov's position, a jagged blue flash bridged the gap to the platform, and he controlled the impulse to jump back.
‘Earthing crew!’
Kubitsky was below on the main bay deck.
He shouted angrily, and a three- man team hastened to attach the sets of magnoclamps which were designed to drain the static charge.
The men were clumsy in heavy insulation suits and the technical officer waited impatiently until the operation had been completed.
Then he looked up at Rostov and saluted.
‘Your pardon, Admiral.
I will instruct the docking supervisor to discipline those fools.’
‘Thank you, lieutenant.
That is not necessary.’
Rostov shook his head, concealing the knowledge that he had been briefly in danger of his life.
Kubitsky's face was pale and clearly he was shaken.
The technical officer could not fail to be conscious of the lethal potential of an electrical discharge from the platform.
As Rostov watched, he seemed to make a deliberate effort to compose himself.
Then he saluted Rostov again and turned away.
Rostov frowned.
The outer skin of any craft which passed through the air barrier of a force field stored static electricity like a giant capacitor.
Ship interiors were specially insulated to combat the problem and an operation similar to degaussing was carried out prior to docking with other vessels.
It was true that the Simonova 's earthing crew had been slow to react — the more so since they must have been required to perform a similar task on both of the platforms which had been docked and inspected previously.
But in fact it was the docking crew as a whole who were at fault, because the platform's progress towards the support cradle should have been halted as soon as it passed completely through the field, so that earthing and other safety procedures could be instigated.
It was possible that, like many of the casual spectators, the key members of the crew had all been frozen into temporary immobility by the looming presence of the ovoid, but Rostov was inclined to suspect the convenience of such a coincidence.
As accidents went, it had been too well arranged.
Acting on a sudden impulse, he turned.
Bock and Grigoriev were behind him on the main section of the catwalk.
They were only a matter of metres away but, due to the insulation which separated every portion of dock superstructure — a provision  designed as a safeguard against just the kind of occurrence which had threatened Rostov — both had been safe from danger.
Neither man had time to conceal or alter his facial expression, and Rostov was struck by the disparity.
Bock looked frightened, but Grigoriev's face was predatory and full of avid intent.
Rostov scanned the platform above for Alexei and saw him finally on the topmost section of the catwalk.
He was laughing with a group of female technicians and did not seem to be aware that anything unusual had happened.
Even though the Simonova was now technically under Navy direction, Rostov's administrative duties remained light and consisted principally of approving the expenditure of insignificant items of equipment during platform servicing.
He glanced down the codings listed on the last of the semi-opaque sheets and imprinted his authorisation.
Alexei added the permafax to the others already contained in the folder in his hand.
He turned as if to leave, then paused.
Rostov waited impassively.
‘There is something going on.’
Alexei did not turn, but spoke as if to an empty room.
‘Something I do not understand.’
Rostov made no reply.
Conversation with Alexei had been limited for the past day to standard matters of duty, and since he had not been able to think of anything which he could say to change his son's attitude, he had allowed himself to accept that the state of affairs which existed between them was likely to be permanent.
He looked at the back of Alexei's head and willed him to turn round.
Alexei seemed to look down at the folder in his hand.
Then his head came up again.
‘I wanted you to know,’ he said, ‘because whatever  it is, I am not a part of it.’
He reached for the door control and the lock hissed with the release of compressed air.
‘Wait.’
Rostov forced out the word.
He was not sure that he cared about the plot, if one existed.
But if Alexei said that he was not involved, then probably he was telling the truth, otherwise there would be no reason for him to say anything at all.
After a moment Alexei touched the control again.
The door hissed shut.
He turned.
Rostov gestured.
‘I'm sorry.
I don't know what to say to you.’
He had never felt comfortable at a personal level.
Irina knew and understood.
But even if he had not been separated from Alexei by duty, and leaving aside the connivance of Irina's family, a gap would have existed between them.
‘I just wanted you to know.’
Uncertainty made Alexei's face appear even more youthful.
‘Yes.
Thank you.’
Rostov hesitated.
If he said that he had never entertained a suspicion, it would be a lie.
‘You don't seem very surprised.’
‘That there is some kind of conspiracy?’
Rostov shook his head.
‘No.
I had warning.
And anyway, there are always little plots.
You know what Imperial service is like.’
He waited for a contradiction, but Alexei only nodded.
He was clearly unsure of himself and, in spite of the seriousness of his expression, Rostov was amused.
‘Sit down, will you?’
He spoke more abruptly than he intended, but Alexei sat at once.
Rostov tried to smile.
It was obvious that Alexei would find it hard to  talk.
It was hard for both of them.
But now that the opportunity had arisen, it was necessary for them to try.
Rostov awoke in suffocating blackness.
He struggled for a moment, but he was enclosed so tightly that he could not even work an arm free from his side.
He forced himself to relax and tried to register his surroundings.
In spite of his initial impression, he was breathing without difficulty.
The material which encased him was permeable foam and there was an air supply somewhere.
Rostov tried to move again, but it was hopeless.
A coffin?
Certainly a container of some kind.
External sound was deadened by the density of the foam, but Rostov heard clearly the clunk of metal surfaces coming together.
The shock of an impact struck him squarely between the shoulder blades, and suddenly he knew exactly where he was.
An escape pod!
He experienced a sensation of horror and his stomach churned.
Like every other large vessel, the Simonova was equipped with batteries of escape pods in addition to her full complement of lifeboats.
Emergency locks were situated in most of the main companionways and, in the event that they were forced to abandon ship, members of the crew who were unable to reach a docking bay in time were assured of a moderate chance of survival.
An escape pod battery was similar to a quick-firing cannon, and operation of the inner lock was sufficient to commence the loading sequence.
The pods themselves were quite complex, but essentially they were multi-skinned torpedoes equipped with minimal  propulsion and life-support systems.
Once it had been ejected into space, a pod assessed its surroundings.
Then it headed straight for the nearest suitable planet and effected a landing.
In the event that it could not locate a world in reasonable proximity which possessed both a breathable atmosphere and acceptable conditions of gravity and temperature, a pod was capable of maintaining its passenger in a state of suspended animation for an almost indefinite period.
Under such circumstances it was programmed to select an orbit around the largest near planetary mass, emitting a distress signal until it was recovered.
There was no discernible motion, but Rostov guessed that the pod was already heading for the surface of Tarvaras.
It was a pity that it would be blown to atoms long before it got there.
More as a means of occupying his mind than out of a desire to establish the facts, Rostov began to calculate the data which governed the interlocking arcs of fire of the Tarvaras platforms.
Even if one of the ovoids was in the Simonova 's docking bay — a recovery sequence had been initiated shortly before Rostov had retired to his quarters — those which were adjacent in orbit would open fire as soon as the pod was more than ten kilometres from the survey vessel's shield zone.
Tarvaras was just over twelve and a half thousand kilometres in diameter and the Simonova was orbiting approximately thirty-six thousand kilometres above the surface.
That meant an orbital path with a circumference of about two hundred and sixty-five thousand kilometres with — Rostov divided swiftly by sixteen — one platform roughly every sixteen-and-a-half thousand kilometres.
Platform weapons were set to allow nothing to rise more than a thousand kilometres from the surface of the world below — or in other  words they had a killing range of about thirty-five thousand kilometres.
More than twice the distance between one platform and the next.
Say twenty seconds to exit the Simonova 's shield zone, at which point the pod would be a target for both of the adjacent platforms…
Rostov stopped, aware that he had been indulging his capacity for mental arithmetic for easily twice that period of time.
He supposed that he had been rendered unconscious when he had entered his quarters.
Thinking back Rostov realised that he could remember nothing after the moment when he had operated the lock control and the door had hissed aside.
The nearest pod battery had been only thirty metres from the entrance to his stateroom, and no doubt that fact had influenced the would-be assassin.
It was an arguably effective method of achieving both killing and disposal of the body — probably ensuring that the perpetrator remained undetected — to load the victim into an escape pod which was destined to be destroyed as soon as it was tracked by any of the platforms in orbit.
Except that there appeared to have been a miscalculation — one which Rostov himself did not yet understand — so that the pod was now heading unscathed for the outer atmosphere of Tarvaras.
as if in confirmation of that fact, the pressure of the foam encasing his head eased slightly and a display readout began to project data onto a hitherto invisible screen in front of his eyes.
It occurred to Rostov that there would be more point to the information if he also had some control over the pod's guidance system, but at least he now knew where he was going.
It was still hard to believe that the pod was not going to be destroyed before it reached the ground.
The recognition codes which the Simonova was  broadcasting should not in theory render any platform completely inoperative.
Nor should the temporary protection which the survey vessel was acquiring by the signalling process extend to any other object in contiguous space.
The pod began to shudder and Rostov quickly checked the visual display.
It would be a neat trick of fate if he survived the plasma energy weapons of the platforms only to be burned to a crisp because the pod entered the upper atmosphere of Tarvaras at the incorrect angle.
There was a sharp crack as the first of several skins of heat-resistant material which coated the exterior of the pod shattered and then separated.
The instrument readings remained unchanged, and Rostov was reassured.
Thus far the internal structure of the pod had protected him from extreme variations in gravitational pull, but now he felt his weight increase as the slim capsule reached terminal velocity for the thin, wind-torn upper atmosphere.
The pod was no longer strictly under guidance.
Instead it was falling.
Following the data which was being projected on to the tiny screen, it was clear that the telemetry and guidance modules had performed according to specification.
The second skin of heat-resistant material seemed to burn off unevenly — at least that was Rostov's impression — for the vibration increased and the pod appeared to tumble and then check as the first ribbon chute opened.
The chute itself only lasted seconds.
It provided one good hard jerk at nearly five gee, and then the tattered remnants were detached automatically.
The second chute lasted all of half a minute, and when the third opened, Rostov began to think about landing.
There was no point in worrying about what was happening aboard the Simonova .
Either they would  send a rescue party, or they would adhere to quarantine regulations and he would be marooned on Tarvaras.
In any case he had more pressing matters to worry about.
It was growing uncomfortably warm inside the pod, but with the third skin gone there was a transparent patch in the casing shell level with his face.
Rostov's body was still firmly encased in the pod's foam safety envelope, but now the system obligingly extended a bar switch until it was at mouth level.
He bit down on it, and the display began to supply proximity and ground contour information.
At least the ground fifteen kilometres below was fairly flat.
Rostov peered past the screen at the porthole, but he could see nothing of the surface of the planet.
The pod temperature rose a few degrees more, and then levelled out.
The main chute cluster banged open and a second bar switch was extended.
This time the display flashed a red warning signal:Danger — Pod Hatch Release — Do Not Operate Until Pod Has Grounded Rostov grinned relief.
He was pleased to discover that the Simonova was equipped with the type of pod which permitted the moment of release to be selected independently.
Clusters of explosive bolts secured the hatch, and early models of the pod had been programmed to blow these automatically on grounding.
There had been a series of rumours about accidents: pods which malfunctioned on impact, leaving their passengers trapped and helpless; pods which misinterpreted conditions of temperature and air pressure, releasing their human cargo while they were still several kilometres above ground.
Rostov checked the visual display again.
According to the  proximity readout, the capsule was only a kilometre or so from contact with the surface of Tarvaras.
He gazed out through the transparency and cursed.
The pod appeared to be descending directly towards a winding ribbon of water.
The river — it stretched away as far as he could see in either direction, and could not therefore be a lake — was very wide.
Rostov estimated that the distance from one bank to the other was over a kilometre.
There was no way of guessing at the depth, and as the pod continued to fall it became increasingly obvious that his initial impression had been correct.
He was going to land almost exactly in the middle of the widest part of the stream.
Rostov considered the alternatives briefly.
Either he could wait until the pod splashed down at which point it would start to sink, and if the water was deep enough and he had difficulty in escaping from the safety envelope, or became entangled with the chute, he might drown before he was able to struggle to the surface — or else he could blow the hatch prior to landing, risking being either injured or knocked unconscious during an unprotected impact.
On the whole Rostov thought that he was more confident about his chances in the second case.
He would try to detonate the hatch bolts when he was about a hundred metres above the river.
After that he would fight clear of the envelope and hope to dive away from the pod.
It was fortunate that he was able to swim, although he wondered for a moment about the presence of large predators in the water.
He had paid very little attention to the section of the survey briefing which dealt with native flora and fauna.
At the time the information had seemed to be of no consequence.
Now he wished that he had listened more closely.
He looked through the transparency again, and was alarmed to discover that the pod appeared to have increased its rate of descent.
Perhaps one of the chutes of the cluster had collapsed, but whatever the reason time had suddenly run out.
Hastily he bit down on the bar switch.
The hatch bolts exploded in rapid-fire sequence, and at once Rostov forced both arms up to chest level and punched them forward, tearing the extruded foam casing.
Now it was as if he was teetering on the brink of a lidless coffin.
The water seemed to rush to meet him.
He threw himself forward and dived clear.
The water was very cold.
Rostov kicked hard, aware that somewhere above him was the pod.
When he surfaced he saw it about ten metres away.
The chutes had collapsed across the casing, and already it was starting to sink.
Rostov spat out a mouthful of river water, and struck out for what looked like the nearest bank.
It was hard to tell what time of day it was.
The ground was too warm, Rostov was sure, for it to be morning.
But since he had only a vague idea about the length of the Tarvaras day, he could only guess from the position of the sun and the length of the shadows that it was mid to late afternoon.
The sun was huge: a glaring red ball which was almost touching the tops of the distant range of mountains.
There were a few white clouds and, although towards the sun the sky was tinged crimson, elsewhere the shade was a deep oppressive blue.
Rostov thought that the colour of the sky probably had something to do with the state of the sun, and he wondered briefly about the effects of prolonged exposure to solar radiation.
For a long time it had been accepted that humans could not survive on worlds which were  in orbit around any sun which was capable of being classed as a red giant.
But the Imperial survey had located colonies on Cerberus and on the Manchu worlds, all of whose systems were identifiably red-shifted.
There were only a few trees along the river bank.
They were tall and straight, their branches covered with clusters of fine blue-green leaves shaped like needles.
Rostov saw that none of the leaves which had fallen were withered or had changed colour, and the ground below every tree was covered by a soft carpet which was perhaps a metre thick.
Away from the river in every direction the ground was practically level, a plain covered by broad-bladed grass which grew in some places to waist height.
There were a few small brown birds in the trees, but no other sign of life.
Mountains were visible in the distance both towards the sun and on the far side of the river.
The range in the latter direction seemed to be closer, and some of the highest peaks were capped with what looked like snow.
Rostov thought about following the course of the river in one direction or the other.
If people and habitation were to be found, it was likely that they would be located somewhere along the bank.
He looked at the expanse of the river.
The pod and chutes had disappeared as if they had never existed.
As soon as it had been fired from the Simonova the pod would have started to broadcast a signal and, since the crew of the survey ship could not fail to be aware that a pod had been discharged, and that it was occupied, he supposed that his descent had been tracked and that someone at least knew where he was to be found.
Perhaps under the circumstances it made sense to remain in the one place.
His coverall was already dry, and the sun was so  warm that Rostov was glad of the minimal shade provided by the trees.
The shadows had lengthened, he thought, so that probably he had been right and it was towards evening.
There was a broken branch half-buried in the bed of leaves around the base of the tree under which he stood.
He pulled it free.
It was about a metre long and as thick as his wrist.
When he struck it hard against the trunk of the tree it seemed solid and did not break or splinter.
Thoughtfully, Rostov laid it to one side.
He was not sure that he would need a weapon, but there was no harm in being prepared.
If a large animal appeared, he thought that he could probably climb the tree.
But predators came in various shapes and sizes, and he was troubled by the knowledge that any rescue party from the Simonova could also include the person who was responsible for dumping him in the escape pod.
He guessed that somewhere aboard the survey vessel a meeting was in progress to determine whether or not the quarantine regulations were to be obeyed, and whether that adherence meant that he ought to be abandoned.
It was a neat dilemma.
From one point of view it could be argued that he should be rescued from Tarvaras before he had an opportunity to come into contact with any of the inhabitants.
In theory, at least, his knowledge of technology, and in particular his military ability, could affect the whole course of the planet's history.
But in fact, it was just as likely that he would be killed by the first group of native Tarvarians he encountered.
If the quarantine regulations had already been broken by the landing of the escape pod, so the opposing argument would run, then surely it would be a second and far more serious breach to despatch a lifeboat on a rescue mission, especially since the size of such a vehicle increased the risk of inhabitant contact a thousandfold.
Rostov doubted if either his rank or his arguable status as both husband and father of members of the Royal Family would affect the outcome of such a discussion.
It was possible that recovery might be organised, and for that reason he would remain where he was at least until morning.
There was nothing to be gained by worrying further, so he settled himself as comfortably as possible against the trunk of the tree.
The sun was warm and he was tired.
His eyes closed and he slept.
It was still light when the thunderclap of the passage of one of the Simonova 's lifeboats over his head woke him.
The vessel dipped above the surface of the river and Rostov judged that it was hovering roughly over the spot where the escape pod had disappeared.
Then the boat lifted away and settled on the far side of the river.
Instinctive caution made Rostov remain in the cover of the trees.
He could see figures emerging from the lifeboat hatch, but he was too far away to be able to identify faces.
Soon he realised that the coveralls which were visible on the far bank were Navy dark blue and not Survey Service drab grey.
He stepped out of the shadows, shouted, and waved his arms to attract attention.
An answering shout came at once.
A delay followed while those who had left the vessel, presumably to search, re-entered it.
The craft lifted smoothly across the river and, as it grounded nearby, Rostov was treated to a view of the blistering which marked the heat shield around the blunt nose.
Clearly the pilot had not wasted time calculating an entry angle, but had bored down through the upper atmosphere as directly as he was able.
The hatch opened.
Rostov started to walk towards  the boat, then stopped.
Slowly he raised his hands until they were above waist level, and turned the palms outward to show that he was unarmed.
Disappointment made him feel suddenly weary.
Kubitsky was holding the weapon, but it was Sandor who was smiling as he watched the others — Yuan, Zukov, Mubarak, even Vorontseff — as they climbed unarmed from the hatch.
Alexei appeared last.
He jumped down and seemed to stumble.
Then he straightened and dusted invisible grains of dirt from the knees of his coveralls.
Sandor laughed unpleasantly and shook his head.
‘Admiral.’
It was as if he was pleased by the outcome.
‘I began to think that you had more lives than a cat.’
‘And the luck of the angels.’
Kubitsky's expression was sour.
Sandor disappeared inside the boat for a moment.
When he re-emerged he was cradling an explosive projectile rifle similar to the one which was being trained on them by Kubitsky.
‘It is a pity it has to be done this way,’ Sandor observed.
‘My other ideas were so much neater.’
He cocked the weapon.
Rostov looked at the others.
He caught Sandor's eye.
‘All of us?’
The lieutenant nodded.
‘Admiral, I am afraid so.
We would have preferred not to have included the Noble Born, your son —’ he indicated Alexei with a wave of the muzzle, ‘— but our orders are quite explicit.
No loose ends.’
‘Six of us.’
Rostov did his best to speak without a tremor.
‘You really think you can get away with it?’
Kubitsky sniggered.
Sandor nodded cheerfully.
‘No question of it.
Officially you are all going to be victims of a surprise attack on the rescue party by the native  inhabitants.
An unfortunate incident; but on a rescue mission which was undertaken against the advice of the Imperial Adjudicator, no one will be suspicious.’
‘I see.’
If he had been concerned to compile a mental list of likely candidates for involvement in conspiracy — any conspiracy — Rostov would have placed Grigoriev at or near its head, and so reference to the Adjudicator was not a surprise.
All the same he raised his eyebrows and pretended to consider the possibility for the first time.
A few paces to the right Yuan was flexing arm and shoulder muscles as if to ease some strain or tension, and Rostov wondered if the assassins knew how fast a Manchu could move when the need arose.
Instinctively he did his best to prolong the conversation.
‘So you take your orders from House Andreeyev?’
It was Alexei who cut in on Sandor's response, his tone frigid.
‘The Noble Grigoriev insisted that only Navy personnel be employed for the rescue attempt.’
‘And my unscheduled departure from the Simonova ?’
Rostov looked at Sandor and ignored Alexei.
‘How is that to be explained?’
‘Oh.
An accident, of course.’
The assassin's tone and bearing were completely confident.
If he noticed that Zukov was now edging further to the side, widening the arc of fire, he did not appear to be troubled.
‘The report will show that you were examining one of the pod batteries when it malfunctioned.’
‘Reports have to be counter-signed.’
‘True.
But we have a small advantage in that respect.
You see, the Simonova 's administrator owes a certain — ah — obligation to House Andreeyev.’
‘Or in other words, he will do exactly as he is told,’ Kubitsky said.
‘Indeed.’
Rostov tried to think of something else to  say, but suddenly it was as if his brain had dried up.
He had no idea why House Andreeyev desired his death, and in any case it no longer seemed to matter.
Kubitsky was flicking the safety lock of his weapon on and off.
Clearly he was bored with the conversation.
Sandor glanced sideways.
Then he turned to look at Rostov again.
He shrugged, and the decision in his eyes was final.
‘And now, Admiral —‘
The rising muzzle signalled his intention, but it was not in Rostov's nature to stand passively to be slaughtered.
It made sense to assume that Yuan and Zukov would throw themselves to the right of the line of fire, but he did not wait for them to act.
Instead he shoved Alexei hard at shoulder level, and dived left.
‘What?’
Alexei was unprepared.
He sprawled untidily, grabbed at Rostov's arm, and brought him down.
Rostov was deafened by the explosion of a single shot.
On his knees in the grass, he was aware that he was not going to make it — that in all probability none of them were.
Determined to face the bullet when it came, he looked up.
There was an arrow in Sandor's throat.
As Rostov watched, the lieutenant dropped his weapon and pitched forward out of the hatch.
Rostov froze.
Kubitsky was bringing his rifle to bear on a target which lay somewhere in the direction of the grove of trees on the river bank to Rostov's rear, but before he could open fire three more arrows took him in the chest and he fell over backwards without a sound.
Rostov felt as if there was a bare exposed place between his shoulder blades.
Then an animal snorted quietly and broke the momentary stillness.
Slowly he got to his feet, extended his hands at waist level to  show that they were empty, and turned.
There were a dozen riders.
Most of them were carrying bows, but even those who had arrows nocked were not aiming at anything in particular.
Rostov drew a long shuddering breath.
Everyone else appeared to be unhurt.
Yuan had somehow managed to reach the cover of the side of the lifeboat, but now he rejoined the others.
He moved slowly and cautiously, and kept his hands in clear view.
The Tarvarians rode forward.
Rostov watched them, absorbing every detail.
The mounts were huge.
They looked like equine stock, but they were half as big again as any horse that Rostov had ever encountered.
A single immense horn projected from the forehead of each animal.
‘I thought the unicorn was a mythical beast.’
Alexei spoke with studied calm.
‘Not on this world apparently.’
As he responded, Rostov remembered the survey briefing and wondered if he was seeing the first evidence of genetic mutation.
If that was the case, then it was a mutation which bred true.
Apart from the difference in the colour of the coat — there were blacks, chestnuts, a grey and even a piebald — the beasts were exactly alike.
The riders themselves appeared to be human.
At least, they looked like men.
They had light skins which were tanned to various shades of golden brown, and most wore long down-turned moustaches or straggling beards.
Only one — the leader by the richness of his robes and the gold chasing on his equipment — was unhelmeted.
Rostov saw that his hair had been drawn back into a neat queue which had been tied with ribbon then folded decoratively forward across the top of his head.
There was a weird kind of shading or tattooing around the lids of each man's eyes  and Rostov thought that the eyes themselves were oddly shaped.
They were slanted somehow, and he recollected pictures he had seen of the early ancestors of the Manchu.
There was a vague similarity.
The bows were short, stubby affairs which looked as if they had been bonded from several different kinds of wood.
The main part of the bowstave seemed to bend back upon itself.
‘Compound bows.
Powerful.’
It was Mubarak who made the observation, and Rostov nodded.
In addition to a bow, each rider carried a curved sword and a shorter dagger, both in a belt around his waist.
Several of the warriors also bore long lances which were tipped with iron or steel, and a few had shields slung either from the saddle or on a strap around the shoulders.
The Tarvarians halted in a semi-circle which enclosed Rostov and his companions against the side of the lifeboat.
The leader seemed to eye them for a moment, then he spoke briefly.
Clearly he was asking a question, but the gutturals of the language he used bore no relationship to any form of speech which was in use in the Empire.
Rostov realised that signs and shrugs were going to be inadequate.
He struggled for a moment to remember the rules for first contact with alien cultures.
Most of them were inapplicable, but there were procedures for language which might be appropriate.
He stepped forward and addressed the riders solemnly in Anglic.
‘Your father was a peasant, mine had an emporium.
But there's nothing in that.
Even if you offered me two hundred thousand, I would refuse.
I'm a free man, and all that you hold dear, you rich men — and beggars too — none of it has any power over me.’
The lines came from a play dimly remembered.
It  was a comedy which was said to have originated on Terra.
Rostov had chosen the speech simply because it was the first thing which came to mind.
He might as well have recited a passage from a Navy field manual.
The purpose was to show that he too used spoken language and that it and Tarvarian were mutually incomprehensible.
The Tarvarian leader digested the announcement.
Then he said something, his tone amused, and the other riders laughed.
Alexei came forward so that he was at Rostov's shoulder.
‘Second stage?’
Rostov nodded.
He touched himself on the chest.
‘Me.’
Then he touched Alexei.
‘You.’
Alexei copied the movement.
‘Me.’
He tapped his own chest.
‘You.’
He addressed Zukov, touching the Master-at-Arms at the same moment.
The process continued down the line.
When Yuan stepped forward to touch Rostov and complete the circle of address, there was a murmur of comment from the Tarvarians.
Rostov pointed to himself again.
‘Me — Sergei Rostov.
Sergei Rostov —name .’
He caught the eye of the Tarvarian leader and pointed.
‘You —name ?’
The man spat to one side.
He muttered a few words and his companions chuckled.
Then he addressed Rostov.
He was speaking Anglic and, though his accent was strange, the words were perfectly understandable.
‘Me —’ The man tapped his chest, ‘— Arghatun, Leader of a Thousand.
You —’ He showed his teeth and gestured to include the whole group, ‘— prisoners.’
The Tarvarians were laughing openly and Rostov cursed under his breath.
To Rostov's surprise, the Tarvarian warriors showed no interest in the lifeboat or its contents.
Either they  operated some kind of taboo against such things, or else the technological relics of past civilisations were commonplace enough for them not to attach importance to a vessel which they must at least suspect to be in operable condition.
Rostov had hoped to be permitted to seal the hatch, and thus to preserve the interior of the ship from incursion by animal and insect life — as well as from the potentially damaging effects of atmosphere and temperature — but Arghatun had rejected the request out of hand.
‘No,’ he said.
‘First you will talk to my Khan.
He will decide.’
Several of the Tarvarians were leading strings of three or four remounts, all of them unsaddled, and Rostov and the others were each assigned an animal.
It did not appear to occur to Arghatun that they might not be able to ride.
After Vorontseff had fallen off twice he was hoisted up by a grinning trooper and thrown face down in front of the saddle.
The party set off downstream along the river bank and Rostov concentrated on making it look as if he had been riding bareback all his life.
The pace was fast, but after a while Arghatun reined in until he was riding at Rostov's side.
‘Back there,’ Arghatun gestured to his rear, ‘when I asked who you were.
What was that nonsense you recited about rich man and beggars?’
‘Oh.’
Rostov hesitated.
‘Just some words from a play.
I was supposed to be trying to show you that we also had a language, but that it was different from yours.’
‘Hunh.
I see.
That explains the game you played — naming one another.
But most of the Yek can speak C'zak as well.’
‘C'zak?’
Rostov queried the word.
‘The name of the language you speak.
Although you don't look like C'zaki — especially that one.’
Arghatun  indicated Yuan with a nod of his head.
‘He doesn't look like a man at all.’
‘Oh, well.
In the first place we call the language Anglic and it is spoken by people on worlds all across the universe.
And my friend is quite human, but he comes from a world very far away.
You cannot even see it as a star in your sky.
A long time ago — many thousands of years — something happened to the sun which shines on that world.
All the people changed until they began to look as he does.’
It was a simplified explanation.
Rostov expected the mention of other worlds to excite a reaction, but Arghatun only nodded understanding.
‘Ah.
I knew you could not be C'zaki,’ he said.
‘These C'zaki —’ Rostov paused to disguise his interest, ‘— are they many?’
Arghatun shrugged.
‘Who knows?
We conquered them years ago in their land to the west of here.
Most of them are soldiers now.’
‘The women as well?’
The answer was a snort of derision.
‘Only a fool uses women to fight.
No, some follow their men.
Others well, I for one have a C'zak wife.’
The Tarvarian grinned and urged his mount forward again.
Suddenly the sky behind them flashed brilliant fire.
Animals shied and the warriors shouted.
Rostov turned to meet the eyes of the other members of the Navy party and in a moment of mutual intuition, they dismounted.
Rostov caught at Arghatun's bridle.
‘Quickly, tell your men to dismount.
If they can make their animals lie down, they should do so, and lie down with them.
Very soon now there will be a wind, greater than any you have ever known.
If they are caught in its blast, they may be killed or injured.’
The Tarvarian was busy calming his mare.
He stared at Rostov as if he was calculating the value of what he had said.
Then he turned in the saddle and shouted briefly.
The warriors hurled themselves at the heads or horns of their animals to make them lie down.
Rostov sat down quietly.
The shock wave was delayed by only a few more seconds, and then it rolled over them like a small hurricane.
No loose ends.
The words had been Sandor's before he died and Rostov wondered if the assassin had ever suspected that he too was scheduled for termination once he completed his assigned task.
Either the power plant of the lifeboat had been rigged to explode, or else the area of the landing site had been fired on from space.
In either event it would be assumed that everyone had perished.
There would be no attempt at rescue, and it came home to Rostov with sudden force that he and the others were marooned on Tarvaras for ever.
Already the warriors were climbing back into the saddle.
Rostov saw that Arghatun was watching him, and waited for the man to ask how he had known what was going to happen.
But the Tarvarian only muttered something under his breath, and spat left and right.
Then he turned away.
The party began to encounter scouts or sentries along the way, and Rostov guessed that they were approaching a camp or a settlement.
Mounted men in ones and twos appeared suddenly from the cover of trees, or out of folds in the ground.
They galloped up until they were within shouting distance, exchanged words with Arghatun, and then rode away again.
The size of the camp when they came in sight of it made Rostov's eyes widen with surprise.
From the  river's edge it stretched back on to the plain for a distance of over a kilometre, and he thought that it must contain well over three thousand men.
The tents were straw-coloured, ranked in orderly rows, and every so often they passed a larger pavilion which Rostov guessed belonged to some kind of nobleman or senior officer.
The lines of tethered animals were guarded by patrolling sentries, and even those long stretches were under the shelter of strips of fabric.
Many of the men who sat outside the tents were stripped to the waist and some of them were barefoot.
Most were working to clean weapons or saddlery, and only a few looked up and gazed incuriously as the party rode past.
There was a clearing among some trees close to the river and a number of two-wheeled carts had been parked there.
On the tail of one of the carts a man was sitting.
He was about Rostov's age and his clothes were very fine, although the colours were sombre.
Four younger men were lined up in front of him and he was addressing them.
All of them were richly dressed, but it was their hair which attracted Rostov's attention at once.
It was an odd shade of reddish gold and, coupled with their tanned complexions and slanted eyes, made them look like young eagles.
When Arghatun saw the man on the cart tail, he tossed his reins to one of the troopers and dismounted.
He crossed the clearing, bowed respectfully, and started to speak.
At once one of the younger men interrupted.
Arghatun stopped speaking and bowed, but it was the older man who growled a reply and showed his teeth.
The others laughed.
The young man spoke again, and this time it was clear that he was angry.
Then he spun on his heel and stalked off round the side of the cart.
His three companions followed more slowly.
Rostov did not wait to be told that he could dismount.
He was sore from the long ride and, as he tried to walk the stiffness out of his legs, pacing in limited circles under the eyes of his guards, he saw that the man on the cart tail was watching intently.
Arghatun was speaking again, and he gestured once or twice in the direction of Rostov and the others so that it was clear that he was making a report.
After they realised that the warriors did not care if they stayed in the saddle or not, Yuan, Alexei and the others got down as well.
They left their animals and gathered round Rostov in a group, but none of them said anything.
Rostov asked one of the guards if the man sitting on the cart was the Khan, but the trooper only grinned insolently at him and replied in his own tongue.
Rostov walked a little way off, squatted on his heels on the grass, and tried to pretend a calm he did not feel.
The process of report and interrogation took quite a time, and Rostov began to suspect that if he and the others were to be subjected to some form of tribunal before their fate was decided, then at least it would pass for a fair one.
Arghatun was speaking at considerable length, but every so often he paused and the man who sat on the tail of the cart asked what appeared to be a series of questions.
Rostov knew that he would not be able to understand even if he could hear, but due to the fact that Arghatun's replies were clearly either affirmative or negative he thought that probably the officer's account was being clarified at every stage.
It was not the kind of approach to the situation that the survey briefing had led him to expect, and Rostov realised that he was going to have to adjust his notions about standards of behaviour.
Much of what he had  seen so far confirmed the assessment of the Imperial survey — that the stage of development Tarvaras had reached was equivalent to that which was thought to have existed during the Terran medieval period.
However, there were anomalies.
Arghatun's lack of interest in the news of other settled worlds suggested an awareness of the universe which was far in advance of the inhabitants' theoretical evolutionary time.
Military organisation was also well advanced, in spite of the fact that only primitive weapons were in evidence.
Rostov guessed that the social hierarchy was far more complex than anyone would have imagined.
Not for the first time he concluded that the Empire was inclined too quickly to dismiss mutant and alien societies and to confuse technological advancement with civilisation.
At last Arghatun seemed to have finished.
He bowed again to the man sitting on the cart, then walked back across the clearing.
Rostov searched his face for some hint that a decision had been reached.
‘The Khan will talk to you now.’
Arghatun's face was impassive.
‘How should I address him?’
‘Call him ‘Khan’ or ‘Lord’when you speak, and bow when you enter his presence.
Tell the others with you that they must bow and not speak unless he speaks to them first.’
Rostov nodded.
Arghatun was shouting at the warriors who were grouped around the clearing, and twenty or so ran at once to one of the carts and pulled out a mass of folded fabric.
Working swiftly they erected a canopy supported on poles and ropes.
‘Come.’
Arghatun gestured.
Rostov followed him; Alexei, Yuan, Zukov, Mubarak and Vorontseff crowded behind.
It was cool under the canopy and there was less light than Rostov had expected.
He decided that the material overhead had been treated somehow, probably to protect those beneath from the harmful effects of the sun.
A floor of matting had been laid, and the Tarvarian Khan was sitting cross-legged on a carpet at one side.
The fringes of the carpet had been teased out so that the individual strands could be seen.
‘Bow!’
Arghatun hissed the word.
Rostov took two paces forward on to the matting.
Then he stopped and bowed at the waist.
When he straightened again he saw that he was being examined at length.
The Khan's gaze started at his feet and travelled slowly up his body so that by the time their eyes met the Khan was leaning back and holding on to his knees to stop himself falling over.
He said something to Arghatun who laughed.
The others were spread out in a line behind and to either side of Rostov, and now he heard Arghatun telling them to bow.
Suddenly the Khan's eyes moved left.
His expression was no longer amused.
Rostov turned round and saw that everyone was bowing except Alexei.
‘Bow, fool!’
Rostov glared.
For a moment he thought that Alexei was going to argue, but then he ducked his head quickly in the Khan's direction and stared back at Rostov, cheeks flushed, expression angry.
Rostov turned and bowed again.
‘I'm sorry, Khan.
This is my son and I apologise for his bad manners.
Customs are different on our world and it is my fault that he does not yet understand what is expected of him.’
The Khan looked hard at Alexei.
Then he gestured dismissal of the incident, and spoke.
‘All men have trouble with their sons.
In that  at least we are alike.
Sit down.
It hurts my neck to look at you.’
Rostov lowered himself on to his knees and sat back on his heels.
‘So.’
The Khan waved a hand at Arghatun.
‘I have my officer's report of you.
Now tell my why I should not have you killed or make you into slaves.’
The directness of the approach took Rostov's breath away.
He struggled for a moment to find a proper answer.
‘As to that,’ he hesitated.
‘I do not know what you have been told.
Is it usual to kill prisoners, or have we broken your law?
If so, it was not by intention.’
‘Hunh.’
The Khan nodded.
‘Perhaps you should have been present to hear him speak.
But you can believe that he is a truthful man.
You are not from this world, he says, and you came here in a metal ship which flew through the air.
We know of such things, but we do not concern ourselves with them.
Also he says that when he saw you first there were two others with you, dressed as you are dressed.
He says that they carried weapons of a kind which fire by creating a small explosion.
These are forbidden by our law, which is called the Yasa, and so he killed both of them.
He says that he did not kill you or your companions because you were unarmed, and anyway he thought that the two he killed intended to use their weapons on you.’
The statement was made flatly and did not seem to require confirmation.
Rostov grinned in spite of the seriousness of his situation.
The Khan paused, then nodded thoughtfully.
‘Yes.’
The Khan nodded again.
‘There is a matter here which I will ask you to explain to me, although it is of no particular consequence to your situation.
By our law your lives are forfeit.
Have you a defence?’
Rostov thought about what had been said.
‘Can a man be punished for breaking a law if he does not know that it exists?’
‘An excellent point.
Some say that ignorance of the law is no excuse, since any man can say that he did not know, and gain exception thereby.
Is it the truth that you are not from this world, but from another far away?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then you could not have known our law.’
The Khan seemed to consider the argument.
‘Very well, I will spare you.
Now tell me what I am to do with you.
I have been told that your ship has been destroyed.
Will your own people come for you?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘And you cannot be slaves.
The Yasa says that we can enslave only those we conquer in battle.
What else can you do?’
‘In our own world we are all soldiers.’
Rostov indicated Alexei and the others.
‘Perhaps we could be soldiers here.
Or perhaps —’ He paused, unsure how to continue.
‘Yes?’
‘Khan, most of us have a knowledge of science which may be useful.
But there may be things which are forbidden by your law.’
‘Hunh.
There is no law against knowledge.
It is the use to which it is put which sometimes breaks the Yasa.
But you would have to talk to the Sechem.
It is their task to interpret Old Science and to discover the new.’
The Khan eyed Rostov, then surveyed the others.
‘You say that you are soldiers, but I guess that your weapons are different from ours.
Can you fight with a sword, or use a bow?
Can you ride long distances?’
Rostov thought about the hours which he had spent hooked up to the Naval Academy's ACSC — Accelerated Combat Situation Computer — and grinned.
Like every  other officer cadet he had spent three weeks with every hair shaved from his body so that he could be immersed in a tank of oxygenated fluorocarbon.
Linked to the machine by electrodes, he had learned the best way to use every weapon ever invented.
He had felt a spear in his hands, and a bow very similar to the type in use on Tarvaras, and he had watched his own performance with them until he was an expert.
The men he had killed were only electronic ghosts, but they had seemed real enough at the time.
Non-commissioned officers like Zukov and Mubarak went through a similar but briefer course, and Rostov felt able to nod confidently.
‘Yes, Lord.
Maybe you have weapons that we have never encountered, but those I have seen we can use as well as any of your men.
And we can ride, most of us, although we are out of practice.’
‘We will see how well you fight,’ the Khan observed.
‘Very well, I will make you soldiers.
What rank do you hold?’
Rostov indicated Yuan and Alexei.
‘Those are officers, although my son has never commanded men in battle.
The others have a rank which is below that of an officer but above that of an ordinary soldier.’
‘Yes.
In the army of the Kha-Khan they would be leaders of ten, or perhaps a hundred.
But I cannot set them over others here.
Will they serve in the ranks?’
‘None of us speaks your language, Lord.
But we will serve where you decide.’
‘Well put.
If there were enough of you, I would form you into a company with men of mine to supervise you.
In that way those of you that are officers would have a chance to remain so.
What if I give you to Arghatun, or to some other thousand commander, as a unit to fight together and act as scouts?
Then you would remain as a group and could observe your own  customs, those which do not conflict with our law.’
The speed of the reasoning was amazing.
Rostov could only nod acquiescence.
‘Good.’
The Khan seemed satisfied.
‘I am travelling to a place called Pesth and you will travel with me.
It is our second greatest city.
After that you will have the space of two months to learn our ways.
Then you will ride on campaign.
Learn our language quickly and things will be easier for you.
I will put someone with you who will teach you.
What is your name?’
‘Rostov, Lord.
My name is Sergei Rostov.
My son is called Alexei Rostov.’
‘I see.
You have two names, and the second is the name of your family or clan.
We use only one name here, so you will be called Suragai.
Don't be offended.
It isn't an insult.
But it will speed your acceptance if your name sounds like one of ours.
I am called Burun — Burun Khan.
You are in the lands of the Yek, and I am a general in the army of the Kha-Khan of the Golden Clan — the Yek Altun.
Also I am Khan of the Merkuts.’
Arghatun assigned a burly leader of ten to look after them.
The man was a cheerful rogue called Kadan.
It was from him that Rostov learned that under normal circumstances the whole camp would have moved about two hundred verst to the north during the late afternoon and through the night — probably all the way to Pesth — but that a full day's rest had been ordered by the Khan.
‘Think yourselves lucky,’ Kadan observed as he dumped the bedding and equipment that he had scavenged on their behalf on the grass and began to sort it into piles.
‘From what I saw of you when you rode in, you'd have finished that journey roped face-down across your saddles, the lot of you.’
He held up a pair of boots, assessed their size and tossed them to  Zukov.
‘But don't worry —’ His grin robbed the insult of its sting.
‘By the time we ride out tomorrow, I'll have you looking like real soldiers.’
Zukov grimaced rudely behind the Tarvarian noncom's back, and Rostov grinned.
He had not expected that they would be worshipped like gods, but on a world where technological ability excited only minimal interest, all of them were at a considerable disadvantage until they were able to prove themselves against local standards of performance.
Kadan had digested the news that they were strangers from another star system with scarcely a raise of the eyebrows and it was clear that if the rest of the population was as phlegmatic, then the effect of the visitors on the course of Tarvarian history was likely to be non-existent.
In the evening Rostov, Yuan and Alexei were summoned to eat with the Khan and his officers.
The dining area was the same canopy beneath which they had been interviewed earlier in the day, only now the matting was covered with carpets, some of them very fine, and an inverted ‘U’ of low square tables of some dark wood had been set out.
Burun was not at the head of the placings.
Instead he was halfway down one side.
He waved Rostov to an empty place at his side, and one of the aides drew Yuan and Alexei off and seated them among younger men.
There were huge platters of cooked meat at intervals of every three or four settings.
Rostov could see no sign of vegetables, but there were bowls of various kinds of fruits, a few of them identifiable.
As soon as he sat down a slave laid a plate in front of him.
It was heaped with a grain something like rice.
Burun was using his short sword to cut thick slices from the meat on the platter in front of him.
He dumped an  enormous quantity on top of the cereal which covered Rostov's plate.
The juices soaked into the white grains, staining them brown.
‘Eat!’
Burun commanded.
Rostov watched to see how he should behave.
There were no forks, and everyone seemed to be using either his fingers or a knife.
He had already observed that many of the officers, especially the older men like Burun, had fingernails which were lacquered or overlaid with silver or gold.
Now Rostov was amazed to see the Khan flex his hand so that the nails extended like claws.
The tips were needle sharp.
Burun impaled a piece of meat and forked it delicately into his mouth.
Then he flexed his hand again, and the claws retracted with a flash of silver.
It was the first time that Rostov had noticed the mutation and he wondered what else he had missed.
It had been so easy to assume that the Tarvarians were human because they acted like men.
Now suddenly he knew that he had been betrayed by the preconceptions which had been imposed by life under the Empire.
Yuan and Alexei were seated on the far side of the space which lay between the tables.
The Manchu was eating with economy, and seemed oblivious to the strangeness of his surroundings, but Alexei was sitting frozen, unable to conceal his disbelief as he watched a Yek officer impaling his meat with claws which were easily three centimetres long.
Rostov saw that Burun was watching him and, unable to put the emotion into words, he lifted one hand, indicated the meat on his plate, and shrugged helplessly.
Burun laughed.
‘You have no talons.
Don't worry.
Use your knife instead.’
He demonstrated, and Rostov followed the example.
‘Does everyone have talons?’
‘No.
Only the Yek, the Ch'noze, and the N'pani.
Everyone who lives across the northern part of this land.
Khans have talons of silver like mine,’ Burun flexed, and the claws flashed briefly, ‘but the talons of the Altun are tipped with gold.’
The dinner became noisier as it progressed but, because most of the shouted conversation was in Yek, Rostov confined himself to his food.
Now and then he was addressed in Anglic, either by the Khan or by one of his neighbours at the table, and in such cases he did his best to answer politely.
Mostly they compared customs and attitudes.
There was an undercurrent of curiosity which centred around Yuan's presence.
Finally it was Burun who brought the matter into the open.
‘Your officer.’
He indicated the Manchu with a nod.
‘Is he a man like you?’
Rostov was surprised that the question had not been asked earlier, and guessed that a code of manners existed which governed the kind of questions which could be asked.
He pretended to consider, and then shrugged.
‘Lord, he is human, as I am.
Beyond that, who can say?
Are all men similar in appearance on this world?’
Those who sat nearest were listening intently to the answer.
Rostov saw several of the older men nodding agreement.
‘And yet the Yasa is clear.’
It was Arghatun who interrupted, continuing the discussion in Anglic so that Rostov could understand.
‘A man who is not as other men shall be suffered to live, but not to breed to produce others of his kind.’
A gnarled hundred commander named Jenjin produced a snort of disagreement.
‘Hah!
The Yasa was made when your grandsire and mine both thought  that it was a long way from Kinsai to the Eastern Sea,’ he growled.
‘How was anyone to know that there were so many people in the world — or that they would all be so different?’
There was a murmur of agreement which ceased when Burun spoke again.
‘The Yasa is broken every day.’
Burun held Rostov's eyes for a moment.
‘How many of the subject races have no talons?
And yet they serve us and multiply.’
Rostov thought that it was probably the wrong moment to suggest that the qualities which defined humanity were subjective.
It was startling to discover that a race which was identifiably mutant had laws for the suppression of mutations, and he guessed that the origin of cause and principle alike lay somewhere in the lost time of the isolation of Tarvaras from the Empire.
‘Oh, Khan, surely that is not the same.’
Arghatun turned to protest.
‘For when a man who has talons takes a wife who has none, his children are taloned.
The race breeds true.
They are not monsters.’
‘And is my officer a monster in your eyes?’
Rostov enquired mildly.
He saw Burun grin at Arghatun's confusion.
The thousand commander flushed.
‘He does not look like a man,’ he maintained stubbornly.
Burun sat back.
He took two pears from a bowl and tossed one to Rostov.
‘Who knows what a man looks like on other worlds?’
It was clear that he was dismissing the subject.
Rostov started to peel the pear with his knife.
When he looked up, Yuan was watching from his place on the other side of the dining area.
Rostov wondered if the Manchu had overheard the conversation, but he gave no sign.
One of the younger men with red hair was saying something to him, and Yuan answered  briefly, and bowed as he sat in his place.
His lengthened features were expressionless, but just for a moment Rostov imagined that the bow was intended for him, and not for the Altun.
He nodded, and Yuan looked away.
When the meal was over and the tables had been cleared of everything except the wine and the cups, one of the Altun stood up.
Jenjin spoke in Rostov's ear and said that the young man's name was Nogai, a grandson of the Kha-Khan.
‘Be quiet, all of you!’
Nogai was speaking in Anglic.
He waved his arms and finally the noise of conversation died.
‘We're going to wrestle.’
The young Altun looked at Rostov and showed his teeth.
‘To help settle the blood.’
One of Nogai's brothers shouted something in Yek and everybody laughed.
Jenjin told Rostov that Burun had broken Nogai's wrist during an argument five days earlier, and that it had just been suggested that if his plan went ahead he might get the other one broken as well.
There was no strapping on Nogai's forearm, but Rostov supposed that on Tarvaras a sprain or a cracked bone could just as easily be referred to as a break, depending upon the state of medical knowledge.
‘Do you wrestle?’
Burun looked at Rostov expectantly.
Rostov stretched so that his full size was apparent.
He was a head taller than most of the men round the table, and only Burun and Jenjin were anything like as broad.
‘I can,’ he said.
‘But would it be a fair contest?’
‘Wrestle Burun,’ Nogai suggested.
There was a glitter in his eyes, and Rostov realised that he was trying to manoeuvre Burun into a situation where he would be either hurt or embarrassed.
Burun shook his head.
‘I'm an old man, Nogai.’
Arghatun and some of the younger men jeered at him.
Nogai only smiled.
‘Oh but Khan, they say that you're in good condition for your age.’
‘Do they?
That's beside the point.
And anyway, only Jenjin here could give me a match.’
Rostov noted that he had been excluded.
He said nothing.
He saw Alexei watching, and wondered what he was thinking.
‘Why don't we shoot instead?’
Jenjin asked.
‘Shoot?’
Nogai looked round.
‘Where?’
‘Out in the clearing.’
Burun gestured.
‘But it's dark outside.’
A young officer at the foot of the table made the objection plaintively, and Jenjin sneered.
‘You haven't ever fought in the dark?’
‘No.’
‘You will.’
Burun made the comment drily.
‘If you live long enough.
Nogai, you can't wrestle with a broken wrist, and no one here is big enough to take on Suragai.’
‘Yes.’
Nogai agreed quickly.
‘You're right.
We'll shoot instead.
Arghatun, tell the slaves to put up some targets.’
He smiled.
‘Burun, you'll shoot with us of course.’
‘Of course.’
Everyone stood up and moved out into the clearing.
Most of the officers had to send orderlies to fetch their bows.
While they were waiting for the targets to be set up, Burun took Rostov aside.
‘Be careful of Nogai.
He wants to set you against me.’
‘I thought as much.’
Rostov looked around the clearing.
The carts had been moved to one side, and  now slaves were attaching torches to the arched wooden frames.
‘Would he try to shoot you?’
‘Possibly.
Why?’
‘Well, he was pleased when you agreed to this.
Maybe it was what he wanted all along.’
‘Hunh.’
Burun nodded.
‘You're no stranger to conspiracy, that's for certain.
Well, maybe you're right.
But Nogai's a good shot.
Maybe he just thinks he can beat me.’
Rostov shrugged, but said nothing.
‘How good are you with a bow?’
Burun asked.
‘I may need a few shots before I find the mark, Khan.’
‘I see.’
Burun grinned as if he suspected an overstatement.
‘I'll lend you mine.
The pull's fairly heavy, but someone with your shoulders ought to be able to manage.’
An orderly ran up and Burun took his bow out of the case, and strung it.
Rostov held out his hand.
‘May I see it?’
Burun gave the bow to him.
Arghatun came over with an aide called Hodai, and they stood and grinned and Rostov flexed the bow experimentally.
‘Hah!’
Arghatun elbowed Hodai in the side.
‘See, I told you.
He's as strong as an ox.’
He took one of Hodai's arrows and offered it to Rostov.
Burun shook his head.
‘No, use one of mine.
Hodai, your arrows haven't enough spline for use with my bow.
They'll shatter if Suragai pulls it at full stretch.’
The nearest target was about a hundred paces away.
Rostov nocked the arrow which Burun handed to him, and sighted on it.
He loosed, and by the target a slave called out, ‘Gold in the first!’
‘Easy shot,’ Nogai jeered.
He stepped up behind Rostov, drew and shot.
‘White in the fifth!’
The voice of the slave beside the  furthest target came clearly.
One of Nogai's brothers slapped him on the shoulder, but Burun shouted, ‘Which target were you aiming at, Nogai?’
‘Huh.’
Nogai snorted.
‘You have a try.
The light's terrible.’
‘What light?’
Hodai stepped up to the mark.
‘I can't see the target.’
He shot well enough, however, and the slave called, ‘Gold in the fifth!’
Burun shook his head.
‘If Hodai can score in the furthest target, we're too close.
Make another line fifty paces back.
And maybe we should take down some of the torches.’
Rostov blinked.
Jenjin paced off the new line, marked it, and offered his bow to Yuan.
The Manchu tested the pull, nocked an arrow, and shot.
‘Gold in the third!’
Jenjin slapped Yuan on the back, then took the bow and offered it to Alexei.
Alexei peered down the range and shook his head.
‘I can't see anything beyond the third target,’ he said.
He looked at Rostov.
‘How can you hit something you can't see?’
Burun laughed.
He took his bow from Rostov and gestured at Nogai.
‘Take down the last three torches.’
‘I wondered when you were going to shoot, Khan.’
Nogai grinned.
He trotted away.
With the torches extinguished, Rostov could see only a vague blur where each of the targets stood.
He looked at Yuan, and raised his eyebrows expressively.
‘Watch this,’ Jenjin murmured.
Burun appeared to sight carefully.
Then he lowered his bow.
‘Nogai!’ he shouted.
‘Take down three more torches, and move the target.’
‘Turn it round to face the other way!’
Hodai called out, and everyone laughed.
A dim shape moved at the end of the clearing.
Burun raised his bow again.
‘Throw a torch!’ he shouted.
A light flared briefly at the side of the furthest cart, and then a torch flew through the air over the target.
Burun cursed, and Rostov saw that the straw circle had been moved back and turned sideways so that it was no wider than a man's forearm.
Burun shot, and at once the torches flared.
Nogai ran over to look.
Then he turned.
‘Gold!’
Jenjin crowed and slapped Burun on the back.
Nogai came back up range, running easily.
‘My turn,’ he said.
He looked at Burun.
‘Your choice, Khan.
Move the target any way you choose.’
Burun grinned and nodded.
He handed his bow to Rostov, and loped away.
Rostov stepped off to the side for a better view, but already Burun was a vague outline among the carts.
Nogai stepped up to the line.
He raised his bow.
‘Throw a torch!’
Light bloomed, and Rostov heard Jenjin snort with amusement.
Burun had set the target back in its original position, an easy shot.
Nogai swore and shot swiftly twice, once at the target, and once to the side where Burun had been standing.
There was a yell, and then Burun came trotting back through the trees.
‘You missed the slave, Nogai.’
Several of the officers chuckled, but Nogai flushed.
‘You'll insult me once too often, Khan.’
‘Insult?’
Burun looked innocent.
‘What insult was that, Noyon?’
He took wine from a slave and drank.
‘Now let's put up a few of the torches again and we'll  have a proper competition.’
He took his bow from Rostov and smiled cheerfully.
Rostov started to feel sick in the middle of the night.
He felt as if he was burning and it hurt to breathe.
Kadan took one look at him, and ran for help.
‘Name of God.’
Burun came into the tent, knelt down, and touched Rostov's forehead.
‘You're on fire.’
Rostov tried to sit up and found that he could not.
‘Am I the only one sick like this?’
His mouth was dry.
Burun gave him water from a bowl.
He shook his head.
‘No.
Your son and the others are the same.
Don't worry.
Arghatun is seeing to them.’
‘You ought not to come so close.’
Rostov tried to think clearly.
‘Either we have caught a sickness which is native to this world and we have no immunity against it, or maybe we have brought something with us, and because the air and the temperature are different here, it grows and alters.
Are any of your people sick?’
‘Oh.’
Burun seemed not to be perturbed.
‘We never get sick.’
‘Never?’
Rostov was drained by the effort of conversation.
At first he did not understand what had been said.
Burun shrugged.
‘Sometimes a man who is wounded suffers a fever.
But we don't get sick the way you are now.
Maybe it was the food.’
Rostov tried to laugh, but the motion hurt his chest.
‘Oh.
In that case we're in real trouble.
If we can't eat your food, we might as well die.’
He lay back and closed his eyes.
Nausea climbed up his throat.
He heaved over on to his side.
‘Keep him quiet.
He's going to throw up.’
‘He has.
Look at the mess.’
‘Never mind.
Clean him up and look after him.
Keep him cool.’
One of the voices was Burun's, but Rostov did not care.
He was marooned on a world full of strangeness, where nothing was predictable, and now he was sick.
He remembered being sick when he was on leave on Knossos.
Irina had wanted to nurse him, but the doctors had sent her away.
Tears ran down his face.
‘What's wrong with him now?’
‘He has a fever.
Wash his face.’
‘No.
He's crying.’
Strange dreams disturbed his mind: weird animals chased him down long dark valleys, but gradually he came to know that they were only nightmares.
Somebody was supporting his shoulders so that he could drink.
He spluttered, and the water went everywhere.
Burun sat back on his heels.
‘You're cooler.
Good.
How do you feel?’
Rostov sat up.
He felt as weak as a kitten, but the fever and nausea were gone.
‘Better, thank you.
My son and the others?’
‘They recovered yesterday.
I sent them on with Kadan.
They'll be in Pesth by now.’
‘Yesterday.
How long have I been sick?’
‘Oh.
Four days.
Your officer — the one with the yellow skin — got better first.
Then the others.’
Rostov nodded.
Through the open end of the tent he could see that the campsite was deserted.
Hodai and Jenjin were sitting on the grass.
Somewhere a st'lyan neighed shrilly.
‘You waited for me.’
‘Well, if I had lost you, the Kha-Khan would have been displeased with me.
There was a message two days ago.
He wants to see you at Kinsai.
We can go there as soon as I have seen to the army at Pesth.’
‘Kinsai.’
‘Yes.
You'd better learn some Yek in a hurry.
Lie back now.
If you're well enough, we'll ride when it gets dark.’
They arrived at Pesth early the next morning.
It was a great walled city with a massive gate which towered above their heads.
Some of the army was camped outside the walls, but only a few sentries were stirring.
As soon as the guards on duty in the gate towers saw Burun, they shouted down inside, and the gate was swung open.
Inside there was a portcullis of some dark metal.
It protected the entrance to a tunnel which passed through the wall, and Rostov was amazed at its length.
The stones of the wall did not seem to be held together with mortar, but instead they were keyed so that each lay on the other with hardly a sign of a join.
The men operating the windlass for the portcullis cheered Burun as he rode past and, as soon as they gave tongue, more men came out of a gate-house and joined in.
Burun ignored them.
He kicked his st'lyan into a trot across the wide stone-paved courtyard.
At the far side was a second gate, nearly as massive as the first.
Soldiers were pushing it open and Rostov saw that the whole inner yard was a clever device to protect the city.
An attacking enemy could be allowed to break through the outer gates and would find that he was surrounded by walls and towers which were every bit as impregnable as those outside.
A hail of arrows and other missiles could be launched on those who were trapped between the walls, and they would be decimated.
‘Where are we going?’
Rostov looked at Hodai.
The aide was steering his st'lyan to follow Burun through the second gate.
‘Oh.
The Khan has a house in the city.
So do most of the Altun.
He'll go there first, I expect, and when he has eaten and rested, he'll see Arghatun and Wotai.
They're the thousand commanders he's taking south when we go on campaign.
Now that we're going to Kinsai, they'll have to supervise most of the preparations.’
‘What about Nogai?’
Hodai shrugged.
‘The Altun are coming on campaign.
The Kha-Khan's order.
But they don't hold any rank with the army unless the Khan chooses, and they command only their own guard.
One of the thousands — Wotai's is part of T'zin's tuman, but they haven't served with him for several years, and they were always a bit leery of him.
Probably the Khan will give Nogai some work to do to keep him occupied until we return from Kinsai, but we could just as easily find the whole pack of them travelling with us to the capital.
As long as they're in Pesth for the start of the journey south, they can do very much as they like, although none of them will be welcome at court.’
They turned in at the yard of a two-storey stone house which had a red tiled roof.
Alexei was leaning out of one of the upper windows.
He waved.
‘Father!’
Burun grinned.
‘Your son is pleased to see you,’ he said.
During the ride to Pesth they had talked a great deal.
Filial conduct was one of the subjects which had been touched upon.
Rostov now knew that Burun's eldest son was called Jotan, and that he was married to a grand-daughter of the Kha-Khan.
He wondered if Alexei would marry now that there was no likelihood that he would ever leave Tarvaras, and if he did what his children would look like.
Alexei came out into the yard as Rostov was dismounting.
He had new clothes: loose grey trousers of a material which looked like silk and a grey tunic which was open at the front almost to the waist.
The trousers were tucked into high boots, and Rostov saw that his son's eyelids had been stained a shade of silver-blue.
Alexei turned and shouted back into the house.
‘Kadan!
My father's here with the Khan!’
The Tarvarian came out of the house and took Rostov's reins.
Rostov stood awkwardly, aware that Hodai and Jenjin were carefully ignoring the reunion which appeared to be going on.
‘You look well,’ he said to Alexei at last.
‘What have you done to your eyes?’
‘Oh, it's a kind of tattoo.
It's permanent, but Kadan says it's necessary, especially if I'm going into the hot lands.
Every clan has a different colour, and they made up a special shade for us.’
Alexei paused, then smiled ingenuously.
‘I'm talking too much.
I'm happy to see you.
I thought you were going to die, you were so sick.
What was it, do you think?’
‘The sickness?
Probably a reaction to toxins our bodies hadn't encountered before.
If we're lucky it won't happen again.’
Alexei shuddered.
‘God, I hope not.
Do you know the Yek have no doctors?
There are the Sechem, who deal with anything connected with science, and they act as surgeons if someone is badly hurt.
But nobody gets sick — nobody.’
‘So I've been told.’
Rostov made the comment drily.
‘Are the others with you?’
‘Yuan's staying with Nogai.
They're in a house down the street.
Zukov and Mubarak are living in the camp outside the walls.
They made friends with some of the Yek sergeants.
Do you know that the drink they call k'miss is actually fermented mare's milk?
And Vorontseff  is somewhere in the house.
He's got some new clothes for you.’
‘Good.’
‘Yes.
They're very fine.
Do you know the Kha-Khan has sent for us?
Well, not for everyone.
It's you he wants to see, but I'm going too.
We're going to Kinsai in a few days.
Kadan says it's ten times the size of Pesth.’
‘The Khan told me.’
Rostov started to walk towards the door.
‘They must have a very good system of communication, don't you think?’
Alexei's tone was innocent, but Rostov stopped and turned.
‘The Kha-Khan's message arrived the day we left camp, and yet Kinsai is four days’ ride from here at least.’
‘And yet they don't use machines.
You've been observant.
How is it done?’
‘Heliograph.’
Alexei made a face.
‘It's very primitive.
They don't have electrical power, so they can't use a telegraph.’
Rostov was suddenly sure about the purpose of his son's remarks.
He sighed.
‘And you think we might just take the opportunity to suggest such a thing.’
‘Well.
Their law doesn't actually forbid the use of machines.
I checked.
And anyway they could probably design a system based on the photo-electric cell.
With the amount of sun they get, it's the obvious choice.’
‘A telegraph, using power from a system of photoelectric cells.’
Rostov summarised the idea flatly.
‘Have you seen any industry at all?’
‘Not much.
And what there is seems to be fairly basic.
I expect we could teach them.’
‘It would be a lot of effort, surely, for a relatively small increase in efficiency.’
Rostov made the observation with deceptive mildness.
‘As you remarked  yourself, their communications are already quite efficient.’
‘Well —‘
Rostov showed his teeth.
‘Electricity.
Which of the dubious benefits of civilisation would you introduce them to next, I wonder?
Tell me, have you spoken of this to anyone else?’
Alexei was staring at the ground.
He shook his head.
‘Good.
Then oblige me by keeping your ideas to yourself.
Apart from the fact that these people seem to possess a remarkable amount of scientific knowledge, even though they do not care to employ it, it seems possible that their ideas about civilisation and ours may be quite different.’
‘Civilisation!
They are primitives!’
The protest was out of Alexei's mouth almost at once.
‘Are you so certain?’
Rostov queried.
‘I grant you they don't live in a manner similar to anything we have ever encountered in the Empire.
But hasn't it occurred to you that if they have access to knowledge and culture from a previous machine age, yet still continue with their own customs, then maybe they have reasons which seem at least to them to be perfectly good and sufficient?’
Alexei's expression remained stubborn.
Rostov shook his head.
‘Look, we have been on this world a matter of a few days.
We're going to be here for the rest of our lives.
Don't you think we ought to try and understand our surroundings before we try to change them?’
Rostov turned away and followed the others into the house.
It was depressing to discover that the warmth of Alexei's concern was a sham, and that it had been aimed at making him susceptible to ideas which would lead to the industrialisation of Tarvaras.
He was annoyed at himself for being pleased by his son's initial  welcome.
He should have known from the first that the chasm which lay between them would not be so easy to cross.
‘The man is in the field.
The man was in the field.
The man will be in the field.’
Rostov repeated the words, coached by Hodai.
They were a day out of Pesth on the way to Kinsai and Rostov was concerned that when he met the Kha-Khan he would be able to speak enough Yek to conduct a simple conversation.
‘God help the Alan against a man who learns so fast,’ Hodai said.
Kuchuk, the Khan's standard-bearer, laughed.
‘Alan?’
Rostov queried the word, although he had heard it before in connection with the campaign to come.
‘Alan.
The people of the land on the far side of the G'bai,’ Hodai expanded.
He put the new words through their paces, and Rostov incorporated them into sentences.
Already Hodai was starting to adopt the mannerisms which Rostov supposed were common to teachers everywhere.
‘Heh, Suragai,’ Kuchuk teased.
‘Now you can talk to the ladies of Kinsai.’
Rostov made a face.
There had been women in Pesth, some of them attractive even by Imperial standards, but they had been the wives or concubines of Burun's officers, or else they had belonged to the Altun.
In any case he was not sure that he was interested.
He had been apart from Irina on many occasions — too many — but a permanent separation was something he still had to get used to.
‘Maybe he's like the Khan,’ Hodai said slyly.
‘Burun's a great fighter because he diverts all his sexual energies into fighting and giving orders.’
‘Maybe Suragai has no sexual energies at all.’
Kuchuk was grinning.
‘I've heard that old men lose their interest in women.’
Rostov cursed him in newly acquired Yek.
Hodai laughed.
‘How old are you, Suragai?’ he asked.
‘How old is the Khan?’
‘Oh, fifty summers.
Are you as old as that?’
Rostov ignored the question.
He looked at Kuchuk.
‘The Khan has a son?’
‘Several,’ Kuchuk agreed.
‘And his wife — is she still alive?’
‘Wives.
He has two.
One is the daughter of Vortai the Black, and there's bad blood from here to the Eastern Sea over the marriage.
They say he fought twenty men, including her brothers and her father, to win her.’
‘His second wife,’ Hodai sighed in a pretence of ecstasy, ‘Heavenly Name, you should see her.
A N'pan woman, beautiful, like a perfect flower.
They call her the Regal Lily.
The Khan got her at the sack of T'sosei, and when the Kha-Khan — the present one's father — wanted her for himself, the Khan married her.
He has two sons by her, both grown, and lets no man look at her twice.’
‘I see.’
Rostov smiled grimly.
‘But yet he diverts his sexual energies into fighting.’
‘Oh.
Well —’ Hodai waved an arm, and Kuchuk laughed.
‘Hah, Suragai, you are learning our language well enough to argue in it.’
‘Not well enough yet,’ Rostov answered tersely.
‘Talk to me some more, Hodai.’
They rode all day and into the night.
Alexei never rode near enough to talk, but sometimes Burun dropped back and discussed the people Rostov was  likely to meet at the Kha-Khan's court.
He spoke of the feuds which surrounded the succession, and Rostov felt a small chill of worry that he had left Yuan in Nogai's house.
The pace was fast; they stopped only at way stations which were situated every hundred verst or so to change st'lyan.
Hodai had said that the Khan's wives were with the clan on the Merkut hereditary pastureland a day's ride north of Kinsai.
Rostov wondered if Burun was in a hurry to see them again.
On the third night they stopped at an inn which was attached to a relay station.
The innkeeper and the attendants were Yek, but the place was thronged with foreign traders, part of a caravan which was travelling from Kinsai to the western coast.
The pack animals were large tawny-coloured beasts of a kind that Rostov had only ever seen in illustration.
They had humps in which they stored fat and were capable of travelling for days without water or food.
The drivers were Ch'kassians: small olive-skinned men from an island country which Hodai said was on the other side of the Inner Sea.
They wore long light blue robes and smelled of strange spices.
Burun spent half the night talking with their leaders.
The Ch'kassians spoke a version of C'zak, and Rostov was, with some difficulty, able to follow the conversation.
The captain of the caravan guard mentioned the Alan almost at once.
‘How do they fight?’
Burun asked.
‘Name of God, they are invincible.’
The Ch'kassian rolled his eyes.
‘Each man is armoured in metal, like a fortress.’
‘They carry swords.’
‘Other weapons also.’
The captain's eyes shifted away.
‘Firearms?’
‘Some, Lord.
Companies of men on foot, with armour not so heavy.
But they are few.’
Burun's eyes were expressionless.
Rostov wondered if the scarcity of firearms indicated a shortage of the materials for making gunpowder.
‘Also they use the lance,’ another Ch'kassian continued swiftly.
‘Heavier than those used by the Yek, Lord.
They hold them locked against their sides, the points forward.
On a ground of their own choosing, nothing can withstand their charge.’
Burun smiled.
‘The Yek don't usually wait to be charged.’
The Ch'kassians laughed nervously.
‘Everyone knows that the Yek are great fighters,’ the captain said.
Burun sat back.
Rostov saw that he was hiding his expression behind his cup.
‘Someday we'll fight them, maybe.
Then we'll see.’
After a while Rostov found that he was losing track of the ebb and flow of the conversation.
He was tired, and the heat of the fire was making him sleepy.
The scent of Ch'kassian was like a drug in the warm air of the common room.
He rolled himself in his riding cloak, lay down upon the broad straw-covered pallet which covered the bench, and slept.
They left the inn before dawn, crossed a wide river by a stone bridge, and continued east.
Rostov was amazed at how fast they were moving.
A st'lyan ate up the ground like no horse he had ever encountered, and although at first he had estimated that a verst, the basic unit of Tarvarian distance, was equivalent to about a kilometre, now he realised that it was probably more than twice that.
It was common for the army to travel two hundred verst in a day's march and, with frequent changes, it seemed that the animals could be driven twice as hard.
Rostov exercised his capacity for mental arithmetic  and blinked.
A Tarvarian army was capable of moving at between forty and fifty kilometres per hour, and individual units riding fast could move at twice that rate.
It was a speed equivalent to that of the fastest armoured land vehicle in use in the Empire.
Kinsai was a city on a hill.
It grew out of the plain like a monument.
The buildings were all of red stone and many had gold roofs.
The Kha-Khan's palace was in the exact centre of everything.
A river of golden water surrounded it, flowing between banks cut out of the stone, crossed by four bridges.
The streets radiated away in every direction like the spokes of a wheel.
There were crowds of people everywhere but, when they saw Burun's banner, they moved politely aside to let the party pass.
Many of them bowed.
Hodai told Rostov that the major-domo who met them in the antechamber of the palace was a N'pani, the only foreigner with any authority at the court.
The man was clad in midnight blue silk and his head was shaved except for a queue of black hair which was coiled on top of his scalp.
He bowed to Burun.
‘The Universal Khan will see you shortly.’
Burun sat down on a bench which was decorated with gold filigree.
He unfastened the laces of his coat and yawned.
‘Bring me something to drink,’ he commanded.
‘The Khan wishes.’
The major-domo gestured to one of the slaves who knelt beside the wall.
‘Would you prefer wine or k'miss?’
‘K'miss!’
The N'pani's nose seemed to wrinkle.
Rostov stared around the antechamber.
Its silk hangings shimmered.
The inside of every room in the palace was said to be roofed and walled with rich fabric, and he guessed  that the Yek had once been nomads.
Even though they lived inside stone buildings, they furnished them like tents.
The cups in which the k'miss was brought were each cut from an individual chunk of crystal chased with gold.
The bowl of Rostov's was so delicate that he felt that if he closed his hand too suddenly it would shatter.
A man entered the room, and at once all the slaves prostrated themselves.
Burun only looked up idly.
Then he drank from his cup and set it aside.
‘Khotan.
You look well.’
The Yek was dressed in silver silks so fine that Rostov thought that they would bruise if anything brushed against them.
The wearer was about Burun's age, but he was much smaller and slimmer.
His hair was red, so that Rostov knew that he was Altun, but there were strands of silver among the gold.
Hodai, Kuchuk and the others were bowing.
Belatedly Rostov collected himself and followed suit.
Burun rose.
‘Your father is keeping us waiting,’ he said.
The Altun laughed.
‘Not for long.’
Suddenly Rostov realised that this was Khotan the Restless, conqueror of the C'zaki and only living son of the Kha-Khan.
He felt Khotan's eyes studying him.
‘Are these the strangers?’
Burun nodded.
‘This is Suragai, and yonder his son Alexai.’
Rostov's lips twitched at the new interpretation of his son's name.
He bowed again.
‘Lord.’
‘Hunh.
They look like men, only taller.’
‘Oh.’
Burun's tone was mild.
‘They are quite human.’
Khotan looked once more.
Then he turned away.
‘How does your fighting go in the west?’
Burun sat down.
‘You know the Ch'noze.’
He picked up the cup.
‘How can we rule a people who won't accept that they're beaten?’
‘They rose again this spring?’
‘They rise every spring.
I put down four revolts in towns you wouldn't even notice if you rode through them.
And then, thank God, your father's summons sent me south.’
‘The Alan war.
Yes, well, that's more your kind of fighting.
Who did you leave in Ch'nozia?’
‘Berke.’
‘Sidacai's brother.
He'll enjoy governing a province.’
‘Yes.’
Burun was grinning.
‘He'll turn the men into Sufi if he gets the chance.’
‘Huh.’
Khotan snorted.
‘If there are any more mystics, there won't be a Khanate.
But if my cousin wants to contemplate the mysteries of the unknown, then he may as well do it in the middle of a Ch'noze snowstorm.’
‘Yes.’
Khotan sat down heavily on the bench beside Burun, and Rostov realised suddenly that the Kha-Khan's son was drunk.
The major-domo came quickly out of the inner chamber.
He bowed to Burun.
‘The Kha-Khan will see you now.’
Burun stood up.
He motioned to Rostov and Alexei.
Khotan subsided suddenly, but before he could fall over, the major-domo was signing to the slaves.
They picked Khotan up and carried him away.
The Kha-Khan's chamber was bigger than the anteroom.
The floor was made of wood which had been brushed with gold leaf so that every knot and line of the grain created a ripple in a seeming golden pool.
In the centre of the room there was a raised dais, roofed with gold.
The Kha-Khan was sitting in a chair which had been carved into the shape of a reclining dragon.
To one side of him there was a low couch.
A woman was stretched lazily along it.
She was only thinly veiled, and Rostov could see that although she was beautiful, she was old.
He stood by Burun's side, knelt and bowed, then prostrated himself.
Even Alexei was awed by the splendour, and behaved perfectly.
Rostov rocked back to sit on his heels and the gold on the floor reflected his face, distorting it so that it was not recognisable.
The richness all around unsettled him, for he had expected to find it accompanied elsewhere in the Khanate by signs of extreme poverty.
Instead there were no beggars on the city streets of either Pesth or Kinsai, and no one in any of the towns and villages through which he had passed seemed to be poorly clothed or underfed.
The existence of a noble class like the Altun was not remarkable in any way.
But Rostov's experience of the Empire had not prepared him to find at the same time a complete absence of the poor and underprivileged.
Arjun the Great was white-haired.
His skin was translucent with age and he had dark brown eyes like two deep pools.
He said something in an undertone to the woman at his side, and she nodded and smiled.
‘Burun Khan, we greet you.’
The Kha-Khan's voice was strong and deep.
‘Lord.’
Burun had risen to his feet.
Now he bowed again.
‘I am happy that you are well.’
‘Ho.
Well, do you say?
If I am well, then the desert has turned to water.’
Rostov saw that Burun was suppressing a grin.
The woman laughed openly, and he stared.
‘Are these the strangers?’
‘Yes, Lord.’
‘Then bring them closer.
My eyes fail me like every other part of my body.’
Rostov waited for Burun's nod, then walked forward until he was a pace from the foot of the dais.
‘Strange.’
The Kha-Khan did not address anyone in particular as he spoke.
‘The one is father to the other, we are told, yet they are not alike.
See, the younger has hair the colour of freshly gathered corn, but the other, his father, is dark.
Apart from his size he could be a C'zak, or even one of us.’
‘Not one of us,’ Burun commented softly.
‘He has no talons.’
‘Ah.
Indeed.’
Rostov wondered how long the conversation was going to continue over his head.
Suddenly he was being addressed directly.
‘How many other worlds?’
For a moment he did not know what had been said.
‘Your pardon, Lord.
I don't understand.’
‘Your people come from other worlds.
How many are they?’
‘Oh.
I'm sorry, Lord.
I don't know.’
‘A thousand?
More than that?’
Rostov thought.
‘More.’
‘And the people.’
It was the woman who spoke.
‘Are they like you?’
‘Some are similar, many are different.
Not all worlds are the same, and life upon them has strange effects upon the body.’
‘Yes.’
The Kha-Khan nodded.
‘Your officer.
We were told of him.’
‘Yes, Lord.
Also there are those who are not human at all— we call them aliens.
Some alien races are intelligent.’
‘Say you so?’
The Kha-Khan seemed to digest the news.
‘And the Khan of your world — how is he called?’
Rostov took a deep breath.
He had dreaded this question.
‘Lord, there is one ruler over all the known worlds, and he is called the Emperor.
His name is Priam; he is the second of his line.’
‘What's that?
A Khan who claims to rule all the known worlds?’
The information was not well received.
Rostov wondered if he could have phrased the statement differently.
But he had already said something similar to Burun, and did not know which of his words had been repeated verbatim.
‘Does he claim this world?’
The Kha-Khan's eyes flashed.
‘What arrogance!’
‘Oh.
Please forgive me, Lord.
The Emperor does not claim this world.
In fact he has no interest in it or in any of the other worlds within your solar system.
The Empire has laws which forbid contact with planets which have been contaminated by certain substances.
This is one of those which is so prohibited.
Excuse me, Lord, but parts of your planet are poisoned, although you may not yet have discovered that fact for yourselves.
The effect of such poisons is to cause some children to be born as monsters, and the people who venture too close to contaminated land sicken and die.’
‘The G'bai.’
It was Burun who spoke the word softly.
The Kha-Khan nodded.
‘Yes.
We know of the poison.
But its effect diminishes every year.
Will not your Emperor send to claim this land when it is gone?
Indeed,’ the accusation came swiftly, ‘did he not send you?’
Rostov thought that probably this one question was the reason for his summons to Kinsai.
‘Lord, I came to this world by accident.
If it was otherwise, surely others would have come by now to find me?’
The Kha-Khan seemed to consider.
‘We are content,’ he said at last.
‘It seems that you would need a vessel such as that in which you came, before you would be able to return to your own world.
Burun Khan may have told you that we know of such machines, but do not concern ourselves with them.
It is possible that some day such concern will change.
Perhaps then the Yek will meet the army of this Emperor, and on that day we will send you to him as our ambassador.’
Rostov remembered the ring of plasma weapons which ensured that Tarvaras was forever isolated, but he said nothing.
‘Serve us and you will prosper.’
The Kha-Khan's tone was tranquil again.
‘You were a general in the armies of your Khan.
No doubt you will find advancement here.’
‘Yes, Lord.’
The Kha-Khan made a sign like a benediction.
Then he looked at Alexei.
‘Truly, this is your son?’
‘Yes, Lord.
He has the look and colouring of his mother.
She is related to the Emperor.’
‘Ho!’
The Kha-Khan seemed unimpressed.
‘Then the lady, his mother,’ it was the woman who spoke, ‘was very fair.’
‘Yes, Lady.’
Rostov sorted through the physical descriptions which Burun had supplied of the principal members of the court and knew that he was addressing Va'na Khatun, once a slave and concubine, but now the wife of Arjun and grandmother to the wife of Burun's own son Jotan.
‘Aah.’
She nodded, satisfied.
It was born upon Rostov that he had the opportunity — perhaps the only one he would ever have — to communicate the extent of the scientific advancement of the Empire and to speak of the technology which he  and his companions were capable of introducing to Tarvaras, even given the prohibitions of the Yasa.
But it was as if there was a halter on his tongue.
The wife of the Kha-Khan was saying something, but for a moment the Yek was incomprehensible.
‘I'm sorry, Khatun.
I don't understand,’ Rostov apologised.
‘The Khatun observed that you would miss your wife, and suggested that it was our duty to find you another.’
It was the Kha-Khan who responded.
Rostov hesitated, trying to find the words to frame a non-committal response.
‘Or are our women unattractive to your eyes?’
‘Oh.
Lord, they are as attractive in their way as women anywhere, or so I would suppose.
I am in any case no judge of beauty.
But forgive me, Lord, if I say that I have no inclination towards another marriage.’
The Kha-Khan did not appear to be offended.
‘As you wish.
Your feelings may alter, and in such a case, you have our blessing.’
He indicated Alexei.
‘On this world or any other, one son is not enough.’
Rostov was not sure that these final words related to his own case.
The Kha-Khan seemed to look inward as he spoke, and there was an uncomfortable silence.
COURTSHIP
Orcadai's house was perched on a ledge which overlooked a sheer drop from the city wall to the plain.
In reality it was not part of the city at all; the builders of Kinsai had carved away the plateau and slotted the massive stones of the defences into place around the old structure so that the marvellous symmetry of the circular layout would not be interrupted.
‘Hold!’
A sentry on the wall called out to Burun as he rode the narrow path below.
‘Declare yourself.’
‘Burun Khan.
Let me pass.’
Burun kicked the st'lyan as she tried to sidestep.
‘Lord.’
The sentry grinned and saluted.
‘I should have known you.’
Burun grunted.
The silver banner of the Merkuts was flapping on a staff outside the house and, from the number of animals tethered under the lean-to shelter at one side, he guessed that Orcadai was entertaining.
The inside of the building was on two levels, constructed so that the upper portion formed a kind of balcony above the lower.
Orcadai and several of the junior officers of the Kha-Khan's Guard were dicing, and they did not notice Burun when he came through the door.
Burun grinned unpleasantly.
Then he grabbed Orcadai by his top knot and by the sash at his waist, dragged him to the rail, and threw him over.
Orcadai tumbled in mid air and howled.
He landed on his back on the bed which was in the centre of the chamber below, and it collapsed.
His guests shouted in outrage, and Burun waved them down.
‘What kind of welcome is this to give your father?’
‘Oh, God.
It's you.’
Orcadai got up out of the wreckage of the bed.
‘I didn't know.’
He started up the stairs, but Burun sidestepped so that he was standing in the way.
‘Hah, child.
You've grown fat and lazy since I saw you last.’
Orcadai looked up at him.
‘Old goat,’ he said, and tried to push past.
Burun caught the outstretched arm, whipped Orcadai round, and threw him back down the stairs.
‘Old, do you say?
Then show some respect.’
Orcadai yelled, and charged up the stairs.
He dived headlong as he reached the top, but Burun stepped out of the way, caught his son's sash at the back as he passed, swung him round and threw him into the wreckage of the bed again.
The guests leaned over the rail, jeered, and shouted advice.
Orcadai gestured them to silence and paced the length of the room.
Burun could see that he was deciding what to do next.
‘Well?’ he said.
Orcadai raced up the stairs, but when he was still some steps from the top he vaulted on to the hand rail and somersaulted into the upper room.
At once he was on Burun.
He seized him by the waist and threw him bodily over the balustrade.
‘Beloved parent.’
He bowed irreverently.
‘I mourn your advancing years.’
Burun charged.
He shouldered into Orcadai, and they struggled at the stair head.
‘Let me win,’ Orcadai whispered hoarsely.
‘You'll embarrass me in front of my guests.’
‘Hah!’
Burun snorted.
He ducked his head and butted Orcadai under the chin, his hands grasping for purchase.
Together they crashed to the floor, and then rolled apart.
Orcadai sat up laughing.
The officers who were watching jeered and Burun glared at them.
‘Go away,’ he ordered.
They left, and Orcadai righted two stools and sat down on one of them.
A female slave came from the back of the house and started to clean up the mess.
‘What are you doing in Kinsai?’
Orcadai straightened his robe.
‘The last time I heard, you were in Ch'nozia.’
‘Oh.
The Kha-Khan wanted to see some prisoners who were taken near Pesth.
Strangers from another world.’
‘Hunh.’
‘But I would have been through here sooner or later anyway.
The Kha-Khan has ordered a campaign against the Alan.
Siban commands, and I am to carry out the reconnaissance.’
Orcadai looked up sharply.
‘You're taking Jotan of course.’
‘Naturally.
You as well.
I have the Kha-Khan's authorisation.’
‘Good.
I'm tired of ceremonial.
Where is the assembly?’
‘Pesth.
My own first tenth and a tenth of T'zin's.
The bronze month.’
‘That's two months away,’ Orcadai objected.
‘What are we going to do until then?’
‘Well for a start we're going to get everyone into shape to cross the G'bai.
The Kha-Khan has ordered me to take Nogai and the younger Altun.’
‘Name of God.
And you're taking Jotan.
You know he and Nogai have a feud unfinished?’
‘Yes.
But they can settle it in their own time.’
Orcadai looked amused.
‘Huh.
I think I'm going to enjoy watching you trying to keep them apart.
When do you want me to leave?’
‘You can wait here until I get back from the Khirgiz.’
‘Ah.’
Orcadai laughed shortly.
‘Let me guess.
I'm to escort Zurachina to Pesth.’
‘To the escarpment if she wants to travel that far.
Your mother as well.’
‘You're sure you don't want to make your life a little more complicated?’
Orcadai made the enquiry politely.
‘Jotan and Nogai on one hand, and both of your wives on the other.
What a combination.’
He grinned.
‘Well, the journey will give my mother something new to complain about.
I expect she's been bored lately.’
Burun retrieved a wine flask from the floor.
‘Oh.’
Orcadai looked surprised.
‘Do you want a drink?’
‘I thought you'd never ask.’
Burun uncorked the flask and drank deeply.
‘God, how can you stand this stuff?
It's like taking a mouthful of honey.’
Orcadai gestured languidly.
‘One gets used to it.’
His tone seemed to alter.
‘Everything is too sweet here.’
‘Oh?
And how is the court this month?
I have heard some strange tales.’
‘What do you expect?
Khotan is drunk, when he isn't doped with hashish and, now that Nogai and his brothers are forbidden the Golden Pavilion, your father-in-law is courting everyone.’
‘Hunh.
I might be a drunk if I had Khotan's reasons.
He always feared to inherit the Khanate.’
Burun looked sideways.
‘So it's to be Vortai Kha-Khan, is it?
The name doesn't sit very well on the tongue.
And it seems to me that there are better claims.’
‘True.’
Orcadai nodded.
‘There's Kodai.
But he's older than Arjun.
How long would he reign?
And everyone knows that Siban has no desire to sit on the  Dragon Throne.
I'm surprised you haven't been approached to give your support.’
‘By Vortai?’
Burun snorted.
‘He knows me better than that.’
He drank more wine.
‘So the Kha-Khan is really sick?’
‘He fails a little more every day.
Sometimes he gets better, but the improvement never lasts.’
‘So.’
Burun studied the wine flask absently, then laid it aside.
‘Did you know that Vortai has been ordered to command the base camp on the escarpment during the campaign?’
‘Ensuring that he won't be in Kinsai when the Kha-Khan dies,’ Orcadai observed.
‘How convenient.’
‘Yes.’
‘The Kha-Khan's order, do you suppose?
Or is Siban trying to tell us all something?’
‘Well, considering that Siban has been ordered to Kinsai, I think the Kha-Khan might be indicating a preference, don't you?’
‘Hunh.’
Orcadai was watching Burun shrewdly.
‘And is that a preference you intend to follow?’
‘God.
You're all the same.
The Kha-Khan isn't dead yet, so I haven't decided.
Why do you think you are still unmarried?’
Orcadai said nothing.
He studied the floor between his feet, and Burun guessed that the rumour was true and he was involved with one of the Khatun's ladies-in-waiting.
‘On that subject,’ Orcadai spoke finally, ‘I would hope to be consulted first.’
Burun grinned.
If any of his sons married without his permission, he had the right to have the match annulled.
He had married Jotan to the daughter of the Kha-Khan's late second son Buratai.
If the opportunity presented itself he intended to marry his other children just as advantageously.
Burun took Suragai with him when he left Kinsai to ride north into the lush grassland of the Khirgiz.
He was beginning to find that he enjoyed the big offworlder's company, and it was amazing how many things they had in common.
The Merkut clan was camped along the curve of a small lake, and when he saw the first yurts Burun kicked his st'lyan into a gallop, his spirit soaring with anticipation.
Jotan had placed the family yurts in the centre of a clearing, part of a screen of trees which enfolded the northern end of the lake.
Men were herding mares and their foals away from the water, and a few women were washing clothes beside the shore.
As the riders passed they called out: high-pitched cries which startled the birds that nested in the tree-tops.
Burun grinned and waved.
The Khirgiz was choice pasture and, in the days before he had made submission to Daijin, the Merkuts had fought with other clans for the grazing rights.
Arjun had given Burun the land for all time, and now the Merkuts occupied it in peace and prospered.
There were children and dogs around the wash tubs.
The girls who were almost women practised for motherhood by taking care of the toddlers and babies, and along the water's edge whooping small boys rode their young st'lyan through sheets of spray.
Zurachina came out of the largest yurt.
She was small and slim, red-haired like her Altun cousins, and her brown eyes sparkled with pleasure.
She watched Burun dismount, and when he turned to face her they stood wordlessly.
After a moment he took her hands in his.
‘Khan.
I heard you were in Pesth.’
‘I was.
I'm going back in three days.’
She laughed.
‘And you thought I would enjoy the journey.’
She nodded.
‘I'll tell Anya to pack.’
The offworlder was still mounted.
She looked up at him and smiled.
‘You must be Suragai.
I've heard of you.’
Suragai was bowing from the saddle.
‘Your servant, Lady.’
Burun was still holding Zurachina's hands, and she looked back at him.
He knew his gaze was avid, and she blushed like a young girl and lowered her eyes.
‘Did you miss me?’
‘No.’
She looked up and smiled, so that his heart gave an absurd bump of joy.
‘But if you hadn't come, I'd have died of loneliness.’
Burun laughed.
‘Woman.
You always say the same thing.
–
‘Yes,’ she agreed.
‘And it's always true.’
She walked in front of him into the yurt.
It had been recently re-floored, and the polished timber glowed.
‘Where is Kiku?’
Burun had not meant to ask so soon.
Zurachina picked up a loose cushion.
‘In the other yurt.’
‘And Jotan?’
‘Out inspecting the herds.’
‘Hunh.’
He turned towards the door, but Zurachina moved in front of him.
‘Have you eaten yet?’
‘No.’
He shook his head.
‘I'm not hungry just now.
Later.’
He took another pace, but she did not move aside.
‘I'll have the slaves prepare a feast.
The offworlder will he eat our food?
He's much taller than I expected.’
Burun knew she was delaying him deliberately.
‘Yes,’ he answered patiently.
‘He eats our food.’
He grinned.
‘You will be eating here?’
She stressed the last word.
‘Yes.
But later.’
He lifted Zurachina up by the shoulders and set her aside.
Then he walked out through the doorway.
The smaller yurt was an ocean of coolness and quiet.
Two female slaves were tending a small fire in a brazier in the antechamber, and when Burun entered they veiled themselves.
Burun snorted.
The floor of the inner room was of light-coloured wood which had been sanded to an unbelievable smoothness.
A white rug had been laid in the centre of the floor and Kiku was seated on an ebony stool, her back to the door.
She was combing her hair, her face reflected in the mirror sheet of beaten gold.
Her eyes met Burun's for a moment and her hand stopped moving.
Then she looked away.
Burun knelt behind her and touched her cheek with the back of his hand.
She shuddered.
He could see that her body was naked beneath the midnight blue silk of her robe and her scent overpowered his senses.
Her hand stole up to cover his and gradually she rested herself back against him.
In spite of his desire for Kiku, he spent the first night in Zurachina's yurt.
It would have disturbed the harmony of his house to have done otherwise.
‘Siban wants me to scout the G'bai, the passes through the mountains, and the plain where the Moistr’ River flows to the sea.’
Burun took a handful of nuts from a bowl and cracked one open.
Jotan nodded.
‘I've seen the old maps.
There are a lot of cities.’
‘Yes.
We will have to siege or storm them.
Or maybe we can simply cut them off from one another until they surrender.’
‘Maybe.
But that would be boring.
What do you want me for?’
‘I want you to ride east once we cross the G'bai.
The land between the Serai Gorge and the southern coast is completely unknown, and I would like to be sure that we aren't going to have any surprises at our backs when we start this war.’
‘Hunh.
Is that all?’
‘Not quite.
There may be a way into the Alan country south of the mountains.
I don't believe they run all the way to the sea.
If there is a coastal plain you're to find it, and in that case we'll meet near that southern coastal city —’ Burun gestured, searching his memory for the name, ‘— Ruysdal.’
‘Very well.’
Jotan sat back.
‘I'm taking Jehan.’
Burun nodded.
He had known what Jotan was going to say.
‘Zurachina told me.
Is there anything I can say to change your mind?’
‘Nothing.’
‘I won't try, then.’
Burun cracked another nut and ate the meat.
‘I don't know why you're so set against the idea.’
Jotan sounded stubborn.
‘According to Jagatan you went to war when you were ten years of age.’
‘The Merkuts were fighting for their lives then.
I just don't want to lose my grandson, that's all.’
‘You won't.
How many men are you going to give me for this work?’
‘Five hundred from T'zin's fourth tenth.
Also you can take Tulagai and Targoutai.
Their personal guards will add another two hundred to your strength.’
‘I command?’
‘Subject to Siban's agreement, yes.’
Jotan made a face.
‘I command, or I don't go.
I've ridden with that pair before.
They need authority.’
Burun thought about arguing, but dismissed the idea.
Apart from anything else, he knew Jotan was right.
‘I'm taking your mother and Kiku with me to Kinsai.
Orcadai will escort them on from there.
Are you leaving Arkhina here?’
Jotan shook his head.
‘No.
I'm sending her to visit her grandfather.’
He met Burun's look squarely.
‘I thought it might be useful if we knew what was happening at court while we were in the south.’
Burun shrugged and pretended disinterest.
‘As you choose.’
He thought about the position which he was being forced to take, and decided that he was unhappy about the whole situation.
In the event of the Kha-Khan's death, every Khan and every member of the Altun even those related by marriage like Jotan — would have a vote in the election of his successor.
The absence of a clear candidate was likely to result in a land torn by dispute and, because Arjun had not so far named anyone, it was to men like Burun that the others looked for indication of a preference.
Burun sighed.
He had no desire to be a kingmaker.
The fire by which Jotan sat lit only half the clearing and left the rest in shadow.
On a sudden instinct Burun looked round and saw that the offworlder Suragai was standing at the water's edge.
He seemed to be gazing up at the night sky.
Burun wondered how long the big stranger had been there — not long, surely.
Then he wondered if he was capable of putting what he must have heard to some use.
Jotan stirred the fire.
‘I suppose you'll keep Nogai with you.’
His tone was bland.
Burun compressed his lips.
No one knew how the fight between Jotan and Nogai had started and both had the right to refuse to speak against the other except in front of the Kha-Khan.
A feud was a private matter.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘The Kha-Khan wants me to report on his conduct.’
‘Oh?’
Jotan looked interested.
‘I ask you not to fight with him.’
Jotan laughed softly.
‘Ask?
That's a sweet sound coming out of your mouth, Khan.
Did you swallow honey?’
‘Please.
It's a fight neither of you can win.’
Jotan stirred the fire again.
He grinned.
‘That depends on what you call winning.’
‘Damn you!’
Burun was unable to rein in his temper.
‘Obey me and stay away from Nogai!’
‘Hah!’
Jotan laughed aloud.
‘I didn't think you could keep up such softness for long.
But no, dear father.
Saving my duty under the Yasa, that's an order you can't enforce.’
He stood up.
‘I'll see to Nogai in my own time and I advise you not to interfere.’
In the middle of the night one of Kiku's cats got in among the dogs and, when Burun got up to see what was causing the commotion, he found Suragai trying to save the animal.
The cat was white, a Suristani with a prehensile tail, and it hung from the lower branch of one of the trees and slashed at the dogs which were clustered below.
Suragai's hands were already scratched and bleeding, and he was cursing quietly in his own tongue as he positioned himself for another rescue attempt.
Burun stood watching for a moment and laughed.
It was the nature of dogs to eat cats and he had never been able to see the sense of trying to stop them.
Then, as the dogs started baying again, he went back inside the yurt and returned carrying a stockwhip.
He shook out the coils, then reached out and clipped a piece from the ear of the largest hound in the pack.
The dogs fled.
The cat howled, dropped to the ground, and shot between Suragai's legs and disappeared back inside Kiku's yurt.
Suragai looked after it.
His expression was comical and Burun laughed again.
Then he stopped.
‘I know.’
It was easy to read the resentment on the offworlder's face.
‘But from where I stand, it's funny.’
He inspected the scratches.
They were long and deep.
‘You'd better have those seen to.
Come.’
Suragai followed him into Zurachina's yurt.
Burun sent a slave for water and towels.
The offworlder looked rueful.
‘On my world a cat is a domestic pet,’ he observed.
Burun was interested.
‘Have your cats claws?’
‘Oh, yes.
And they scratch sometimes.
But they're not so —’ The offworlder seemed to search for a word.
‘Wild?’
‘Yes.’
Burun grimaced.
‘Surely you don't expect our animals to be the same as yours?’
Suragai's hesitation was apparent.
‘Those that I have seen are of the same basic stock,’ he said at last.
‘But altered.
The animal you ride for instance—’
‘St'lyan?’
‘Yes.
In the Empire they would be called unicorn.
But they are —’ Suragai used a word Burun did not understand, then corrected himself, ‘— imaginary.
They exist only in stories for children.’
‘Hunh.
But if they are described in stories, then surely they must have lived once upon a time?’
Suragai looked doubtful.
‘Well.
No one is really sure.
The stories originate from Terra, the birthplace of mankind, or so it is said.
But if Terra exists, no one knows where it is.’
Burun tried not to let his scepticism show.
‘Oh well.
The st'lyan has always existed here.’
‘Always?’
Burun shrugged and gestured.
‘They are mentioned in our history and they are in the old texts.
So they lived in the world before we became a people.’
He visualised.
‘Five thousand summers at least.’
Suragai seemed to inspect his hands.
The bleeding had almost stopped.
Then he looked up.
‘In the Empire it is thought that the history of mankind goes back about five million years.’
Burun digested the implications of the statement.
‘Five thousand thousand?’
He queried the number.
‘Yes.
At least that, and probably more.
No one knows quite for certain.
But there was another Empire, about the time you say your history starts, and before that another, or something like it.
Also there were the federations: groups of worlds which banded together and fought one another for supremacy.’
The offworlder's eyes were troubled, as if he saw the whole past of his kind moving before him.
He looked up.
‘Khan, mankind has been in space for a very long time.’
Burun was silent for a moment.
The fact that Suragai clearly believed what he was saying did not mean that it was true.
‘You mentioned old texts,’ Suragai said.
‘Do they contain nothing of this?
What do they say?’
Burun stared at him.
‘Am I Sechem?
The old texts describe the science of a time past, before we became a people.
They describe our world, and speak of other worlds beyond.
They are knowledge.’
The offworlder looked as if he failed to comprehend the distinction between science and history.
A slave brought hot water in a bowl.
Burun started to clean the cuts on Suragai's hands.
He was amazed that the wounds were still open, and that although they had ceased to bleed, they had not healed themselves.
‘These will scar.’
The offworlder grinned.
‘I will know better next time.’
Burun realised that the observation had been taken at face value.
He flexed his hand and stroked a talon across his own forearm.
Blood welled.
Suragai looked startled, then puzzled.
‘Khan, why —’ Suddenly he seemed to realise that the cut on Burun's arm had ceased to bleed.
Burun extended his arm for inspection.
‘This will not scar.’
Already the lips of the wound were drawing together.
‘Does that happen every time you are injured?’
Suragai appeared to be fascinated.
‘To a great extent.
Broken bones must be set quickly and they are weak for a time.
Deep wounds must be stitched together to help the healing process and they tend to leave scars.
But it is the same for everyone on this world — even for the races that have no talons.’
‘And you don't get sick,’ Suragai said slowly.
‘I didn't understand.’
Burun nodded significantly.
‘We heal differently, you and I.’
‘Yes.’
Suragai's expression was thoughtful.
‘So we do.’
Now that the cuts on the offworlder's hands were clean and dry, Burun saw that they were not as bad as he had thought.
It had been the amount of blood flowing which had made him think that they were worse.
He thought about what Suragai had been saying about the origins of mankind.
‘The animals on this world and on others are of common stock, you say.
Surely you don't now contend that your race and mine have also a common ancestor?’
Suragai was hesitating, and Burun saw that he was trying to choose his words to avoid giving offence.
He smiled softly.
‘Khan, there are records which show that this world was resettled during the Second Empire, over five thousand years ago.
The races without talons are similar to the inhabitants of other worlds in many respects.
The C'zak language, for example, is the same in essence as the Anglic which is spoken throughout the Imperium.’
Burun weighed the argument.
‘What you say may be true.
Perhaps the other races on this world are the descendants of the people of this one-time Empire.
But how about the Yek, the N'pani, the Ch'noze?’
The offworlder shifted as if in embarrassment.
At last he responded.
‘The scientists of the Empire who were responsible for examining your world from space concluded that some of the races had been altered, either deliberately or as a result of the radiation which poisoned every continent.’
He looked up and met Burun's eyes.
‘But of course it is possible that they were wrong.’
‘Hunh.’
Burun nodded.
He did not think that the True People were the result of some genetic accident.
More probably they were the original inhabitants of the planet, and had evolved until they were superior to the interlopers.
Much of what Suragai had said suggested that all the races had been around for far longer than recorded history, but that was a possibility which had always been accepted.
Only a fool assumed that the knowledge which was in his possession was the fullest extent of a man's ability to know.
Suragai was obviously relieved by Burun's reaction.
Apparently he had expected that his explanation would be taken as an insult.
Burun decided to mention the conversation to the Sechem at a suitable opportunity.
‘Am I to be dragged halfway across the country in a cart?’
Kiku's expression was frigid, and Burun laughed.
‘Tied hand and foot if you argue about it,’ he agreed.
‘I thought you were bored with the Khirgiz.’
She made a face and turned away.
She was kneeling in front of a case of fine linen which Burun had brought for her from Kinsai.
Her head was at the level of his thigh, and he laid a hand on her shoulder.
Against the smoothness of her skin his hand seemed rough.
‘Don't,’ she said.
‘You hurt me.’
Burun snorted.
He went out into the antechamber and sat with C'zinsit.
The boy was eight, and still supposedly in the care of a nurse.
He was dark like Burun, but his eyes held the remembrance of Kiku.
‘Are you going away again?’
C'zinsit asked.
Burun nodded.
‘Yes.
The Kha-Khan has work for me.
Will you miss me?’
C'zinsit thought about the question.
‘Yes,’ he said after a moment.
‘But you'll come back, won't you?’
‘Oh, yes.’
‘That's all right then.’
C'zinsit had a length of string formed into a loop and he was playing a complex game with it.
‘Have you seen this?’ he asked Burun.
Burun looked.
‘Yes.’
Then he looked again.
The cat's cradle had elongated so that it looked like a cone.
‘No.
I haven't seen that one before.
How is it done?’
C'zinsit demonstrated.
‘You're taking Jotan with you.’
His eyes were on the string.
‘And mother.’
‘Yes.
And you will be Khan while I am gone, and the people will come to you for justice.’
Burun watched his son's face.
‘Oh.’
The cone collapsed.
‘What you mean is that my uncle will tell me what to say.’
Burun grinned.
‘That's right.
Don't you like Jagatan?’
‘Of course.
He tells me stories.’
Burun nodded.
‘I expect they're the same ones he used to tell me.’
‘But —’ C'zinsit paused as if he was unsure how to continue.
‘Yes?’
‘If I do what Jagatan says all the time, how can I be the true Khan?’
‘Well you could do something else,’ Burun said mildly.
‘But if you made a bad decision, or gave the wrong judgement against someone in a dispute, then some of your people might suffer.’
‘Hunh.’
C'zinsit made a face.
‘I hadn't thought of that.
It's not easy being a Khan.’
‘No.
It's a great responsibility.’
Burun smiled.
‘But I think you're equal to it.’
Kiku came out of the inner chamber.
‘Take me riding,’ she said.
C'zinsit sat up very straight.
‘Me too?’ he appealed.
Burun looked over C'zinsit's head at Kiku, and she laughed at his expression.
He wanted to be alone with her, to anticipate the night to come, and he guessed that she was teasing him.
‘Very well.’
He nodded.
C'zinsit whooped and dashed outside.
Kiku's eyes were bright with mischief.
‘Wait for me, Khan, while I change.’
She shrugged her gown away from her shoulders.
It fell to the floor at her feet.
Burun felt the heat rising through his body.
Kiku was naked.
She looked challengingly at him, then walked through the hangings out of his sight.
He clenched and unclenched his hands, and took a long  deep breath.
Then he went outside to wait.
The night was hours away.
Suragai was riding along the lake shore.
He was schooling a new st'lyan that Burun had given him.
When he saw Burun outside the yurt he guided the mare across.
‘How does she handle?’
Burun inspected the mare.
‘Quite well, Khan.’
Suragai made a clicking sound with his tongue against the soft palate of his mouth and the st'lyan backed up four or five paces.
Then she snorted and dipped her head.
Burun laughed.
He noticed that Suragai had not used his hands at all during the manoeuvre.
‘Good.
You ride like a Yek.’
‘Oh well.’
Suragai grinned.
‘I've been practising.
It seems to me that I might have my hands busy during a fight, so I've taught this one to answer to sounds, and to react to the pressure of my thighs.’
Burun nodded approvingly.
‘Yes.
Good.’
He remembered that Suragai had said that on most worlds men did not ride, and he wondered how they managed.
C'zinsit hurled himself into the saddle and charged away.
Burun nodded to a mounted trooper who galloped after the boy, guarding him like a mother hen with a chick.
C'zinsit bounced out of the saddle, touched the ground with his feet, then vaulted up on to the mare's back again.
He balanced with both feet on the st'lyan's withers, and Suragai stared.
‘Do all Yek children ride like that?’
Burun grinned.
‘No.
Only the Merkuts.’
Osep brought up the piebald that Burun used for riding when he was with the clan, and Burun mounted.
Kiku's st'lyan was a light golden tan and it had a pure white mane and tail.
It sidestepped nervously, reared, and the slave leading it let go of the rein.
Burun cursed.
‘Catch that devil-damned rein!’
Already the mare was trotting past the yurt, heading for the plain beyond the trees.
Half a dozen men started forward to obey Burun's shouted command, but then Kiku came out of the yurt door.
She ran in front of the animal and caught at the bridle.
The st'lyan tossed her head, and then quietened.
Burun guessed that Kiku had been no more than a hair's-breadth away from being impaled on the st'lyan's gilden horn.
He discovered that he was holding his breath, and gulped for air.
If she had been hurt, he would have had the slave bastinadoed.
If she had been killed, he would personally have roasted the man over a slow fire.
Kiku laughed.
She was unveiled, and all the men were watching her, their thoughts plain upon their faces.
The offworlder Suragai got down off his animal to help her mount, and she thanked him prettily.
Then she looked across at Burun, smiled brilliantly, and lashed the st'lyan across the barrel so that it charged away through the trees and out on to the plain.
Burun rode after her.
The grass was lush green and came up to the st'lyan's hocks.
C'zinsit was far ahead, wheeling in wide circles which brought him every so often closer to Kiku as she now rode sedately towards the hills.
The trooper in attendance kept pace, but his head was mostly turned away from his charge while he studied the occasional stands of trees or searched the landscape for hidden folds from which an ambush might be mounted.
Burun thought that the precaution was probably unnecessary, but he approved the sentiment which resulted in its instigation.
There were no enemies and only a few night-time predators on the steppe; however he was pleased to note that elementary security was not being neglected.
He kicked his st'lyan into a trot and rode to catch up with Kiku.
Jagatan's yurt was set well away from the others of the clan.
It commanded a rise in the ground on the eastern side of the lake, and Burun grinned at the preoccupation with strategy which appeared to have determined its position.
There was a female slave working outside, but when Burun rode up she did not even raise her head.
Jagatan was lying on a couch under the awning at the door.
He was stripped to the waist and the scars on his chest were like a map of the battles in which he had fought.
Burun decided that his uncle was only a little drunk.
There was a minstrel sitting on a stool by the yurt wall.
He was singing the Ballad of the Dragon, and Burun waited until he had finished the stanza before he spoke.
‘Well, uncle.’
Jagatan raised his head.
‘Oh.
It's you.
You took your time coming to see me.’
‘I did have other priorities.’
Burun's reply was mild.
‘Hunh.
Women and children.’
‘Yes.
Well, I was away almost a year.
And I had only a day here before I received the Kha-Khan's summons.’
‘I lose track of the time.’
Burun grinned at the lie.
Jagatan liked to pretend that his faculties were failing.
In fact he was as sharp as a man half his age.
The minstrel got up quietly and went inside.
Then he started to sing again.
‘— And sank into the water's depth,
Enfolded in his scales
The maiden lay —
And fast did hold in slumber safe,
Until the dawn of time,
And True Men came.’
Burun made a face, but either Jagatan failed to notice or he did not care.
‘How was Ch'nozia?’
Jagatan asked finally.
Burun shrugged.
‘Different.’
‘Oh, well.
You always liked new places.
But now you are returned?’
‘For a short time only.
There will be a war against the Alan next year.
I am charged with the reconnaissance.’
Jagatan spat.
‘They use you like a pack beast.’
His tone was angry, almost querulous.
‘How many summers have you spent with the clan since you were old enough to fight their battles?’
‘Oh.
Few enough.’
‘And always they place you in the forefront.
If they intend your death —’
Burun was alarmed to see that his uncle was becoming agitated.
‘Why should they want that?
I am the Kha-Khan's trusted servant, and he has given me everything I ever asked of him: this land in perpetuity, peace and security for our clan forever.’
‘The land was ours by right.’
Jagatan raised himself on one elbow, and Burun guessed that he had been drinking for most of the afternoon.
‘I remember when we rode here, your father and I. Young and strong we were.
And now —’ Jagatan sank back on the couch.
There were tears on his cheeks.
‘I know.
I know.’
Burun spoke soothingly.
He did not know how to react to Jagatan's distress.
As a youth he had mourned his father, of course.
But the memory of the man in his prime was not constantly in the forefront of his mind, and it did not cause the pain and unhappiness Jagatan always seemed to feel.
The Yek had killed his father in an ambush, but he did not hate them, and had never wondered why.
Jagatan poured k'miss from a jug.
He drank unsteadily.
He was the elder brother of Burun's father, the son of a concubine, never acknowledged as heir.
His hair had been white for as long as Burun could remember, but this was the first time his age had seemed to affect his behaviour.
‘The flower of the Merkuts —’ Jagatan's voice was a mumble, ‘all gone.
All the young men.’
He wept and Burun laid a hand on his shoulder.
‘I know.
But we are Yek now.’
Inside the yurt the minstrel was still singing.
The ballad was ancient, the kind of thing that only an old man would enjoy.
It recounted the fable of the emergence of the One People from the eggs of a mythical golden dragon.
‘— All armour'd in the dragon's scales
The young men bravely fought
That break of day —
And as they fell upon that field,
Their dragon time began
In golden flame.’
Burun went round to the side of the yurt and called the female slave he had seen working there.
Together they supported Jagatan inside the yurt.
The minstrel stopped singing abruptly, and went outside.
Burun sneered.
Jagatan seemed to be asleep.
‘How often is he like this?’
The woman was middle-aged, a Keraistani.
She pulled a quilt up over Jagatan's shoulders, then looked up.
‘Once or twice a month,’ she said finally.
‘Does he get sick?’
‘Sometimes.
And he sees things — old battles and  people he once knew.
He talks to your father.’
‘Who looks after him?’
‘I do.’
The woman's eyes were bold, and Burun wondered if she also shared Jagatan's bed.
‘Very well.
Don't let him drink any more.’
‘Hah.’
She made a face.
‘He'll beat me.’
‘Tell him it's my order.
Now go and make him something to eat.
I'll sit with him.’
She went out.
Burun sat down on a pile of cushions on the floor, and settled himself to wait.
He thought that probably it would be the evening before Jagatan woke, but he needed to discuss certain matters with him before he left for Kinsai.
Because Turakina's private time had coincided with Burun's return, he had spoken to his daughter only briefly.
Jotan's sister was eighteen, and Burun was constantly aware that he would have to find her a husband before the year was out, otherwise she would be entitled to go with any man she chose.
It was not that she was unattractive, or that there had not been offers for her.
Turakina was nearly as tall as Burun, and she had inherited her mother's Altun colouring.
Enough young men came to pay their respects, Burun was aware.
But few of them were of good family or had prospects which were worthy of consideration.
In any case Burun thought that there was a wild streak in his daughter's nature, and he suspected that only a mature man would be able to manage her.
All the eligible mature men were married already, and it would not be fitting to contract her in a match where she was not the senior wife.
They were heading south-west along the road to Kinsai.
The red ball of the late afternoon sun was low on the horizon.
Both Kiku and Turakina had insisted on riding and, as they galloped along the borders of  the cornfields which supplied the Kha-Khan's granaries, Turakina's unbound hair streamed out behind her so that her whole head appeared to be on fire.
A wild pig started from a patch of undergrowth at the side of the road, and she whooped and rode in pursuit.
Kiku reined in beside Burun.
‘She is unwomanly, that one,’ she observed primly.
Burun chuckled.
He had seen Kiku riding flat out along tracks where no sane man would take an animal faster than a trot — but only when she thought no one was watching.
‘Hah!’
He watched as Turakina caught up with the pig and rode over it.
It squealed and dashed unhurt into the corn, and she trotted her st'lyan back up the road again, laughing.
Kiku adjusted her veil and rode sedately back towards Zurachina's cart.
The offworlder Suragai was riding at the cart-tail and he made way and then urged his mount forward to join Burun.
Turakina drew level and Suragai bowed.
‘Lady.’
The greeting was polite, almost formal.
Turakina ignored him.
She looked at Burun.
‘How much further is it to Kinsai?’
‘Oh, a day's march or so,’ Burun exaggerated, teasing her.
‘What, are you bored already?
Go sit with your mother.’
‘Huh.’
She tossed her head.
‘Who wants to sit with women, talking women's things?
Come and race with me.’
‘Oh, no.’
Burun shook his head.
‘Not I. Race with Suragai, if you must.’
Turakina behaved as if she was seeing the offworlder for the first time.
‘Can he ride that well?’
Her tone was supercilious.
‘Ask me, Lady.’
Suragai's response was barely audible.
He looked at Burun, and Burun grinned.
Turakina wrinkled her nose as if she was smelling bad meat.
Her stare was openly insulting, and Burun waited to see how Suragai would react.
‘Or can you only win races against men of your own family?’ the offworlder finished.
Burun choked on a laugh.
Turakina flushed crimson.
She lashed out with her riding whip, but Burun caught the thongs.
‘You asked for that,’ he told her.
‘Now apologise and behave, or go and ride with your mother.’
Angrily Turakina jerked her mare's head round.
She galloped away towards the rear of the convoy of carts and attendants.
Burun looked after her, then sighed.
‘I apologise for her.’
He did not know whether to be amused or angry.
Suragai shrugged.
‘With respect, Khan,’ he gestured dismissively, ‘your daughter is no different from young women on other worlds I have visited.
And no doubt she thinks me strange beyond belief I am too tall, not handsome by this world's standards, and I don't know how to pay the pretty compliments a young woman expects.
Perhaps you ought to introduce her to my son.
They might get on well.
He doesn't like me much either.’
Burun sniffed.
He had left Suragai's son in Kinsai with Orcadai.
From the outset he had decided that he did not much care for the tall fair youth who seemed to look down his long nose at everything.
Alexai fitted in well enough in military surroundings, and it was apparent that he was used to that kind of ceremonial which was commonplace in the capital.
However, he maintained an obvious disdain for the customs of the True People which irked Burun.
Burun thought about what Suragai had said, and finally he grinned.
Now that he considered it, Turakina's expression when she stared at the offworlder  was exactly like the one Alexai used when he was looking at Burun.
‘I will see you in Pesth.’
Burun looked past Zurachina, out into the courtyard.
He hated goodbyes, and now that the women had been safely delivered into Orcadai's hands, he was urgent to be away.
‘Ten days, or perhaps twelve,’ Zurachina said.
‘Will you be able to bear it?’
The sarcasm in her tone made Burun look back quickly, and she laughed.
‘Oh, you.’
He hugged her, and she nestled against his chest.
Kiku was standing beside the open window.
She was pretending to look at the people who were passing in the street, but Burun was not deceived.
‘Don't stare at her like that,’ Zurachina whispered.
‘It makes her proud.’
‘Hush.’
Burun buried his face in her red hair.
‘You mustn't criticise her.
She's not like us.’
Zurachina made a rude noise and Kiku turned.
‘Don't ride while you are travelling to Pesth.’
Burun addressed Kiku.
‘Or if you must, have Orcadai guard you.
The Ch'noze are raiding further east than usual this year.’
Kiku made a face.
‘Orcadai will be too busy.
And he doesn't let me ride where I want.’
‘Then you will have to stay in the cart.’
‘Huh.’
She looked unimpressed.
‘Will there be no other guards?
Assign one to ride with me.’
Burun's mouth twitched.
‘And who would guard the guard?
They're only men, after all.’
‘Oh, well.’
Kiku's sigh was exaggerated.
‘Of course I am only the humble second wife.
I obey your command.’
Burun spluttered, while Zurachina laughed.
Kiku  had never behaved humbly in her life.
‘Give me the offworlder,’ Kiku said suddenly.
‘You can leave him behind for a few days.’
Burun stopped smiling and looked at her sharply.
He had seen nothing pass between Suragai and any woman, but now he wondered if there was something he had missed.
‘Well?’
Kiku's face was set and determined, and as Burun tried to read her expression she turned away from him as if in dismissal.
He swallowed, and went out into the courtyard.
Suragai was standing beside the gate into the street.
He was talking to Jotan and a group of orderlies.
Jotan said something and everyone laughed.
Burun's stomach tightened.
He thought about the offworlder and Kiku together.
Jotan turned.
‘Have you finished your farewells?
Let's ride.’
‘When I am ready.’
Burun stared at Suragai, fighting to conceal his feelings.
The offworlder seemed to sense that something was wrong.
‘Khan.
Have I given offence?’
Burun looked at him hard, but the man did not flinch.
‘Khan?’
He repeated the query.
Burun relaxed a little.
‘Do you want a woman, Suragai?’
The offworlder looked surprised.
‘I made my feelings on that subject clear, Khan.’
‘I didn't ask you about a wife.’
Burun watched Suragai's face.
‘You are a normal man.
Do you want a woman?’
Suragai looked embarrassed.
‘Sometimes.’
He nodded.
‘I'm normal enough.’
‘And if I gave you one, would you take her?’
‘No, Lord.
’ Suragai shook his head.
‘It's much too soon.’
Burun stood undecided.
Jotan was watching him curiously.
One of the orderlies said, ‘As long as you're giving away women, Khan —’
‘Be quiet.’
Burun silenced him.
‘Suragai, come with me.’
He was sure that he would know the truth when he saw them together.
He led Suragai into the house.
Kiku was standing beside the window again.
She turned, and when she saw the offworlder, she smiled.
Suragai bowed to her.
‘Lady.’
Burun could tell that he was puzzled.
Kiku was smiling again, but at him, not at the offworlder.
‘Thank you, Khan,’ she said.
A pulse in Burun's neck jumped, and he turned away.
He was afraid that his emotions were too plain on his face.
Silence hung on the air, and when he turned back he saw that Suragai was still watching as if he did not understand what had occurred.
Burun took a breath, and tried a smile.
‘Suragai, I want you to remain behind.
Travel with my younger son tomorrow, and when my wife wishes to ride, guard her.
I entrust her safety to you.’
‘Lord.’
The offworlder bowed.
Burun nodded dismissal, and Suragai left the room.
Kiku picked up one of her cats.
Her face was inscrutable.
Zurachina was in the next room; Burun could hear her ordering the slaves to unpack the boxes of bed linen.
He crossed the room and took the cat out of Kiku's hands.
‘I am sorry,’ he said.
‘I cannot help what I am.
Jealousy is in my nature.’
Kiku shook her head.
Her eyes were closed.
She moved against him and, when Burun touched her, he found that she was trembling.
There were signs of intense military preparation all  the way into Pesth.
Herds of st'lyan remounts grazed the meadows above the city, and the forges were busy with repairs to weapons and mail.
Tulagai met Burun at the gates.
He looked as if he had been waiting for some time.
‘Where have you been?’
He reined across so that Burun was forced to stop.
‘We expected you days ago.
Didn't you come straight back from Kinsai?
What were you doing?
Arghatun won't arrange the remount herds without your authority, and Wotai backs him up in everything.
Nogai's fighting with T'zin, and we've been left to see to all the training and armouring, Targoutai and I.’
‘So?’
Burun raised an eyebrow.
‘That's what you were ordered to do.’
‘But you don't understand!’
Tulagai reached across and seized Burun's reins.
‘Listen, damn you —‘
Burun kicked his mare hard; she reared and lashed out.
Tulagai fell out of his saddle and someone behind Burun laughed.
‘Just because we don't faint or react the way you want doesn't mean we haven't taken in everything you have said.’
Burun spat.
‘Now get out of my way, or I'll ride over you.
There will be an officer's kuriltai at my house tonight.
Sunset.
Tell your brothers, and make sure they attend.’
He rode on.
Nogai's house was deserted.
The empty rooms echoed and there was an air of desolation about the whole place.
Burun had sent Jotan on to the camp.
Now he felt a gnawing feeling of apprehension in case Nogai was already there.
A clatter of hooves sounded in the yard, then three of the offworlders came into the house.
The one who did not look human was in front.
When he saw Burun, he bowed.
‘Khan.’
His tone was polite.
Burun remembered that the man's name was Yuan, and that he had been staying with Nogai.
He nodded curtly.
Suragai had said that the race was called the Manchu and that this man was a good officer and an expert swordsman.
‘I'm looking for Nogai Noyon,’ Burun said.
‘Do you know where he is?’
The Manchu made an odd hand gesture.
‘I'm sorry, Lord.
I have not seen him since this morning.’
Burun found it uncomfortable to talk to someone who was incapable of understandable facial expression.
He could not interpret the hand gestures and did not know what the offworlder was thinking.
‘He's not at the camp?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Hunh.’
Burun was relieved.
He wanted a chance to talk to Nogai before Jotan caught up with him.
All three of the offworlders were dressed Yek style in tunics and loose trousers tucked into the tops of calf-high boots.
The Manchu also wore a flowing cloak, and his hair had been dressed in a style which was similar to that normally adopted by the Altun.
Part of the head had been shaved, however, and, instead of being fanned out across the top of the scalp, the end of the queue was simply looped over upon itself and tied.
In addition to his d'jaga, Yuan was carrying a sword.
Burun was amazed to see that the hilt of the weapon was almost entirely unguarded and that it was long enough to permit a double-handed grip.
The Manchu's two companions were the men whom Suragai had described as non-commissioned officers.
Their clothing and equipment was more functional, but they carried the same pattern of long sword.
‘Who made these?’
Burun asked.
‘I have not seen their like before.’
‘Oh.
I did, Lord.’
The Manchu bowed.
‘May I show you?’
He extracted the sword complete with scabbard from his sash, and presented it.
Burun attempted to draw the blade, but there was some kind of locking device at the hilt.
Yuan had to show him how it was released.
‘On my world we call this the jusei , Lord.
The great sword.’
The offworlder watched as Burun slid the gleaming blade out of its sheath.
‘It is made by a special process.
The metals are folded together many times before tempering.
See, it has no proper point, and it is sharpened along one edge only.
It is a cutting weapon.’
Burun was extending a finger to test the edge, but Yuan stopped him.
‘No, Lord.
Not like that.
It is sharper than you think.’
The offworlder pulled a hair from his queue.
‘Permit me.’
He brushed the single strand across the edge of the blade.
It parted, and the severed end drifted to the floor.
‘Hunh.’
Burun was impressed.
‘How do you fight?’
The Manchu seemed to hesitate.
‘Lord, I cannot demonstrate well here, but I will try.
Please stand over against the wall.
You will be safe there.’
Burun raised an eyebrow.
He did not think that swordplay was very dangerous, even when practised indoors.
Yuan was saying something in his own tongue to one of his companions, the man Mubarak, who had been renamed Barakai.
The fellow backed off into the centre of the room.
Then he bowed.
The Manchu had replaced his sword in his sash.
He stripped off his cloak.
Now both men bowed together, then unsheathed.
The action was curiously graceful, a two-handed movement which caused both blades to flash in the light as they revolved and reversed.
Both were holding their swords double-handed, one hand above the other on the hilt, arms extended stiffly to  the front so that the sword blade in each case projected up and forward, cutting edge out.
They seemed to bend at the knee, setting their feet apart so that they could never be off balance when they moved.
Suddenly the man called Barakai gave a shout, then charged.
He leapt forward and slashed at Yuan's neck, a circular cut which would have beheaded the Manchu if it had connected.
Burun flinched instinctively.
Then he saw Yuan duck and move aside, apparently without effort.
The swords clashed once in a parry, and then both of the offworlders were circling one another cautiously.
It was clear that the Manchu was permitting his opponent to initiate all the attacking moves and, as the combat progressed, Burun began to appreciate the skill with which the mock battle was being controlled.
Several times he witnessed strokes which would have killed or maimed if they had been allowed to connect with flesh and bone.
He guessed that the two had fought together many times before.
Barakai commenced a fury of strokes which seemed to beat down the Manchu's blade.
The smaller man was retreating and it seemed that his guard was weakening.
Burun clenched his fists and bit his tongue to stop himself from shouting out.
Yuan seemed to turn his opponent's mightiest cut aside at only the very last moment.
Then he began to advance.
Clearly he was the stronger fighter now.
He was striking left and right with unbelievable speed.
With every stroke he shouted ‘Hai!’
Barakai was reeling backwards.
He fell, and the Manchu's final stroke seemed to descend with unstoppable fury.
Then Yuan froze.
The cutting edge of his sword was a hair's-breadth from Barakai's forehead.
Burun held his breath.
He had forgotten that he was watching an exhibition.
Yuan stepped back.
He raised his sword two-handed so that the hilt was level with his face, then he sheathed the blade and bowed.
Barakai got to his feet and bowed also.
Then both men bowed to Burun.
‘Name of God.’
Burun could not keep the respect from his tone.
‘Do all your people fight like that?’
He was not certain.
but the Manchu seemed amused.
‘No, Lord.
Even on my own world there are only a few who earn the title of sei-sen — sword bearer.
Those of us who now serve the Kha-Khan have practised together many times.’
‘Suragai and his son also?’
‘Yes, Lord.’
‘And who is the best fighter?’
‘Oh, I am, Lord.’
The answer was given with perfect sincerity.
‘Suragai is almost as good.’
Yuan made another odd hand gesture.
‘But I was born to the sword.’
The kuriltai at Burun's house began with a noisy argument between Tulagai and Jotan.
Jotan had already countermanded a number of orders given with regard to the arming of the troopers who were to ride on his portion of the reconnaissance.
Now he was criticising the discipline of the men of Tulagai's personal guard: a force of about a hundred men which was maintained by every one of the Kha-Khan's grandsons.
‘Guard?’
Jotan was shouting as Burun entered the room.
‘A handful of Merkut children armed with stones could see them off, Tulagai.’
Tulagai was flushed and it was apparent that Jotan had been baiting him for some time.
He started forward, but he was restrained by Hodai and Targoutai.
‘Everyone knows that Merkut children are dangerous.’
It was Nogai who spoke.
He was flanked by  T'zin and Alexai.
Yuan was sitting quietly behind him.
Burun wondered what the Manchu would tell Suragai when he saw him.
Jotan looked up quickly when Nogai spoke, but he said nothing.
‘Settle down, all of you.’
Burun growled at them.
‘I don't propose to spend all night on this, so if you can't behave, you can get out.
There's a caravan leaving for Kinsai in the morning, and anyone who displeases me will be on it.’
Nogai looked amused.
‘Can you do that, Khan?
I think you're bluffing.’
Burun looked across the room.
Then he grinned.
‘Try me and see, Nogai.
You're the last person who can afford to make that journey.’
Nogai tried to pretend that the threat was of no consequence, but he did not interrupt again.
Burun waved his arms for quiet.
‘With the exception of Orcadai, Suragai and Yoruba the Y'frike, you are the complete assembly of those who will officer the reconnaissance of the Alan country.
I will command the main body and Jotan will be responsible for that part of the force which will travel west once we have crossed the G'bai.
‘The easy ride,’ Tulagai jeered.
‘Then you should be happy.’
Burun looked at him.
‘You and Targoutai travel under Jotan's command.’
At once Targoutai and Tulagai started to protest.
Burun waved them down.
‘Tulagai, if you don't want to go you can always stay here and run caravans of supplies down to the escarpment camp.
No?
Then I assume that you withdraw your objection.
Everyone else comes with me.
Once we are through the mountains and out on to the plain of the Moistr’ River we may split into smaller groups, but I will decide who will be given individual  commands when that arises.’
‘What about remounts, Khan?’
Arghatun stood up.
‘I've been holding them for your decision.’
‘Every man will need a string of four,’ Burun said.
‘What is the condition of the herds?’
Wotai was sitting at Arghatun's side.
He made a face.
‘Name of God, Khan.
An animal we would kill for meat would look better than some of them.’
Arghatun nodded.
‘That's right.
Some of them are good enough, but most are returns from the tumans patrolling Ch'nozia.
They've been ridden hard.
I've seen splints and saddle sores that would make you blench, and you can pull the coat off some of them with your bare hands.’
Burun was perturbed.
The ride across the G'bai was going to require st'lyan in the peak of condition.
Since no one knew what they were likely to encounter once they entered the Alan country.
the extra remounts were an absolute necessity.
‘Are there none elsewhere?’
Arghatun shrugged.
‘Well.
There are herds belonging to your father-in-law.
He has nearly twenty thousand grazing the land between here and Pantai.
‘And how many do we need?’
‘Oh.
A tenth of that, Khan.
No more.’
Burun kept his face expressionless, but he w as laughing inside.
‘Very well.
Commandeer from him what you require.
If he protests, tell him to appeal the matter to the Kha-Khan.’
Vortai would scream bloody murder when he heard that his herds were being culled.
The fact that he could do nothing about it made Burun's enjoyment of the situation all the sweeter.
‘How are we to feed our animals when we are crossing the G'bai?’
Targoutai asked.
‘There's no grazing, and no water.’
Burun was pleased that someone had asked an intelligent question.
‘We grain them.
Rest up by day and travel by night.
Five or six days’ march if we are lucky.’
‘Grain.’
Sidacai was lounging in a corner.
‘That means pack beasts.’
Burun glanced in his direction.
Sidacai and the remaining Altun who were to ride with the command had arrived several days earlier, but since his return he had spoken to none of them.
‘Yes.’
‘What about the return journey?’
Sodai piped up.
‘If we try to re-cross the desert without water and provisions for the st'lyan, we'll end up walking.’
‘Oh, well.’
Burun grinned.
‘I thought I would leave a few of you on the G'bai side of the mountains with the pack beasts.
You can set up an intermediate camp, then bring more supplies across by caravan.
Since you brought the subject up, maybe you'd like the responsibility?’
Sodai sat down quickly.
There were jeers and catcalls.
Nogai chuckled.
‘God, Merkut.
I can see you're going to have us all counting grain sacks like traders.
Is this an army or a commissariat?
Surely there is another way we can do this?’
‘What do you suggest?’
Burun did not expect a serious answer.
‘We could go down the coast from Losan,’ Tulagai said.
‘There's desert to cross, but it's nothing like the G'bai.’
‘Don't be stupid,’ Sidacai sneered.
‘The land is poisoned for a day's march in every direction.’
‘Not to mention the fact that the only mountain pass is probably well guarded,’ Burun commented.
‘No.
We have to cross the G'bai where it's safe for us to do so, and where we'll be least expected.
That means  we have to set up supply stations, even for the reconnaissance.
We might as well get used to the idea.
It's going to be a hundred limes worse next year when we have to move the whole army.’
‘You made them think.’
Arghatun poured wine.
Burun nodded.
‘Yes.’
Until the kuriltai most of the Altun had entertained no notion of the problems presented by the campaign To the majority of them the Alan country was just another part of the continent.
They failed to appreciate the fact that the G'bai turned it into an island.
‘Why can't we avoid the G'bai?’
Arghatun asked.
‘We took Y'frike by sea.’
‘We landed unopposed,’ Burun pointed out.
‘Five tumans by sea from X'nadu, with remounts.’
‘God, yes.’
Arghatun laughed reminiscently.
‘I was sick the whole way.’
‘But once we landed, we had grazing in plenty.’
Burun reached out and took a cup.
‘It was just another campaign.
But this time will be different.
We're fighting cities.
We don't know the country.
And the Alan use firearms.’
‘Even so—’ Arghatun started.
‘No.’
Burun shook his head.
‘Besides, the Alan trade with Ch'kasia.
They would scarcely need spies to discover that we were preparing the kind of fleet we would need to land an army across the Inner Sea.
They would be waiting for us.’
Sidacai came quickly into the room and Burun looked up.
‘Nogai and Jotan are fighting in the stables,’ Sidacai said.
Burun leapt to his feet and charged out of the door.
Sidacai and Arghatun were close behind him as he descended the stairs.
The stables were at the back of  a courtyard and there was a crowd outside the door.
Tulagai and Targoutai were holding everyone back so that they could not push inside.
‘Get out of my way, damn you!’
Burun forced his way through the press, using his elbows.
The interior of the stable was lit by lanterns which hung from the rafters above the central passage.
T'zin was standing at the far end, and Jotan and Nogai were circling one another in the wide space of one of the loose boxes.
They had pitchforks.
‘Come on, Merkut,’ Nogai invited.
‘You want me come and get me.’
He slid quickly aside as Jotan charged, and the bright steel tines of his fork flashed.
Somewhere outside Burun heard the high-pitched cry of a boy, and knew that it was Jehan.
He turned to Sidacai.
‘My grandson.
Keep him out of here.’
Sidacai nodded, and pushed back through the crowd.
Jotan's tunic was hanging in tatters, but he did not seem to be badly injured.
‘Come on, Jotan,’ Nogai urged.
‘You can do better than that.’
He backed away as Jotan moved forward again, missed his footing on the straw, and stumbled.
Jotan's fork flashed twice.
‘Yes.’
He laughed harshly.
‘So I can.’
There was bright blood running down Nogai's left arm as he rolled out of the way and, when he scrambled to his feet again, his expression was less confident.
Burun sensed a movement at his back and turned.
Yuan had worked his way through the crowd and now he ducked under Tulagai's arm.
‘Lord,’ he said.
‘We can stop this.’
Targoutai snorted.
‘And get ourselves spitted in the process.
Let them fight.
We can stop it before they kill one another.
Nogai backed out into the passage.
He spat over his shoulder.
‘Come and try,’ he said.
Yuan ignored them both.
His eyes were steady on Burun's face.
‘Lord?’
Burun shook his head.
It was time for Jotan to learn.
‘No.
Not yet.’
In the passageway Nogai seemed to stumble again and Jotan leapt forward.
But the move was a feint.
Nogai rested on one knee and brought his fork up so that Jotan almost ran on to it.
When he moved back there was blood running down his chest and soaking into the waistband of his trousers.
‘They're playing,’ Tulagai observed.
‘They're trying to cut each other to ribbons.
Look at the blood.’
‘God.
I suppose we'd better stop it,’ Targoutai said.
He sounded reluctant.
‘Try.’
Jotan darted forward, slashed at Nogai, and backed away.
Nogai went after him.
Jotan stepped round the side of a loose-box door and swung it hard.
The wooden end caught Nogai in the face, and he pitched over backwards.
At once Burun nodded to the Manchu.
‘Now,’ he said.
The offworlder seemed hardly to move.
A black metal ball flew from his right hand.
It caught Jotan on the forehead and he collapsed without a sound.
The ball was attached to a length of thin chain; the Manchu reeled it in, then tossed it idly in his palm.
There was a sudden silence.
Then Targoutai laughed.
‘Surprise,’ he said.
T'zin was kneeling beside Nogai.
He looked up.
‘Out cold,’ he reported.
Jotan was in a similar condition.
‘They'll have to be bandaged,’ Tulagai said.
‘Some of the wounds are deep.’
‘Yes.’
Burun nodded.
‘Use horse blankets to carry them.’
He nodded to the Manchu.
‘Thank you.’
The Manchu bowed.
Targoutai was examining the metal ball and its attached length of chain.
‘Clever,’ he said.
‘Very clever.’
Arghatun and Tulagai carried Jotan back to the house.
T'zin stood by as two officers rolled Nogai in a blanket so that he could be taken down the street.
‘They'll kill each other next time.’
He glared at Burun.
‘If we let them,’ Burun agreed.
He looked around.
‘Where's my grandson?’
‘He ran into the house,’ Sidacai said.
‘When they brought Jotan out, he thought he was dead.’
Burun cursed.
‘Damn it.
Couldn't you have kept him out of the way?’
He went across the yard and the trooper guarding the door saluted.
‘Which way did my grandson go?’
‘Upstairs, Lord.’
Burun ran up the stairs and started to search the rooms.
He called Jehan's name, but there was no answer.
Then he looked up.
Jehan was sitting among the rafters.
‘Jehan, come down.’
Burun gestured.
Jotan's son was a copy in miniature of his father.
His face was white and his lips were trembling.
‘My father's dead!’ he accused.
‘YoU let them kill him!’
Burun shook his head.
‘He's alive, Jehan, I promise.
Come down.’
Jehan slid off the rafter and jumped into Burun's arms.
‘He's dead,’ he said.
‘I saw him.’
Burun hugged him.
‘No.
Nogai made him bleed a little, that's all.
Then he got knocked out.
But he's all right.’
Jehan looked doubtful.
‘You're sure?
Nogai was trying to kill him.’
Burun laughed.
‘Maybe.
But your father doesn't kill that easily.
He did some damage to Nogai, and now they'll know to keep away from one another.’
‘Hunh.’
Jehan buried his face in the fur of Burun's collar.
‘He's really not dead?’
‘Really.
We'll go and see him in a while.’
‘Now.
I want to see him now.
And I want my mother.’
At last Jehan began to cry, and Burun rocked him and held him close.
‘There,’ he said.
‘Don't cry.’
He carried Jehan back downstairs, and together they waited while Jotan was bandaged.
Orcadai arrived eight days later.
When the scouts reported that the caravan was approaching the city, Burun rode out with Jehan to meet them.
‘Will my mother be with them?’
Jehan asked.
‘No.’
Burun shook his head.
‘Your father arranged for her to stay in Kinsai.
I told you.’
‘Oh.’
They rode at a gentle trot.
Ahead Burun could see the dust which hung in the air above the moving carts.
It had been dry for weeks, but there were thunderheads over against the mountains and the atmosphere was heavy with the hint of rain.
A pair of riders breasted the rise ahead, and Jehan yelled and spurred forward.
Kiku rode sedately down the slope towards Burun and Suragai followed her like a shadow.
Burun saw that his bow was uncased and ready to hand.
‘Well, Khan?’
Kiku reined in.
‘Very well, thank you.’
Burun grinned, and Kiku answered with one of her rare smiles.
‘Jehan,’ she said.
‘Your grandmother is in the second cart.’
The wagon was drawn by a team of matched oxen.
Jehan rode up beside it, stepped out of the saddle, and ducked inside the cover.
Burun shook Suragai's hand.
Then he indicated the bow.
‘Trouble?’
Suragai shook his head.
‘Not really, Khan.
I was just being careful.
We were raided two nights ago — nomads, your son said.
They tried to drive off a pair of pack beasts.’
‘Hunh.’
Burun did not bother to ask about the fate of the raiders.
‘So where is he?
My son I mean.’
‘About a verst to the rear.’
Suragai gestured.
‘One of the baggage carts has a loose wheel.
It's been holding us back since yesterday.’
‘You made good time.’
Burun raised an eyebrow.
‘But then Orcadai doesn't like to travel slowly.’
Suragai laughed.
‘Oh, Khan, I think if we hadn't been so near the city, he would have burned the cart.
I didn't know your language had so many swearwords.’
Burun chuckled.
Kiku was wearing cloth of gold.
She twitched her reins abruptly and started to ride towards the caravan.
The red sunlight made her garments glitter.
Burun watched her for a moment, then he looked back at Suragai.
‘Thank you for guarding her.’
‘An honour, Khan.’
The offworlder bowed.
He seemed to hesitate, then spoke again.
‘She — the lady, your wife — explained to me the reason for your behaviour the day you left Kinsai.
Thank you for trusting me.’
Burun grunted non-committally.
He rode after Kiku.
Zurachina was seated in a nest of silk cushions.
She had one arm round Jehan.
‘I gather my son's been fighting,’ she said.
Burun stepped off the back of his st'lyan into the cart.
He hugged her, and Jehan burrowed in between them.
‘He lost some blood.’
Burun caught at his st'lyan's reins and attached them to a hook on the cart tail.
‘With any luck he'll stay away from Nogai for a while.
I  sent him out to command the men culling the remount herds as punishment.
He'll be back tomorrow.’
‘He wasn't badly hurt, then.’
Burun shook his head.
‘No.
His pride suffered more than anything.
He didn't beat Nogai.
He just knocked him out.’
He stood up and looked at the following wagon.
‘Where is Turakina?’
‘Oh.’
Zurachina nodded at Suragai as he wheeled in behind Kiku.
‘Wherever that man is, look in the opposite direction.
She's probably with Orcadai.’
‘Ah.’
Burun nodded understanding.
‘I thought she might have learned to behave.’
‘Behave?’
Zurachina laughed.
‘Khan, if looks could kill, Suragai would be stone dead and our daughter would be on trial for her life.
She hasn't exchanged two civil words with him since we left Kinsai, and the fact that he lets most of her insults pass over his head just makes matters worse.’
She grinned.
‘She's wearing herself out getting him to notice her so that she can pretend to ignore him.’
‘Hah.’
Burun snorted.
‘It sounds as if she's in love.’
It was a joke, but Zurachina's face became thoughtful for a moment.
Then she shook her head.
‘Unlikely,’ she observed.
Burun was taken by surprise.
He liked the offworlder well enough, but it was ridiculous for Zurachina even to consider the suggestion.
Apart from the fact that Suragai had no rank, it was doubtful if he was human.
‘Don't fight with Jotan.’
Nogai stood in his stirrups to see where the outriders had been placed.
Then he sat down in the saddle again and looked at Burun.
‘The dispute I have with your son is a private  matter, Khan.’
He spoke calmly.
‘YoU can't interfere.’
‘The next time you may not be so lucky,’ Burun pointed out.
‘He could have killed you.’
‘Or I him.
Under the Yasa I don't have to discuss the subject with anyone other than the Kha-Khan.’
Nogai turned his head, then looked back.
‘Have you asked Jotan if he wants to yield?’
Burun made a rude noise.
‘All right then,’ he tried another approach, ‘if you have to fight, don't do it with pitchforks, or knives, or swords.
I need both of you.
The Kha-Khan needs you.
Call a truce until the war is over.’
The under-officers of the exercising thousand galloped up.
Nogai gave them fresh orders and sent them away again.
‘As everyone is so fond of reminding me,’ Nogai met Burun's eyes, ‘my death would not cause a ripple in the affairs of the Khanate.
It might even be welcomed.
And as for Jotan —‘
‘I need Jotan,’ Burun said quickly.
‘Oh?
What on earth for?’
Suragai rode up into the grove of trees.
He exchanged a few words with Hodai, then rode away again.
As he passed Burun he nodded respectfully.
Nogai ignored him.
‘I asked you why you need Jotan.’
‘He commands my scouts.’
‘So he does.’
Nogai sounded amused.
‘No doubt he could be replaced.’
Burun compressed his lips.
He had already tried to talk sense into Jotan, and had got nowhere.
Yuan rode up the slope.
He saluted Burun.
‘Lord, there is a body of riders approaching from the west.
Their banners are black.’
‘Vortai.’
Nogai was suddenly alert.
‘Maybe.’
Burun considered the possibility.
He was  sure that Vortai was still in Kinsai, which was in the east.
The only other person who was likely to travel under the banner of the Gaijin clan was Sipotai, Vortai's son, Burun's brother-in-law.
‘How many men?’
He looked at Yuan.
‘Over a thousand, Lord.’
‘So many.’
Burun experienced a feeling of anticipation.
It would be just like Sipotai to attempt overwhelming force, and he had been expecting some kind of reaction ever since he had issued the order for Vortai's herds to be culled.
‘Hodai!’
‘Yes, Khan?’
‘Send to Jotan.
He is to bring the men under his command in from the west.
Tell him Sipotai is coming.
He will know what to do.’
‘Yes, Khan.’
‘And tell him to leave Tulagai and Targoutai behind.
They can't be involved in this.’
Hodai nodded.
He galloped away downslope.
Burun picked up his reins.
‘You're preparing to fight.’
Nogai sounded surprised.
‘Only if I'm attacked.’
Burun snorted.
‘Don't worry.
You won't be involved.
He saw Nogai flush.
The insult was a mild one, but explicit.
‘That wasn't w-hat I meant,’ Nogai protested.
‘But you can't make war without the Kha-Khan's permission.’
‘Oh, I don't think it'll come to war.’
Burun grinned.
‘But if Sipotai is fool enough to offer me the chance, then we have a score to settle, he and 1.’
‘God.
He'll claim provocation, surely.’
‘Let him,’ Burun said shortly.
‘Besides, dead men can't complain.
He looked over his shoulder.
‘Kuchuk!’
‘Yes, Khan.’
The standard-bearer urged his st'lyan forward.
‘Signal the hundred commanders under my banner.
And bring in the outriders.’
‘I can do that, Khan.’
Yuan spoke.
The scouts and outriders were part of a growing band which had started to acknowledge the unofficial leadership of Suragai.
Burun nodded.
‘Yes.
And find my other son.’
‘The Khan wishes.’
The Manchu saluted.
He charged away.
Four of Nogai's guard rode into the grove.
They were all Altun family retainers of long standing — men whose first and only concern would be to protect the interests of the Kha-Khan — and Burun watched them out of the corner of his eye in case it occurred to Nogai to send Sipotai warning.
‘Please,’ Nogai said.
‘If you have a quarrel with Sipotai, let me mediate it.’
‘Did you permit me to interfere in your feud with Jotan?’
Burun asked.
Thank you, but no.’
‘But you're breaking the Yasa!’
‘Not yet.
I will fight Sipotai only if he attacks me first.’
Burun thought that the objection was foolish.
‘Do you expect me to make no preparation?
He's the most treacherous member of his family, and that's saying a lot.’
‘Then let me arrange for the two of you to meet.’
‘Oh.’
Burun showed his teeth.
‘We are going to meet, certainly.
But it will be on my terms.’
Suragai came up through the trees.
‘The outriders are all in, Khan.’
‘Good.’
Burun turned aside from Nogai.
‘How well do you know the land to the west of the city, Suragai?’
The offworlder shrugged.
‘Well enough, Khan.
It is  full of little valleys and defiles.
We have used it for scouting exercises.’
‘Very well.’
Burun looked at the sun and estimated the time.
‘The riders who are approaching.
Locate them, and find out if there are any more.
There could be a second group riding behind or parallel.
Send to me in any event.
I'll be on the plain before the city gates.
Hurry.’
‘Yes, Khan.’
Suragai nodded.
‘And if I run into their outriders?’
‘Oh.
Well, if you have to kill them, they must not be found.’
A few weeks earlier, Suragai would have betrayed his misgivings.
Now he seemed undisturbed.
He saluted and rode away.
Orcadai arrived.
He was accompanied by Arghatun and Jenjin.
‘Sipotai?’ he asked.
Burun nodded.
‘It can't be anyone else.’
‘Well.
You must be pleased.’
Orcadai sounded amused.
‘You think I like the idea of fighting my in-laws?’
Burun scowled fiercely.
Orcadai laughed, unabashed.
‘Not especially, I'm sure.
But I imagine the fact that it is Sipotai who is charging into the net must provide you with certain gratification.’
Burun ignored the sarcasm.
He looked past Jenjin at Arghatun.
‘Well?’
‘Oh!
I'm sorry, Khan.’
Arghatun grinned.
‘We're ready to ride whenever you command.’
‘God, I should hope so.’
Burun snorted.
He could not understand why everyone was suddenly so cheerful.
‘In that case let's go.
If I stay here any longer, I will choke on all the good humour.’
‘Khan.’
‘I know.
I saw their dust ten minutes ago.
Is there any word from Suragai yet?’
‘No, Khan.’
Hodai shook his head.
‘Shall I send to look for him?’
‘No.
Either he's coming, or he's dead.’
Burun thought about that possibility, then stood in his stirrups.
‘Is everyone in position?’
‘Yes, Khan.’
‘And Jotan?’
‘As I told you, Khan.
We have heard nothing from him since he acknowledged your order.’
Burun chewed the end of his moustache, then spat it out again.
Even without Jotan's five hundred, he could deal with Sipotai, but he preferred the edge that would be provided by Jotan's presence in Sipotai's rear.
The grass on the plain was short, sharp-bladed stuff, no good for grazing.
Most of the hundred or so men who were waiting with Burun had dismounted, but their st'lyan stood heads up, waiting patiently.
Kuchuk was sitting cross-legged behind his saddle.
He w as filing arrow heads, and the sound of the metal on the whetstone set Burun's teeth on edge.
The dust cloud was closer now: about half a verst away.
Burun estimated that the party of riders beneath it was coming through the last of the little valleys which led out onto the plain.
‘Rider, Khan.’
Hodai pointed.
‘Yes.
I see him.’
It was Suragai, riding flat out.
When he saw Burun, he reined in so hard that his st'lyan sat down on her haunches.
‘Report.’
Burun's eyes were on the nearing dust cloud.
The offworlder was breathing almost as hard as his  mare.
It was a moment before he answered, and Burun saw that he had an arrow embedded in the edge of his shield.
‘Khan, as you ordered, I scouted the intruders.
There are only the men whose dust you can see.
I estimate twelve hundred.
They have scouts, but only in front, and they are riding too fast to see much of the ground.’
‘Hah.’
Burun was pleased.
‘How close did you get?
Did they see you?’
‘I ran into one of their forward scouts.’
Suragai gestured at the arrow in his shield.
‘But we were in some trees, and so —’ He made a motion with one finger across his throat.
‘No one else saw me.’
‘Good.’
‘And I got close enough to count them as they rode past.
Their leader is a small man on a black st'lyan with white fore-hooves.
He has dark hair and wears a gold helmet with a crest.
His banners are black and his standard-bearer carries a totem — a skull cased in gold on top of a golden lance.’
‘So.’
Burun was impressed.
It was clear that Suragai had a talent for fieldcraft.
‘Well done.
Now let's pretend that we are taken by surprise.
Hodai, get everyone mounted.
We'll ride away from them at the walk.’
Burun led the troopers north-east, a diagonal path across Sipotai's projected route towards Pesth.
He wondered if the fact that there were no tracks in the direction from which they were supposed to be coming would be noticed, and thought not.
Once Sipotai's scouts saw the small party under Burun's silver banner, they would forget everything else.
The whole horde would come charging across the plain to intercept.
Straight into his trap.
‘They're out on the plain, Khan.’
Hodai shaded his  eyes as he looked back.
‘I can't see any detail yet, but I think — yes — they've seen us.’
‘Good.
Keep riding.’
Burun uncased his bow.
‘Name of God,’ Kuchuk muttered.
He sounded elated.
‘I feel like a piece of bait in a snare.’
Suragai laughed.
He looked back over his shoulder.
‘They're splitting into two groups to surround us, Khan.
Here they come.’
A screen of black-clad riders was spreading out on both sides.
Burun reined in and sat waiting while they circled and closed in.
Few seemed to have weapons drawn or shields unslung.
They're confident.’
Hodai's voice came softly.
‘They ought to be,’ Kuchuk answered sourly.
‘They outnumber us about twelve to one.’
‘Oh well, if you're worried about the odds —‘
‘Be quiet, both of you,’ Burun growled.
‘At least try to look serious.
See, here comes Sipotai.’
There were perhaps six or seven men under the skull totem.
The leader wore a golden helmet.
When he saw Burun he smiled unpleasantly.
‘God is good to me today.
I swear, Merkut, I never thought to come on you so easily.’
Burun showed his teeth.
‘Indeed, brother-in-law.
You never could find your way without God's help.’
Kuchuk sniggered.
At the edge of the plain a new dust cloud hovered.
Burun wondered if anyone else had noticed it, and he spoke again to divert Sipotai's attention.
‘And is this a social visit?’
He made his tone deliberately insulting.
‘Or do you have some serious purpose?’
‘Oh.’
Sipotai laughed harshly.
‘I'm hunting thieves.
Merkuts, they would be.’
Burun ignored the growl of anger which went up from his men.
‘I am sad for your loss,’ he said mildly.
‘And what did  they steal, these thieves?
Apart from your sense of direction, that is.’
‘Merkut pig!’
Sipotai spat.
He gestured, and the men on either side of him lowered their lances and charged Burun.
Burun was prepared.
He ducked and turned his st'lyan into a sidestep.
Both attacks missed.
The man on the right surged past, then wrenched his animal's head round to charge again.
At once he was feathered with arrows like a pincushion.
He pitched out of the saddle.
Yuan intercepted the man on the left.
The offworlder seemed to unsheath and strike in one fluid movement.
The Gaijin rode on for a moment.
Then his head toppled from his body and bounced in the dust.
There was a roar from men on both sides.
Burun flung up a hand.
‘Look behind you, Sipotai!’
There were mounted men spilling out of the defiles and patches of dead ground on both sides of the plain.
They rode forward at the walk, but their weapons were ready.
To the Gaijin rear Jotan's five hundred were a solid mass cutting off the line of retreat.
The silver banner of the Merkuts waved everywhere.
Sipotai's st'lyan reared.
He was looking for a gap in the net which enclosed him and his men.
‘Dog!’ he screamed.
Burun was amused.
‘Name of God, Sipotai.
Did you think I would sit here and wait for you to kill me.
Yield now.
There are half a dozen bows drawn on you If we fight, you will be the first to die.’
Sipotai's face was suffused with rage.
‘Then we die together!’
He gestured at the Gaijin around him.
‘You think you will live long after me?’
Burun looked, but he could see only unprepared men who had not even drawn their bows because they  were so confident of success.
‘It is possible,’ he said.
‘Can you tell me that your men will fight on after you fall?
Will they avenge you, knowing that they must die?’
He raised his voice so that it carried, and saw that some of the men in black were already raising their helmets on lance or sword points, the universal token of surrender.
‘We outnumber you.’
Burun addressed Sipotai cheerfully.
‘But if it is your wish to die, then by all means let us set to.
Come, give the word.’
Sipotai's hand went to the hilt of his sword, then withdrew again.
Burun could see the seed of doubt blossoming in his eyes.
‘The next time, Merkut,’ he said.
‘The next time.’
‘Oh?’
Burun laughed.
‘And what makes you think there will be a next time?’
Sipotai stared back.
He said nothing.
Jotan rode up.
‘What are we to do with them?
I never saw men with such a small desire to fight.’
Burun had intended Sipotai's death.
Now he saw that it was not the right time.
‘Disarm them and release them.
Escort them away from the city.’
‘Eh?’
Jotan gaped.
Even Sipotai seemed surprised.
Then he seemed to anticipate a possibility.
He smiled bitterly.
‘Such mercy,’ he sneered.
‘You send us on our way weaponless, so that we can be slaughtered from ambush.
Do you lack the courage to kill us cleanly?’
‘What, don't you trust me, brother-in-law?’
Burun said innocently.
‘Leave a few men behind when you go.
They shall load your weapons onto carts and follow you.
only be sure you ride back to Pantai.
You have seen that we were waiting for you.
Don't try again.’
He kicked his st'lyan into motion and she trotted out  on to the open plain.
The Gaijin who were with Sipotai had melted away from his side so that he was left alone in the middle of an escort of Merkuts.
‘I can't believe you're letting him go.’
Jotan caught up and rode alongside.
‘Have you gone soft?’
‘You should have taken him when he sent those two against you, Khan.’
Hodai came up on Burun's other side.
‘That was the right time.
God, when those lances passed over your head, I swear my heart stopped beating.’
‘You're making a mistake.’
Jotan ignored Hodai's comment.
‘What if they arm, then turn round and try again?
Sipotai can add nearly a tuman to his strength whenever he wants, and most of them are no more than two days’ ride from here.’
‘Well.’
Burun considered.
‘Perhaps we ought to make sure that they keep travelling towards Pantai.
We could send them on their way with the odd arrow, maybe.
Once they get used to running, they'll find it hard to stop.
Who knows,’ he pretended that the thought had only just occurred to him, ‘they might be attacked by bandits.’
Jotan looked at him sharply.
‘Bandits.
I see.’
Burun guessed what Jotan was thinking.
He thought seriously about having Sipotai ambushed on the road, and remembered Sipotai's eyes on Kiku, desiring her.
He burned for revenge.
But even if he denied involvement, no one would believe that he had not arranged matters so that Sipotai was killed.
‘I am sure you do,’ he said after a moment.
‘But I want Sipotai to reach home safely.’
Jotan looked disbelieving.
Burun searched for a convincing argument.
‘Consider,’ he said.
‘Sipotai can only die once.
But why should it be soon?
In the meantime he will have Vortai to face.
‘Name of God, yes.’
Jotan grinned.
‘I hadn't thought of that.’
Burun was easily able to imagine his father-in-law's reaction.
The news that Sipotai had tried to recover by force the st'lyan which had been commandeered under the Kha-Khan's warrant would be bad enough especially since the attempt had failed.
But when he heard that Sipotai had tried to kill Burun in front of an army of witnesses, he would spit blood.
No matter how the outcome of the incident was considered, it was a victory for Burun.
Sipotai was shamed and Vortai was embarrassed.
In spite of everything, Burun felt depressed by the whole affair and could not understand why.
He stood in the stirrups and looked around.
The Gaijin were piling arms in an orderly fashion.
Along the edge of the plain the outriders that Burun had planted were galloping back to join the main body.
It was strange to see Yek surrendering, but it had been Sipotai's mistake to involve troops in a private feud.
Faced with an enemy such as the Alan, no warrior of the True People would ever yield.
But with the possible exception of the Gaijin family retainers, most of the men following Sipotai would have been reluctant from the start.
He was an ill-starred leader, and no one liked the risk of being caught breaking the Yasa.
‘What would you have done if Sipotai had decided to fight to the death?’
Jotan asked suddenly.
‘Oh.’
Burun considered.
‘Probably I would have died.’
Jotan nodded.
‘So you were bluffing after all.
You knew they wouldn't fight.’
Burun grunted sourly, but he said nothing.
There were times when Jotan was too perceptive for his own good.