

Fred and Arthur
‘Friends, Romans, countrymen ,’ shouted Fred Stokes at the top of the Forum steps, carrying Arthur Moe in his arms centre stage.
They wore togas, sandals, and short white socks.
Fred was thin, Arthur very fat, and Fred's head made a pecking movement over the bulk of his friend with the effort of bearing the load.
Arthur felt anxiety in the grip and spoke into  the pullet neck on the upstage side.
‘You've got your weight wrong.’
‘Lend me your ears ,’ Fred orated, altering his hold and guttering at the knees.
‘It's your right foot.’
‘I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him .’
Fred was still concentrated on his clasp instead of his balance, and getting sworn at for it.
Their manager, standing in the wings, wondered what Arthur was yakking about, and at the same time had a moment of seeing them as Gandhi carrying a buffalo.
‘I'll have to do a fall,’ Arthur muttered.
He gathered his great weight neatly to a point against Fred's sickly-looking chest, said ‘Serve you right’ in a cheery tone under the roar of the music-hall audience and shoved away, grounding delicately at the foot of the Forum steps and watching  his partner with one eye.
Fred was thundering on with the speech as though the corpse hadn't fled, and at the same time bobbing up onto the balls of his feet with relief from the lost burden.
Arthur scrutinized the business and thought it makeshift but not bad.
He started taking apart the engineering of the scene, keeping count of the timing in his head.
They went back to their dressing-room in a hurry as soon as the act was over, and Arthur started a metronome.
Fred tucked his toga between his legs like a baby's nappy and picked his friend up.
‘I don't see what I did different,’ he said, facing front to inspect the two of them in the mirror and then turning round to have a look from the side.
‘I told you.
Your weight was on the wrong foot.
It still is.
You can't hardly manoeuvre.’
‘It wasn't bad, what we did.’
‘Best get it straight the old way first.
Seventeen, eighteen,Lend me your ears , then my sneeze on nineteen, and your slap on twenty.’
‘I like the fall better myself,’ Fred said.
‘Let's keep it.
Long time since we did a fall.’
‘Bit old-fashioned, isn't it?’ said Arthur.
‘What are you talking about?
Falls don't date.’
‘Take it from fourteen,’ said Arthur.
‘Friends, Romans .
My shoulders is busting.’
‘Fifteen, sixteen.
Carry on, I'm counting.
You've got to come to .
Nineteen, twenty.’
‘Bury Caesar, not to .
Now I'm on my left foot.
Suppose I stay on it.
Praise him .’
‘Twenty-four, twenty-five.’
‘Are you going or not?
I said praise him .
That's where  you did it before.’
Fred watched carefully in the mirror for some muscular indication of what his friend had in mind.
The bulk lay poleaxed.
‘Twenty-five,’ it said again.
‘The evil that men do .
You've gone and left it far too late.
Lives after them, the good is oft interred with their bones .
You'll have to go, I've run out of words.’
But by now Arthur had quit, flying smoothly through the air like a zeppelin and saying ‘Thirty-one, thirty-two’ as he went.
‘All right,’ he said, rolling lightly onto the floor.
‘Again.’
Their manager came into the room.
‘If you don't keep in that fall, I'm stopping your sweets,’ he said, and then looked down at the mass of Arthur on the ground.
‘I haven't seen you do one like that since your old dad was alive.’
‘It's all in the position of the head,’ said Fred, sitting down and having a beer.
’ I can't do it.
Not like he can.
You use the head as the rudder.’
He stopped the metronome and put his hands on his bony kneecaps, looking into the mirror at his gloomy Indian-brave's face.
Arthur watched him, pulled in his stomach, listened to the loudspeaker to hear how the performing dog was doing, and thought seriously enough that he hadn't seen Fred so exhilarated since last August at Blackpool.
‘Good date, this.
I've always liked Huddersfield,’ he said.
‘You're putting on weight,’ said the manager, picking up Arthur's belt and looking at the notches.
‘No, he's not,’ Fred said loyally.
‘That's muscle.’
After the second house the two of them went out to supper.
It was their ninth year together, and they had been top of the bill at the Palladium in the West End six years running.
It was a buoyant evening.
They had four pints of  beer each and a slap-up dinner in one of Huddersfield's new swinging joints.
’ Changed a bit,’said Arthur, looking at a girl dancing in a mini-skirt not much deeper than a belt.
‘My old dad used to sing Handel here in the working-men's choir,’ Fred said.
’ Came up from London by coach.
They like Handel here.
Here and Newcastle.’
‘Newcastle's a good date, too.’
Arthur and Fred had been to school together.
Their partnership seemed freakishly fortunate.
When they went out on their own with girls, they tended to fix things for the same evening so as not to spend two nights separated where one would do.
Fred's father had owned a pub near a music hall where Arthur's father had often played, and before their sons were even born the men had sometimes had Saturday-night booze-ups together.
Arthur's father had been a famous comic called Willie Moe, and his mother, Queenie, was the butt in Willie's routine.
When he married her, she was a reserved, very plain girl who played the harp in a provincial symphony orchestra.
She had learned the harp because she had once been told that she had beautiful elbows, and harp playing seemed to make better use than most careers of the Lord's stingy gift.
Her husband admired her serious-mindedness, and at the same time saw that her absence of humour held comic promise for his act.
He would plant her downstage and get her to start playing’ I dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls,’and then sabotage her work from the back wall.
As soon as the infant Arthur was old enough to be propped against the proscenium arch, he was included in the turn.
There was nothing else to do with him; theatrical  landladies didn't offer babysitting with the rent.
When he strayed, his mother would shove him back into position with her foot as she harped.
Then one night the child fell onto the bass drum, plummeting ten feet into the orchestra pit without seeming to harbour a grudge, and it occurred to his father to try bouncing him.
Arthur commanded fame and respect in the profession for several years as ‘The Living Football’, followed by ‘The Living Boomerang’ and ‘The Living Dart’.
The characterizations consisted of being rolled up into a sphere by Willie, or swung by one arm, or aimed at a dartboard while wearing a trick suction device on his head.
The cap fixed him securely to the board, with his airborne body trembling behind him like the handle of a plunged dagger.
Later on, when he was five and too heavy to play a dart satisfactorily, he became ‘The Living Gladstone Bag’.
He wore a handle on the back of his costume, stitched there by his hard-driven mother herself because she wasn't going to have some theatrical costumier treating her son as if he were a sequin.
His on-stage father would unsnap the child's clothes, which were held together at the back by a clasp, pack them with toothbrush, pyjamas, and reading matter, and throw the patient luggage at an assistant stage manager dressed as a railway porter.
The boy went without a name until he was six.
His father dismissed the notion that it was any necessity and called for his son by clearing his throat, like Henry Irving demanded a prompt.
His mother felt wretched about the matter and often suggested Roland.
She liked this name because it was romantic and well-bred, which were precisely Willie Moe's objections to it.
Her alternative was Percy; Willie said it was wet, and she said it was’ Henry  IV’.
When she moaned and said, well, what did he suggest instead, Willie would affably juggle the child and two oranges, and reply with the obvious oath.
And his wife would flinch at the coarse life that harp-playing had brought her to, and go off her kipper, and mash up the remains with some potatoes for the boy's breakfast next morning.
If her son hadn't got a name, at least she was going to see that he had a proper lining to his stomach.
He went to bed on porridge, got up on potatoes, and did his twice-nightly work on scones, baps, cottage loaves, crumpets, and Yorkshire parkin.
The boy adored his father exclusively; his mother's recourse was starch, and his bulk therefore waxed and waxed.
The process didn't perturb him for the simple reason that it didn't repel Willie.
The jibes of the kids at his scattered schools, which he attended sometimes for a token day or two to throw a sop to the government, struck him as neither here nor there.
What he watched for anxiously was any sign that his father found fatness unprofessional.
But on the contrary Willie made it seem a prop of the work, like ripe thighs in a chorus girl or the swivel eye of Ben Turpin.
Nor was it a disadvantage technically.
The child was agile enough to seem filled with helium, as if he had mass without weight.
He was named on his seventh birthday.
His mother had hopelessly suggested Cyril.
Willie Moe snorted and picked up the boy by the leg and started to whirl him as if winding him up, which was part of a new routine called ‘The Living Propeller’.
Then he dropped the weight with a glow on his face and said,’ I've got it.’
‘What?’ his wife asked.
‘Arthur,’ he said, pronouncing it ‘Arfer’because he  was a Cockney of the old generation.
‘Arfer Moe.
‘Alf a mo.
We can work it into the act.’
His wife felt unspeakably lowered and lit the gas for the baked beans.
Everything was grist.
The child's own feelings were split between mortification at a christening that doomed him to live out for good a pun that he could already see to be gruesome and pride that his father had cared for him enough to embed him into his act by the very roots of his name.
The ambiguity lasted long after Willie died.
So did Arthur's torn attitude to his weight.
He could never entirely regret it, because it reminded him of working with Willie, and the passing resolves he made as a grown-up to lose some of it always contained a tang of unease about betraying his professional qualifications in the eyes of a man who would have belted him for such a thing.
After Willie's death Queenie packed in the theatre.
She gave harp lessons and sent her son firmly to school.
It was wartime and the boys called him Barrage Balloon.
The normal childhood that other people wished on him struck him as mostly plaguing and tawdry; his own lost norm, a life spent in the company of ribald sopranos and tap-dancers and hard-pressed comedians in fear of the sack, seemed to have more decency and purpose.
When Fred Stokes arrived at the school, Arthur had spent a year in hell.
But as soon as their friendship was struck the memory faded and the bad time seemed no worse than some null interlude between two boon companions.
To be with Fred was as naturally convivial as to be with Willie.
At the age of nine Fred was already very much like the man he was going to be at thirty-five or forty.
He was tacit, bold, and weedy, with a miraculous sense of humour at work behind the face of a tomahawk.
He could make his friend laugh convulsively enough to fall off schoolroom chairs, and once even out of a hammock.
Arthur would lie on the floor heaving, dead silent apart from a rust creak at the moments when he managed to catch a breath.
Within himself he would have a sensation of liquefying with giggles and of becoming extremely thin, like a puddle.
The two fitted together even in the way the day took them.
Fred woke up lugubriously, and the spectacle of Arthur's capacious morning optimism lifted his spirits.
After the last show, or earlier if they weren't working, Arthur would often fall prey to the bite of melancholy, with such sharp dread of all endings that he would greatly fear going to sleep, as if nothing would be left to him unless he kept watch on it.
He hated other people's leaving him for bed, and when he saw a hard mood ahead he often took a sleeping pill at supper to stop himself from being clamorous, though at the same time he found his terror about the end of a day daft in a creature who was surely intended by build to signify immortal fun.
While they were walking back from the Huddersfield discotheque, it suddenly dawned on Fred and Arthur that they had eaten three main meals that day instead of two.
The usual sausages and spuds had been brought to them between the shows.
‘We had lunch.
That's what put us out,’ Arthur said.
A producer had fed them silly in an effort to woo them to do a film.
Arthur had eaten large helpings of scampi and steak-and-kidney pudding, refrained from the damson pie as a gesture, and taken his mind off the others' plates by  saying that they would do the film if he and Fred were allowed to write it, direct it, find the props, and put together the sound track.
He also said that he would want to do his own stunt work in an escape sequence.
The appalled producer took refuge in the unions and his insurance company, and Fred and Arthur composed their faces into the necessary combination of artistic bloody-mindedness and guestly sympathy to scotch the project without actually seeming to throw their good lunch back into the producer's face.
Neither of them had liked him at all.
‘I've never had a good experience of a boss with a short upper lip,’ said Fred.
‘The scampi was OK,’ Arthur said, bumping a penny along the railings in groups of four and muttering ‘Breakfast, lunch, dinner, supper…
Breakfast, lunch, dinner, supper.
No more than the Tudors had, I bet.’
’ You should have had the damson pie,’Fred said.
‘No, I shouldn't.
I'm blowing up again.’
Nearer to their hotel, Fred did an improvisation about the home life of an air hostess who was taken over in bed by her working phrases and asked her husband if he would care to recline and have a beverage.
Arthur leaned against a lamp-post and felt thinned.
The mirror in their tatty hotel suite exposed that delusion.
‘My face looks as if it's going to drop off a fruit tree,’ he said at himself.
‘It's like a medlar.
Purple .
It seems to be running .’
’ It's the light,’Fred said.
The telephone rang.
Arthur left Fred to it and lay on his back in his own bedroom, reading a book about ballistics.
He felt himself to be so uneducated that it seemed hopeless  even to try to catch up with the ordinary things that people knew.
‘Daisy said to give you her love,’ Fred said, coming into the room half an hour later.
Daisy was Fred's bird, a freckled teenager with red tabby hair whom Arthur had entrusted with a slice of his savings so that she could open a boutique.
He often caught himself liking her better than his own girl-friend.
Perhaps this was because she belonged to Fred, which meant that there was no call to Oh, all that, he thought, shutting up in his own head.
He had a striking decorum even in his thoughts.
Fred sat on the end of the bed with his elbows on his knees and his hands hanging down with their knuckles back to back, like a tired football player in a dressing-room.
He was looking at a beautiful textbook about racehorses that Arthur had laid out on the floor.
‘She says the shop's raking it in,’ he said.
‘She's going to pay you back the loan at the end of the week.’
‘No hurry.’
‘You like making people's fortunes for them, don't you?’
Fred said.
Arthur immediately started to tell a story about a time in music hall when he had set out to behave less admirably and had cost a theatre manager a packet.
After a couple of sentences he went into the present tense, which was a habit he had in speaking of the past, as if it were the plot of some play he was about to do.
‘So even the performing seals are disgusted with his cheeseparing by now, and that night the lyric soprano breaks one of the hoops of her crinoline in the middle of her best love song because he wouldn't run to proper whalebone, and I take myself aside and say to myself….’
This was another characteristic that he had: he often talked about himself as if he had custody of someone who needed a lot of upbringing.
‘Tell that story to Daisy sometime,’ Fred said at the end of it.
‘You two should get married,’ said Arthur, scaring himself.
His thoughts teetered nastily, and he wondered if he had uttered the possibility in order to ward it off.
‘Why don't you marry Peg?’
Fred rinsed the old tea out of a cup and poured some Scotch and tap water into it.
’ It mightn't suit the work.’
’ What?’
‘We'd be three, and all that.’
But the same thing was true of Fred's marrying Daisy.
‘It would be different if it was you and Daisy.
I mean, I like her.’
’ I like Peg.’
‘Anyway, I'm too fat to get married.’
’ Don't be so sorry for yourself.’
’ I'm not sorry.
I'm just fat.’
‘What about King Farouk?
He never stopped getting married.’
They hadn't spoken like this before.
Arthur tightened.
Constraint stung his skin like a wave of hornets.
The conversation was alien and impossible.
At the same time he had the clearest image in his mind of the three of them: Fred, Daisy, and himself, and it was a spectacle of nothing but pleasure.
He was hanging his head over the edge of the bed and wondering what to do next when a spring burst in the mattress.
‘I still think you should try marrying Peg,’ Fred said, starting for the door and giving Arthur as sharp a seizure as  he had ever had of longing and hatred for an ally who was deserting him to go to sleep.
‘You could always split up,’ said his friend.
Another ending.
A second swarm of enemies attacked Arthur's skin and he swore at them blue murder.
‘I've got a new idea for the fall,’ he said.
‘I keep the arms still and move off from your downstage shoulder.
Your weight's on your back foot, same as before, but now you can brace it better against the step.’
Peg was all right, but to marry her seemed a deal of foreign new trouble to face for the sake of off-loading the known old pain of loneliness before sleep.
He remembered some story about a primitive farmer who discovered roast pork when his house and his pig barn burned down and then imagined that he had to set fire to the place again every time he fancied a bit of crackling.
‘Hang on to the house,’ said Arthur, taking himself aside.
‘Hang on to the house.’
He lay on his elbow and hip along the top of a bureau, looking more like a Turkish sultan in a harem than he felt.
Then he flung himself neatly across to the bed, thinking agreeably of life with Fred and Daisy as he went, and another spring broke.
Mankind (me), he thought, mashing up the rest of the mattress because he wasn't going to spend the night braced for a lot of bedsprings to bust in their own time, is idyllic in his intentions, tragic in his fate, and farcical in his functions.
No:ludicrous , he thought next morning, when the first thing in his waking head was the image of his sealion self with a wife.
Fred and Daisy got married later that year.
Arthur was their best man and there were jolly pictures of the wedding  in the papers.
He took them out on a spree the night before, just the three of them.
‘It's a stag night, only with a girl,’ he said.
‘You don't want a lot of people, do you?’
Daisy asked Fred privately whether they shouldn't get him to invite Peg.
Fred had already thought of it and shook his head.
At the Savoy Grill, Arthur told Daisy that they were going to drink Dom Perignon.
‘We've gone off beer since you decided to get spliced,’ he said, looking at Fred.
‘Fred hasn't.
We always drink beer,’ said Daisy, collaring the ‘we’.
Then she regretted it, and touched Arthur's arm and laughed.
‘I don't know anything about wine.
Is Dom Perignon good?’
‘Also very pricey,’ said Fred.
‘That's what money's for,’ Arthur said.
Fred said, ‘The only other time he ever ordered it was the night you rang us up in Leeds to say you'd got the house and we could move in by the week we were spliced.’
Then Arthur took them to a night club called The Scotch, and made them dance, and thought they looked good together.
‘Half the room is wearing clothes they've brought from your posh shop,’ he said to Daisy.
‘Best investment I ever made was in that place.
In fact, the only one I ever made.’
‘Haven't you got any stocks and shares, then?’
‘He hardly even trusts the bank,’ Fred said.
‘I know what he means.
He'd much sooner keep it in an old pair of tights.’
‘What you put into the business,’ Daisy said, ‘you should have treated it as a loan and let me pay you back the  capital.
I always thought of it as a loan.
Two thousand quid is a lot of loot.
You might need it.
Or I might go bankrupt.’
‘I like getting dividends,’ said Arthur.
‘The other day I got twenty-two pounds five and six from your accountants.
It seems like real money, your dividends.
Like getting a wage packet again, instead of voting myself a salary as my own director or whatever it is they make me do.’
He saw them off on honeymoon and didn't know what to do with the weeks they were going to be away, until he thought of taking a total-immersion course in Italian.
Daisy had once said that the three of them might spend a holiday together next year in San Gimignano.
He worked at the course twelve hours a day and found it exhausting but staggeringly easy.
Once he was over the edge of extreme fatigue his brain drank up the language by the pint.
He thought of startling Fred and Daisy with a flood of Italian when he met them off the boat train at Victoria Station, but at the sight of them his plans fled for excitement.
Intruding on a newly married couple sounded a textbook mistake when he surveyed it, but plainly both of them were glad he was there; he could see it in their faces and ran up the platform with joy, not shy at all about the reflection of his hurtling bulk in the glass of a newsagent's stall.
It was a couple of months before he felt in Daisy's way.
He tried to find himself a new girl to take his mind off it: some new girl, because Peg had gone wrong.
He invented engagements when he had nothing to do, and ordered La Stampa to keep up his Italian as a surprise for Fred when the present stage was over.
Surely it was too predictable that Daisy was going to want to elbow him out; the feelings  that existed between the three of them were substantial enough to forbid anything so trite.
He started keeping Fred and himself to timetables, so that she knew where she was, and cut out eating with Fred after the show or seeing him in the daytime at weekends.
Working together was more enviable than ever, and professionally they seemed infallible.
By good luck, they were in the middle of a long stint in London.
The next provincial tour was months ahead, and by then Fred would have seen Daisy through whatever was bothering her.
Arthur liked her very much, and when he heard from Fred that she was going into hospital overnight to have a minor operation he packed her room with flowers and clownish notes.
Fred was jumpy while they were working together the next morning, so Arthur opened a bottle of Bollinger in their businesslike new office and then took him out to lunch.
’ What's she in there for?’he said.
’ Children,’said Fred.
Arthur changed the champagne to Dom Perignon.
They had two bottles.
He looked at his watch.
‘Is it over yet?’
‘I don't know.’
‘When were they doing it, then?’
‘I don't know.’
‘You don't know ?’
’ She didn't want me to think about it too much.
She just went in last night and said she'd be back today as soon as she could.
She wouldn't let me take her.’
‘I understand that,’ Arthur said.
‘She knew you'd hate the lousy place.
Couldn't she have had it done at home?’
’ She doesn't mind hospitals like you do.’
They had a brandy, and then another.
Arthur saw Fred looking at his watch.
’ Do you want to go?’he said.
’ I don't much want to be at home on my own.
She won't be back for ages.’
’ Let's have a Calvados.’
They forgot the hospital and invented a new sketch.
The restaurant closed in the end, so Arthur took Fred to Fortnum's and they floated through the food department arm in arm.
They ordered chicken breasts in jelly and invalid grapes for Daisy, and grouse in aspic to be sent when she was better.
Then they went down the stairs to the wine counter and Arthur bought Fred some port a lot of port, what the noble-nosed assistant called a pipe of port.
Arthur told the lordly one that it was to be sent to Mr and Mrs Stokes, but Fred knew whom it was tacitly meant for, because he had read in newspaper gossip columns about dukes laying down pipes of port when heirs were born.
‘Why do you hate hospitals so much?’
Fred said when they had dropped into Jacksons of Piccadilly to buy Daisy some out-of-season strawberries that they hadn't thought of in Fortnum's.
‘Dunno,’ Arthur said.
Fred waited and looked at him, knowing that only forbearance might call it out.
‘Heart,’ Arthur said loudly.
The morning-coated manager had recognized them and was being proprietary with them in front of a dowager customer.
Taking the word ‘heart’ or ‘art’? for a signal of entertainment, he brought his dowager nearer.
Fred, drunk though he was, saw what was happening and pushed Arthur toward the Stiltons.
‘The old bag's got  her ear trumpet out,’ he said too clearly.
‘What do you mean, heart?
All right, aren't you?’
‘You know how it is,’ Arthur said.
Fred stumbled and steadied himself by putting his hand on a York ham.
‘Yes,’ he said.
The dowager looked on and smiled and thought courteously about the people.
Fred was suddenly felled with booze.
‘You're all right, though?’ he said at last , holding on to a Gorgonzola.
’ I always think the old thing's conking out, you see.
They keep telling me it isn't, but it's all bluff, isn't it?
Doctors.
Look at the common cold.
They don't even know about that.
I mean, obviously I've got it coming.
A man of my weight.’
He focused on a birthday cake that interested him.
’ I once saw a film about a girl in love with a man who had a dickey heart,’he said.
‘I think he was a composer.
Thin, of course.’
‘Anton Walbrook.’
’ Can't remember who the girl was.
I wish it had been Carole Lombard…
I'd like to have married Carole Lombard.
Do you remember what we were doing when she was killed?’
‘Bleeding French dictation.’
‘No we wasn't, it was bleeding basketwork.
They was making us make baskets , for the war effort .
Carole Lombard was a nice girl.
She had the nicest forehead I ever saw.’
Arthur thought of her dead, and reacted to a reflection of his own mortal hulk with more sympathy toward it than usual.
’ Poor child.’
‘What do you mean, child?
She wasn't any younger when she died than we are now.’
‘But she feels younger, because we've gone on living  longer,’ said Arthur.
He glimpsed a fallacy, said ‘Longer to us, I mean’ with a vague interest in nailing it, and then thought the hell with it and bought some very expensive soap.
So after that they staggered happily to Hamley's in search of mechanical toys for themselves, and passed a record shop on the way that reminded Arthur of something.
‘Daft of me not to be able to remember who the girl was,’ he said, ‘but I tell you what I do remember.
They played the Grieg Concerto every time the composer was going to have an attack.’
He hummed and sounded quite at ease, so Fred asked if he would like the record.
‘Thanks very much,’ Arthur said furiously.
‘I can never hear the damned thing without wanting a cardiogram.’
When they got back to Fred's house, it was eight o'clock.
They had had tea at the Ritz and drinks at the Café Royal, and then more drinks at Lyons' Corner House in Coventry Street because they were fed up with swish places and Lyons' seemed more like home.
They were more than fairly high, merry as grigs, and prepared to go on all night.
Daisy had been back for a long time; she looked white and pinched.
‘Where have you been?’ she said, crying.
‘I rang everyone.
I was out of my mind with worry.’
‘Shopping,’ said Fred.
‘He didn't think you'd be back for ages,’ Arthur said protectively.
‘You're drunk,’ she said to Fred, and turned on Arthur.
‘You've made Fred drunk.
How could you?
When I was in hospital .’
She cried some more.
‘I came out faster than anyone's ever left before.
As soon as I could walk straight, I got out.
They said I had to lie down for two hours because  I was going to be groggy, but I thought Fred would be worried.
I had to get back.’
’ You shouldn't have done that,’Fred said.
‘He's only drunk because he was worried,’ Arthur said.
‘People should do what doctors say.’
Fred's voice was acid.
‘After operations.’
‘It wasn't an operation.
How can you call it an operation ?
It was for a baby .’
‘You're being a soppy date,’ Arthur said.
‘Funny, you're not usually.’
‘Perhaps it's the anaesthetic,’ Fred said.
‘Anaesthetics can upset people for hours,’ Arthur said.
Daisy screamed at them.
‘Stop ganging up.
Even when I've been in hospital , for this , the two of you gang up.’
The humiliation and jealousy that had surfaced in her didn't abate in the weeks ahead, and the prospect of the friends' provincial tour together made her behave like a vixen.
She broke up the partnership with exhaustive cunning, prising Arthur away with weapons of sexual mortification that she knew he would never describe to a living soul, least of all to Fred, because she was Fred's loved wife.
She made Fred see himself only as she described him as a man who was deliberately making his now pregnant wife unhappy.
All the same, he insisted on doing a final tour.
He did it because he wanted to, because he wasn't going to be her victim, and because he cared very much for Arthur.
The time together wasn't at all the funeral wake it might have been.
On the contrary, it was brilliant and buoyant: two months of boon nights.
They had actors' temperaments, and they forgot London because it wasn't there.
Future  separation didn't exist, except when the long arm of the telephone reached into the room.
‘It's only for a time,’ Fred said on the last night of the tour.
‘We'll give it till the baby's a year old, say.
Or six months.
Probably she'll be so wrapped up in it she'll feel differently.’
Daisy had one baby and then another, and Fred and Arthur did a television series together directly after the first child was born, but a reserve had come between them and their companionship wasn't quite the same.
Arthur went back to life alone in his rooms in South Kensington and wondered how to proceed.
He dipped into books, but couldn't get his brain to bite.
He went to Italy on his own and eventually made himself pick up a girl in Rome, mostly for the sake of having someone to speak his new Italian to, but she thought his intense shyness some sort of perversion and kicked him out.
Arthur wandered the streets and ate pasta on his own and learned the intricate history of Christian heresy in an Italian-language library.
It was plainly not a useful thing for a comedian to do.
But then being a comedian was plainly not a useful thing to do either.
He came back to England and went on drinking champagne alone, and nerved himself to do a TV series without Fred.
The endeavour was professionally abysmal as well as painful, and his money started to run out.
Life seemed more exacting than God himself.
Then the Aldwych Theatre suddenly asked him to play Bottom in A Midsummer Night's Dream for the Royal Shakespeare Company.
He waited until it was nearly too late, and then set his alarm for the old confident time of the  morning and rang up his agent to tell him to say yes.
As soon as the offer was accepted, it seemed the clearest piece of luck.
Arthur remade his day, for he had let it disintegrate stupidly.
His new habit of sleeping on and on to rid himself of as much time as possible and then of staying up drinking alone until very late only left him with none of his natural good time and hour upon hour of his bad.
So he started getting up early again, at five or even four, and going into heavy sleep with the waning light.
The work ahead began to make him feel over-rested and dangerous, like a fat lion.
Every now and then he would walk through Covent Garden fruit market towards the Aldwych to make sure that the theatre was still there.
He refrained from ringing Fred up and stored Daisy's dividend cheques in a drawer without cashing them, although he could have done with the money.
The rehearsals were as pleasurable as they generally are.
The director was a small, pink-cheeked man with bottle-shaped shoulders and an expression of misleading blankness.
He took rehearsals in an ancient overcoat that might have come from Gogol's dustbin.
It hung to his mid-calves and he was devoted to it.
Instead of talking from the stalls to actors in front of one another, he would always shamble up onto the stage with his peculiar hedgehog gait and take them aside separately.
He spoke very shrewdly and at alarming speed, in a low voice that seemed to come from elsewhere; though his lips might be moving in front of Arthur, the shafts of help would sound as if they came from the wings or the orchestra pit.
The director had a knack of giving elegant voice to exactly the thought that was currently in poorish shape at the back of Arthur's head, and this was infuriating, though to feel resentment at having  your skull so stylishly looted seemed small-minded and a blunder of taste.
Halfway through the rehearsals Arthur started to feel anxious, and after nights of floundering he concluded that he should stop trying to put aside what he knew from music hall.
Next day, of course, the director shuffled up onto the stage, stopped the rehearsal, took Arthur on one side, and lifted the ass's mask to murmur, fluttering the hairs on the bearded jawbone,’ You're cutting yourself off from your technique.’
’ I know,’Arthur said impatiently.
’ I thought that Shakespeare…
I mean, I thought ‘
’ Bottom is a music-hall character,’said the director over him.
‘People always make him too pathetic.
Try playing him as George Robey.’
‘Blast,’ Arthur said to himself.
‘There goes what I was thinking again.’
After a traditionally disastrous dress rehearsal the director came into Arthur's dressing-room, which he shared with Flute the Bellows Mender, and said cheerily, ‘I tell you what, why don't you go back to the awful way you used to do it?
Then the production will be integrated because it will be all bad.’
’ I think it's disgusting, him talking like that,’Flute said afterwards in a thin voice.
‘as if the conception hadn't got anything to do with him.’
He slammed down a tin of cleansing cream.
Flute was a mirthless man who often used words like ‘conception’, ‘subtext’, and ‘seminal’, and also ‘Jarry-esque’, which appeared to have something to do with a play called Ubu Roi .
Four weeks of being cooped up with Flute had taught Arthur that Ubu Roi was the most seminal possible thing about funniness, and if it was a book  he was prepared to try getting it out of the public library one day.
Arthur looked at Flute's cross face and thought longingly of Fred's horse sense at dress rehearsals.
With as much robustness as he could spare, he said that he didn't think the director had meant to be flippant.
This added fuel to Flute's chilly little fire, and Arthur's shoulder was given a painful thwack with a rolled-up copy of the Tulane Drama Review .
‘Comedy should be taken seriously,’ Flute said.
Arthur grunted a serviceable yes or no, perfected in combat with supercilious wine waiters who had tried to test his strength, or his French, or both.
Cheek, he thought later, with his usual time lag, pouring himself a glass of champagne from the half-bottles that he kept in the fridge.
He nearly rang Fred up, but he would be seeing him tomorrow at the first night.
Then the telephone rang, and the director said he had been very good, and did he like päte1?
Because his wife had made dishes of it as first-night presents for the cast, apart from Titania, who was on a diet and would have to be dealt with in some other way.
At the idea of päté in the offing, Arthur's voice leaped like a salmon.
‘Oh, blow Titania,’ he said, putting four fingers into his waistband, which was on the loose side at the moment.
‘Give her the päté anyway and let her get on with it.
She can always hand it on to Peaseblossom or Mustardseed.
They both look starving.’
‘That's their ballet background,’ said the director.
‘You could give yourself a nasty cut on those shoulder blades,’ Arthur said, suddenly remembering the whole girl subject after his respite from it and feeling unusually breezy.
The sight of Fred and Daisy after the first night added to his nerve, and he scooped the skeletal Peaseblossom out of a dressing-room full of tulle to take her out to dinner with them.
She stayed mute through two rounds of drinks and potted shrimps.
‘You did have a crush of fans in your dressing-room,’ said Daisy, doing her best.
‘Mashed up Mustardseed's wings,’ Peaseblossom said.
‘What?’
Daisy asked.
Arthur inquired further and relayed his findings.
Her colleague's fairy costume had been badly injured by an admirer who had sat on it.
‘What rotten luck,’ Daisy said, putting on the upper-class voice that she used only when she was feeling guarded.
But what about?
Not about the sight of me acting , thought Arthur; surely not.
He asked after Fred's new play and she ran on with unconvincing enthusiasm about a young actress who was going to be in it.
‘She's a dish,’ said Fred.
‘Only sixteen.
We'll all be up for child rape.
I don't know whether she can act, but she looks a treat.’
‘She's the bird with the two Afghans,’ said Arthur, who had seen pictures of the dogs in the papers.
‘She's a fearfully nice girl.
Have you met her?’
Daisy said graciously to Peaseblossom, who was in contemplation with spaghetti.
‘You sound like a royal going round a factory,’ Fred said.
He ladled some of his stew onto Daisy's plate.
‘Go on, shut your cake-hole with that.’
They laughed together with such intimacy that Arthur had to look away.
Then Fred took Peaseblossom off to dance and Arthur gave  Daisy an envelope of the uncashed dividend cheques, saying that he wanted her to plough them back into the business.
She missed the quality of his action altogether, or chose to pretend to, and said crisply, ‘Oh, you can tear them up, love.
I had them stopped ages ago.’
When Fred came back to the table, the two old friends suddenly fused and started to laugh, while Daisy had to wait upon them as their natural audience.
‘This is the way things really are, isn't it?’
Arthur cried in his head.
‘It can't have been lost.
Dear God, they'll pick their things up in a minute and leave me on my tod with that Peaseblossom.
I'm tired, it's not fair.
What shall I do with her when she's had enough to eat?’
He took her back to her flat in Putney, which was a long way, and she turned out to be keen on cocoa.
Arthur left her to a mug of it and a Beatles record.
He began to be asked to act in play after play.
There was something awry with directors' reasons for casting him and something unnourishing in the West End audiences' response, but he smothered the knowledge of it.
Intellectual reviewers took him up in left-wing papers because of his music-hall background and appreciated him in a way that made him wretched.
They wrote as though finding him funny were something radical and upright, of a kind with rallying goodwill toward coloured immigrants.
One director used him in Waiting for Godot , and he felt at home in a straight play at last, but unfortunately a critic wrote four hundred words about the Christly nature of the moment when he took his hat off.
After Arthur read that paralysing codswallop, the piece of business became impossible and it was only after Fred rang him up and ribbed  him about it that he could manage to get the thing off his head again.
It was summer, though, and life was working in its careless way.
Arthur went to the Kings Road one hot afternoon to buy some sausages at Sainsbury's.
‘That's Arthur Moe,’ said a young man on the street outside.
He looked like a male model.
‘So it is,’ said his girl friend.
‘Ask him for his autograph, then.’
Arthur was used to people talking about him in his presence as if he couldn't hear.
It made him feel as if he were a television set.
The man long-sufferingly tore apart a paper bag for him to autograph, shoved it onto his hand, and said furiously,’ Haven't you even got anything to write with?’
Arthur's affability began to be tinctured with a faint new sarcasm.
He asked them into Sainsbury's, borrowed a pencil from the sausage assistant, and wrote his name on the paper bag.
‘Phoney writing,’ the man said severely.
’ What?’said his girl, leaning over his shoulder to look.
‘I said phoney, not funny.
I haven't laughed at him for years.’
Arthur bought two pints of Devonshire cream as an act of aggression.
Life being what it is, he thought, one dreams of revenge.
He came out into the sun and wondered what next.
Defend myself!
I'm fed up with my place.
I'd like a cat.
A man must have somewhere to go.
Then he saw a wonderfully pretty girl who had obviously been watching him for a long time.
It was Sukie, Sukie  something, the nymphet Fred was working with; he knew her by the Afghans.
‘You were even cooler than Fred,’ she said, laughing at him admiringly and leaning her two dogs against her as if they were supporting a fine book.
He was glad she thought he had been cool.
He decided not to wipe his face, which had started to run in its usual sleepy-fruit way, because to do so might have destroyed the impression.
‘Come home and have a drink,’ she said.
‘You're not playing tonight, are you?’
She imparted her knowledge of him so agreeably, and her kneecaps looked so trustworthy, that the glancingly unkind afternoon improved out of all recognition.
He had an obscure faith that he was in the presence of some tributary of Fred's staunch temperament.
They walked to her car: two lean and amazing dogs, one lean and amazing girl, and the old bladdery wineskin.
Oh, well.
Oh, hell.
She bought a choc-bar ice-cream on the way, and this immediately gave him the illusion of proxy licence that he always felt upon seeing the thin and flawless elude the rules.
Indeed, he even had a buccaneering moment when it seemed to him that to have a choc-bar himself would do the trick of making him exactly like her.
So he bought one.
Her car was a red MG with the hood down, parked closely; there was room for her to get in, but not for him.
She realized this openly and laughed at him in the sun, saying that the Afghans couldn't manage it either, and her blatant flirtatiousness fuelled him to perform one of his music-hall leaps over the back of the car into the bucket seat.
’ Fred never told me you did that sort of thing.’
’ I don't usually.
Not in private life.’
‘He said you were shy.
Do it again.’
She really was a  child.
OK: one more when we get home and that's all before bedtime, he thought, facing the fact that bedtime was probably all too literally what she had in mind.
Well, in that case, he told himself, there are ways of quieting kids down.
Meaning no when you say it, for instance, and hot-milk drinks.
‘Not here,’ he said maturely.
‘I'll do you one more when we get to your place.’
Her chin was shaped like a baby's heel.
She gave him a Coke out of a fridge that held caviare, half-empty tins of sardines and water-chestnuts, and medicine bottles for the dogs.
There was also a cold-cream jar containing marijuana jam.
The drawing-room was full of rugs that looked upsettingly as if they had been made from earlier Afghans.
She sat on one of the longest-haired mats, draped the dogs around her, and catechized him about Fred with an insistence that he took for childishness.
He tried asking her about herself, but she had a knack of averting his questions with an apparently bashful stammer, looking at him with kohl-lined eyes that rolled around like the globules in a bricklayer's balance.
Her beauty was so startling that it mysteriously approached the comic.
Arthur found the reasons for this unfathomable, but took it that they had to do with a comparison to his own looks.
The sight of her bare toes made him feel slightly religious.
When she wanted not to reply to something, she would lift her ravishing upper lip over her opened teeth in a way that put him alarmingly in mind of a horse wanting to be bridled.
He grew very hot and thought that he was probably looking runnier than ever, but felt it would be courting horse trouble to take off his jacket.
She was wearing  schoolboy shorts herself, and what seemed to be an eleven-year-old's prep-school cricket blazer.
Her hair was in a single pigtail tied with black bow, like one of Nelson's sailors.
Merely to connect her with the Battle of Trafalgar liquefied him a little further because it moved him.
He assumed the pigtail to be her own, but it wasn't.
When she came back from changing, her haircut was a boy's, except that it had new-born-looking curls at the nape of her neck, which knocked him out for a bit.
He went into her giant bathroom to take his mind off things and stood there awhile between her mirrors, thinking not particularly of how he looked himself but mostly of the inflections that she had caught from Fred, and also of how it must feel to be this negligently perfect child, who had obviously never in her life spent herself combating a flaw.
‘You shouldn't wear a switch, you know,’ he said when he came back.
’ Your own hair's nicer.’
‘It's fun, that's all.
It's boring to be the same all the time.’
‘When you're as pretty as you are, you should leave yourself alone.’
She wavered her eyes at him, but he wasn't going to hand her anything more, for she knew perfectly well she was pretty.
Not that her vanity took away from her; in some eerie way that he didn't relish, her self-absorption even made her harder to withstand.
He found himself thinking solemnly about her bone structure, going on and on about it in his head, but put a stop to that because his thoughts sounded like the conversation of fashion photographers.
‘Promise me not to wear a switch again,’ he said, after a fool's pause.
‘Why?
That's the whole point of living now.
We can change ourselves.
We can be anyone we want.’
She read too much newsprint, perhaps.
‘I've got dozens of wigs.
I suppose you think that's frivolous of me.
But I get so bored with myself.
Don't you?
What I mean is, you can choose now in the mornings whether you're going to be Marie Antoinette or a plumber's mate.
As far as your hair's concerned, I mean.
Or you can learn something.
Like, er, Spanish.
Anything.
Shorthand.
You can decide to have kids or not.
You can be fat or thin.
You just have to know what you want.
Of course, it doesn't matter for a man about being fat.
Women don't mind that sort of thing in men.
I'd kill myself if I was fat.’
She poured a glass of Perrier water for herself and asked if he would like to smoke some pot.
’ If I was fat I simply couldn't stand it.’
He watched her as she moved around the room.
She was smoking her joint with quick snatches of breath, like a swimmer doing the crawl.
He forgot for a moment that it was pot and thought of nicotine, and then of cancer, cells in delirium, the inroads that living would make one day even on this varnished little icon of the exempt: the flab of tiredness, children, overwork, sitting up too late at night listening to people, indulging buoyant childish appetites as a device to sustain good nature against foreshadows of the senile self.
‘I hate Daisy, don't you?’ said the little beauty, sitting cataclysmically on his knee, with a baby sparkle hard to tell from old-age mischief.
He put his huge right hand on her polished gold kneecaps, because it suddenly looked ridiculous lying around on the arm of a chair, and said,’ No.’
‘Tell me about Fred.
No.
Tell me later, when we're in bed.
I'll cook us some shepherd's pie.
I'm a super cook.
Did you know that?
Fred told me you used to have shepherd's pie three or four times a week when you were in music hall.
He said you liked it best the way they did it in Derby.
Fred's a smashing man, isn't he?
He's taught me everything.
I even feel I know all about you.
I mean, I know about your mother the harpist, and your father, and why you're called Arthur, and about the way you can fall.
I wasn't really surprised when you jumped into the car like that, you know.
I wanted you to.’
She was a witch, then, because he had never before in his life done such a thing with a girl in the street.
She must have put the idea into his head herself: pinned it onto the back of his mind, like one of her flaming hairpieces.
The room was full of photographs of her.
He looked at them.
There was one of her dandling a baby, and he took it into the kitchen to her.
‘It's my godchild,’ she said.
‘I adore babies.
I'm going to have eight.’
He looked at the backs of her knees, nearly fainted with the beauty of them, and went into the drawing-room again to convalesce, holding the photograph on his big lap.
What was she doing?
He couldn't see his way.
He seemed to have become her creature, though she was the one on a drug supposed to make her passive.
The cadences of Fred in her speech were cruelly deluding.
She struck him as perilous and avid, and he had the sensation of going into a skid.
He looked again at the photograph, and recognized at last that the baby who looked familiar was Fred's.
No, Daisy's, with the child in the kitchen as her surrogate mother.
‘How on earth did you get this?’ he said.
‘It's Daisy's kid.’
‘I want Fred to see it.’
She smiled gaily, and a freezing wind howled in his guts.
‘You need locking up.’
‘We'd better get on with it if you're going to be nasty, hadn't we?
What a waste of my beautiful cooking.
Still, I'm not really hungry.
Are you?’
She came and kissed him like an anteater, and he went out of the door.
‘You're frightened of me, aren't you?’ she shrieked at him.
‘Come on, we could have fun.
I think you're nice.
I think you're attractive.’
He went down the stairs, and she stood at the top of them screaming.
‘I admire your work.
Help, I'm falling.’
‘Hang on to the doorpost, then.’
He hesitated.
She had certainly gone ashen, but it was probably pique.
‘Go to sleep,’ he said.
‘Have something to eat and go to sleep.
It was a bad idea, that's all.
And leave Fred and Daisy alone.’
’ I'll kill myself.’
As soon as he got home, the telephone was ringing and she told him the same thing many times.
’ I'll kill myself.’
‘Where did you get my number?’
‘From Fred.’
‘What've you done to him?’
‘I'll kill myself if you don't come back.’
‘Eat your nice shepherd's pie and lay off.
I've got to work tomorrow.’
‘So I'll never see you again.’
‘All right, I'll take you out to lunch one day.’
‘You don't love me.
Mine's Flaxman 9424.
You grab what you can get and then you desert me.’
‘Don't talk such bollocks.
We've only just met.’
‘I can't bear being deserted.
I won't have it.
You're just like Fred.
If you don't come back I'll take the whole bottle.’
’ You mean you did this to Fred .’
‘I can't stand it — I'm taking them — I'm giving them to the dogs….’
She made her voice fade and left the receiver knocking against a table leg.
Arthur listened carefully and heard her tiptoeing away.
An hour later he dialled the number, but it was still engaged.
The night seemed the longest he had endured.
He sat for many hours in front of a mirror, moving his joints, detecting stiffness in a knee, juggling with cakes of soap to see if he could still do it.
He was rehearsing Sir Toby Belch in Twelfth Night and the lines had fled; what he hung on to was the physical business, and when he did some of it to the mirror it seemed poor stuff for the old Living Boomerang.
‘I am not doing what I ought to do,’ he kept saying to himself.
Was Fred free of that girl?
He tried to reach her again, and told the operator to put the howler on the line because the phone was off the hook, but the girl said reprovingly that it couldn't be done in the middle of the night in case it woke people up.
‘It might be an emergency,’ Arthur said, though he didn't believe it.
Then he got out his old square-toed athlete's shoes and practised falls onto the bed.
His heart seemed to be beating too hard, and he started to test his twenty-twenty eyesight by leaping with alternate eyes closed.
He thought the right one seemed weak.
Perhaps it was tiredness.
I am not doing what I ought to do .
The next day the press was onto him.
Sukie had been rushed to hospital after taking an overdose of sleeping  tablets, and she had left an incriminating love letter to him.
It was printed next Sunday in one of the gutter tabloids.
There were also photographs of himself, and of her bedroom as the police and reporters had found it, with the two Afghans poisoned on the floor.
Sukie recovered, and there were no charges to be brought, but she was a favoured public child as well as a minor and something stuck.
After he opened in Twelfth Night , Arthur was hissed by a crowd of women waiting for him outside the stage door.
It happened again, out of the blue, a few days later in Oxford Street.
He thought of something he had read once about Fielding, who had heard the watermen at Rotherhithe mocking his body when it had grown ugly with the dropsy.
Fred understood Sukie's vengeful ruse, and most people could have guessed it if they had cared to, which they didn't.
Often it isn't the truth that punishes but what's believed.
After a fortnight, Fred saw what was likely to happen and went to a lawyer whom he trusted.
‘The girl's practically a nut.
Can't he make a statement?’
’ It'll do more harm than good.’
‘You think it'll die down?’
The lawyer looked out the window.
‘You know what I really think?
His weight will damn him.
He'll become a monster.’
Arthur survived.
Defeat was too great a compliment to pay to society.
He merely changed.
He started to smoke incessantly, carrying around a cigarette box as big as a biscuit tin.
He lost so much weight that he wore two suits, one on top of the other, because he despised the sign of toll.
I'm the kind you can trample for a time.
But then I quit.
God hear, That's it.
He woke up in the middle of some night with this composed in his head.
He had practically no money left in the world, but he went on drinking champagne on credit.
After he had been out of work for months his telephone rang and a manager asked to see him.
In his office the manager said that he thought he might have a part going, and then looked at Arthur for a long time.
Arthur looked back grimly.
’ No,’the manager said.
‘It isn't for you.
But keep in touch.’
Arthur left without a word.
What had he been expected to do?
Go down on his knees?
Fred was killed in a car crash at the end of the year.
By that time Arthur had started again as near as possible to the place where he had begun.
He played in working-men's clubs in the North of England.
They didn't pay much, but they were more like the old music halls than anything left in the South.
With an enjoyment that came back as soon as he started to work, he invented a solo routine that was deliberately and taxingly physical.
The audiences at the first show of the evening were sparse but hair-raisingly alert.
The second houses were packed, but the people were generally too drunk to pay much attention.
The roaring, boozing Saturday nights were always great.
Daisy found him by telephone in Harrogate with the news of Fred's death and asked him to identify the body for her.
She seemed to be asking not so much to save herself as because of some instinct for the men's friendship.
Arthur  flew to London and stayed in the police morgue a long time with the body that he knew as closely as his own, thinking of Fred's splendid good nature, his tough-mindedness, and his humour about the absurd and even the terrible.
Daisy let Arthur pay for the funeral, although she knew he had no money.
His choices were old-fashioned and lavish, with a full choir and more flowers than he could possibly afford.
The bills came on the morning of the burial, and he suddenly drew them from his pocket during the service, opening them without knowing what he was doing.
He crushed them in his hand as he passed the coffin and shouted at the lid, weeping, ‘Even when you're dead you cost me too much.’
Living on the Box
The poet, feeling stale, thought the world stale and began to abuse it.
Since he lived in isolation, being a nature poet and finding contact with people a digression from his work, the only object of abuse that was readily available to him was his wife.
During the twelve years of their life together, he had tutored her carefully in monkishness.
As part of the training he spoke to her rarely.
To rail at her meant opening a conversation, and this involved preposterous changes in his day.
Generally he rose at five-thirty, before she was awake.
She got up later than he did because she went to sleep later, tossing and sometimes weeping, and in the end usually fumbling her way downstairs to get herself a drink.
Until noon he stayed out of the cottage, walking across the Northumbrian moors with a knob-headed stick and humming Anglican hymns, whose verbal schemes he admired for their metrical embodiment of depression.
At twelve he had a simple meal, cooked with natural foods and sea salt, which she hacked with a chisel from a damp sackful in the yard.
At one he slept, and at three he worked in a shed at the bottom of the garden.
In the evenings they read together, keeping silent because he believed that silence was more real than chatter, and at half past nine they went to bed.
Sometimes she sat on the end of his divan if she couldn't sleep and tried to wake him up to talk, but he slept with the heaviness of the very thin, and her weight on the divan made it sag and creak in a way that embarrassed her.
In the earlier years of living with her he had sometimes left her a note speared on the kitchen tap before he went out for his walk — stirred and perhaps even drawn by the sight of her plain, flushed face in bed, which had begun to acquire in sleep a look of distress and disappointment.
Lately the notes had not been written.
She thought the zest of her replies probably struck him as crude.
In his mordant presence she always felt vulgar and self-indulgent.
When he made one of his rare, shapely jokes, they gave her a flash of great pleasure — a passing reassurance that life was good after all — and then an experience of despair and palsy.
He was the only person she had ever known whose humour seemed entirely immobile.
It expressed no wish, no venom, no energy in any direction.
But to complain that its effect was therefore paralysingly glum would no more have occurred to her as fair than to complain that it made her feel fat.
It did both, but this only drove home to her the grossness and subjectivity of her own temperament.
On an evening when he had broken the silence with one of his quietist cracks she would feel a sense of remorse and insufficiency descending on her, and hours later find herself in the larder, eating the remains of whatever was under the meat sieve and weeping that she should do something so self-defeating and stupid.
On the days when he used to leave her a note in the morning she knew well enough that there was no good to be hoped for in replying to it.
She understood that her excitement upset his sense of style.
At the same time she was so ravenous to talk to him that it was quite impossible to stop herself.
She would write her first reply in the bathroom, turning on the geyser to pretend she was having a bath and writing joyfully on a breadboard balanced on the small wooden basin (they used a breadboard as a bathmat on the freezing floor, because he liked the genuineness of natural wood).
And then, after putting the note on his bed for him to read when he came back for his rest and covering it with the undyed hessian bedspread in case their child saw it, she would sit down and try to wring words out of the sleepy little boy at breakfast before he went off to school, and find that she had an empty morning in which to worry about what she had written.
She would make the poet's lunch, starting with the radio playing but switching it off after a time because he believed that people should be able to do without background noise.
And as she was moving about she would realize that her letter communicated nothing of her pleasure and love, so she would get the paper back and add a postscript and a laborious drawing.
Then she would do housework, but it was such an austere cottage that there was hardly anything to do.
And while she was having a whisky and eating a piece of cake at eleven o'clock, in a hapless impulse to demonstrate and somehow fix her freebooting mood — though she saw the irrationality of it on a day that had begun with a clear insight that at least she would try to equal his thinness even if she could never hope to achieve the frugality of his  expectations — just as she was leaving the last part of the cake, she would think of a better way to write the note.
By the time she had done it several times, and copied out the postscript, and redone the drawing, it sounded false to her and she lost her nerve completely.
At lunchtime, when he read the note, he would always thank her as warmly as he could, but her mistake of taste was plainly defined in his face.
She had a vision of him sometimes, struggling for breath beneath the crassness of her impulses, in the same way that she sometimes imagined her fattening body to be asphyxiating his small fine frame in bed.
Shy and unhappy, she one day went to sleep in the spare room, hoping that he would come in to find her, but he credited her with his own temperament and thought only that she wished to be alone.
Indeed, he was quite unaware of her frenzy and mildly loved her.
The absurd fact was that he had married her for her gaiety.
But in his grey presence her larks had soon seemed shameful, and she had disciplined herself as though she were entering an order.
He observed the ebbing of her vivacity with thoughtless disappointment.
Occasionally he hated her for it, because he took it to be a reproach of himself.
Their life was one for which she was very unfitted, and her gigantic effort to enjoy it struck him as a piece of self-deception.
He knew, when he considered the point, that she did not even really like his poetry.
His visions of moral order in biology and of the superior integrity of sap, expressed in a thin, precise style like the print of a hopping bird in snow, struck her as impossible to live with.
But, on the face of it, the perfect little couplets about twigs  and foxes that he wrung out of his gargantuan walks justified the form of their lives as fully in her eyes as in his.
She knew everything he had written by heart.
The sound of her repeating a line back at him drove him mad.
‘Have some more stew,’ she said one evening.
‘No thank you.’
‘Is anything the matter?’
‘No.’
‘Is work all right?’
He didn't reply, and filled his pipe.
She came round to his chair and put her big arms around his neck, aware of what her flesh would feel like on his skin and at the same time ashamed to be self-conscious.
‘I was thinking today about ‘Frost’,’ she said.
Unable to see his face, she recited ‘Frost’ to him.
Her voice was pretty, but she made ‘Frost’ sound a thin dirge, and he looked murderous.
He decided at that moment to make a victim of her.
One morning, he stayed at home and dropped his gum boots hard beside her bed to wake her up.
‘You'd rather I wrote sea shanties,’ he said in her ear.
She looked alarmed.
‘What time is it?’
‘Or hornpipes.’
‘Why haven't you gone out today?
Have you got a cold?’
‘You'd like it better if I tried to make people happy, wouldn't you?
What obligation have I to do that?
Or to you, to make you happy?
Doesn't it ever strike you as faintly ludicrous — the pursuit of happiness by a species that is less equipped for it than anything in nature?’
He did a short  angry dance by the bed.
It was like the rollicking of a Desert Father.
‘I don't understand a word you're saying.’
‘Naturally.’
‘I've only just woken up.’
‘I wish you wouldn't deceive yourself.’
‘What about?’
‘How unhappy you are.
How much you hate my poetry.’
‘I don't.
I love it.
You….
I don't understand.’
‘You aren't asked to.’
‘But we live together.’
‘We might be on other planets.’
‘I thought you liked being left on your own.’
‘On my own?
I'm about as much on my own here as a man with a dog that wants to be taken for a walk.
Your forbearance is a weapon that you know how to use all too well.’
She started to weep, with her long brown hair falling over her face.
‘Don't.
You look like Elizabeth Barrett Browning's spaniel with a cold,’ he said thinly.
Later there was a letter from the BBC about doing a long television interview.
Out of waywardness, because she had assumed he wouldn't want to, he decided to accept.
‘It'll certainly be a coup for them,’ she said helplessly.
In extremity, she kept trying to be pleasant.
‘I expect you'd like me out of the road.
Though perhaps they'll want lunch.’
‘They'll be here all day.
They're sure to want the poet's wife,’ he said tartly.
‘You can tell them how much you  love the work, can't you?’
He always spoke about his poetry as ‘the work’; it was this sort of dispassion that so excited the BBC.
‘We must get all this!’ cried the young producer to his assistant, driving his Rover over the moors from Newcastle and pointing to the horizon.
‘Somehow the sky seems bigger up here.
I think one feels that in his poetry.’
‘We mustn't force the domestic part of it in this one,’ the assistant said.
‘I'm not sure we shouldn't do it all outside.
What do you think?
He's such an abrasive spirit, isn't he?
Nothing…upholstered — do you know what I mean?
That's what so remarkable about him.’
‘I suppose he's one of the few classicists writing.
Is that the line, do you think?
One could say that he was the dissenter in an age of…romantic anarchy.
Anarchic romanticism.
No.
Megalopolitan romanticism, perhaps.
Anyway, an age with an intense admiration for disorder.
Whereas he sees order in things, doesn't he?
In a very unfashionable way.’
The poet's wife was told when they arrived that they would want to film her.
She had spent too long getting dressed, changing again and again, because her thighs looked bigger in every pair of trousers that she put on.
The exertion and self-scrutiny had made her flush, and she began to turn purple under layers of powder.
This made her late with the lunch, and at the table she found the young men impossible to talk to because she was trying to retain the lines of what she had prepared to say.
In the afternoon, they went out on the moors with the cameras, and she sat crouched over the plates while the logic of the sentences  fell apart completely.
She wanted to talk about his poetry.
All she could think of was the two of them, and her suspicion that he was right about her.
She knew that she had never been an intellectual, but she thought that she had probably once been capable of insight.
At the beginning she had known clearly enough that he was an irrevocably solitary man, and it had seemed to her fortunate to live with him at all.
He would say, ‘People need air round them,’ and she would pretend she agreed.
Or perhaps she had felt it then herself.
When the young men came back and started to film her in the kitchen, she forgot every word she had learned.
The poet had no television.
To watch the programme, a month later, they went with their child to Newcastle and took a room at the Station Hotel.
The poet's wife tried to avoid going, by saying that it was late for the child and that she would have expected her husband not to be curious.
While they waited in the room, which was furnished like a nursing home, with the child reading a comic on the bed and eating a bag of shortbread biscuits, she thought that it was as well to be next door to the railway station in case she had to get away quickly.
At the sight of his big-nosed face slanted across the screen, like a pale and captious parrot, the poet detested his sufficiency and looked across at her to ward off its effect.
He had a powerful impression that the programme was happening in a vault.
When the film used some footage of his wife moving about the cottage, he felt as if he had been given a reprieve.
She used this moment to light a cigarette.
‘What's ‘Muse’?’ the child asked suddenly.
’ Shut up,’his mother said.
‘Father keeps saying it.’
‘It's what I hang around for all day,’ said the poet, ‘when your mother is doing something useful.’
‘Useful!
You could do without any of it.
And what do you mean, that you hang around?
You write on the dot.
Nothing stops you.
It's like the bloody crops.’
‘I can't hear,’ the child said.
‘If some people think that I live in a void, as you put it,’ said the poet on television, ‘perhaps that tells us more about them than about me.
I can't think of a thousand acres of natural activity as a void.
I agree that it's not a particularly easy life for most people to support.
I don't suppose my wife finds it easy, for example.
But for me it's the condition of working.
I find most company the opposite of useful, because it's conducted at a feverish level.
The high temperature of the modern is what I suspect most about it.
Art now romanticizes chaos.
We have developed an aesthetic of inconsequence and accident.
I mistrust a literature that finds suicide more significant than death, and a man's inability to communicate more sorry than the frenzy of his need to.
By celebrating the clamorous, we celebrate the bomb.’
The poet's wife turned away her head and tried to grow absorbed in their child.
‘Twentieth-century art glamorizes the act of flying apart,’ the poet on television continued.
‘No one seems to face the fact that this is bound to reduce the tragic to the simply catastrophic.
There's nothing tragic about a man flying off course like a burst tyre and exploding in a ditch.
We now have a colossal documentation of what it feels like to be in the margin.
The sensibility of the centrifugal  can't go any further, can it?
It can only become more heated.
Or as I see it, more sentimental.
It seems to me that there is something finally maudlin and trivial about seeing neurosis as Nemesis.’
The camera shifted angle: white face against white wall, a head picked clean of expression, like a skull.
The poet felt indifferent toward it; the poet's wife felt suddenly free of it.
‘Not that I find it easy to deny what everyone else in Europe apparently finds truthful.
But I should like to make poems that are about space and order, in the same sense as some modern sculpture.
Not poems that make you feel on the edge of space but poems that make you feel you contain space inside yourself .
I've seen abstracts that do this.
With the verbal arts I think it can only be done for the moment by writing about nature.
In an age that sees all human behaviour and motive as finally hectic, and finds an art that says so rather glorious, the humanist is driven to the vegetable.’
The poet's wife unexpectedly laughed.
‘You never said all this.’
‘I thought it was implicit.’
‘I hadn't any idea you would call yourself a humanist.’
‘…not a void , anyway.
Simply to contain space,’ said the television in the poet's voice, over a shot of him half an inch high striding over the moors.
‘The word ‘void’ only projects modern people's irritation with anyone outside their own trap.
I expect my wife used it.’
The poet hadn't expected the programme to leave this in, and he was shocked.
‘He doesn't live in a void,’ said the poet's wife on television, in a cut that shook her with its glibness.
They had photographed her sitting on a kitchen stool in a white passage, with her back against a long stretch of wall, like someone at a dance.
‘'Void’ is the wrong word.
He lives in a sort of gavotte where no one is ever going to drop a glove.
But he calls it a world, and he's such a good writer that he can make it seem like one.
I think he feels that the most difficult thing in a man's life is to find some sort of balance between longing for company and longing for isolation.
Some of us don't think of that till we're dying.
My husband has been practising dying for years.
I never know whether the death wish is a wish to get out of activity or out of existence.
My husband said once that he wanted to be dead but still to be.
I don't understand that.
I'm a poor person to talk about his work really, because I don't understand the open air.
But looking for the truth in nature walks?
Hips and haws don't mean anything.
They're just hips and haws.
He thinks a tide chart is a sort of hymn sheet.
The only difference between the significance of a tide chart and the significance of a railway timetable is that a railway timetable can be altered, isn't it?
I don't believe that the sort of intractability there is in nature has very much to teach us.
I think it just excites people now because it's remote, like the idea of four days of lemon juice to men who have business lunches every day.
I mean…
I suppose I mean that I don't think my husband would be a nature poet if he didn't live now, here, in England.
Some other time, he might have been a hymn writer, perhaps.
Or a theologian.
He just has a monkish temperament.
I make it sound as if he finds it easy….
He doesn't really dislike people.
He used to love girls.
I think his poetry is an effort to be stoic.
Being married is probably a hindrance.’
‘You shouldn't have said that,’ said the poet.
She watched her big face fade into a still of his Savonarola profile while an actorish voice spoke more of his verse.
‘Did you expect them to leave all that in?’ he said.
‘I suppose so.’
‘You talked as if I were dead.
Or deaf.’
‘No.
I'd never, never have said such things if you were dead.’
She wondered how she could explain this to him if he didn't see it already.
The little boy had lost interest and started pulling open the drawers of the dressing-table.
She put her coat on.
‘You looked beautiful,’ he said after a pause that agonized them both.
He was suddenly moved by her physically, as he had been by the sight of her in the film.
‘Like a Bonnard.’
She thought he was throwing her a sop and it steeled her.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said stiffly.
‘You should have said it all before.’
‘I didn't know it before.’
‘Other people would call it treacherous, I suppose.
I don't.
It's rather a relief.
Where are you going?’
‘London.’
She packed the child into his gum boots.
‘Oh, no.
Not now.
It'll be all right.
I'm not angry.
It's absurd to go because you think I'm angry.
Is that it?’
‘I can't do anything else now.
It's happened in the wrong order.
Most things about us have.
Not like botany at all.’
She kept her face turned away as she moved about the room, and looked stony.
At the door she suddenly grinned at him, and when she had gone the grin seemed to him still to be hanging in the air, like the Cheshire cat's.
He wept.
That night he took a midnight train to London, searched for her all day, and had his first demanding quarrel with her in a Chinese restaurant at five o'clock in the afternoon, blue-jowled with fear and tiredness, and smelling of the stale smells of travellers.
She came back to the north with him after that and they lived together again for a time.
The Tactics of Hunger
‘Algy is a she!’
Lady Grubb shouted into the telephone to the young man from Fleet Street.
‘The he is called Guy.
It's quite clear which is which in Burke's Peerage .
Surely you have Burke's Peerage ?’
The gossip reporter said that he had, but she overrode him.
‘If your newspaper can't afford it, then go to the public reference library.
There is one beside a cinematographic house in Leicester Square.
But surely you should possess a copy.
Tell your proprietor I said so.’
Her twin children, bitterly cold, fiddled with their sherry, which had been mixed with whisky in the decanter by mistake, and took the reporter's side.
’ He's got a copy of it, Ma.
He keeps telling you,’ said Algy, who was the girl, as her mother had bellowed.
Lady Grubb made a whirring noise like a pheasant going up.
‘Why didn't he say so?’
She glared at the telephone dial as if it were the young man's face and held the receiver away from her ear.
‘What did you telephone for, then?’ she said into the mouthpiece.
‘No, of course she's not engaged.
She hasn't come out yet.’
The fact was that Algy had been living for the last year with a working-class architect called Len in a basement flat  in Maida Vale.
But her mother, who was hostile to facts, had gone on entertaining for her as if she were a chaste child just emerging from school.
The young men she rustled up as marriage candidates seemed to Algy to be all one person with different haircuts, well-born dullards on their way into industry who exclaimed ‘I say, how jolly enterprising!’ when they heard that Algy was a scene painter, and who surprised her by still dancing foxtrots and rumbas that she thought extinct.
This weekend she had finally braced herself to the course of obtruding the existence of Len into the house.
She had thought for months of trying to blow the gaff on the fact that she was past marrying off, but it had seemed a lot to put Len through, and her mother was anyway exceptionally good at not acknowledging that a gaff had been blown.
At sixteen, three years ago, she and her brother had erupted together from home practically unnoticed.
Their parents were elderly, though not as elderly as they seemed.
Lady Grubb had fallen easily into the habit of behaving to her children as if she were some doggedly snobbish godmother, inviting them home every few months to look into their marriage prospects and treating the occasion as if it were a country weekend that put her to a lot of trouble, though her house was actually in the middle of London and fully staffed with unhappy au-pair girls.
Reality got through to her intermittently; her apprehension of it was uncommonly tuned, for though she was generally oblivious to the most apparent, she was often startled by things to which others were deaf.
When Guy brought his girl friend home for the weekend, for instance, the air was thick with sex, but Lady Grubb noticed nothing.
On the other hand, when she had taken up the carpets for a dance for Algy and filled the house with sixteen-year-old boys from Harrow and Marlborough, she twitched to the thin soprano signals of public-school lust like a dog hearing the squeak of a rat in its sleep.
She was cruelly obsessed with class and if her children had not come from a background that she knew to be reliable she would certainly have ignored them as she ignored the au-pair girls.
‘I wish she'd get her hair done,’ Algy said when Lady Grubb was out of the room.
‘She looks all right,’ said her brother.
‘No she doesn't.
She used to be pretty.’
‘You're kidding yourself.
When's Len coming?’
‘Late as possible.’
Lady Grubb's invitations to them were always by letter, and led to a file of correspondence because she enjoyed making microscopic changes of plan.
The first summons habitually began with a long and belligerent explanation of why some other weekend was not possible.
As it had never been proposed in the first place, her children could read this only as a piece of unadmitted defensiveness about having ignored them in the past.
They dreaded the prospect of accepting, but they were fond of their father, so they generally packed warm clothes and went.
Lady Grubb kept the house miserably cold.
Occasionally she recited, as though it were a rule of life, a testy saw of her own invention maintaining that fifty-five degrees Fahrenheit was the correct temperature for a drawing-room and fifty degrees for corridors and bedrooms.
Bathrooms she regarded as outhouses.
She was a clever woman with obscure sources of energy who would suddenly start to  garden by torchlight late at night, or walk wilfully all the way to Soho to buy vegetables at the times when the pin in her hipbone was especially painful.
In other moods she would go to bed for days, and have trays sent up to her room that were laden with stingy nursery snacks of mashed fish and junket.
Her interests, when they were detectable, were urgent and surprising.
Sometimes she startled her mild husband by knowing all about African politics.
Lord Grubb was an ancient hereditary peer who kept up eagerly with the times and was trying at the moment to unlock his capital to set up a chain of waffle shops.
His wife, more canny than she seemed, had already witnessed huge losses over a scheme to promote detachable shirt cuffs, and so far she had managed to sit on the remaining money.
Lately he had been troubled by rheumatism brought on by the damp in the house, and his doctor had set him up in sleeping quarters on the ground floor with independent heating arrangements.
But his bathroom was in the conservatory, which had two doors on to the garden where his wife grew plants, and as she left these doors open all morning his part of the house was apt to be colder than anywhere.
The house was decorated almost entirely in weedy shades of green and looked to the children like a fish tank that needed cleaning out.
Lady Grubb knew a great deal about antiques and owned some beautiful pieces, but she topped up the genuine furnishings with reproduction Jacobean coffee tables and plastic cruets.
The cruets were said to have been bought in the cause of saving the work of cleaning silver ones, but she still made the au-pair girls polish a hoard of Georgian silverware in the cellar every week.
One of her hobbies was anaesthetics, and she subscribed to an anaesthetists'  journal in which she had seen an advertisement for a chemist who outfitted doctors' waiting-rooms and surgeries.
This had appealed to her, and recently she had replaced a broken standard lamp in the drawing-room with an operating arc light.
It had been refitted with a low-watt bulb practically too dim to see by, in order to save electricity.
Algy particularly was made miserable by the change in the house.
Her only pleasure in it now was the notes left all over the place by her father: cheery instructions in a classical scholar's hand, written on the gummed labels used by the more pious English government departments to get a second use out of old envelopes.
‘If this drawer sticks, don't despair,’ said a label on a Queen Anne chest in the spare room.
‘It will open if tugged sharply to the right.’
And on the bedside table, facing the sleeper: ‘Don't be alarmed by any irregular thudding noise in the night.
It is probably the water tank.
If in doubt, call for help.’
Lord Grubb knew well enough that Algy dreaded her visits, and to let her off the trial of breakfasting with her mother he had installed a complicated route of strings and pulleys that led from her second-storey bedroom to the basement.
This made a placard spring out in the kitchen.
It said, ‘I'm ready for breakfast.
Thank you.’
The idea of a bell didn't occur to him.
‘Ma must have taken to cooking up bits of food in her bedroom,’ Algy said when Lady Grubb was doing something to the plants and she and Guy were alone with father in his study.
’ What do you mean?‘
‘She's got a Primus in there.’
‘I haven't been up for a while,’ her father said, implying a total absence of mind, and some of body, too.
’ She seems extra loopy today.’
‘Eh?’
‘I wish she wouldn't wear those cardigans,’ Guy said.
’ She looks like a Scripture mistress out to grass.’
‘When does she expect us to leave?’
Algy said.
‘Lord, it's only Friday.’
‘I don't know, my darling,’ Lord Grubb said.
‘Whenever you like.
Sunday evening?’
‘Last time she couldn't wait to be rid of us.
She didn't say a word all Sunday.’
‘I think she was frightened to ask how long you were staying in case you left,’ said Lord Grubb, with a lunge of shrewdness.
When Len arrived, they seemed for some reason to talk about nothing but health.
He was a tall, shy, bony man with a stoop, who cracked his fingers when he was worried.
He expected to be patronized by Lady Grubb because he came from a lower class, about which he didn't generally care tuppence, but when he saw her effect on Algy he found it more difficult than usual to be ribald about it.
‘You've got a cold,’ Lady Grubb said accusingly to her son.
‘No I haven't.
I don't think I have, at least.
Have I?’
‘I can always tell when you have a cold,’ she said, brooking no argument.
‘The whites of your eyes go pink.’
Then she said to Len, but without turning to him, ‘Do you get ill much, Mr Warren?’
‘Hardly ever.’
‘We've all had colds here.
Cecil had a snorter.
I could hear him honking all the way from my bedroom.
He lives on the garden level because he suffers from gout.’
‘Rheumatism,’ Lord Grubb said softly.
‘Did you know that tortoises get gout?
If they're brought to a cold climate too young, that is.
I persuaded our member of Parliament to introduce a bill about it.
About the importation of small tortoises.
One can judge the age by length.’
‘Daddy wouldn't have rheumatism if the house wasn't so damp,’ Guy said.
‘The place isn't damp at all,’ said Lord Grubb.
‘You can always tell a damp house by the state of the cigars.’
‘It must be very different where you come from,’ Lady Grubb said enigmatically to Len, who came from Putney.
Putney was two miles away at the most, but she implied that it was two thousand.
‘I'm afraid this is what you'll have had every day of your life,’ she said to him later as the au-pair girl put a plate of mutton in front of him.
Algy suddenly realized that her mother was engaged in an elaborate pretence that he was a New Zealander.
’ Not a bit.
Algy and I live off baked beans,’ Len said.
‘Ma,’ Algy said,’Len was born in Putney .’
Lady Grubb gracious]y ignored the rebuttals.
‘Would you like some ice in your drinking water?’
‘Aren't you having wine?’
Algy said to him.
‘Don't press it on him,’ said Lady Grubb.
‘He's not accustomed to it.
We had an American to dine the other day who wanted coffee with the sirloin.’
‘Len and I have wine all the time,’ Algy said, but facts led nowhere; they never had.
‘Have you found somewhere pleasant to live in London?’
Lady Grubb said.
’ He lives with me , Ma.
He's always lived in London.’
‘I expect you'd like to meet a few people.
Algy must remember to ask you to come next time I give a little party for her.
There are always plenty of spare girls.’
The au-pair maid went down to the basement and again started plotting with her friend how soon they would have enough money for the fare home to Zurich.
When she came in with the junket, the row had obviously developed.
There was a V-shaped vein sticking out in Algy's forehead.
Lady Grubb looked triumphant.
Lord Grubb was trying to concentrate on taking the band off a cigar.
Guy had left his mutton, and Len was watching Algy.
‘Where on earth did that trolley come from, Ma?’ she said.
‘The chemist.’
‘You're furnishing the whole place from a medical outfitter.
It's starting to look like an obstetrician's lumber room.’
‘It's not your house.’
‘It's certainly never felt like it.
You're dead right.’
‘Too right, as your friend would say,’ Lady Grubb replied, imitating a New Zealand accent.
‘Will you have some junket?
Louise makes it very nicely.’
‘You must have rennet spilling out of your ears,’ Algy said to Louise, who by now was beyond taking pleasure in such moves of friendliness and simply handed round the dish with her left hand behind her back as she had been  taught, feeling mutinous and thinking proudly of a homeland where not junket but fondue was the commonplace.
‘Why do you shop at the chemist's?’
Algy said to her mother, stupidly pursuing the question of the trolley.
‘I had to go there anyway and I saw it.
I needed some things as presents.’
Her children knew at once the sort of things that these would be.
Last year for Christmas she had given Louise a red rubber medical bathmat for the aged.
There was a silence, and then Lady Grubb said,’ It was quite a pleasant walk.’
’ But why couldn't you telephone?
They deliver.’
‘The delivery is very unreliable.’
‘Oh, Ma.
The one thing that chemists are is reliable.
That's what their profession is.
Like those men in long white overalls who see schoolchildren across the road.’
‘Last week they made a mistake on a prescription label.’
‘Well,’ Algy said lightly, ‘don't be a nit — complain to the Lancet .
Or go to another chemist.’
‘'Nit’ must be a local word that you taught her?’
Lady Grubb said to Len.
Dislike ran round the table like electricity, and the lightning generated and struck.
’ Come off it, you old bag,’Len said.
‘I'm not that outlandish.
I was born two miles away.
My mum probably did your scrubbing.’
Then it was as if trees started crashing down and roots tearing out of the ground.
Algy began abusing her mother.
Lord Grubb, in terror, waved his arthritic right hand at Algy with a patting motion of great violence and scattered cigar ash on his beautiful old green smoking jacket.
‘Don't rise to it, sweetheart!’ he shouted.
‘Don't you see  your mother's only trying to convince herself your friend doesn't belong here?’
‘Don't you think it's time she realized he did?’
Algy said coldly.
‘Probably,’ said her father.
‘But she's old.
We're both old.
I hate her.
She's going to die first and she won't notice it, and then I'll be on my own.
It's not dying I'm afraid of; it's being dead.’
Lady Grubb picked up her plate of junket and went to eat it in the drawing-room, shaking with a passion she didn't care to scrutinize because it contained not only fury but also amazement and fear.
‘She's killing herself with what she eats,’ said Lord Grubb to the three left at the table, who felt they should be listening to nothing.
‘It's not fair.
It's not fair to me.
I don't want to be on my own.
One more fall and she'll break her hip again and then she'll die.
What she puts into her system isn't fit for a woman of her age.
It's pap.
It's food for premature lambs.
But she won't do anything I say.
I might as well not exist.
I write her notes every day — notes all over the house, in her potting shed, and on her food lift.
I try to warn her and she pays no attention.
She never replies.
Sometimes I think she can't read any longer.
For all she advises me of her condition she might be blind and I wouldn't know it.
I hate her.
I've written her notes and notes and notes and she's never answered one of them.
Surely she could send me a message of some sort?
She's only to give an envelope to Louise.
I haven't seen her handwriting for so long that I can hardly remember what it's like.
Perhaps she can't even hold a pen any longer.
Perhaps she can't do anything any longer.
Poor soul.
Poor old cocky.
She used  to call me ‘my old mate’ when she was a girl, you know.
It was a joke from a music-hall song.
I hate the sight of her now.
She's nearly dead.
I know it.’
‘Father,’ Guy said.
Then he could find nothing more to say at all.
It was impossible to find any landmarks for the moment.
The balance of power had moved like the contours of a desert after a night wind.
What was happening?
Before this, the twins' visits had always seemed extorted.
Now it was apparently neither here nor there that the two even happened to be present.
They had always written off their mother's manoeuvres as tribal tactics devised to keep the two of them for her kind, with their father as some sort of lower ally in the endeavour, more deeply absorbed by his autonomy and his cigars than by the dynamics of living with his wife.
But now his needs seemed more urgent and primal than hers.
‘You mean she won't admit she's ill?’
Algy said.
‘That's what he's been saying all the time,’ said Len.
‘Haven't you been listening?
Lord Grubb says she won't admit anything.
Blimey, she wouldn't even admit I'm English.’
‘Oh, shut up.
Of course I've been listening,’ Algy said to Len.
‘I can't get…’
She waited and tried again, to her father.
‘You mean she's frightened of the doctor and she thinks you're going to send for him behind her back?’
‘You can't possibly be suggesting Father intimidates her,’ Guy said.
‘Not Mamma.’
‘She won't confess it,’ Lord Grubb said, hectoring the table but still powerfully giving the impression of talking sotto voce to himself.
‘She's blind, for all I know, and half  starved.
Probably even all those long walks she says she takes are a pretence to put me off.
It's quite likely she calls a taxicab every time and has it waiting round the corner out of sight.
It's perfectly probable she can't even get about now.
I write to her about it again and again.’
‘You keep talking as if you live in different houses,’ Algy said.
‘She's going to die, and she's keeping it from me.
She was always secretive.
I won't stand for it.
She's got to put it in writing.’
‘Do you want me to talk to her?’
Guy said.
‘If you're as worried as this….
But she doesn't seem ill.
That's what I don't understand.
Does she, Algy?
And if she is, surely she's perfectly capable of calling a doctor herself.
Isn't she?’
‘She does it to spite me,’ his father said.
‘Don't you see what I'm saying?
She refuses to answer.
I never hear from her.’
‘Daddy, you live together ,’ Algy said.
‘Talk to her when we've gone and tell her that we're going to get a doctor to come.
Would that make it easier?’
Guy said.
Lord Grubb snorted and looked sulky.
The room was full of ire.
Len said carefully, ‘When my dad died, he and my mum hadn't spoken for three years.
They'd had a fight.’
He watched, on an instinct.
The block of paranoia sitting at the other end of the table minutely shifted shape.
‘I certainly shan't speak to her until she starts replying to my letters,’ said Lord Grubb, cued in so that it was possible to say it at last.
* 
Algy got up from the table and went into the drawing-room.
After a moment Len followed her.
‘Ma,’ Algy said, as normally as possible.
‘Is it true that you and Daddy don't talk to each other?’
Lady Grubb suddenly wept over the magazine on her lap and the finished plate of junket.
It was a spasm, over at once, like a sneeze.
’ My hip hurts,’she said.
‘You can't go on like this,’ Algy said.
‘My mum and dad managed not to open their traps to each other for fourteen years,’ Len said.
‘Mum used to play the wireless and turn on all the bath taps as soon as he came in.
Even in front of me they did it.
At least you two don't do that.’
He tried a cliché, to seem breezy.
‘There's always somebody worse off than yourself.’
‘It's the only time I hear his voice, when you two come,’ Lady Grubb said, ‘He even leaves notes for the maids.’
‘Do you speak to him ?’
Algy said.
‘I won't be bullied.
Why should one?
Getting nagging letters in one's own house.
During the Labour landslide they used to be love letters.
He hasn't even changed his handwriting.
It's perfidy.
Even the same black ink.
Reminding and reminding me.
He's trying to break into me.’
‘Which Labour landslide?’
Len said softly.
‘Ramsay MacDonald's.’
‘Why don't you speak to him?’
Algy said, sitting on a low tapestry footstool by her mother's chair and putting her forefinger on Lady Grubb's big garnet ring as if she were pressing a doorbell, staring up at the implacable old head and thinking of nothing but of how to get her to look at one of the two people in the room.
‘He's going to die,’ said Lady Grubb, eyes fixed on the  carpet.
‘He'll die first and he knows it.
Then I'll be on my own.
I have to practise being on my own.’
‘Is that why he moved downstairs?
To make you learn?
I thought it was because of his gout.’
‘You silly goose.
The young guess nothing.’
‘If you mean about being lonely…’
Len said.
‘If you mean we don't know much about being alone because we don't find it difficult, that's true.’
‘No one understands loneliness if they haven't been married,’ Lady Grubb said.
‘For forty years….
You two.
Fly-by-night affairs.
You risk nothing.’
Algy turned on Len.
‘It's not true at all.
Do you really think I don't know what isolation's like?
What do you imagine goes on in my head all night when you've been talking about splitting up?
You hope it takes the pain out of it to talk about it, but it doesn't.
You said when we bought those bloody birds last Christmas, ‘I wonder how long it'll be before we're yanking all this apart again and halving the furniture and carving up the doves.’
I've never forgotten it.
It's unbearable.’
‘Oh, come on,’ Len said.
‘Not unbearable.
Inevitable.
When it happens it'll just happen naturally, and that's all there'll be to it.
It would be silly for us to say if it happens, because it's bound to.
The things you can't avoid are the easy part.’
‘I see,’ Algy said angrily.
‘Like dying.’
Albert
Terror of the next move.
Albert Cruikshank, customs officer at London Airport, had told his wife, Bella, that he knew she was in love with his best friend.
There had been an anonymous telephone call to tell him so, but he had guessed it anyway, mostly because her habit of reversing the responsibility for everything that happened had made her start to behave as though she had herself some gross cause for mistrust.
His jokes with her had started jamming, and she had grown steely and even gone through his pockets.
There was something obscurely over-energized about her, quite unlike his old succulently lazy wife, and she had begun to clean the house as if it were a sin of the flesh.
‘Come and sit with me,’ he had called one night.
‘I was lying in the bath,’ she had said, marching downstairs with a towel draped round her, looking ravishing but severe about the face.
’ There's a brown rim under the soap-dish!’she shouted from the kitchen, coming back with a scrubbing brush and abrasives.
‘You can see it quite clearly when you're lying down.’
He had thought she must be joking, but she wasn't.
The change in her left him helpless.
In the next few days she had kept speaking of their child as ‘my son’, with a possessiveness that struck him as bestial and prescient.
As soon as he confessed what he knew, fumbling the hideous admission as they came out of a rather good film about love that he had hardly been able to stand, she managed to make it seem that it was he, not she, who was the disturber of their lives.
If he hadn't brought it up, she said resentfully again and again, everything would still have been the same.
The anarchy of her action was apparently his, for knowing of it.
Contact between them was immediately ignoble.
She went on seeing Jim, his friend, his appalled good friend, just as before — perhaps even in his own bed, Albert realized, since the shift-work timing of a customs officer's job made the logistics of adultery comically easy.
He took this in suddenly one morning as he was charging a girl the duty on a camera, hitting the thought like an air pocket and ludicrously yawning at the same time with his mouth shut so that the girl noticed his face lengthening like a mule's.
When he tried to talk to Bella in bed at night, there were passing moments of ease and sweetness that made it seem almost possible to recover what had been lost.
And then they would start wrangling, and she would shout that he was keeping her awake and fall asleep while he listened for hours to her breathing; and next morning reprisals would be exacted for her fatigue.
After a week he walked out, suddenly, with their five-year-old son.
He left a meticulously explanatory note on her dressing-table to say that he and the child would be telephoning, and went to ground at the airport hotel.
It was Friday.
He had three days off.
Now what?
He didn't telephone.
He sat in the hotel bedroom all weekend with Sam, played games with him, ate meat pies and children's  gob-stoppers cheaply out of paper bags and gorged on the all-in breakfast.
It came to the third night.
The child slept.
Albert looked at his watch by the light of the empty television screen.
Programmes were long over, but the white screen with the volume down served not badly as a night light; any of the lamps in the shoebox room kept Sam awake, and total darkness made him frightened.
Me too, thought Albert; me too.
It was three in the morning.
What happened tomorrow?
Solicitor?
School?
Work?
He must telephone Bella, obviously.
Fear of everything ahead burned into him like acid.
He wanted never to leave the room.
In three days, the gimcrack furniture had become familiar and the two of them had developed habits of eating and passing time that was consoling, like the lives of spies in a loft.
Fear that the next move will be worse.
Even the most dismal and unstable circumstances can become something to be clung to.
About three o'clock, he telephoned his wife.
His best friend answered, in a voice clotted with sleep.
Albert panicked, and put the receiver down, which made the next attempt more difficult.
It took him an hour.
Again he got Jim.
‘Tell Bella that Sam's all right,’ he said to his old friend, in the old friendly tone, because there was no other to be found.
‘I mean, I'll take him to school tomorrow.’
‘Where are you, old man?’
Jim spoke as if he were telephoning from a golf club instead of a cuckold's bed.
‘I'm not saying,’ said Albert.
Then Bella must have taken the receiver.
‘You realize what you're doing,’ she said.
‘Technically it's kidnapping.’
She laughed drowsily.
‘You're the guilty party,’ he said, and cursed himself.
He did something bold, then talked like a ninny.
‘Dear Albert.
Really.’
She laughed again.
He longed shamingly for her all the same.
‘The mother always gets custody.’
There was a pause.
‘Where are you?’ she said.
‘I'm not saying.’
Even with the volume as low as possible, the closed-down TV still emitted a faint shriek.
‘You're not going to get Sam,’ he said.
‘I've lost enough.
It's not as if you really mind.
You never wanted him in the first place.’
He waited, urgently needing news of her.
‘Are you all right?’ he said.
‘I'll pick him up from school, then,’ she said.
‘If you do, I'll go to a solicitor.’
‘Don't be daft, Albert.
You bring him back tomorrow or I'll get on to the police.’
‘I can't talk to you while Jim's there.’
Couldn't she go downstairs to the other telephone?
He realized she must have nothing on.
She would have to find a dressing-gown.
He felt sick with lust and grief, and had no tongue for any of it.
‘You're talking as if I asked you to telephone,’ she said.
‘Waking me up.
I knew Sam was all right.
It's so hysterical.
You should know better.
You of all people.
What about your famous regular life?
You were always the one that was on about a regular life.’
‘I've taken a stand.’
She snorted.
‘I've come to a decision,’ he said.
Didn't she see it?
The child thrashed and bawled something cheerful in its sleep and lay still again.
‘I could have you up, you know,’ she said lightly, with an adopted benignity that froze him beyond death.
‘It's your casualness that gives you away,’ he said.
‘I mean, that gives away your guilt.’
He wasn't a customs officer for nothing.
It was his profession that had brought him that shaft of insight, and he felt mildly safer because of it.
Another part of him — not a customs officer — told him that guilty people were dangerous, and he wondered in panic what she would do.
‘Oh, honestly, Albert.
Trotting that out.
Giving me your wretched customs clichés at a time like this.’
Did she mean at four in the morning, or at a time of extremity?
The first, probably, in this offhand mood.
‘You're not to go near Sam tomorrow, do you hear?’ he said.
‘Producing self-righteous customs definitions about your own wife.
as if I were some Arab with five gold watches up his arm.’
‘You're not my wife any longer.’
What had he come out with?
The unfaced truth, no doubt.
He had the impression that his appendix scar was tearing open, and looked down at it.
‘For heaven's sake, let's all get to sleep,’ she said.
‘And you'll go back to work tomorrow, because you'd never skip work, would you, Mister Reliable?
No matter how much of a crisis.
And Sam'll go to school, and you'll pick him up again if you insist on it, and just see how you like it.
You won't be able to keep it up for more than a week.’
He put the phone down with the usual feeling of life at present, that he could strike forward forever and only land up farther behind.
He sought resolve and found a little and went to lie down on the bed to read a paperback of Anna Karenina , which he had always fancied because it had a  scene on a railway platform.
He liked train journeys very much.
‘Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way,’ he read, and his stomach lurched.
After the opening page, he noticed that he had retained nothing of what followed and that he was eating a potato crisp.
I didn't come over here to eat potato crisps, he thought, and turned over, and cried for Bella, and ate another potato crisp.
There's something morbid about my appetite, he thought.
Then he made an effort in another direction and tried to rehearse the future — not Monday but the future that lay farther ahead.
It struck him suddenly, like the teeth of a trap round his skull, that it was quite possible that he and Bella might never live with each other again.
He took in that fact for the first time; in spite of his knowing job, he had a clownish naîveté about fate and always tended to be innocent of the possibility of calamity.
He lived by temperament in the eternal present of circuses and drunks.
The mortal faculty of looking ahead was granted to him rarely, and then usually at dead of night.
He would see Bella sometimes, he supposed.
He would hear news of her, which he would find hard to bear, because a fragment of information about a familiar who has suddenly become perplexing is so insufficient as to be nearly intolerable.
What she would feel on hearing news of him he had no idea.
Nothing, probably.
Perhaps a twinge of malice or discontent, or some dull glee.
He felt he knew very little about her present feelings, which were so malign toward him and unmapped that it was as if he were seeing the back side of the moon.
Now she told him that he had never understood her in any case.
Once she had seemed to  know a good deal about him, but in her idle rancour of the last few weeks she had abused him for faults that seemed nothing to do with the truth of him.
If they should meet when the trouble was over, he thought, avoiding the word ‘divorce’ even in his head, they would communicate with difficulty and unease.
There were no topics left.
It would be impossible for him to speak of their past, or of her, without seeming vulgarly proprietary; or of Jim, without seeming barbed; or of Sam; or even of work.
His job had turned into such a jest over the last few weeks that the thought of putting on his uniform, that humiliatingly naval-looking, obviously non-sea-going uniform, made him stiff with bashfulness.
She would go on living in their small house, he supposed, and cooking rather well, and hiding small amounts of money touchingly in drawers and atlases.
He would go on sleeping badly, and opening people's luggage, and given great luck he would even keep on living with Sam, though it was difficult to imagine that she would seriously consent to give up such a trophy, however little genuine pleasure she had from the child.
She would continue to define her ex-husband as diminishingly efficient, and he would go on seeing himself as an ill-equipped buffoon who had stumbled into six years of brazen luck.
He would go on thinking of her as a beautiful, hidden woman, with a striking flair for life lying in sulky disuse.
And she would take herself for what?
He wasn't sure.
An ill-served victim, probably, for she had an impregnable trick of seeming the passive one in situations she had generated.
He imagined she would always picture herself as a woman too lazy ever to be guilty, with a certain black dash in the late afternoon, and a temperament born  two gins below par.
And in the meantime he would go on missing her unremittingly, and finding reminders of her everywhere.
It seemed unlikely that there would be an end to that.
Perhaps she would think of him one day with less ill-will than now, but not for very long at a time; not obsessively, not like this.
He longed for a drink, and ate the crust of a sandwich.
They would perhaps build an occasional Bailey bridge between one another because of Sam.
Would she marry Jim?
Presumably.
Or perhaps not, if she retained enough satisfaction in keeping her boring husband on the hook.
When they met, they might even have the decency to paper the cracks.
In time, perhaps, she would make efforts to conceal her resentment about his ability to make her feel guilty, and he would make efforts to conceal his anguish about the loss of her.
It was a dour and racking prospect.
For he was going to be burdened always with the conviction that it could have been avoided.
He wondered if she would ever regret it, and thought not.
Regret was not in her compass.
He suddenly remembered writing cheery lewd limericks with her on a train to Yugoslavia, and worrying about the possibility of her getting pregnant there with the child he longed for, bothering about the bad doctors and the heat.
Oh my dear, he thought.
How terrible, what has happened: I don't know how to deal with any of it.
At seven o'clock he dialled room service, but it was too early.
At seven-thirty he dialled again, and could wait no longer to wake Sam.
They had a very large breakfast together.
Sam was gratified to be alone with his father and identified only the improvization and daring that lay in the situation, not the guilt and apprehension.
The small boy ate  ten griddle cakes and the man eight.
They called for more maple syrup and more butter.
A complicity indistinguishable from lovers' happiness ran through the two of them, not localized but suffused through their frames, like alcohol after exercise.
He took Sam to school each day and the airport was accommodating about his hours.
He said that his wife was ill.
Though he despised the dinginess of the impulse, he transferred half the money in their joint bank account into one of his own at another branch.
The airport hotel was an expensive way to live, but they gave him a trade reduction, which seemed the logically absurd extension of a farcical situation.
It was ludicrous: a customs officer living with a contraband child, spending half the day in a posture of specious confidence with one foot up on his inspection counter while he intimidated law-abiding passengers, and the other half knowing furtiveness and joy in smuggling around a small boy who was his own and licit son.
He took to having a daily early-morning nip from a half-bottle of whisky in his hip pocket.
In the dark hours after breakfast it was some way of controlling the monstrous disjuncture between his private and his public life.
He had a sense of subterfuge that was often nearly paralysing.
Added to the simple foundation for it, there was the more complex one that he somehow found it essential to hide his wound about Bella from notice.
His secrecy about his unhappiness made everything about daily life seem a little counterfeit, apart from meals with Sam and sprees with him at the pictures.
The perplexing thing was that Bella, whom he had now nerved himself to telephone every other evening with  news of Sam, seemed not to mind the untenable situation particularly and had taken up the flute.
The flute .
‘Are you going to a solicitor?’ she said in the end, cushioning her voice as if she didn't care.
‘Not unless you try to take Sam away.’
That was the balance of power.
Both had a mortal deterrent.
Bella didn't want to be called guilty; her instinct was always for ambiguity.
Albert equally dreaded the law, for though it would find him the injured one, no court would approve of leaving a five-year-old to the care of its father in an airport hotel.
Change had to come.
It was something apparently irrelevant that had enough secret bearing on Albert's situation to push him into action.
The catalyst was the atmosphere of the airport.
Over two or three days it suddenly became malign enough to seem a reflection of Bella's casual slaughter of their lives, and at last he rose in revolt.
The passengers who use an airport will think it too barren of temperament to have anything so interesting as an atmosphere, but for the people who work there its moods are as mutable and contagious as any other place's.
During a strike, for instance, there is an anger with stalemate that nothing soothes.
In fog there is an atmosphere first of temper and then of inertia, followed by improvization and a peculiarly relieved conviviality, like the illogical sense of reprieve that lies in having to eat a carefully planned picnic lunch inside a car because it is pouring with rain outside.
Soon after Albert had left Bella, London Airport was gripped by the mood of a vicious incident at Immigration.
An eighteen-year-old boy who had flown from India to marry a Calcutta girl now living in Liverpool was detained  for three days by the officials, who suspected him of being under age and of using marriage as a trick to get a work permit.
His desperate girl, ox-eyed, perhaps twelve years old or perhaps thirty-five, waited outside the Customs Hall for him without leaving even to sleep, watching through the glass and crying softly and putting the damp balls of face tissue into a big plastic handbag that looked ugly and moving against her sari.
After long-drawn-out bickering, the boy was taken away for a medical examination.
The officials' mood was self-protective and unpleasant.
The newspaper reporters who came on to the scene contributed to the overspill of spite.
Albert was affected by it and frightened.
And then, early one morning, when the affair was still unsettled and he could see the Indian girl asleep on a sofa with one arm through the strap of her handbag and the sari drawn over it, a delayed flight from Jamaica arrived with twelve unaccompanied West Indian children on board.
They came down the stairs into customs in procession, wearing party dresses and dull cardigans and silver shoes, with ribbons in their pigtails and a purple tinge under their skin from the cold.
Two of them were wearing navy-blue men's overcoats that must have been the crew's, holding the ends carefully to save them from trailing on the stairs.
The English porters, who are generally friendly, helped them to find their luggage: brown paper parcels and cardboard boxes and suitcases tied together with string.
Albert was joking with the kids and grinning when he heard one of the porters talking, leaning on his luggage-trolley and speaking loudly.
‘Send them back where they came from,’ the porter said to no one in particular, following it with an obscenity.
The  malevolence was so startling that Albert shook his head as though he had a wasp in his ear.
‘They're after our jobs.’
What did the man mean?
Ten-year-olds after jobs?
‘Bread out of our mouths.
They've got their own country, haven't they?
Who's going to look after them when they fall flat on their face and come whining, that's what I want to know?
Us , that's who.
Bleeding you-ess .
Off our insurance it'll come.
Free dentists, free operations, free tonsils, free milk.
It'll be free housing and overtime before you can turn round.’
He found another porter to address himself to.
‘You want to put a bit of boot polish on your face, mate.
If you're a nig-nog you've got it dead lucky.’
Albert had started talking as loudly as possible to the children.
They seemed too exhausted to take much in, apart from one little girl who understood very well.
Suddenly he exploded, yelled at the porter to buzz off, and broke union regulations by pushing the children's luggage himself to the two West Indian women who were meeting them.
One was carrying a string bag with three cauliflowers in it and the other some distressingly expensive-looking toys.
Next day he took a week's holiday and went with Sam to Switzerland, because he thought he would enjoy the tobogganing.
They went by train.
Making an effort, Albert told Bella where they were going, and she sent a pair of children's ski mitts ahead of them to the pension.
Aha, Albert thought — spying on me; and then sat on himself for thinking anything so paranoid.
There was no note in the package; only Bella's name and address printed on the customs declaration form.
She might have written something to me, he thought.
Sending off a pair of mitts, indeed.
as if I'd have  let Sam's hands freeze.
Silky of her.
It even looked a bit like Jim's handwriting.
Couldn't she be troubled to print the name of her own husband (no, ex-husband) and her own child?
Obviously old Jim was trying to muscle in on Sam.
‘Here,’ Albert said to himself, ‘I didn't come all this bleeding way to have Sam's future step-father on my back.’
The child slept, sated with the wagon-restaurant food, and Albert mooched about the room and fought with the bed-sized pillow that the Swiss take to be practical as an eiderdown.
By gum, the address didn't even call him ‘Esquire’.
Just ‘Albert Cruikshank.’
It was pretty studied of her.
(Or of Jim.)
Not that he was a stickler for such things; he thought courtesy titles rather silly, in fact; but she always used to call him ‘Esquire’.
He hurled himself over in bed to study the writing under the lamp, still couldn't decide whether it was Jim's or Bella's, ate a piece of milk chocolate, and then six Codeines, because he had forgotten to bring his sleeping pills.
After he had taken them, it occurred to him that the aspirin was possibly a stimulant, not a sedative, and he read the details on the bottle morosely for ten or fifteen minutes, thinking now and then of emetics and vomitoriums and wondering how the Romans did it.
The only ingredient he recognized on the prescription was caffeine.
That was a stimulant, all right.
He must have had the equivalent of a good twelve cups of black coffee.
He wouldn't sleep a wink.
Damn her, he thought, and pined for her.
Bella could always sleep.
Coffee knocked her out like a blow on the head.
So did a row.
Whereas rows kept him awake all night, like lobster.
What a thing to do: to send a pair of ski mitts for Sam and  nothing for him.
It wasn't exactly that he wanted a present.
But he was the adult involved, after all, he thought, eating a piece of chocolate hard on a particular tooth to get rid of some bitter aspirin lodged in a broken stopping.
Adults suffered more.
People made such a fuss about the children of separated parents.
What about the separated parent?
Sam showed no sign of missing Bella.
Unless he was hiding it, of course.
Like himself.
There was that possibility to be considered.
Probably to be considered all night , he thought bitterly, dropping off to sleep in his clothes.
Sam and he learned to ski.
Sam did it much faster and much better.
Albert asked him once if he didn't find it agonizingly painful on the calves, especially in the case of an attempt to stop, but the child obviously didn't know what his father was talking about.
The effort of giving Sam as much exercise as he wanted made Albert more fit than he had been for years.
Good health gripped him exhaustingly.
He slept almost as long as Sam, because there was nothing much else to do but read, and reading put him to sleep anyway.
He had intended to learn French and had brought with him a set of books asserting that you could teach yourself French in two weeks, but he didn't open them.
He had also brought a chess manual, because he had heard that children could play chess brilliantly, but after ski-ing with Sam for a few days he decided that there was no call to be beaten by a five-year-old at two things at once.
The Red and the Black , a crossword-puzzle book, and How to Train Your Labrador — he had toyed for years with the idea of owning a Labrador — also sat about on the dressing-table and the floor unread.
Dropped projects littered the room like old socks.
‘Dad,’ said Sam, drumming him awake with blows on the face, ‘it's our last day and you're asleep .’
‘What time is it?’
‘I don't know.
Late.’
Albert looked at his watch and found it was only six, but thought it gratuitous to say so.
Sam dangled a pair of ski boots in his face.
Albert had gone to sleep in his clothes, as usual.
He put the boots on in bed.
‘I can't understand why you're not stiff,’ he said.
‘What do you want for breakfast?’
‘Chocolate.
No, coffee.’
‘Chocolate's better for you.
Do you really like coffee or are you pretending?’
‘I like it with a slug in it.’
‘What did you say?’
‘Like you.’
‘Listen, that's not for people of five.
Anyway, I only have it with a slug in it in the morning.’
‘Poor old dad.’
Sam bounced on his face commiseratingly.
‘How old are you?’
Albert was offended, and swung his legs athletically out of bed, wincing on the distant side of his face.
‘I'm not really stiff at all,’ he said, putting his ski boot into a plate of gelantine that he had had in bed for dinner last night.
‘Look out,’ Sam said.
‘Why?’ said Albert, knocking over a toothglass of Kirsch with his other boot as he tried to scrape the gelantine off the left heel with his right toe.
When they got back the airport hotel seemed like home but his money was running out.
Albert started reading The  Weekly Advertiser for cheap furnished rooms.
He had two days' respite before Bella delivered her deathblows.
A solicitor wrote him a letter at the airport, with a copy to the customs authorities, saying that Bella had evidence he was drinking and unfit to have the care of the child, whom he had anyway abducted without written consent.
He was sacked at once.
An arm of the law arrived the same day to take Sam away from him, and also demanded to see what the man called ‘the place of lodging’.
Seen through those jaded, cautious eyes, the messy hotel room seemed something to be protected.
Albert himself took Sam back to Bella.
‘You're out of your mind.
Saying I drink!’ he yelled at her.
‘Don't shout in front of Sam.’
‘Don't be pious.’
‘You've admitted it yourself.’
‘You've gone mad.
You're out of your vicious skull.’
‘Jim was a witness.’
‘You've made up every word of it and you know it.
Where is Jim?’
‘At work, of course.
He's made an affidavit about what you said.’
The multiplying sins took his breath away.
He could find nothing to say.
‘I have an opinion, that's all!’ he shouted finally.
‘You're bluffing,’ she said.
‘You've nothing to say.’
How could she always appear to be so right?
Even to him?
Perhaps she was right.
He went away and got a job as a waiter in a bad restaurant in Soho.
It suited his mood.
Bella's slander about drink baffled him, but at the same time it queerly took root, until  he did indeed start boozing a good deal.
He was in the restaurant kitchen late one night before closing up, knocking back the remains of four glasses of liqueur from a dirty table, when his head suddenly cleared and he heard some lines from the past in a devastating playback in his head: ‘You're better off without me’— Bella's voice, coolly justifying herself to him on the telephone.
‘A bachelor's life suits you far better.
You never liked living with me, anyway.’
‘It's simply not true.
We were happy.
How can you have forgotten?
I can't bear living on my own.’
‘You're not on your own.
You've got Sam, who you say means so much to you.
You're deceiving yourself about that too, of course.’
‘I can hardly cope without you.’
‘You're functioning beautifully.
Mister Reliable.’
‘I tell you I can hardly manage.
I have to have a drink every morning straight after breakfast to get through.
What do you think it's like?
You with Jim.
Both of you lost.’
He had thought they were at least speaking to one another privately, but if Jim had really sworn an affidavit he must have been listening on another telephone.
So even that small intimacy with her was a deceit.
Or his own self-deception; she had unseated him too deeply for him to be sure any longer of the distinction.
He found some more dregs of many different drinks and tossed them down.
A young couple came to the door of the restaurant, which said ‘Closed’, and made pleading gestures to be let in.
He crouched down behind the service hatch in an instinct not to be seen, and then the alcohol stirred in his veins and he was emboldened to be rebuking, lecturing them about  making a noise and then, with extreme lordliness, cooking them a very bad meal at no charge.
He did it not because he liked people that night but to make a moral point about something or other.
He was obviously in the right.
Or had been in the right.
Though Bella had now eerily made him wrong.
But he was bound to be right still about something.
Such as stealing a couple of meals from his boss, for instance, he thought, shaking Worcester sauce merrily onto two steaks to cover the taste of burning.
Bella asked for a divorce because she was going to marry Jim.
She said, through her solicitor, that she wanted no maintenance for Sam.
She was getting a job.
Bella a job ?
When Albert missed the child most urgently, the refusal of money for him seemed like a moral tactic to take him away forever.
But no, Bella said through her solicitor; to see the child, Albert had only to ring up.
Which he couldn't do now for all the tea in China.
He took himself to the call-box in his lodgings night after night, but whether he was sloshed or sober there was no way of finding the nerve to dial.
He went without a sight of any of them for a year.
Once he read something in a paper about Bella; she seemed to have done rather well.
It said she was a fashion adviser in ‘a famous West End store’.
There was a picture of her in something described as ‘at-home trousers’.
Albert cut it out, snipping around the paragraph that said that her husband was the buyer in the men's sports-clothes department of the same store, and pinned up the clipping in his room.
Jim a sports-clothes buyer.
Then he took the clipping down again because the photograph made her look thin.
Or perhaps she actually was thin now.
Thinned by Jim, by  Jove, by gum.
He had another drink.
He had always liked her better fat himself.
One day he saw them both through the window of a hotel bar when he was sitting on a bus in Shaftesbury Avenue.
The bus was in a traffic jam right opposite them.
They seemed to be having a quarrel.
Not a bad one, perhaps.
After gesticulating at each other, they both fell silent and looked at their drinks.
Bella was indeed thinner and looked distantly smart.
Then the bus moved on again into his own particular vacuum.
He missed even the sight of them acutely.
He had been sacked last week, for the fourth time in a year, after a row with an unpleasant restaurant owner who had a fat pink face that looked about to snort, and chaste little feet on raised heels that he walked on as if they were trotters.
The row had been about drinking; it generally was.
Or rather, about finishing up customers' drinks, for when Albert came in on a Monday morning drunk at his own expense none of his morally outraged proprietors had ever turned a hair.
Hypocrites! he thought, and entertained a fugitive idea that Bella and Jim needed him.
Later that evening — many glasses later, and four or five hours — he took a bus to his old house and lurched gaily along the interminable suburban road.
He was wearing a duffel coat, done up on the wrong toggles, with copies of evening papers turned back at the job columns sticking out of both pockets.
His hair, which he had cut himself in one of the gales of thrift that blew up in him every few weeks, kept getting into his eyes and caused him to see a charming rainbow when he stood under a street lamp to look up at Sam's room — something he had done too often.
Enough of  loitering, he said to himself.
I'll be turning into a voyeur next.
The drainpipe needed mending.
Old Jim had looked a bit got down, he thought; I'll cheer them up, and we'll all have a drink.
Quite a gesture, turning up at this hour.
They'd be more nervous than he was.
He'd have to put them at their ease.
He yelled abuse at a dog that was about to turn up the garden path, doing it more for form's sake than because he disliked dogs, and then Jim opened the door and unfortunately called the animal inside.
‘Hallo, old man,’ Albert said, realizing that his face was invisible against the light of the street lamp.
‘It's me.’
‘Who's me?’
It was a bad foot to start on.
However, Albert got over that, and so did Jim, and they went into the sitting-room, where Bella was sitting in mini-gear frighteningly too young for her, with office folders on her lap.
‘Working late?’ said Albert chattily.
They talked about the store where Bella and Jim worked.
Jim sat down by the fire in Albert's old chair and then reversed direction and got up again in one amazing movement.
He stood in front of the fire instead and said, ‘Sit down, old man.’
Albert said that the work sounded very interesting, concentrating on getting vim and colour into his voice.
Jim said that the store had a first-rate food department and a bank.
Albert said joyfully that he must start using it, then.
The mention of a bank made him feel guilty about not having a joint account with Bella any longer.
His self-reproaches had been in pickle for a year, and the notion that they might be out-of-date escaped him.
He found it impossible to keep in his head for any length of time that Bella wasn't  still his wife.
‘You don't mind not having a joint account, do you, darling?’ he said to her.
‘I mean, it seemed sensible.’
‘We've got one,’ said Jim.
‘What do you mean?’
Bother him.
Other times, other spouses, thought Albert, and the floor rocked.
He kept an eye on it.
He noticed that Jim was wearing some very expensive-looking clothes, and feared he might be spending all Bella's earnings on his own back.
‘I hope you get a discount,’ Albert said.
‘On clothes.’
‘Bella gets a lot of hers free,’ said Jim.
‘The manufacturers let her have things, you know.
And trips to Paris…’
‘Sam's going to a new school,’ Bella said, and time was oddly foreshortened in Albert's head so that two or three minutes of silence passed between them and he thought it only a second.
‘We're going to take him to Italy when I go over for the collections.
We thought the trip would be nice for him,’ Bella said.
Then she remembered that she was supposed to get the father's permission before taking the child out of the country, and said, ‘If you agree, that is.’
She looked away from the tramp in her drawing-room to Jim in his Italian shirt and black doeskin trousers.
Albert said graciously,’ I'd be delighted for Sam to have a holiday with you.
With both of you.’
The floor appeared to be attacking his face.
He shook his head quickly as if he were warding off a sneeze and concentrated on Jim, whose affable plasticine face now seemed sharper and more ambitious.
He and Bella didn't seem to be having very much fun without him.
Not up to the old days; not for either of  them.
‘Let's have some champagne,’ said Albert.
‘I'll treat you.’
‘There's nowhere open, and we haven't got any, have we, dearest?’
‘There's a bottle under the stairs,’ said Albert.
‘I put it there myself for an emergency like this.
I mean an occasion like this.’
‘It'll be warm,’ Jim said.
‘I'll ice the glasses,’ said Albert.
It occurred to him as he was crashing about in the cupboard among his own old mackintoshes, tennis racquets, gum boots, and broken picture frames that he might be doing the wrong thing.
‘You don't mind my using the house as if it were my own?’ he cried with as much boisterousness as he could muster, waving the bottle like a flag.
Bella lit a cigarette, which she smoked now with a holder.
She looked frosty, so Albert tried a friendly guffaw.
‘I'll go and get the ice,’ he said, pushing on with it.
Jim sprang up, but Bella raised her eyebrows at him and said, ‘It's no use.’
The fridge was full of delicious things and Albert tried a few of them.
Then he started making a plate for them all.
Again time must have passed very quickly, for Jim came out to look for him.
‘Hello,’ Albert said, with his mouth full of paté.
‘Just getting us all a little something.’
‘Have you got a job?’
Jim said, sitting on a plastic stool and looking like a husband in an ideal kitchen advertisement.
Albert suddenly thought with loyalty of cockroaches and other vermin.
‘I've given it up for the moment,’ he said.
‘What were you doing?’
‘Waiter.’
He sucked a thumb with some gravy under the nail from a pie that he had investigated.
‘Bella's a good cook, isn't she?’ he said.
‘You've put on weight, old boy.’
This cut Jim, because it was true; the new Italian doeskin trousers were a size bigger than his usual.
‘It suits you,’ Albert said kindly, seeing his face.
‘Honestly.’
‘Wouldn't you like to take your duffel coat off?’ said Jim, seeing that there was a cuff in the butter.
The atmosphere when they opened the bottle seemed to Albert to improve no end.
Bella and Jim needed some gaiety.
Dull dogs now, he thought.
I must buck them up.
He tried a few jokes to breach their blandness.
It wasn't easy.
What a pair, he thought, as joke after joke hit fog.
Nevertheless, at whatever cost, he must perk things up.
After all, that was what he had come for.
The night wore on; time alternately pelted and ground to a stop.
Albert fell prey to his nightly fantasies of living with Bella again and began looking at Jim with rage in his heart toward the wet blanket who was preventing it.
Yet he couldn't quite drum up the enmity that seemed necessary in the circumstances, and that fact quite pleased him, for it proved what an enduring thing male friendship was, even if Jim did look to him less than his old self, and over-dressed in foreigners' plumes that must have cost a packet in duty, the jacket obviously being pure wool.
The levy due on hundred-per-cent woollen goods made him remember other customs regulations, and then instantly of his contraband Sam.
‘Can I see him?’ he said, gesturing upward with his head to Sam's bedroom.
‘He's away,’ Bella said.
Albert eyed her carefully, correcting a possible squint in his gaze, and decided she was lying.
’ I can hear him breathing,’he said irritably.
‘Jim, can we get him home?
’ Bella said.
‘Have some black coffee, old man,’ Jim said.
Bella telephoned for a taxi.
‘I can hear him breathing ,’ said Albert again, making for the door to the stairs.
Jim tried coaxing him away with a glass of brandy, which Albert thought a low device.
He could indeed hear breathing, though it was true of course that it might be his own, since everything about himself seemed to be happening so far away for the moment.
‘I'm not having a drunk near my child,’ Bella said.
‘Jim, see if you've got any clothes we could give him.’
‘I'm not a drunk.
I just drink,’ said Albert.
‘I don't know how you afford it.
Jim says you're out of work.
Do you want a job?’
Jim came back with some clothes over his arms and stood at the door, while Bella very slowly told Albert to come and be interviewed next week for a job as a public-relations officer in their department store.
She said she would fix it, as long as he stayed off the drink.
‘You're spoiling the party,’ Albert said desperately.
‘You and Jim want jollying up a bit.’
He told them another long joke and won a laugh out of Bella that sealed the success of the evening for him.
Jim stayed at the door with the clothes over his forearm, listening and waiting.
He looked servile, Albert said happily to himself — not like a man  of command passing on old clothes at all; more like a foot-man waiting for an end of his master's good-byes.
‘Is Sam really away?’ he said.
‘You can see him if you keep this job,’ Bella said.
He went up for the job, grinding his teeth, and got it.
He gave Jim's clothes away to a refugee organization and pawned his watch to buy some clothes of his own choice for the interview.
He did the craven work for two months, seeing Sam every weekend, until it came to a meeting at which he was supposed to speak: a report about a provincial store promotion scheme.
The meeting was called for a Monday, at three o'clock in the afternoon.
He spent the weekend without a single drink, for Sam's sake, as he saw it.
And then on Monday morning things moved around in his head and he started drinking quite a lot, a]so for Sam's sake, to toast the victory of seeing him once more and to say a damn to caution.
By the time he arrived at the meeting, the floor was slanting like a deck again.
He had bought a bunch of parsley on his way in, because he had heard that it clears away the smell of alcohol.
He ate the bunch in the staff lift in front of two girl assistants, joking nervously and making rabbit faces at them.
They thought him quite mad.
The boardroom was full of women in hats and men in dark suits who looked like a convention of dentists.
Albert realized that he had forgotten his report, but trusted his memory to make it up.
To his pleasure, he saw Bella there.
Bella would get him through.
The talk of promotion schemes and window displays was hard to listen to.
The stocking buyer's nose began to fascinate him.
It was long and pointed, like a quill, and she wore  a hat that seemed to have a beak.
The faces along the table started to look like the masks of animals in a zoo and struck him as needing his help to get out.
When it came to his turn to speak, he took his time, lit a thin Italian cigar, and leaned back in his chair to think about them.
‘Mr Cruikshank,’ said the chairman, a woman all in brown from Balenciaga.
‘The report.’
He started to speak.
He suddenly felt horribly drunk, but his wits had not altogether left him and he had a nasty inkling that his speech was not to the point.
He seemed to be split into three clear elements, all of them aching with good intent and a longing to sound some clarion call not to hold back.
For the first part, there was his voice, managing quite efficiently without him.
For the second, there was a sense of desperate fortitude and a desire to conquer obstacles not yet quite in sight.
For the third, there was the pang in his body, physical, yet presumably more to do with the mind: a regret for the paltriness of his life; grief about an existence that seemed in perpetual stalemate now because of a devouring sense of loss and betrayal, and yet a certainty of the possibility of something else.
All at once he wanted to win them over, the people in the boardroom, win them with his candour and his vision of a better country.
At the same time he was aware that he was growing hard to understand and that he must have fallen into spitting, because the corset buyer opposite was glaring at him and wiping her face with a lace handkerchief.
‘Leeds, Mr Cruikshank.
The Young-As-You-Feel promotion in Leeds,’ said a voice.
The voice spread like ink through blotting paper and seeped across his mind until it reached the nerve that knew it to be Bella's.
‘Ladies and Gentlemen Madam Chairman, I should say, ladies and gentlemen, my wife, my ex-wife….
As I say, Leeds is a city ready…ready for hipster tights….
A toast!
As I was saying, it's a god-awful hole.
But the fact is there is something happening….
As I said, England….
As I said, Madam Chairman.
Yes!’
He took a long puff on his beautiful cigar and tapped the ash into a wastepaper basket full of mimeographed reports.
‘My wife, England, is experiencing, in my profound conviction, a renewal.
She might seem to you to be a vulgar woman, cautious, opportunist — I don't know how she seems — but there is something ready to….’
He heard his voice shouting and lowered it carefully.
The people around the table watched the papers in the basket smoulder and begin to smoke.
’ One must pay attention,’Albert said.
‘We must all pay more attention.
To notice….
Notice more, yes, about the way we live….
Bella had a better life once, I swear it….
But I didn't attend….
God help….
Perfidy and ambition and swinging gear.
It's a bad time I tell you.
A bad…
England….
You don't listen.
I shall enjoy my cigar.’
The corset buyer got to her feet grimly and picked up the glass of drinking water in front of her.
Before she could throw the water into the wastepaper basket, the reports had gone up in smoke.
Albert seemed to notice last, and his face expressed less than anybody's.
Then he rather undercut the room's prim pity for him by roaring with laughter.
Known for her Frankness
‘What are dialectics?’ said Anthony, looking for his agent's kit-bag and make-up case on the baggage trolley at Frankfurt Airport and speaking with as much truculence as he could ever muster.
Maud tapped her cigar and said, ‘You mean what is dialectics.
I predict that the car will crash.
Then I drive it at a brick wall.
The car crashes.
I am right.’
‘Ah.’
‘Though properly understood, dialectics is the muscle of the drama.’
Anthony still wondered if it shouldn't be ‘are the muscle’.
No: ‘The wages of sin is death.’
But no one would actually ever say such a thing.
Though that wasn't entirely true, for Maud would, and she would probably even bring it off.
To have the character to give sanction to grammar — phew!
Maud talked with a mixture of pedantry and horse sense that impressed him as singular and forcible.
Sometimes he tried to catch her style in scraps of speech that he wrote in a notebook, because she had often told him to listen to the way strangers talked and to keep a record of conversations overheard in the Underground.
But for reasons that he took to be his own error in transcription, anything  that he pilfered straight from life never sounded convincing.
She could make him doubt most things about himself, but not the accuracy of his ears.
He might put down until kingdom come the dully literal truth of the way she talked, but when it was written out it was clearly not credible, except maybe as the English of Nkrumah, or of an Eskimo who had studied the language by gramophone record.
Her style on paper, in her manuals about how to write, was rather different.
It was terse and practical, a little like a dog trainer's.
In the quiet of his own skull he called it manly, but he would never have used such a word to her, not only because she was privately decorous but also because the way she talked about her children made him sense that she dreaded being thought lesbian.
The blight she cast on his work was something he didn't care to inspect, for she certainly wished him well.
Before she had taken him over he must have written too easily.
Then he read a textbook of hers about the craft of the dramatist and it had stopped him from showing her anything for a year.
There was a chapter in it titled ‘So You Think You're Chekhov’.
The very thought had crossed his mind only the day before, when he contemplated giving up doctoring, as she kept telling him to.
He felt appalled at her insight, and at his own cheek.
There was another chapter called ‘Study Your Market, Not Your Navel’.
‘I'd like something to drink,’ she said while he was putting the luggage together.
He spoke to the porters in English, because he was trying to forget that he had spent the first ten years of his life in Berlin.
‘Practise your German,’ she said.
In the airport restaurant he asked her what she would like.
‘A plain soda water.
With ice.’
‘It seems to be all beer,’ he said after reading the menu for a long time.
‘They don't give you any alternatives.
How German.’
‘An alternative.
They don't seem to give you an alternative.
There can never be more than one alternative.
Alter ,alter — one of two.’
‘Aren't you feeling well?
No, I didn't mean I meant about wanting soda water?’
‘Aeroplane food is inspissating.
My tongue feels like a rug.
We ate better in Hall at Oxford.’
The days of reading philosophy, politics, and economics, called PPE, came up a good deal.
‘I've just sold a comedy of Philip's about air travel,’ she said.
‘It's ill-executed, I'm afraid.
My fault.
It was my topic.
I gave it away to the wrong person.
No, I correct myself: for the wrong reason.
I'd hoped to get the poor man writing again.
But he's sold out.
My God, he's sold out.
Still, I suppose the play's commercially viable.
Everyone abominates air travel, though they all do it.
What a travesty of Mary Wortley Montagu.’
She ran a comb through her cropped hair.
‘It's awfully good of you to have come with me,’ he said, feeling he should apologize for something, and kicking as powerfully as possible against the fancy that he was Philip.
‘It's a poor play.
I hate it, frankly.’
He remembered a girl he had known once who used to say ‘franchement ’ whenever she meant ‘frankly’— rather a soupy girl, and far from frank, but consoling all the same on despairing Sundays, and she had made beautiful casseroles.
‘Philip hasn't written a real play for four years,’ Maud said, looking round for the waiter.
‘I've told him so perfectly frankly.
He's funking it.’
‘I must get you your soda water.’
‘It looks to me as if there's some system of getting service that you don't grasp.’
‘No, I don't think so.
Really?
Oh.’
He floundered, and then clicked his fingers, doing it hesitantly, because it seemed like the worst of the British raj in India.
But no one can click his fingers hesitantly.
‘Why don't you shout something to him?’
‘I hadn't realized how much I was going to hate speaking German again.’
She snorted.
‘You mustn't funk it.
Once you get over it,there's your play.’
‘Two soda waters with ice, please,’ he said eventually to a waiter who looked like Himmler.
‘It is absolutely forbidden to have soda except with whisky,’ Himmler said.
‘Two coffees, then,’ Anthony said in German, trying a grin to rinse out the sounds in his mouth.
‘What's happening?’
Maud asked.
‘Why are you laughing?’
‘He says it is absolutely forbidden to have soda except with whisky.
It's so German, that's all.
It's exactly what I remember.’
Kindergarten in Berlin in 1936.
Special Jewish kindergarten.
His Jewish mother pretending there was nothing special about it at all, and pouring chicken soup with barley down his throat.
Maud made a swatting gesture against his amusement.
‘Why didn't you ask for Perrier water, then?’ she said.
‘They must surely possess Perrier water.’
‘I wonder if you have Perrier water,’ Anthony said.
’ Or Pellegrino?’
‘Mineral water,’ said the waiter.
‘You have to have.’
‘Is the mineral water still or sparkling?’
Anthony asked, trying to foresee snags.
In his consulting room he was good at it.
‘Yes,’ the waiter said.
‘What?’
Maud said.
‘He says mineral water we have to have,’ Anthony said.
‘I mean, we have to have mineral water.’
He laughed again, without looking forward to a thing.
‘I hope it's sparkling,’ Maud said.
‘Surely mineral water's bound to be still.
They must have something sparkling.
Something like soda.’
‘Soda is absolutely forbidden except with whisky,’ the waiter said.
‘Because it is permitted only to charge a profit of sixty pfennigs if soda is served with whisky.’
Anthony started to translate this, out of an inability to do anything else with it, and when he turned round again the waiter had disappeared.
There was a silence of a sort that he knew very well.
It seemed especially designed to give weight to his ineptitudes, lending a ridiculous dignity in space to what he had screwed up, like making a free-hanging sculpture of a broken egg-whisk.
Maud salvaged him as usual by noticing nothing, and he mistakenly respected her instinct for dealing with his doldrums.
She went on talking strongly, attacking Philip's decline as a playwright, the way he had compromised and  run dry by doing translations and hack comedies.
And once he had been at Oxford , she said.
He had got a Double First .
In PPE .
Then the waiter came back, with two glasses of soda.
‘I have brought you what you absolutely insisted upon having,’ he said.
‘What's he saying now?
He's brought the soda perfectly agreeably.
You must have misunderstood him.
Your German can't be as fluent as you think.’
‘He did say one couldn't…’
Anthony said.
But the next thing to be said was ‘Thank you very much’ in German, as quickly as possible.
No point in behaving like some second German.
But he was German, of course.
Ex-German, rather.
Jewish.
A Londoner.
A doctor.
A future playwright.
No, a playwright already, by gum.
(’ So You Think You're Chekhov.’)
He thought with envy of the young locum doctor standing in for him at home, seeing his patients at this very moment, and then he thought of his ex-wife, and his ex-cat, which used to sleep on their bed, and then with interest and longing of flukes, the flukes of absorption that can at least put the unforgettable at some merciful remove.
The waiter set down the glasses, saying, ‘It should be entirely forbidden.’
Maud smiled at the man, which struck Anthony as expedient of her, and said to Anthony, ‘How do I say thank you?’
‘I've said it already,’ Anthony said.
She ignored it.
‘He's been charming,’ she said.
‘I'm afraid you've been churlish.
It's understandable, of course, with your history.’
They went out through a door that was marked ‘Hours of Opening: 08.00 to 23.59’.
Anthony laughed again, at which Maud felt curious while her face stone-walled.
It was a habit of disguise that she recognized as costly but could not be rid of.
The waiter bawled at them triumphantly and kicked the door with his shoe to point out another notice, which said in English ‘No Passing’.
‘No passing,’ Maud said.
‘Even I can read that.’
‘No passing !’
Anthony laughed again in some torment.
‘Everything brings — brings things back.’
When words ran as thin on him as this, he sometimes managed to suppose that it meant he was unconsciously saving them to write with.
But generally it was plain to him that the cause was his familiar and wringing insufficiency.
‘You mustn't get subjective,’ Maud said.
‘Don't investigate your troubles.
People don't want to hear about that.
See it their way.’
He was starting to feel like a bundle of notes about himself in a case-history folder in hospital, one of the folders labelled ‘NOT TO BE HANDLED BY PATIENT .’
In Berlin his past rose to his teeth.
Maud had put him into a small hotel near the street where he was born, telling him to absorb the atmosphere.
He was supposed to be germinating a television programme for her, on her own topic, about the conscience of an escaped East Berliner.
She had told him she was fed up with plays about love — which she spelled out ‘l-u-v’ as if she were saying ‘b-e-d’to another grown-up in front of a child who might be going to throw a tantrum — and that she wanted to hear about some public issues for a change.
Sick with longing for  his wife, Diana, and worn out with the public issues of doctoring that had apparently lost her to him, he had agreed.
He tried to think about the Wall.
He could see the passion of the theme, but its substance eluded him.
He was in the grip of more personal and random emotions.
After a few days in his efficient hotel bedroom, the rage and shame of having any connection with West Berlin passed into glassy remorse.
He felt more like a hole in the air than ever, and began also to seem frighteningly insensible.
He could have stuck pins into himself and it would have taken ten seconds for his body to complain.
He slept ten or twelve hours a day and didn't answer Maud when she telephoned.
This was the furtiveness that could become fear: not owning up to a language he spoke, smuggling sausages into his bedroom, pretending he was out, plaguing the porters for a letter from his wife when he knew she didn't know where he was.
He began to have the spy's terror, the terror caused by one's own silence.
He saw Maud once in the Kurfûrstendamm, eating alone in a cafe and looking a little desolate, with a stack of coins already piled beside her plate although her meal had only just come.
Instead of keeping her company he dodged into a doorway to watch her.
She had ordered no wine.
Perhaps her money was running out.
In the middle of eating she got up to telephone.
He thought her not easily distinguishable from the Berlin women, with their detestable white felt bowler hats, who still looked much as George Grosz had drawn them thirty-five years ago.
But there was also something isolated about her, and the battered mannish brief-case against the leg of her chair was touching.
She came back from the telephone booth quickly, looking distracted.
When he got to the hotel, she had left another message.
‘Please telephone back urgently any time until 4 a.m.’
He felt like a pursued husband, though not like any husband that he had ever been himself.
In his own life it had always been he who was the supplicant, telephoning Diana from call boxes on his rounds in the hope of closing some nagging gap of intimacy left at breakfast, and always having to hide the agony of dread that her casualness could cause him for fear of the danger of irritating her.
She was never in now when he tried to make contact with her.
Nor had she answered messages through friends, and she had written to him only twice in his makeshift London digs — once to say she hoped he was well, and once about some dry cleaning.
He couldn't even put together a picture of her day any longer, because she hadn't allowed him to see the Bloomsbury rooms where she lived, though he had mooned by them in his car often enough, at the starts of many nights doomed to reveries of longing and revenge.
He spent the black hours best in the writing of hopelessly happy propositions to her that he kept for comfort in a drawer, as if they were love letters received from her instead of dead ones from himself that he saw no good in posting.
His memory of her became dulled and blocked, a stalemate of the imagination that began to have the taste of sloth and suicide, like the evil torpor that can ensue from spending night after night without a dream.
When he finally had a nightmare about the loss of her, at least it supplied him with a landscape to imagine her in again; there was some spasm of life in that, he supposed.
Maud caught him in the doorway of his hotel one evening.
‘You never ring me back,’ she said.
‘I have tried.
You've been out.’
‘There were never any messages.’
‘You know what hotels are like.’
‘I was concerned about you.’
‘I'm all right.’
‘I don't like not knowing what you're doing.
Are you working?’
The muscles under her eyelids clenched, and the skin on the bone of her forehead moved back like the hood of a snake.
Was she angry?
Something else.
‘I must talk to you,’ she said.
‘Otherwise there's no point in my being in Berlin at all.’
‘I thought you were here for lots of other reasons as well.
You said you had to come anyway.’
‘Are you getting somewhere with the script?’
‘I'm doing my puny best.’
‘Is it coming along?’
He felt precisely as if he were hiding something from her.
‘Am I going to be pleased with it?’
She pursued him to the porter's desk.
‘There's nothing.’
What on earth had made him say that?
He sounded as if he were denying an affair.
That was what it felt like.
Yet all he was doing was not writing, and missing his lawful wife.
He was in the middle of more grief than he could deal with, yet he was piling onto it the commonplace misery of subterfuge, as if he had to protect some clandestine happiness that didn't even exist.
To shake off the mood of secrecy, he took her out.
The  balance of power must have shifted between them, because he had a few glittering moments of objectivity about her as well as the old nuzzling gratitude of some broken-kneed dray horse.
For once, too, she seemed to want him to order, and to pay the bill.
‘Here's to your play,’ she said when they had decided to have another brandy.
‘The play of public conscience.’
‘I don't know about that.’
‘A reprieve from the telly of l-u-v.’
‘I feel in more of a muddle about politics every moment.’
‘Not ‘muddle’.
At least dignify it as ambiguity.’
She was quite handsome in her own brazen key.
He had had too much brandy, and he suddenly thought that her face looked like a Buick.
To make up for the unkindness, he made a bad and nervous joke.
She responded, not laughing but sucking in her cheeks like a man blowing onto his hands in cold weather.
He saw himself as a buffoon with nasty reserves of observation, a man with goonish spectacles clamped round his ears and perfidy in his guts, and he felt so appalled by his mistrust of an old friend who must surely be taken for an ally that he tried as fast as possible to invent some headway on the project about Berlin.
‘You're lying to me,’ she said.
‘I don't know what you mean.’
It was like a B feature about a married row.
‘You haven't written a line.’
All he had written, she knew, were letters to his ex-wife in his head; she could smell it.
‘You're unhappy.
You're obsessed with Diana, aren't you?’
‘No.
Yes.
I can't help it, anyway.
Why should I?’
‘You do extend a prodigious welcome to ghosts.’
‘Anyway, I have written quite a lot,’ he lied, in splendid good heart.
‘Really.’
‘Quite a bit.
I think it's going to be a comedy.’
‘You've never written a comedy.
It's not a very promising subject for humour.’
She checked herself.
‘Well, it's a daring idea.
I believe in you, you know.’
Because she had been aggressive again, she pulled out her wallet and showed him photographs of the children.
He had invented the idea of the comedy at that moment, and to prove it he had to offer her a joke in evidence.
‘I'm going to put in a few of those brutal German proverbs that don't mean anything.
Like ‘A hungry belly has no ears’.’
She started to say that to her this sounded more like Khrushchev, and she stopped herself again; the line was so clearly a proffering of comfort.
He was surely telling her the truth, surely, with that playful-sounding promise of a comedy about the Wall.
‘You mustn't be unhappy,’ she said with an edge.
Every punishing sense she possessed told her that he was going to write about his wife.
‘I do try not to be.’
She put on an adopted cosy accent to make him laugh, but she was no mimic and the effort was arthritic.
‘It's all in the mind.’
‘I know, but that's where I have to live.’
He smoked a cigarette and looked at her stubbly hair and bought her another brandy.
‘I can't think of a toast,’ he said.
‘Never mind the blessed television.
Here's to — oh, all the other writers you look after.
Here's to Philip.’
‘Have you ever heard of the Slavonic banquet?’ she said.
‘It's a Polish image for the Russian method of killing  off the inconvenient.
The Russians invite any dangerous questioners to a sumptuous feast, and during the embraces and the toasts the guests are quietly poisoned.’
‘What do you mean by that?
You don't mean that you're the guest?’
She made no answer.
‘What do I do?’ he said later, very drunk.
‘There's nothing to do.’
Next day, she sent him a huge parcel of books about Germany.
She also enclosed a little leather-bound copy of Heine's love poetry, with a jocular luggage label on it that read, ‘This is not what you are writing about!!!’
There was a plain white card inside as well, saying, ‘Only the artist realizes that some of us exert a Homeric effort simply to behave ordinarily,’ but she had translated her declaration to him into Latin in a self-defeating impulse to disown it, and he never troubled to puzzle it out.
He read some of the German books, soothed by her solicitude and fancying for a time that he really was being impregnated with ideas about the Wall.
He felt like a potato in the soil dreaming of the vodka that was to be made of it.
Then the endless writing of love letters in his head crashed through the barrier into fiction, and he put his fierce lament for a fled wife onto paper.
Maud waited patiently for him to finish, with only a sliver of dread, and they came back together to London.
They did the second half of the journey by train.
The compartment was filled by two middle-aged German couples with a sticky and unhappy child.
Both couples mysteriously spoke in English, with heavy accents.
The  jolliness of the return was very unlike the thorny mood of the journey out.
Maud was buoyant with complicity, and Anthony robust because he was free of his work.
‘Would you like a cup of coffee?’ he said to her at a station, and she grinned at him over the cardboard beaker, holding it with both hands.
One of the Germans, wearing a surprising black-and-white checked cloth cap, made an operation out of buying coffee through the window, and held up the train while he got a missing straw.
‘I took up the cups of coffee,five cups, and they give me only four straws, not five,’ he explained carefully.
He drew in his breath sharply and gave the change to his wife, who put it into a double-clasped purse, which was then hidden in the inner pocket of a locked handbag.
He watched the method anxiously.
‘Now we got to wash up our fingers and later we eat,’ said the second man, when he had collected the paper cups and straws.
‘We might go and have lunch,’ Anthony said to Maud, looking at the preparations for eating in the compartment — napkins tucked into shirt collars, laps spread with paper bags.
The code of agreement he assumed gave Maud pleasure.
When they came back an hour and a quarter later, the meal seemed scarcely begun.
‘I got here tongue as well,’ the man in the checked cap was saying.
‘Tongue.
I have various packets.
These our sister-in-law put in.
And the tin of milk.
And a plum.
And a peach.’
‘A straw for the tea,’ said the second man, pouring from a thermos.
‘No.’
‘No?’
‘No.’
‘Sugar.’
‘I take sugar never either.’
‘I without milk take it also.’
‘Have a cigarette,’ Anthony said to Maud.
‘Thank you,’ Maud said.
‘I haven't got anything to read.’
‘I'm not sure that I could concentrate,’ she said, as near to humour as he had ever seen her.
He wondered whether to give her his typescript to read.
Perhaps she really wouldn't be able to concentrate.
Yet he badly wanted her to.
He thought it might be good.
‘We will real Americans be and with our hands chicken eat,’ the second man said.
He had kept on his hat.
It was a brown derby, worn straight on the head without an air.
‘One half of a gherkin,’ he said, unwrapping a small thin package in disgust.
‘What can you do with one half of a gherkin?’
He flapped it like a galosh.
‘Would you like to read the blessed typescript?’
Anthony asked.
‘Are you sure?’
‘I'd like you to.’
He found it an impossible spectacle to watch, and walked up and down the corridor for nearly two hours.
He thought it unlikely she would be influenced by the disappointment he had dealt to her plan for a play about the Wall.
She was too generous an agent for that.
‘Sorry about no Berlin,’ he said when he finally returned to the compartment.
‘You can't be held responsible for your distaste for politics, I suppose.’
She had her fingers awkwardly in five or six places in the typescript.
‘Are those parts that worry you?’
She pulled her fingers out quickly.
‘Things that struck me.’
’ Struck you how?’
One of the German men undid yet another thermos and offered Maud some chocolate in a cup, with a straw.
She shook her head.
The smell in the compartment was nauseating.
‘How is the strudel consisted?’ one of the women asked.
‘Come into the corridor,’ Maud said.
Her dislike and fear of the typescript burned in her head.
This couldn't be jealousy, she told herself.
No.
More like ordinary disappointment, multiplied to a point that was nearly unbearable.
‘The blow fell with the merciless swiftness of all misfortune’ it was someone else's line, a client's presumably.
‘My dear boy,’ she said, lighting a cigar.
‘I'm probably not fitted to speak about this.’
‘Why?’
‘Knowing your circumstances.’
‘What?’
‘Your Diana.’
‘It's not autobiographical.’
‘No.
The power of feeling is.’
‘That makes it sound good.’
‘Do you want me to speak frankly?’
‘Of course.’
‘I think you shouldn't give up doctoring.
I think there's less disappointment in it for you than in writing.’
‘What are you trying to say?
That you think it's awful?’
She was silent.
‘You're just peeved that it's not about your subject, that's all.
All agents are eunuch writers.
I wish you'd just take your ten per cent and leave us alone.’
He looked round at her, standing beside him in the corridor bar looking out at the stupid countryside.
She was crying, for heaven's sake.
‘Do you know what it's like?’ she said.
‘You use us as conveniences.
We're not just secretaries to fix the Belgian rights.’
‘That's exactly what you are.
You sound like all those parents who complain that their children use the house like a hotel.
Of course they do.
All children do.
And so will their children.
Writers have agents simply to do maths and whoring for them.
And to get loot.
And perfectly handsomely you do out of it.
I don't begrudge your cut.
But it doesn't mean I owe you anything, either.’
’ Except possibly friendship.’
‘Fine kind of friendship to kick a new piece of work in the teeth.’
‘We were happy just now.
And in Berlin.’
‘Happy?
I'm very fond of you.
You've been very good to me.
But you're not being honest, not for a moment.
We were both miserable in Berlin.
I've never felt so lonely in my life.
And you were just inventing errands to stay around.’
‘Because I wanted to.’
‘Out of benevolence.
I missed Diana every moment.
I was down a hole.
I kept falling asleep at the wrong time like an old tramp.
The writing got me through, not you.
It  was a way of wrangling with my own cowardice, that's all.
You can get an edge on yourself by writing.
I'm not saying the thing's great, but it's not bad.’
‘I think it may well be very good.
I said I wasn't equipped.’
‘First you say you're not equipped, then you say go back to doctoring, then you say it may be good.
You take a position and then you say things on either side of it.
What is this frankness of yours?’
‘Each side.
You mean that I say things each side of it.
Not ‘either’ side.
‘Either’ side isn't what you mean.’
He looked explosive, and then laughed and gave her a kiss on her flushed and papery cheek and bought them both a bottle of wine in the wagon restaurant for tea.
He took his typescript with him from the compartment for fear of its vanishing.
She told him she didn't want to be his agent any longer if he didn't need her advice, though it would be pleasant if he ever wanted her friendship.
She behaved with dignity, in a pain that he perceived without comprehension of it.
In the taxi, while he was dropping her at her small house in Fulham, she made an effort to regain some inch of the indispensable contact she had squandered, but there seemed no way of doing it.
The pint of milk and newspapers that she had ordered for her arrival were correctly outside the front door.
‘Coming home is as difficult as going away,’ Anthony said, aware of having behaved kickedly.
‘Fear of the next step, I suppose.’
‘Cowardice isn't the worst vice.’
‘What a curious thing for you to say.
When you can't ever have been guilty of it.’
She shook her head vehemently, with tears flying out of her eyes each side, like water flying off a spaniel's ears.
He speculated about what she was coming back to.
Empty house, chagrin perhaps that he hadn't heeded her theme, loss of face with the TV company, negligent children?
An old affair with some woman who had hurt her?
The thought did come to his mind a week or so later that she might have been in love with him, but it seemed a ludicrous idea as well as self-congratulatory, and he put it by.
The Redhead
When the skulls in the crypt of St Bride's Church were disinterred the wisps of hair remaining on them were found to have turned bright orange.
The earth lying under the paving stones of Fleet Street had apparently had some extravagant chemical effect.
This was what Harriet's hair looked like.
When she was born she had two sprouts of what seemed to be orange hay on her head.
It was shocking in its coarseness and to her gentle Victorian mother alarmingly primitive, nearly pre-moral.
It gave the infant's presence the power of some furious Ancient Briton lying in the crib.
Neither the colour nor the texture ever changed.
The hair stayed orange, and to the end of her life it was as tough as a rocking horse's.
When she was a child it was left uncut and grew down well below her waist.
The tangles were tugged out three times a day by a Norland nurse who attacked the mane in a moral spirit as though it were some disagreeable piece of showing-off.
By the time she was thirteen the routine of agony and rebellion on one side and vengeful discipline on the other had worn everyone out and she was taken to a barber.
The barber took a knife to the thicket, weighed it when it was off, and gave her 2½ lb of hair wrapped up in tissue paper which the nurse briskly took  from her as soon as they were  outside because she didn't believe in being morbid.
The operation had several effects.
One of them was that the nurse, robbed of her pleasure in subduing the hair, turned her savagery more directly on to Harriet and once in a temper broke both of her charge's thumbs when she was forcing her into a new pair of white kid gloves for Sunday School.
Another was that the child, who had always been sickly and scared, as though all her fortitude were going into the stiff orange fence hanging down her back, seemed to begin another kind of life as soon as it was cut off.
She grew four inches in a year.
Her father, a dark, sarcastic, pharisaically proud man whom she worshipped, started to introduce her to people as’ My fat daughter’.
She wasn't really fat at all.
With her hair cut off she didn't even look like any normal Victorian parent's idea of a daughter.
She looked more like Swinburne steaming up Putney Hill.
Her lavender-scented mother began to watch her distastefully, as though she were a cigar being smoked in the presence of a lady without permission.
Mrs Buckingham's dislike gave Harriet a sort of bristling resilience.
She had from the beginning an immunity to other people's opinion of her, which isn't a characteristic that is much liked in women.
Later in her life it made her impossible.
Her critics thought it crude of her not to care what they thought of her.
It meant that she started off at an advantage, for as soon as they imagined they had caused her misery they found that they were only confirming her grim and ribald idea of the way things would always be.
She lay in wait for pain, expecting no rewards from people, and this made her a hopelessly disconcerting friend.
Her peculiar  mixture of vehemence and quietism caused people discomfort.
If she had had any talent, if she had been born in another period and perhaps if her spirit had been lodged in the body of a man, she might just have been heroic.
As it was, her flamboyance struck people as unbecoming and her apparent phlegm as not very lovable.
The only person who might have respected her independence was her father, and he was the one being in whose presence she lost it.
His mockery, which he meant as love, frightened and cut her to the bone.
At thirteen she felt trapped by the system of growing into a woman, which seemed to be separating them, and longed more than ever to be his son.
A year later her back began to hurt.
At the girls' establishment where she had been sent at huge expense to learn music and French and to carry out the ornate disciplines conceived by the headmistress — including communal teeth-washing in the gardens, winter and summer, and then communal gargling into the rosebeds, which the headmistress regarded as a form of manure-spreading — the pain was put down to growing too fast.
It was only after she had fainted at tennis that her father took her to a specialist who found that she had an extra vertebra.
For the next two years she was supposed to spend five hours a day lying flat on her back on an old Flemish seat in the hall of her parents' London house.
Formal education was shelved, which was a relief, because the unctuous kind of diligence expected of her at school had convinced her that she was both stupid and sinful.
The physical privation of lying for hours on cold wood suited her mood.
She began to feel that she would like to become a Roman Catholic, partly to frighten her mother, who was one of the pioneer Christian Scientists in England, and partly because the rigorousness of the experience attracted her.
Her father was a Presbyterian and when she confronted him with her decision, doing it as pugnaciously as usual in spite of her nerves, they had a furious and ridiculous quarrel: a man of fifty for some reason threatened by the vast religious longings of a fifteen-year-old.
She found herself capable of a courage that startled her.
Maybe it was temper.
She went upstairs, emptied her jewelbox into her pockets and left the house.
In 1912 this was an extraordinary thing to do.
For two nights she slept on the Thames Embankment.
It was really the misleading start to her whole punishingly misled life, because it gave her an idea of herself that she was absolutely unequipped to realize.
She started to think that she had a vocation for taking heroic decisions, but it was really nothing more sustaining than a rabid kind of recklessness that erupted suddenly and then left her feeling bleak and inept.
As a small child, sick with temper when she was forced to do something against her will or even when she was strapped too tightly into a bed, she had risen to heights of defiance that genuinely alarmed her family.
She had a ferocious and alienating attachment to independence, but very little idea of what to do with it.
The row about Catholicism got her out of the house and carried her through two euphoric days, during which she thought about the Trinity, existed on lollipops and stared at the Celebration of the Mass from the back of Westminster Cathedral.
After that, the fuel was spent.
The priest whom she eventually accosted took one look at her, an ill-proportioned, arrogant child with cheap clips in her gaudy hair, and started grilling her for an address.
She  was furious that he refused to talk about religion except in terms of duty to her parents; what she wanted was a discussion of Peter Abelard and an immediate place in a convent.
She had an exhaustive knowledge of Sunday Schools and it was depressing to find him full of the same bogus affability that she detected on every Sabbath of the year.
She wanted harshness, remote ritual, a difficult kind of virtue; what she got was an upholstered smile and an approach like a cosy London policeman's to a well-bred drunk on Boat Race night.
Declining to lie, she let the priest take her home, planning to swear the maid to secrecy and slip out of the back door again as soon as he had gone.
When she got there she found that her father was dying.
The truancy was forgotten.
Her mother, supported by two Christian Science practitioners, was in another room ‘knowing the truth’ and trying to reconcile her hysteria with Mary Baker Eddy's teaching that passing on is a belief of moral mind.
The child was allowed into the bedroom and for two hours she watched her father die.
He was in coma, and as he breathed he made a terrible bubbling sound.
The nurse and the doctor left the room together for a moment and she grabbed him by the shoulders and shook him desperately, with an air-lock in her throat as though she were in a temper.
When his bubbling stopped and he was dead, it seemed to her that he suddenly grew larger.
He looked enormous, like a shark on the sand.
After that no one in the family really bothered about her.
Though it was Edwardian England and though Harriet was the sort of upper-class child who would normally have been corseted with convention, Mrs Buckingham's resolve collapsed after her husband's death.
Her natural passivity, encouraged by her religion and perhaps by the fact that she was pregnant, committed her to a mood of acceptance that was sweetly and hermetically selfish.
The nurse was sacked to keep down the bills and the incoming maternity nurse was not interested in an unattractive fifteen-year-old.
It was agreed by Mrs Buckingham, who had always resisted the false belief about the pain in her daughter's back, that Harriet should stop lying around on the hall seat and go to a school founded in the 1840S for the further education of gentlewomen.
Having lost some of the true Christian Scientist's sanguinity about money and the faith that good Scientists should be able to demonstrate prosperity, she suggested faintly that Harriet had better take a secretarial course and equip herself to earn what she called a hat allowance, by which she meant a living.
The classes that Harriet in fact chose to go to were logic, history, English literature and Greek.
Logic, when she came to it, seemed to her as near to Hell as she had ever been.
She felt as though her brain were clambering around her skull like a wasp trying to get out of a jam jar.
History was taught by a whiskery professor who thundered about the Origin and Destiny of Imperial Britain.
His ferocious idealism made her think over and over again in terror of what her father would have said to her, and what she would have replied, if he had woken up when she shook him.
The English master baffled her.
She hated Lamb, who was his favourite writer, and once terrified the class by saying so by mistake.
Her own tastes were all wrong for the times; she liked the flaying moral tracts of the Christian Socialists and a kind of violent wit that had hardly existed since Pope.
She felt a thousand miles away from the gentle  professor, who used to cross out the expletives in Sheridan and even bowdlerized Macbeth .
‘Ladies,’ he said sweetly to the class one day, ‘before proceeding further we will turn to the next page.
We will count one, two, three lines from the top.
We will erase or cross out the second word and substitute the word ‘thou’.
The line will then read: ‘Out, out thou spot.
Out I say!’
To begin with she made friends.
There was one girl called Clara whom she used to meet in the lower corridor an hour before classes began: they had long discussions about Tolstoy, Maeterlinck and Ibsen, and were suspected of immorality.
But soon she began to detach herself from the girls sitting hand in hand in the Bun Shop and from their faintly rebuking way of going at their books.
Life, she felt vaguely but powerfully, was more than fervent chats about great literature.
Life as she wanted it to be was momentarily embodied by the don who taught her Greek, a brave and learned man who fought the Turks in Modern Greece.
As usual her excitement burnt out fast, like her courage.
She had no gift for academic work; she simply longed to be able to dedicate her life to it.
Six months later she went to prison as a suffragette, having lied about her age and enrolled as a militant.
It was the only time in her life when she was free of Doubts.
She had found a cause, and the cause wasn't yet debased by her own incapacity to believe.
She was thrilled with the suffragettes' tenacity and the expression it gave to her feelings about being in some kind of sexual trap.
But feminism, far from letting her out of the trap, turned out to be a hoax.
She suddenly saw herself and her comrades not as prophets but as a howling and marauding mob.
She prayed for faith, addressing a God whom she had never altogether managed to believe in, but clinging to the structure of the Roman Catholic Church as though it might do instead.
During a hunger strike she asked to go to Confession.
The prison doctor refused unless she agreed to drink a cup of tea and eat a piece of bread and butter.
Confused, she agreed, and wrote a letter confessing the weakness to a friend outside, asking her not to tell the stonyhearts at Suffragette Headquarters.
When she came back from Confession, uncomforted, she found her cell mate kicking the doctor who was trying to feed her, and at the same time yelling that he should take his hat off in the presence of a lady.
For Harriet this was the end of Votes for Women.
She had no idea what she wanted, but it wasn't a licence to have it both ways.
She left cold and fraudulent.
After making several trips to Headquarters in Lincoln's Inn and each time letting the bus take her on to Aldgate East, she managed to resign from the movement.
Characteristically, she did it in the most abrasive and insulting way possible.
Everyone was disagreeable.
Six months later the Great War had broken out and she had found a new cause.
She became a ward maid in a hospital.
For a girl brought up in a Christian Science home there was a certain frightening kind of excitement about medicine, like drink for a teetotaller; but otherwise she found the work harrowing and repellent.
Everyone else seemed to be roused by the War, but she saw it as a giant emotional hoax.
The romanticism of the period upset her more than the blood.
All the house surgeons started to  avoid her, preferring the pretty VADs.
Her unnecessary decision to do the dirtiest work in the place struck them as alarming.
By now she was six feet tall and to the patients she looked like Boadicea with a bedpan; none of them found her calming, and the sisters regarded her hair with secret fear.
The people she liked best were the consultants.
Longing as usual with her spirit to enact the role that her flesh shrank from, she pined to be a doctor.
She knew that the one thing that her mother would never provide money for was a training in medicine, so she wrote eventually to the Boys' Own Paper to ask them how to go about it, inventing a letter that was supposed to come from a badly-off boy whom she thought would enlist their sympathy.
The bullying answer appeared in the correspondence columns: ‘Medical training is long and arduous.
It is unsuitable for the working boy.
Our advice is that you learn a trade.’
So the huge, blundering, privileged girl, now seventeen, went back to her mother's comfortable house.
She prayed, and took up vegetarianism, more as an extra religion than as part of the war effort; after a while she made herself go back to the hospital, and eventually she found Higher Mathematics.
She bought textbooks, studied in bed at dawn, and went every night to evening classes given by a frockcoated seer who spoke about calculus as though it were a way of life.
‘The language of Newton!’ he cried, scribbling figures on the blackboard and immediately wiping them off with a damp rag as though he were doing vanishing tricks.
‘O Newton!’
He was the only living person whom she had ever heard using the vocative case.
He talked as though he had learnt Latin constructions before English.
‘To read  the language by which Galileo explored the harmony of the celestial system!
To look backward to the time when first the morning stars sang together!’
He treated the mad redhead as though she were a fellow-spirit, and she responded, until the moment when she finally admitted she was incapable of understanding a word he was saying.
After two months she loosened her grasp on the subject like a drowning man giving himself up to the sea.
Slogging away at the military hospital, sickened by the pain she saw and more muddled than ever, she decided that when the war was over she would become a tramp.
She thought of it first when she spent her two nights on the Embankment, which was littered as soon as dark fell with sad, wild men and women stuffing bread into their mouths out of brown paper bags or staring at the barges on the river.
She was attracted by the privation of the life, which she always linked with virtue, and she liked its sexual freedom.
One woman derelict told her that after living with three husbands for twenty-five years she had decided to give them up and devote herself to the task of viewing the Cathedrals and Abbeys of the British Isles.
This woman also had a passion to visit Russia, and she seemed to look on herself as a sort of tramp reformer.
Besides being keen on Bolshevism she was deeply religious, and a great admirer of the Court of St James.
She told Harriet that she often met King Edward VII in her dreams and thought of him as a kind of uncle.
At the end of the war the Buckinghams decided that something had to be done; not Mrs Buckingham, who was still repining, but Harriet's vast web of paternal relations.
At Christmas her Uncle Bertie assembled the clan at his  manor house in Wiltshire and announced that as a start she had better be presented at Court.
‘But I don't want to be,’ she said.
Girls didn't speak like that then.
‘Nonsense,’ he said breezily.
‘Fun for you.
Get you out of yourself for a bit.
Put some roses in your cheeks.’
And he bore down on her and pinched them, smelling of horse-sweat and sherry.
‘Agnes will see to it, won't you?’
His wife stopped eating marrons glacés and nodded grimly.
‘It's a waste of money,’ said Harriet, looking out of the window at the parkland, which seemed lush enough to feed the whole of the East End of London until the next war.
She remembered going to harangue working women in the East End when she was in the Suffragettes: their pale, pinched faces, dulled with years of lost endeavour.
She had told them that once women got the vote everything would be all right: ‘Poverty will be swept away!
Washing will be done by municipal machinery!’
Not that she knew anything about washing.
At home she had never been aware of it.
But it seemed to her that the women in the East End never got away from it: everlasting wet linen in the kitchen, smells of flat-irons and scorching, burns on their knuckles and puffy skin up to their elbows.
Bertie was furious.
His performance of the lecherous uncle collapsed.
His glass eye — he had lost the original when he was cleaning a gun — seemed to swivel further out of true than usual and stared pleasantly at the fire; the real one looked like a razor.
‘Waste of money!
Question of yield, my girl.
£1, 000 for a season and we might get you married off.
No £1, 000 and  your mother might find herself supporting you all her life.
How much do you think you cost in a year?
Eh?
Add it up.
Add it up.’
The married women in the room looked righteous as though they had made the unselfish decision.
Harriet's Aunt Gertrude, a nervy spinster who lived with Uncle Bertie's household, sat as still as possible.
When they got back to London Harriet packed and left forever.
The fact that she had no money of her own didn't strike her as an obstacle; the Suffragettes had reinforced her natural contempt for people who worried about money.
One of her few friends in the movement, whom she used to meet at Lockharts in the Strand for a poached egg once a week, had come down from a mill town in Lancashire in 1916 with nothing but two brown paper parcels.
(The smaller was her private luggage; the larger, which she called her public luggage, was full of pamphlets.)
Harriet got a job as a dentist's receptionist and lived on lentils and poached eggs in a hostel until the dentist asked her to marry him.
To her surprise, she said yes.
She was surprised, because she had thought that she had a vocation not to marry.
Her heroines were Queen Elizabeth and Mary Wollstonecraft and Edith Cavell and, when she was miserable, Mary and Martha, the maiden ladies of Bethany.
Queen Victoria, whom she made perpetual coarse jokes about in a way that struck people as uncalled for, had put her off marriage in the same way that she had put her off Scotland.
But the dentist supplied her with a religion for a while: the religion of giving up everything for someone else.
As she saw it, this meant becoming as drab and acquiescent as possible, and until her temper and gaiety erupted again it worked.
They lived in a depressing house in Finchley.
She cooked abominably: boiled meat and blancmanges.
After the birth of her second child, during the Depression, she began to dream violently of Hell and her father and the Book of Revelation.
The Queen Victoria jokes got more ferocious and they upset the dentist a great deal.
There was one terrible day when she came into his surgery and found him sitting beside the gramophone playing Soldiers of the Queen with tears pouring down his face.
She launched into a long mocking invention about patriotism and monarchists and the Army, inspiring herself with hatred and feeling pleasurably like a pianist going into a cadenza.
Afterwards she repented it bitterly, but she was hopeless at apologizing: instead of retracting her feelings, what she always did was to say that she was sorry for expressing them, a kind of amends that costs nothing and carries the built-in rebuke that the other person is unable to bear the truth.
The fanatic voice of Revelation built up in her head like the air in a pressure chamber.
‘Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee,because thou hast left thy first love .’
She went over the final quarrel with her father again and again, and left her present loves to fend for themselves.
She brought up her children in her sleep; her husband, who was a silent, kindly man, did a lot of the work.
In the front room she started to hold prayer meetings that were almost like seances.
Presently she found that she had the gift of tongues: notions of sacrifice and immolation and of a saviour with hair of sackcloth poured out of her mouth like a river of lava.
When the war began her husband was too old to be called up.
He became an Air Raid Warden and they kept  allotments.
She made touching things for the children called mock devil's-food-cakes, concocted out of cocoa, golden syrup, carrots and soya flour.
Her back by now was giving her constant pain.
She looked more odd than ever and her movements were beginning to stiffen.
She smoked cheap cigars, and the ash lay on her cardigans like catkins.
On her fortieth birthday, in 1943, she was taken to hospital for a cancer operation and no one expected her to live.
When she found she had survived she felt like Lazarus.
She noticed that everyone was slightly embarrassed by her; she reminded them too much of the death around them, and they put on brutish cheerful voices with her.
She felt, as so often, fraudulent, a corpse stuck together with glue.
In 1944, when she was out shopping, a flying bomb killed her elder child.
It fell on a crowded school, and when she ran to the site from the High Street she could see some bodies still moving.
The youngest children had been out in the playground; some of them survived.
She found one little girl of about four under a pile of masonry.
The child was on her back, unconscious.
Just before she died she began to bicycle furiously with her legs, like a bee not quite crushed under a knife.
Harriet carried the memory around with her as an image of horror, like the sickness in her own body.
After the war it became clear to her that the one heroic thing she was even faintly equipped to do with her life was to teach herself to die honourably, by which she meant without fear.
This meant grappling with a panic that was like an asphyxiation.
Her wisps of belief in an after-life had deserted her irrevocably with the flying bomb.
‘It is not death that is frightening, but the knowledge of death’: she started from this.
After cooking her watery stew one night  and seeing her younger daughter into bed she went to the public library and looked up ‘Death’ in a concordance.
She brought home piles of books every week: Seneca and the Stoics and ‘Measure for Measure’ and the Jacobeans.
Her husband watched her reading and finally lost touch with her.
The daughter fidgeted through her long wild monologues and wished she wore prettier clothes.
People said that she had become nicer, quieter, but harder to get at than ever, if you knew what they meant.
‘I really must go up to Harriet's tonight.’
‘Oh God, she's so unrewarding.’
‘You feel you have to.
She might be gone next week.’
‘I thought they got it out when they operated.’
‘You never know, do you.’
‘But she's as tough as old boots.’
‘I can't bear her really, but I feel sorry for her husband.’
‘How can people make such a mess of themselves?’
She is still alive.
When she dies I think she is going to be more frightened than she expects.
It is an absurd ideal, really: a huge carcass inhabited by a blundering speck of dust and hoping to die as well as Nelson.
I put this down only because I have heard her daughter's friends call her ‘mannish’, and her own generation ‘monstrous’.
This is true, perhaps, but not quite the point.