

11
Haitians of all political persuasions scattered in panic when the first shells, and even cannonballs, began to hit.
Although Port-au-Prince was under fire from the oldest and most primitive of artillery pieces, which were so ill-preserved as to be as dangerous to their operators as to their targets, the effect was still terrifying to the populace, who were unused to the banshee wail that echoed overhead and preceded bone-crushing explosive impacts.
Henri paused briefly under an archway, a glimmer of sadness pulsing within him.
He was delighted, of course, that the objective he and his colleagues had worked towards for so long was finally approaching, but it was disheartening to see such damage and disruption being inflicted on what was, after all, his home.
He rushed towards the corner building that housed the news and wire-service office, hoping fervently that Richmann would still be there.
He was in luck; just as he reached the corner, casting nervous eyes upwards at another screech, Henri saw a glowering Richmann come out of the building.
Kicking aside a couple of fleeing peasants, Richmann came over to Henri, a cold scowl on his face.
‘What the hell is going on?
This isn't supposed to start until dawn.’
‘There has been a change.
One of the blanc women I told you about has entered the palace; the other has been taken by Carrefour.’
‘Hoo-rah,’ Richmann drawled sarcastically.
‘What about the man?’
‘I'm told he has left the city with the American from the university hospital.
He will probably return, however, now that one of the women is ours.’
‘Are you trying to tell me,’ Richmann began dangerously, ‘that these changes in plan have been made just on the basis of your superstitious intuition that the newest arrivals on the island are somehow dangerous?’
‘Mait knows the value of my power of obeah .’
Richmann, clearly less impressed with Henri's powers of fortune-telling, snorted.
‘General Froebe knows the value of following a logical strategy,’ he replied pointedly.
‘The General approved the order.’
‘Oh?
And was he given the choice before the order went out, or simply informed that it had been given?’
Richmann couldn't keep the scoffing tone out of his voice.
‘It is a moot question,’ Henri snarled, eyes burning.
Richmann smiled understandingly, and Henri's blood pressure soared.
‘Your orders, Colonel, are to prepare an ambush for the man and the American.
I recommend taking up position at —‘
‘You recommend nothing, Henri!
You don't tell me how to carry out a military operation, and I won't tell you what you can do with your cards.’
Before Henri could reply, Richmann turned and stalked off, batting civilians aside.
Richmann seethed at Henri's arrogance, and consoled himself that with any luck he wouldn't have to stand for the superstitious fool's whims for much longer Drawing a gun from a shoulder holster, he prepared to fight his way through the streets if necessary; it would be nothing compared to what was to come, he thought.
Henri watched him go, trying to calm himself down, distressed at how easily he had succumbed to Richmann's taunts.
Still, he thought, as long as Richmann considered him a superstitious peasant, he wouldn't consider him a threat.
Or at least, not until it was too late….
Calmed a little, he too walked off, in the opposite direction, safe in the knowledge that no one in their right mind, regardless of politics, would dare to stand in his way.
Jean Vilbrun Guillaume Sam sat at his desk, head in hands, apparently oblivious to the events outside.
He knew he was a dead man, no matter what happened — it  was just a matter of time.
He had called for Etienne some time ago, and was still waiting; it gratified him to think that he would at least have an excuse to send the stupid pig on ahead of him.
When the door opened, he looked up expectantly, his hand straying towards the drawer that held his revolver.
Instead of Etienne, however, he saw a young lieutenant, barely out of his teens.
Sam's hand stopped, but didn't withdraw.
‘Where is General Etienne?’ he asked softly.
‘I do not know, sir.
He seems to have vanished.’
‘Vanished?’
Sam laughed hollowly.
‘I might've known he'd be the first rat to desert this sinking ship.’
He waved around grandiosely.
‘All right, you'll do.
Order an immediate and indefinite curfew.
Allow one hour for the announcement to circulate, then shoot anyone who violates the curfew.’
‘The announcement wouldn't even reach half the city in that time,’ the young officer protested hesitantly ‘You'd be ordering us to shoot anyone on the stree—’His speech ended with the full stop of a heavy bullet in the face.
Without a further sound, he toppled to the carpet.
‘It's going to be hell getting that stain out.’
Sam looked at the revolver as if seeing it for the first time.
He breathed heavily as images of the fates of previous presidents replayed themselves in his mind.
He considered whether the gun offered him an alternative; whether it would be better to shoot himself now and be done with it, or fight on and try to take some of his enemies with him.
Decisions, decisions, he thought.
General Etienne not only had to duck, but also had to hunch his shoulders in, just to fit in the narrow tunnel that led from the palace cellars.
Though brutish and simple, he was by no means stupid enough to fail to recognize what fate would await him when the rebels broke in.
There was no doubt in his mind that they would break in, since there hadn't been any failed revolutions on the island  during his time.
There had been quite a few successful ones, however.
He had briefly considered going out fighting anyway, but had been held back by the thought that he should deal with those immediately responsible for his predicament.
To Etienne, this could only be one person — the blanc who had threatened to betray him to the President in the conversation which Etienne now interpreted with the benefit of hindsight.
Of course, there had been the event with the woman and that blue box, but if Etienne concentrated hard enough, he found that he was able to think that he'd imagined it.
At least, he reflected, his men would be thankful for an enemy whom they could see, and who wouldn't disappear into thin air.
He himself would see what tricks the blanc had to save himself.
It took only a couple of hours for the news to reach Washington DC.
The stocky man who was President of the United States was informed of the news from Haiti in the Lincoln Suite of the White House, which comprised the living quarters for the President and First Lady.
Within ten minutes, Woodrow Wilson had consulted with his chiefs of staff in the war room, and decided to go ahead with the contingency plan.
Though there had been some concern as to what the world's reaction would be, Wilson had smoothed it over with assurances that the world community couldn't deny that America had the right to protect the few hundred of its citizens in Haiti, and to defend the various mining and import/export concessions that had been granted to them.
‘Besides,’ he added confidentially, ‘Haiti's only six hundred miles from Florida, and right in the middle of the Indies.
Now, I don't want their niggers giving our niggers any funny ideas.’
The morse message reached the waiting ships a couple of hours after that.
Marine Captain Glen, who was Colonel L V Mortimer's number two, found his superior  in his cabin, reading a letter poker-faced.
‘Still no change, sir?’ he began understandingly.
‘Not really, but the painkillers are having less effect now.’
With a grunt, he sat up and tucked the letter away.
‘So, what is it, Captain?’
‘Orders from Washington, sir.’
He proffered a slip of paper.
‘Well well.
We're to go in immediately, eh?’
‘The Admiral's ship has already signalled ours.
He intends to make a dawn landing.’
‘Willing to trade the risk of a night of hell in the hope that the niggers'll be too tired to fight us off afterwards?
All right, Captain, dismissed.’
When Glen had gone, Mortimer rose, and took his Browning automatic from its holster.
Rooting out the cleaning kit for it, he went to work thoughtfully, the letter all but forgotten.
Benny had been in something of a fog since her visit to the museum.
Although she could have sworn she had blacked out, she still somehow recalled the journey on which she had been taken by the tall man and a few others.
She had seen them through a strange fuzzy blankness, as if they were constructs of her subconscious which were being projected against her closed eyelids.
She felt a sensation of floating, since the poison which had claimed her had blocked all physical feeling, and she could not move her head to see the men who were carrying her.
After a seemingly interminable journey through what sounded like continual thunder, low walls of tangy wood rose up around her, and she realized in horror that she was being lowered into a coffin.
Chill dread settled in at the base of her skull and directed the activities of her roiling stomach, as she tried in vain to move her mouth, or even blink.
Surely she couldn't really be dead; couldn't they see that?
She still had so much to do, so many worlds to explore, discoveries to make, fathers to find….
Something briefly blurred her vision of the tall man, who silently wiped away the tear she could not even feel, before he lowered the lid over her face, cutting off all light.
She could no longer see what was happening, and certainly couldn't feel anything.
The coffin muffled all sounds from outside, and she wondered if they were going to leave her here, or whether she was being taken elsewhere.
The thought crossed her mind that perhaps they were burying her, and she silently shouted at herself not to think that, even though it was the most natural supposition she could make.
Ace had hung her coat over a chair in her lab, and was busy rearranging the workings of several weapons with the aid of a set of jeweller's screwdrivers.
Occasionally, she glanced across to check on the progress of the chemicals bubbling away on the other side of the room.
‘What is this made of?’
Petion asked with a note of admiration.
‘What?’
She turned, and saw that he was examining her.
combat suit.
‘Oh that.
It's woven kevlar fibres mainly.
Protects against shrapnel from frag grenades and shit like that.’
‘Fascinating.’
He was obviously comparing the slightly elastic design with Ace's figure.
‘I suspect it's very fetching.’
‘You want to see?’ she asked with a certain degree of mischief.
‘Doesn't matter,’ he shrugged.
‘I was mainly thinking of its military application.’
‘Really?’
She didn't believe a word of it.
‘Really,’ he replied firmly.
She looked back at him curiously.
‘Don't tell me you're —‘
‘What?’
‘You know.’
‘Oh!
No, worse than that, I'm afraid.
I'm married.’
‘That usually doesn't matter to guys,’ she commented blithely.
‘It does to me.’
Petion's voice dropped to a softer tone.
‘Do you worry about her?
With all this shit going on, I mean.’
Petion smiled, his scar crinkling, as he thought of the woman with the sunny smile….
‘Often.
But for now she lives over the border in the Dominican Republic.
Her aunt lives there and gave her a room, so as to avoid the strife here.
I took her there myself while off duty after being injured by a faulty grenade.’
‘Probably just as well she got out.
I sometimes wonder what it would be like,’ Ace said softly.
‘Get married, have kids, stay in one place and one time….’
Be a mother, she thought, but what kind?
‘It's not for me, though.
Not yet.’
A thought struck her.
‘I've been meaning to ask,’ she began hesitantly, ‘if it's not an indiscreet question, that is.
That scar — surely it's not from the grenade?’
His hand twitched towards the scar, almost reflexively.
It was just below his left eye and consisted of three sloping cuts, and a fourth bisecting all three.
‘No, it isn't.
It's something that's difficult to explain to blancs .
My parents were something of traditionalists, and in Haiti it is a tradition that if a baby is born more fit and healthy than average, the mother will add a blemish, such as a scar, in case the lou-garou , the werewolf, should take a liking to such a perfect child.’
‘That's obscene,’ Ace growled, the hairs on the back of her neck prickling at the thought that a mother could do that.
‘Not to us,’ Petion answered dismissively.
‘It's better than being eaten alive.’
Abruptly, the all-pervading background noise in the TARDIS altered, and when Ace and Petion dashed back to the console room, they found the time rotor grinding to a halt.
As Ace tipped the door lever, Petion nodded towards the doors.
‘I'll go first, in case some of them are still out there.’
He couldn't bring himself to believe what Ace had told him about the TARDIS's ability to move.
He was surprised therefore, after drawing his gun and edging out carefully, to find himself standing in the deserted mortuary  room where he had introduced the three travellers to Howard.
Behind him was the solid bulk of the blue box, and he walked around it again, still disbelieving.
‘Any sign of the Doctor or Benny?’
Ace emerged behind him.
‘No, but they may be elsewhere in the building,’ he answered distractedly, tapping suspiciously on the nearest corner of the TARDIS.
‘I hope so — listen.’
Outside, the evening was shattered by the sharp sounds of gunfire, and the occasional explosion.
Needless to say, these events didn't silence the persistent drumming, though they did sometimes drown it out.
‘I'll go and check Howard's office,’ he said.
‘No, I'll go.
You round up as many others — nurses, patients, whatever — as possible and get them together in as few rooms as you can.
Then we'll see how defensible we can make this place.’
‘Right.’
Without hesitation this time, he set off.
Ace looked back at the TARDIS door and weighed the key thoughtfully.
‘I get the feeling we're in for a long night’, she said.
Mait received Henri's report dispassionately, before letting a slow smile spread across his face.
‘So, control of the zombis through the mind mirror is completely effective.
I'm sure Froebe is also pleased.’
‘So I gather.’
‘Were there any problems?’
‘Two of the zombis collapsed upon their return and could not be revived.
The French had wounded them and they were too dead.’
‘That is to be expected.
Still, the test was a success, and I am not displeased that a French area was chosen as the site.
Very well, convey my congratulations to General Froebe — I'm sure he'll be anxious to convey his to me for the sake of protocol.’
When Petion returned, Ace had brought out from the  TARDIS the four Vickers guns that she had liberated from the palace armoury, and was checking their actions for signs of wear or damage.
He hurried over, followed more perplexedly by several nurses and patients, and handed her a note.
‘I found it in Howard's office,’ he explained.
Ace took the note and read it, finding that it told her where the Doctor and Howard had gone.
‘They're not back yet?’ she asked.
‘It seems not.’
He indicated the people with him.
‘These are almost all the people who are here, except for a few who couldn't walk, but I'm having them moved to the ward nearest here.’
‘No sign of Benny either?’
‘None.’
‘Strange.’
Ace furrowed her brow and thought about it.
Going by past experience, there was a high probability that something had happened to the others, and her first instinct was to go and search for them.
She knew, however, that getting herself into trouble as well wouldn't help them; going by the sounds of fighting outside, she knew that it would probably be almost suicidal to risk going out tonight.
Clenching her fists until the knuckles went white, she reluctantly decided that it would be better to stay here and hope that the Doctor, Howard and Benny made it back.
When she looked back at Petion, she saw that he was watching her with a sympathetic expression.
She realized that he must know exactly what was running through her mind.
Straightening, she pointed to the Vickers.
‘Get as many able bodies as you can and set up these guns in the most advantageous positions — you know the layout better than I do.’
‘As the highest-ranking military officer, isn't that my decision?’ he asked softly, with a faint smile.
‘Doesn't experience count for anything?
I've fought in more battles than you'd be likely to believe.’
‘Really?’
Petion glanced back at the TARDIS.
‘I think I might believe any number.’
12
Something was disturbing all efforts to continue resting.
Primitive sensations skittered here and there, triggering twinges of irritation that carelessly boiled away.
The Doctor ordered Howard to stop the car at the top of the road leading down into the city, weighing up the risks of being attacked by one side or the other.
‘We weren't attacked by any villagers,’ Howard pointed out reasonably.
‘The villages only really pay lip service to the capital, since the Bizango rules them,’ the Doctor answered.
Howard cocked an eyebrow, intrigued that a newcomer could know such a thing, but the Doctor didn't notice as he continued: ‘In the city, it'll be complete chaos.
Do you have any weapons?’ the Doctor asked resignedly.
‘Just this.’
Howard reached back and pulled out a double-barrelled shotgun.
‘It'll have to do.
Get out,’ he ordered.
As Howard got out and went around to the other side of the car, the Doctor slid over, and examined the rudimentary dashboard.
‘I'll drive, so you keep an eye out and use that thing if you have to.
Try just to frighten with it,’ he added as an afterthought.
Richmann had found a couple of his men in one of the city's bars, and dragged them out to take up position around a junction in the northern poor quarter.
The two men, who were completely sober despite their time in the bar, moved away to stand against the cracked plaster walls of the buildings to either side of the main road, glancing quickly around the corners to check for traffic.
Calm and untroubled, Richmann sat in the shade of a palm tree, and relaxed.
He felt no fear that either the militia or the rebels would molest him or his men, since all the troubles were occurring in what he thought of as the richer areas.
Here, he could see only the occasional flutter of movement, as the fearful denizens of the area tried to keep out of the way and out of trouble.
He strongly suspected that the course of action he was taking was the one that Henri had been about to suggest earlier, before Richmann had walked off.
This hadn't stopped him following the actual strategy, but Richmann wasn't about to let anyone tell him how to do his job that was a matter of principle.
He spent the next few minutes wondering how much more of Henri's ungiven advice he would be following.
He was drawn from his reverie by the faint chugging of an engine.
He stood, cocking his head to estimate the speed at which the vehicle was approaching.
It seemed to be moving quite rapidly.
He gestured to his men, who drew back from their corners and pulled out Lugers from concealment.
Whistling softly to himself, Richmann drew his Steyr automatic from its holster beneath his leather jacket, checking that it held a full magazine.
Returning the Steyr to the holster, he reached into the holster on his right thigh and slipped the cut-down Winchester free.
Slipping ammunition into the Winchester, he strolled out into the centre of the road, and stood casually, facing north, the shortened rifle held loosely but firmly in his hands.
Due to the modifications that the Doctor had made to his own vintage car, Bessie, he found that he had forgotten just how slow the genuine article's top speed was without intervention from superior technology.
The journey in Howard's car forcibly reminded him of that limitation, however, as he struggled to get the thing going over thirty miles per hour.
Muttering very unscientific speculations in a number of alien languages about the  car's origins and usefulness, the Doctor kept his foot down and did his best to avoid the holes in the road.
Howard alternated between scanning their surroundings for signs of hostile action, and glancing worriedly at the Doctor, all the time fearing for his car's safety at these maniacal velocities.
There didn't seem to be any sign of anyone at all, and Howard wasn't particularly surprised, since neither the government nor the rebels were particularly interested in the hovels hereabouts.
Abruptly, the car breasted a small rise in front of a junction, and Howard's eyes widened as he saw a man standing in the middle of the road, who, it seemed, they were about to run down.
Before he could give a warning, the Doctor slammed on the brakes.
Richmann tensed as the approaching engine noise reached a peak.
Suddenly, a car appeared at the end of the short stretch of road beyond his men.
Richmann stood his ground, certain he would be able to jump out of the.
way if things went wrong.
With a screech, the car began to slow as the brakes were applied, and Richmann could clearly see the startled faces of the occupants as it slewed to a halt only a few feet ahead.
Smoothly, he worked the action of the Winchester, and swung it up towards the centre of the windscreen.
Time slowed to a crawl for Howard, as he saw the gun swing up, its wielder moving a half step forward and a half turn round.
Recognizing that he had no time to position his own gun, Howard ducked down, the enemy gun already beginning to flare at one end.
The Doctor too ducked, almost cracking his head on Howard's skull, as a hot blast of air drove a shower of glass splinters over their backs.
Without raising his head, the Doctor threw the car into reverse, inadvertently hitting one of the Luger-toting men who had stepped out behind them.
The other one began loosing shots into the car, sending bullets slamming into the backs of the seats.
Then the first man stalked forward, blasting several more shots into the car; the radiator disappeared in a cloud of steam, the bonnet was blown off, and the car suddenly lurched downwards and circled as half the wheel nearest Howard was blown away.
Howard finally got his gun into position and fired one barrel at their original assailant, causing him to dive headlong back behind the palm tree.
He began to aim at the other man, who was reloading his Luger, but was stopped by the Doctor's hand on his shoulder.
‘The wheel,’ the Doctor hissed.
Nodding his understanding, Howard grimly fired the other barrel at the half-wheel in front of him.
The half-wheel disappeared in a blast of sparks and blue smoke, causing the car to lurch again.
The Doctor immediately threw his weight into the steering wheel and floored the accelerator, sending the battered car down the street at a lopsided angle, the exposed wheel hub throwing up a constant stream of sparks.
Richmann and his remaining man ran a few yards after the departing car, blazing away with a frustrated volley which only succeeded in blowing a few holes out of the bodywork and setting fire to the rear-mounted spare wheel.
Richmann halted, white-knuckled and tight-lipped.
‘Shit!’ he snarled, whirling back to face his men.
The one who had accompanied him chasing the car simply glowered in the direction it had gone, while the other one, who hadn't fired a shot, writhed by the roadside, trying to clutch a leg which trailed at an unnatural angle.
Richmann strode over to the injured man, and glared down furiously.
He gave the bad leg a gentle kick, to be rewarded with an agonized moan and the information that it was certainly broken, probably in two or three places.
Richmann glared back down the road at the settling dust, and seethed that two men with only a double-barrelled shotgun could get away from him .
He looked down angrily at the man who had been so uselessly injured.
Unable to restrain the anger that welled up within him, Richmann swung his cut-down Winchester round and, with an animal roar, blew the man's head open like  a dropped melon.
For a few seconds, as the body crumpled into the dirt, Richmann stood quaking with fury, veins throbbing with hatred.
Gritting his teeth, he fought it down.
‘Damned idiot!’ he spat at the sticky patch in the dusty road.
Evening turned into night with considerable speed in the tropics, and by the time Howard's smouldering car crawled back into the university grounds, it was almost fully dark.
They had run into a few mobs of scuffling Haitians, but fortunately, they were mostly without firearms and so the Doctor and Howard had been able to drive through them, sending the mobs scurrying out of their way.
The car, however, had picked up a few more dents, and none of the windows existed any longer.
A number of dark figures ducked into the surrounding bushes as the car screeched to a halt outside the hospital's front door.
Almost immediately, there was a brief burst of machine-gun fire, which destroyed the three remaining wheels.
‘One group or the other must have taken over already, Doctor,’ Howard said.
‘I very much doubt it.’
Cautiously, the Doctor poked his head out of the door.
‘Ace!’ he called.
‘Doctor?
Is that you?
Hang on a mo.’
‘I thought as much,’ the Doctor muttered darkly.
‘I think it's about time I had a talk with her.’
He and Howard climbed out of the car, which reacted with a series of creaking sounds and the hiss of escaping steam, and hurried over to the door.
Ace opened the door just wide enough for the pair to enter, and slammed it shut just as a brick arced over from the darkened bushes.
‘All right Ace, what's going on here?’ the Doctor said.
‘Well,’ Ace flinched a bit at his severe tone, ‘we got into the palace, persuaded Etienne to tell us where the TARDIS was, and flew it back here.
Just like you said.’
She smiled innocently.
‘And where did the machine gun come from?
‘That arsehole Etienne had stored the TARDIS in his armoury, and I thought it would be best not to waste the  time we had in there.
It's just as well I did, 'cos by the time we got back, this place was virtually surrounded.’
‘Who by?’
‘Rebels out front, militia out back.
I think that they each think this dump's occupied by the other.’
‘And now we're stuck in the middle.
I presume you took more than one gun?’
‘I've got four old Vickers guns set up in strategic positions, so neither group should be able to get in.
Petion and a few of the hospital staff have rifles and handguns as well, and all the patients have been brought into the middle rooms for safety.’
The Doctor had to grudgingly admit to himself that she'd done well, but another thought was nagging at him.
‘When you said ‘persuaded’ Etienne, what did you mean by that?’
‘I just threatened to blow his ba —’ She stopped at the look that crossed the Doctor's face.
‘I threatened to shoot him,’ she finished.
‘And did you?’ he asked dangerously.
‘No.’
‘Good,’ the Doctor said, relieved.
‘I disapprove of killing at the best of times, Ace, but, and this is vitally important, you must never kill anyone with a role in recorded history if you can possibly avoid it.
That is more important for your planet than any other considerations.’
‘What?!’
Howard recoiled in surprise at the direction the conversation was taking.
‘What historically important person ever came from Haiti?’
Ace asked, ignoring him.
‘Er, look, what do you mean by ‘your’—’ Howard continued, rather flustered.
‘Well, it was a Haitian who first deciphered the Rihanssu language that allowed a peace treaty to be drawn up, and ended an interstellar war with Earth in the twenty-seventh century.
Have you killed anyone?’ he asked urgently.
‘Not that I know of; we're firing at knee height.’
‘Oh, that's all ri—What!
Fire above their heads!’
‘Look, Doctor, Ace.’
Howard finally managed to get their attention by laying a hand on each of their shoulders.
‘What do you mean by ‘your planet’ and all that talk about the twenty-seventh century?’
‘Ah, that.’
The Doctor grimaced; he had completely forgotten Howard and now regretted speaking so openly.
There was only one thing to do — brazen it out, and hope that Howard found the facts too ridiculous to believe.
‘Well, actually, Ace is from nineteen eighty-six, Benny is from the twenty-fifth century, and I'm not from this planet at all.
As a matter of fact, we travel in time and space.’
‘Oh.’
Howard's eyes blanked over.
‘I think I'll have to think about that….’
Is this man insane, he wondered, or am I?
Aliens?
Time-travellers?
Utter nonsense, surely?
And yet, the Doctor seemed so matter-of-fact about it, so sincere.
But then, he reminded himself, so do those who believe themselves to be Napoleon, or Alexander, or God.
Howard sighed.
‘Why don't you come with me,’ the Doctor suggested, seeing his expression, ‘and I'll show you the TARDIS.
Ace, you and Benny continue with what you're doing until the Marines arrive in the morning, and please stop making that face.’
‘What face?’
‘That one when I mentioned Benny.
Can it be that you two aren't getting along?’
No, it's not that.’
‘Good.‘
‘It's that she's not here.’
‘You mean she never came back?’
The Doctor sounded horrified.
‘Howard, how far is it between here and that museum?’
‘A few hundred yards.
She shouldn't have had any problems.’
‘Unless she ran into one of those groups….’
‘I wanted to go after her,’ Ace added, ‘but Petion wouldn't let me.’
‘Quite correct of him, too!
I should never have let her go off in the first place.’
He paused for a moment, before  letting his breath out in an uncharacteristic snarl.
‘We'll just have to leave that problem until morning as well.
Reset those guns to fire warning shots, and try to keep us safe till dawn.
If my memory doesn't deceive me, Admiral Caperton's Marines should land around then.
Come on, Howard, and I'll show you the TARDIS.’
Together, they set off.
When Benny's fuzzy vision flared, she imagined that it was one of those near-death experiences that people talked about.
Or perhaps not just near in her case.
She still felt that she was floating — or, more accurately, she thought that she was floating precisely because she couldn't feel.
She was not expecting the vaguely defined figure that coalesced as her vision cleared.
Father, she first thought as the figure of a grey-haired man resolved itself.
So she was dead after all….
Then her vision cleared further, and she saw that the man looking down on her was much thinner than her father had been, with a more skull-like face and thinner-hair.
She realized then that the coffin lid had simply been lifted off, letting in light from a long strip-light that hung from a plain rock ceiling.
The thin man, who was dressed in a white lab coat, examined her eyes with the aid of a magnifying glass and a small torch.
She found that she could not even blink under the harsh glare.
Next, the man lifted a six-inch needle from somewhere beyond her field of vision, and jabbed it down sharply, while watching her eyes.
She strained, but still couldn't see what happened, and couldn't feel where the needle had gone in.
The man glanced down at the needle.
‘Little bleeding,’ he commented in a noticeably Teutonic accent.
‘What did you use?’
‘A coup poudre ,’ came the lilting answer.
‘Diodon and sphoeroides?’
‘You would use such terms, yes.
Absorbed through the fingertips, before you ask.’
‘How long ago?’
‘About three o'clock.’
‘Hmm.
You say she is working with the British?’
‘With a man who claims to be a British agent.’
‘All right.
She'll recover by midday, I should think.
Put her in the infirmary until then — strapped down, of course.’
‘Of course, Professor.’
Recover by midday?
Benny relaxed in relief, though it didn't show in the slightest.
The village didn't even have a name, and wasn't placed on any maps of the country.
Its two-dozen or so crumbling one or two room houses squatted in the scrubby hillside clearing like old termite mounds.
They were far enough from the city for the sounds of insurrection to be too faint to disturb anyone but the few scrawny goats which wandered listlessly around their enclosures.
No lights shone in the village, since darkness was for sleeping as far as the villagers were concerned.
The night air was still and mercifully cool, a gentle breeze blowing in from the coast below.
A few clouds drifted above, forming only briefly before dissolving again.
And then there was something else.
It slipped smoothly through the blackness, a faint throbbing heartbeat announcing its coming to a couple of village dogs, who strained in vain to make out what it was with their inadequate monochrome vision.
They began to howl and bark, rousing the villagers from their beds, and starting babies crying.
Underfed farmers emerged from their homes, rubbing their eyes and searching for suitable throwing stones.
They stopped their search, however, when the faint throbbing finally penetrated their consciousnesses.
Questioning each other, they milled around, looking upwards with tired eyes.
The first wisps of vapour came unnoticed, but not for long.
It was only a matter of moments before one man twitched his nose at some unfamiliar scent, and turned to see what it was.
Rather than completing the movement, however, he simply spun limply into the dust without a sound.
Shocked cries were choked off as his fellow villagers followed him into oblivion, softly caressed by the  spreading gossamer folds of vapour which billowed ever more thickly through streets in which even the babies' cries faded into silence.
In the darkness above, something dark also faded away.
13
The rest of the night had passed quite quietly at the university, and the Doctor, Ace and Petion had taken turns on watch.
Howard had, after a quick tour of the TARDIS, retired to his office with a brandy bottle he had been saving for a special occasion.
Off in the distance, sharp cracks of gunfire and the occasional dull blast of dynamite interrupted the rural drumming.
Around three am there was a huge blast from the direction of the palace, which woke even Howard from the slumber into which he had fallen.
The great double doors of the palace had been smashed inwards by a hammerblow from an American Civil War vintage sixty-five pounder naval gun, which the rebels had somehow recovered from the sunken Atlanta , transporting it on an ox-drawn cart since the wheels were missing from its carriage axles.
As the plaster dust settled, dazed guards emerged from the interior of the palace, only to be cut down by the machete-wielding cacos who had brought their knowledge of the palace to the rebels.
A few shots rang out, killing one or two rebels, and those rebels who had guns returned fire, albeit hitting some of the cacos as well as the guards.
The guards were ill-trained and fearful, with little combat experience, while what the rebels lacked in training and tactics was more than made up for in sheer ferocity and homicidal bloodlust.
It was a matter of only a few minutes before the rebels reached the President's quarters, and stopped to await General Bobo, who had made clear his intention to take over personally.
Bobo was surprisingly young for a general, being only  in his early thirties, and had unremarkable features atop his muscular frame.
He was dressed in yet another variant of an old French colonial uniform, this one blue, with occasional spaces between the somewhat tarnished medals.
He wore a grim expression, not showing the elation with which he looked forward to killing President Sam, and taking over as ruler of his country.
He paused outside the doors, taking stock of his men, careful not to give any sign of his thoughts.
He only wanted the best for his people, of course; to save them from the unjust regime of Sam.
Of course, he would probably have to raise taxes to rebuild his ideal country, and shoot a few of his highest officers before jealousy got the better of them, but that was only natural.
The people would understand, he thought; if they didn't, they were obviously supporters of the maniac Sam, and would be properly shot.
Those who spoke ill of him would find it difficult to continue such activity without a jaw to move, he considered, and made a mental note to put one of the Secte Rouge in charge of security.
They'd enjoy that, he knew.
Bobo was in for a shock, however, for when he kicked open the door to Sam's office, he discovered that the President had already taken the matter out of his hands, having blown his own brains out.
He now sat slumped in his chair, fate having painted a faintly mocking smile on to his clammy skin that spoke of joy at having outwitted his executioner.
Cursing, Bobo emptied the contents of his revolver's cylinder into the lifeless form, which shuddered in a parody of its former fearful existence.
Only then did Bobo step fully into the room, and-allow his followers after him.
‘Tell the people I have executed this most unworthy of Presidents,’ he ordered in a surly manner.
‘In fact, take the body out into the streets and shoot it again.’
The dull orange glow of fires added scant colour to the moonlit visage of Port-au-Prince's whitewashed buildings as seen from Gonave Gulf.
Colonel L V Mortimer, USMC, scanned the city as part of his preparation for  landing.
The ship he was on was, he and his men hoped, hidden from view in the shadow of the large island in the centre of the gulf.
Mortimer had attended a staff meeting with Admiral Caperton which had lasted through the night.
The meeting had determined that Mortimer's ship and one other would simply sail into the harbour, dock, and begin debarking troops to secure the city and protect any foreign citizens they found — particularly Americans from the university and the dockside customs receivership, but also any others if there was an opportunity.
The Admiral's flagship would set men ashore at Cap-Haitien on the east coast, where the Admiral would establish a garrison in Henri Christophe's hilltop fortress known simply as The Citadel.
The other ships would remain offshore, and dispatch launches to set men ashore around the coastline of the gulf, to make their presence felt in the countryside, as well as to circle around and prevent the escape of any rebels or corrupt officials.
The main concourse of the docks was deserted, most of the combatants having gathered around the more important buildings and streets in the city.
As a result, the Marines experienced no resistance as they jogged down the hurriedly lashed gangplanks, and spread out across the docks.
Mortimer, armed with a Browning rather than a rifle, called out orders to his squad, and directed them to positions around the two-storey customs building.
Observing his target through cold eyes, Mortimer strode ahead, pistol ready, marking the positions of the dark figures who could be made out scrambling about the building.
He almost outpaced his men as they approached the customs building, from whence there came sounds of hand-to-hand combat.
Waving his men into a pincer formation, Mortimer surprised the small group of machete-wielding rebels who were trying to wear down the staff of the building.
They turned on the newly arrived Marines in surprise, and yet with considerable ferocity, hurling themselves at the armed men, who coolly gunned them down, their machetes being no match for rifles.
Mortimer himself killed two or three, moving with a sort of mechanical fluidity, ignoring everything but each man whom he targeted.
In a matter of minutes, the attackers had been routed, only a few surviving to run back into the streets where the morning had yet to dispel the darkness.
Mortimer reholstered his gun, satisfied at a job well done, and striving to contain the excitement he felt at the combat.
He spotted a familiar face, and beckoned him over.
‘Glen, pass the word for the main party to head directly here.
We can use the receivership warehouse as a staging post.’
‘Right, sir.’
Captain Glen headed back towards the ship.
The large goods doors opened then, and several white men rushed out, cheering.
The customs staff greeted the Marines warmly.
‘About time someone put down them niggers like the mad dogs they are,’ someone cried, raising a laugh from his rescuers.
‘We know what to do with mad dogs, right enough,’ Mortimer drawled, nodding towards the nearest of the fallen blacks, who had already attracted a brace of flies to the sticky wounds in his face.
‘Who's in charge here?’
‘I am,’ answered a burly man with greying hair.
‘Fred Johnson, manager.’
‘Colonel L V Mortimer,’ the hawk-like Marine responded with a faint smile.
‘With your permission, I'd like to use your warehouse as a staging area and base of operations, while we secure the area and send in protection for other American interests in the city.’
‘Okay, I suppose, Colonel.
We're a bit understocked anyway — business hasn't been so good since the trouble started.’
‘I guess not.
Thank you, Mr Johnson.’
Mortimer found a junior lieutenant and began issuing orders to have his maps of the island, tactical notes, and sundry other items brought in.
It was just a pity, he thought, that he'd now have to sit tight here, while his men were facing the enemy.
It took the Marines a remarkably short time to set up  defensible emplacements on the wide dockside, before Mortimer sent his men into the city, ordering small groups to leapfrog each other in order to secure the university and consulates.
A larger group was dispatched to the palace, to enforce a curfew and arrest both the leaders of the rebellion and the officials of the corrupt government.
The sun had barely begun its climb into the sky when there was a renewed flurry of activity outside the university hospital.
A sudden volley of shots broke out, the sound no longer muffled by windows, all of which had been shattered during the night.
Ace woke at once, drawing her gun and spinning about on the carpeting of plaster chips and glass fragments, searching for the source and target.
To her surprise, the gunfire didn't seem to be directed at them, and she wondered if the rebels and soldiers had finally got around to fighting each other directly.
Looking around, she saw that the others were all awake as well.
The Doctor was using a pocket mirror to see what was going on outside without sticking his head out of the window, Howard was over by a small stove cooking several breakfasts, the hospital staff were milling about seeing to their patients, and Petion was being shaved by an orderly using a piece of broken glass.
Ace was uncertain whether or not to say anything that might disturb his concentration more than the noise outside did.
‘We don't have much longer to wait.’
Ace jumped; she hadn't heard the Doctor come over.
‘Things are moving on apace,’ he finished.
‘Meaning?’ she said.
‘The fighting outside.
They're not fighting each other, you know.’
‘That American invasion you mentioned?’
‘Exactly.’
‘They haven't changed much, then?’
‘Not really.
They come in, widen a few roads, build a couple of schools, and keep a firm hold over what they see as a bunch of ‘upstart blacks’.’
‘Nothing unusual there, then.’
‘No, just the usual bigotry and oppression.’
The gunfire outside died down as the Haitians scattered.
Seconds later, there was a loud bang outside.
‘Grenade,’ Ace commented.
After a few moments of silence there was a series of sharp raps on the door, and a voice called out, asking if anyone was inside.
Howard looked up sharply.
‘An American voice,’ he said in wonder, as if he were surprised to find that he was still alive and about to be rescued, after the previous night's events.
‘You'd better open the door, I think,’ the Doctor said dryly, and Howard left with a nod.
‘I wonder which side they'll be on,’ Petion murmured, with a hint of worry in his voice.
‘Strictly speaking, neither.
They'll arrest pretty much anyone involved with either the rebellion or the government.
I think, though,’ the Doctor said, eyes twinkling, ‘we'll be able to persuade them that you're on the same side as the rest of us.’
At that moment, Howard returned, grinning, accompanied by a Marine sergeant and a man he introduced as Marine Captain Glen.
They tensed somewhat upon sighting Petion, but Howard hastily interposed himself between them.
‘This is Captain Petion,’ he began, ‘formerly with the militia, but didn't like what he saw.
He's with us now.’
‘Captain.’
Glen nodded perfunctorily, still with a hint of suspicion.
Howard went on to introduce his staff and patients, before ending up at the Doctor and Ace.
‘This is the Doctor, he's a Brit investigating some occurrences here.’
‘Such as the disappearance of your envoy?’
Glen suggested.
‘Perhaps,’ the Doctor replied evasively.
‘At the moment, I'm investigating many things.’
‘And this is, er, Ace,’ Howard finished.
‘One of the Doctor's assistants.’
‘A secretary, perhaps?’ the sergeant surmised with a suggestive look.
‘His bodyguard,’ Ace said coldly, not liking his jumping to conclusions one little bit.
‘Dressing like some Dodge City card-sharp might be your idea of fun, but bodyguard?’
The sergeant laughed aloud.
His laugh was sharply curtailed when Ace lunged forward, snatched his rifle from hands that were too surprised to grip it tightly enough, and smashed him in the groin with the butt.
As he doubled over, she kneed him in the face, and had her own pistol levelled at Glen's stomach before he could react.
There was an uncomfortable silence, during which the Doctor watched Ace with a look of worry.
‘Any of you arseholes want to add to Rambo's comments here?’ she asked icily.
‘As one captain to another,’ Petion said, with a conspiratorial smile, ‘I recommend you take her word at face value.’
‘Yeah, sure,’ Glen muttered uncertainly.
He watched Ace warily as she stepped back and put her gun away.
He had always thought that the British were even more conservative than the Americans about what women were allowed to do.
Still, it took all sorts.
‘Quite a looker,’ he whispered back to Petion.
‘Hadn't noticed.’
‘Oh.’
Glen glanced down at the sergeant struggling to get up while clutching his aching groin.
‘Neither had I.’
‘Excuse me,’ the Doctor broke in, ‘but have your men taken all the university?’
‘Pretty much.
Why?’
‘I want to pay a visit to the museum.
Part of the, er, case I'm working on,’ he added hurriedly.
‘Oh, right.
I'll send a man along with you, just in case.’
‘Don't bother.’
Ace smiled sweetly, and slipped her mirrored sunglasses on as she headed for the reception area.
‘Come on, Howard, you can show us the way.’
The Doctor led Howard to the door, but was stopped by Petion.
‘If you don't mind,’ Petion said, ‘I'd like to come too.’
The Doctor shrugged, and they left together.
Mait awoke gasping for breath in a black wave of pain, belatedly realizing, as it faded, that it was pain in a dream.
He got up stiffly, finding a steaming coffee pot beside his four-poster.
In the most shadowed corner of the curtained room, the darkness stirred, and slid forward.
‘Good morning, Mait.
Welcome to another beautiful day.’
‘What are you doing here, Carrefour?’
Mait wasn't particularly concerned, since the tall man had proved his loyalty many times.
He was, however, presently supposed to be with General Froebe's men.
‘The situation has changed, Mait.
The Americans have invaded, and are rounding up both the rebels and governmental forces.’
‘What?’
Mait was momentarily nonplussed, but soon recovered, as he mentally ran through the possible effects of this on his plan.
‘That has been possible for some time.
So long as they are kept busy in Port-au-Prince until the morning, we can continue with only minor alterations.’
‘As you say, Mait.’
‘Use your…influence to arrange to have the Americans kept busy tonight, so that the ceremony may occur in peace.
I will visit Henri, even though he lives uncomfortably close to open water.’
Mait shuddered involuntarily.
‘And I will make sure he keeps Richmann out of sight so that the Americans do not realize their worst fears have already come true.’
‘As you wish, Mait.
And after the ceremony?’
‘Afterwards….’
Mait sighed in expectation.
‘We will be as those we follow.
The Americans will have no power over us then.’
He smiled unpleasantly.
‘And neither will Froebe and his men, once they have shown us the way.’
The Doctor led the way into the museum, followed by Ace, Howard and Petion.
The place was unlit, with pools of darkness shrouding the exhibits.
The Doctor produced  a small but powerful pocket torch and swung it around, briefly illuminating each exhibit in turn.
‘What are we looking for?’
Ace asked.
‘Carvings, statuettes, that sort of thing.
But they'll be carvings of a most odd nature.’
He paused for a moment.
‘Or a most unnatural oddness, depending on how you look at it.
Either way,’ he added more earnestly, ‘they'll undoubtedly be tucked away in some suitably black and hidden corner.’
They slipped through the museum like ghosts dodging the approach of dawn, all but ignoring the Arawak and Spanish exhibits.
Finally, on turning a corner, they entered a small area in which a large slab of stone stood beside a table covered in smaller fragments.
The Doctor walked over and played the torch over the large stone.
As the light flickered across its surface, the already uncomfortably organic-looking reliefs seemed to writhe and slither in an even more lifelike fashion.
Ace repressed a shudder, while Howard looked on unaffected, having seen the stones when they first arrived at the university.
Petion looked astounded in a repulsed sort of way; Privately, he wondered who had carved these things, and hoped it had not been some ancestor of his.
‘It certainly predates the Arawaks,’ the Doctor said.
‘I'd say these carvings were at least fifteen million years old.’
His voice was uncharacteristically hushed.
‘Bullshit,’ Ace scoffed.
‘Even I know man hasn't been around that long.’
‘No, and remind me to wash your mouth out,’ he continued absently.
‘These were never carved by the frail hand of man, so to speak.’
‘How do you mean?’
Howard asked in indignation.
‘Not carved by man?’
‘No.
I'm not the first visitor to this little planet of yours, you know.’
He stopped, peering at the stone, and altered the angle of the torch.
A faint glistening showed up on the surface of the carvings.
‘Aha.
I thought as much.’
‘Coated with poison?’
Petion asked hesitantly.
‘Yes.
Topically active, no doubt.
Look at these smaller  pieces.
They're all coated and some of them are disturbed.
Benny will certainly have picked up some of these things to examine them, and she'll have absorbed the stuff through her fingertips.’
‘You mean she's dead?’
Ace snapped.
‘I doubt it.
Why take away the body if she were?
Do you have any empty nitro canisters?’
‘Yeah, here.’
She handed over a small metal cylinder.
‘Doctor,’ Howard began slowly.
‘If your friend isn't dead —‘
‘I know,’ he said sharply.
Ace noticed that Howard and Petion were both looking at him strangely.
‘I'll want to analyse this to confirm it,’ he continued, carefully using a pen to roll one of the small carvings off the edge of the table and into the canister.
He dropped the pen in after it, and screwed the lid down tight.
‘What's going on with you lot?’
Ace demanded.
‘Benny may be a bit of a dipstick, but if something's happened to her-’
‘Ace.’
The Doctor looked at her with pained eyes.
‘If this stuff is what I think it is, someone may be trying to turn Benny into what the people here would call a zombi .’
Ace felt as if she'd been struck.
Killing someone was one thing, but this was worse; there was no honour or morality in it at all.
Not trusting herself to speak, she settled for gripping the butt of her gun with white knuckles.
‘I should have realized at once— that Frenchman who was killed, the same poison must still have been on the skin of his attackers, and it would almost certainly still have been strong enough to affect him as well !
Howard, Petion,’ the Doctor asked desperately, ‘can either of you put me in touch with a houngan of the Rada Loa ?’
The other two men looked at each other.
‘There are a few places where we might meet one such….’
Howard replied.
‘But,’ Petion interrupted, ‘travelling the streets today would be almost suicidal, what with all the fighting.
And even if you did find a houngan , he most probably wouldn't  agree to talk to you, since no one here has any sympathies for the blancs who have always exploited us.’
‘Well, that's all right then,’ the Doctor stated grimly, ‘because neither have I. Ace, you can come with me.
Howard, get back to the hospital.
They'll need you back there to take charge and you can make sure the Marines don't compromise the defences you've set up.
Petion, take me to a houngan of the Rada Loa .’
14
Benny was shoved down into a leather-covered chair in an office carved from the living rock.
Before she could move or speak, the two guards who had brought her retreated back into the corridor, leaving her alone in the office.
It never occurred to her to worry about what was to be done with her, though she wryly thought that the hospitality of the military establishment seemed to be a constant throughout human history.
Instead, she found herself drawn to a large open window cut into one wall.
It was all in one piece and couldn't be opened, and she judged it as being thick enough to resist breaking, even under the impact of one of the chairs.
Outside, she could see a small three-port dock, with a nest of sinisterly squatting tanks on the far side.
Men crawled over the area like ants over an anthill, and several small handcarts rolled along here and there.
The scene was illuminated by large floodlamps bolted on to the striated walls of the huge cavern which enclosed the whole place.
Up above, the roof was wreathed in shadow, but Benny sensed the presence of something huge, lurking in the darkness.
Pulling herself away, she looked over at the filing cabinets against one wall.
She went over and tried one of the handles, but the cabinet was locked.
Idly, she wondered if there was anything around that she could open it with.
She checked, but saw only a few photographs of a passing-out parade, a map, some pens and a blotter.
There was nothing that could be adapted for lock-picking, not even a paperclip.
‘There is nothing in there that would matter to you anyway,’ came a faintly amused voice.
She spun around.
‘You never know, I have a wide range of interests.
You're General Froebe, I take it?’ she said.
‘Indeed.’
He circled the large mahogany desk and seated himself.
‘You seem to have the advantage of me, Fraulein….’
‘Summerfield.
Professor Bernice Summerfield.’
She shrugged, knowing the name would do him no good, since she wouldn't be born for another half a millennium.
‘Professor of what?’
‘Archaeology.’
‘Which university?’
‘Heidelberg.’
‘Ah, the famous British sense of humour.’
‘Who says I'm British?’
‘Your accent is unfamiliar, but we know you are working in concert with a man carrying British Intelligence identification.’
He smiled patronizingly.
‘If you would like to tell me what you have discovered so far about your missing envoy, I would be interested to hear
‘Our missing envoy?’
Benny thought, trying to recall her knowledge of this period of history.
‘You had him killed, of course.’
‘Of course.
A deduction worthy of Holmes himself,’ he replied straight-faced.
‘Thank you.
Are you about to hand over a signed confession, then?’
‘What were you doing in the museum?’ he asked, ignoring her taunt.
‘A bit of housework: dusting, that sort of thing.
All those old things get rather dusty and so on if they're not looked after.’
‘I am disappointed,’ he sighed.
‘I had hoped I wouldn't have to give a woman the full benefit of our facilities.’
He pressed a button on the desk, and two guards came in.
‘Aha.
Now it's time for the electrodes and rubber hoses, eh?’
She tried to sound flippant, though she suddenly wondered if she hadn't gone a bit far.
‘Nothing so crude.
We'll give you a course of injections of a solution of scopalamine and quinine.
That will give us results with no mess.’
‘Those will have side effects,’ Benny said slowly, forgetting to even try a witticism.
‘Well, you will become something of a vegetable, unfortunately, but I'm sure our guards, so lonely this far from home, will find a use for you even in that state.’
He nodded to the guards.
‘Take her back to the medical centre and have Dr Karnstein meet me there in one hour.’
The guards nodded and ushered Benny out.
Carrefour sat on a low wall that stretched out from the side of a building, leaning his back against the building's wall and tootling to himself on a child's flute.
Along the street, he saw a small group of men drifting aimlessly towards him.
Most were armed with large stones or pieces of wood which had had nails or shards of glass stuck into them.
A few had stained machetes, while two even had old militia rifles.
Their shadows stretched far ahead of them in the morning sun, and he leapt down on to the shadow of the leader.
The group halted, eyeing Carrefour with a mixture of fear and confusion.
Carrefour gave them a wide grin, and stepped down the shadow path to their leader.
‘Good morning,’ he said quietly, locking eyes with the leader.
‘I would like you to do a little service for me, and you will do it.
You'll enjoy it, in fact.’
He chuckled softly.
‘What service?’ the man asked fearfully, as Carrefour had known he would.
‘Take your men.
Show the Americans that we do not appreciate their presence.
I would be most grateful.’
He stepped meaningfully off the shadow on to a patch of sunlight.
The man swallowed nervously.
Brought up in the outskirts of the city, his grandparents had often told him stories of how a bocor could trap your soul through your shadow.
And even this man had heard of Carrefour, who had committed the almost unheard of crime of zombifying  another bocor , rather than just killing him.
Too frightened to speak, the man nodded vigorously, as did his men, and they walked off stiffly, none wanting to be seen to be more afraid than the others.
Carrefour watched them go, and reseated himself, rolling the flute between his fingers.
as if its touch ignited memories, he heard the crackle of burning wood, and felt its heat through his flesh.
He ran a finger along the lowermost surface of the wood, his fingertips brushing the marks that spelled out his name, and it echoed in his mind with the voice of his father, who had carved the instrument many years ago.
The miniature flute was the only object Carrefour retained from his childhood, and the only one which he even remembered with any clarity.
It had been his only possession when he had fled his home as it burned.
His home had burned with the same anger that the men responsible had felt, the anger which Carrefour had striven to purge himself of.
Putting the thoughts out of his head, he settled back to wait for the next people who could keep the Americans busy.
Almost without realizing it, he began to play a soulful, haunting melody.
The rats had been cleared from the lab when the Leutnant returned with a message for Dr Karnstein.
Instead, the naked corpse of Hauser lay on a central table, the chest cavity spread open, and several organs glistening purply on gleaming dishes to either side.
Trying to avoid gazing at the grisly sight, the Leutnant sidled over to the statuesque Karnstein, and handed the envelope to her.
As he left, the image of scarlet, oval glove-prints on white paper went with him.
Stepping back from the autopsy she was performing, Dr Ingrid Karnstein unfolded the paper to read the message.
Professor von Stein raised an eyebrow questioningly.
‘Bad news?’
‘Just a nuisance interruption.
Some girl Froebe wants interrogated after lunch,’ she said.
‘That's an important facet of our work, Doctor, lest  you forget.
Anyway, you shouldn't be surprised — you said yourself that there was a risk that the two men affected by the drum explosion would be found and their condition understood.’
‘That's all right for you to say, since you've always worked in passionless chemical engineering.’
‘We've had this conversation before.
You volunteered for this assignment — never forget that.’
‘Oh, I never will,’ she answered with a hard edge to her voice.
After all, she thought, how can I forget the day I agreed to enslave most of Europe?
‘At the time, we were supposed to be coming to use neurotropic qualities of tetrodotoxin and datura to save lives by slowing the bleeding of our wounded soldiers.
I did not volunteer to have that perverted into a weapon that will kill or turn innocent people into mindless automata!’
‘An additional bonus that will save our men's lives, since no one will be able to shoot at them,’ von Stein shouted.
Karnstein was too repulsed to even try to answer.
She returned to her gory work, which had become less disturbing than her conversations with von Stein.
When she had been strapped back on to the bed beside a tray of sinister-looking instruments in the medical centre, Benny had tensed her muscles as best she could, before the guards had fixed the buckles and left.
As soon as she was alone again, she relaxed, the pressure of the straps easing slightly.
‘Must make a note of this,’ she muttered to herself.
‘Dear diary, history isn't what it used to be.’
She began to wriggle slightly, to see if she could get her hands free, but it was no good, the straps were still too tight.
She tried her legs next, and they moved a bit within the straps, but her boots prevented her from pulling her legs through the loops.
‘Bugger!
Wait a minute….’
Turning her feet towards each other, she pushed the toe of her right boot against the edge of the left, while scraping her left heel against the tabletop.
After several long moments of ankle-straining effort, her left boot popped  off and thudded to the floor.
Her heart froze in her throat, and she stilled completely, trying to determine whether anyone had heard and was coming to investigate.
Nothing happened.
She wriggled her left leg a bit more, and her foot slipped free.
Allowing herself a small triumphant smile, she started the same process on the right boot.
It soon hit the floor as well, and both her legs were free to move.
This time she didn't wait to see if anyone would come, but swiftly glanced to the small instrument tray.
A set of surgical tools and syringes lay on the white-sheeted top, and she focused on a scalpel with a small but wickedly sharp blade.
Shifting into an uncomfortable position in which her back was slightly turned to the tray, with her hands still strapped down, she turned her head at a painful angle to watch the tray.
Carefully, she slid her left leg off the table, and over to the tray, the leg almost on its side and bent at the knee to reach the tray, which was almost level with her hip.
Straining slightly, and with teeth.
clenched, Benny lifted her foot above the instruments and lowered it with extreme care towards the handle of the scalpel.
On the first two touches, it shifted, and she couldn't get a grip on it, but on the third attempt, she clasped it between her toes.
Keeping a tight grip, she slowly swung her leg back into a normal position, laying the scalpel down on the end of the bed.
‘What do you know, those ballet lessons paid off….’
She then pulled the scalpel towards her hips, raising her buttocks off the bed so she could pull foot and scalpel up underneath her.
When the scalpel was level with her hands, she nudged it to the left with her foot, and settled back down, finally grasping the handle with straining fingers.
The hard work done, it took a matter of moments to cut through the strap holding her left hand.
She then unbuckled her right, and stood up, dropping the scalpel into a pocket, just in case.
Pausing only to pull on her boots and recover her other belongings from a shelf near the door, she cautiously slipped out of the room.
Benny found herself in a rock-walled tunnel, with bare bulbs hanging from the ceiling at regular intervals.
Odd sounds of voices and activity came indistinctly from the distance.
The tunnel to the right turned left after a short distance, while the tunnel to the left led to a crossroads.
Uncertain which way to go, Benny gradually became aware of a gentle breeze blowing from the right.
She had spent her share of time in caves digging for archaeological pieces, and realized that she was probably too deep underground to feel a breeze from outside.
The dock below, however, contained water, which meant there could be an opening to the sea.
That being the case, the breeze she felt was probably being caused by air which had got in at low tide being forced out at high tide.
If that was so, then going right, towards the breeze, would take her deeper into the caves.
She set off towards the junction to the left.
Once there, she paused, debating which way to go.
‘This is as bad as that castle on Khul,’ she muttered.
‘That was a real nightmare, that one.’
Sighing, she turned left.
Petion had to duck as he preceded the Doctor into an adobe-style blockhouse, which was refreshingly cool inside.
An open doorway on the opposite side gave a bright rectangular view of an area of beaten earth open to the sky.
A stout woman, whom Petion had spoken to a moment ago, indicated that they should sit on the scraggy cushions situated around the walls.
‘He will see you in a moment,’ she said without explanation, and went out, leaving the trio in the dim room.
Ace glanced around, noting the clay bottles and pots sealed with wax that were stacked together in rickety cupboards.
Plant material was everywhere, hanging to dry from the ceiling, piled in bowls, tied in bundles….
She didn't recognize any of it.
Bizarrely, above an altar spread with objects she couldn't identify, and didn't want to, there was a crucifix, and a cheap reproduction of a painting of St Patrick.
She wondered darkly if all this wasn't just a waste of time, when they should be out hunting for  clues to Benny's whereabouts.
The Doctor sat with an unreadable expression, which presumably meant his patience wasn't being strained.
Petion looked both nervous and comfortable at the same time.
For his part, Petion was feeling no actual fear as such, but these trappings of a bygone age, which could represent good or evil depending on the choice of the individual worshipper, instilled in him a definite sense of wariness.
He was content, however, in the knowledge that this man had only ever been known to serve the Rada Loa , those good spirits who were often associated with Catholic saints when the people felt it necessary to show some respect for the official state religion without compromising their traditional beliefs.
After a few moments, a man entered, his face set in a grim expression that, while not malicious, certainly didn't show any sign of sympathy for their cause.
‘This is Clairvius Dubois,’ Petion announced quietly.
‘Hopefully he may give us the help we are looking for.’
He inclined his head respectfully, turning to Dubois.
‘This is the Doctor and Ace,’ he said simply.
‘They are working with Dr Phillips, and we all need your help, if you will give it.’
‘I have helped Phillips in the past, because he is unlike the other blancs .
How do I know you are as worthy as he?
Even now, I hear that blanc soldiers have again invaded our country.’
Petion opened his mouth to speak, but the Doctor got there first.
‘We don't share the others’ aims here.
We need your help to cut short the troubles that will follow.’
‘By subjugating us more quickly?’
‘By ending the brutal acts that would turn the whites against you and encourage them to clamp down harder.’
Dubois raised an eyebrow.
‘Such as?’
‘How many zombis have been created recently?’ he asked blithely.
Dubois's expression went hard.
‘This conversation is over.’
He stood and began to go out.
‘More than the few the Bizango intended, I'll warrant,’ the Doctor said.
‘What?’
Dubois froze.
‘You may not know who, but you do know that someone is creating — unauthorized, shall we say —zombis , don't you?’
‘Who exactly are you?’
Dubois's voice was hushed and cold.
‘Me?’ the Doctor asked innocently.
He leaned forward, holding Dubois's gaze.
‘I'm the one who's wondering why whites are turning up as zombis — and whites who have no official record, at that.
I'm the one who's looking for a friend who may well be in the hands of the cochon gris .
And most importantly to you, I'm the one who'll have to put an end to all this nonsense.
Does that satisfy you?’
The aging houngan's grim facade held for a moment, then dissolved into a spray of laughter lines as he smiled.
‘To talk to me like that, you must be who you claim to be — no one else would dare do such a thing!’
Stepping briefly outside, he called for a bottle of Clairin to be brought, and the woman who had shown them in brought it instantly.
‘I will admit to some curiosity as to how you know so much about the Bizango , Doctor.’
‘I have enemies in high places.
I've also been here before.’
‘Ah.
Dr Phillips told you of the zombis he has been studying, I take it?’
The Doctor nodded.
Petion handed Ace the bottle and advised her in a whisper not to smell the stuff first.
Naturally she did, and it almost made her eyes water.
‘It is true,’ Dubois continued ‘He asked me in as an advisor, and I realized at once that they were not the work of the Bizango.’
‘Well, you should know,’ the Doctor commented slyly.
‘What?’
‘Surely an outsider, even another houngan , wouldn't have made such a distinction ‘at once’?’
‘Very good, Doctor.
And you are right, I am an Empereur .
I had enquiries made as to the origins of the zombis , but no one knew where they had come from.
We did discover, however, that one called Mait — his officially registered name is Gilles Lemaitre — has built up a small but powerful network of his own, and that they have performed many cochon gris ceremonies.’
‘Cochon gris ….’
The Doctor nodded in contemplation.
‘So they're a splinter group working for their own evil purposes rather than for the island's status quo?’
‘Yes.
We have no proof that the zombis are their work, but they are the only suspects.’
‘Haven't you done anything about it?’
Ace put in.
‘Mait is too well-protected for even us to get at.’
‘Hmm, and that's saying something,’ the Doctor said.
‘Do you happen to know where he lives?
I think I'd like to have a look into this.’
‘He has a large villa in the Cordillera Central.
I doubt if your missing friend will be there, however.’
‘Where else could she be?’
‘There is a small cemetery, where they have held ceremonies almost every night recently.
Either Henri Duval or Carrefour is always in attendance — they are Mait's right-hand men.
If they intend to make a zombi of her, they will do it there.’
‘Tonight?’
Dubois shrugged.
‘Probably.
Usually it takes three days, but in a hurry….’
‘One more thing,’ the Doctor began slowly.
‘Do you know anything of the Old Ones, or the carvings that are in the museum?’
‘I have heard legends, told by old men who should know better, but I have no knowledge of such things personally.
As for the carvings….
They are much like the legends, but as to what that means —‘
‘I know what it means, and I think this Mait of yours thinks he knows what it means.
We'd better get over there.’
He pulled out a tatty map from an inside pocket.
‘If you'd point out the villa on this?’
‘If you really think you can get in, I will come with you.
This is as much my business as yours, Doctor.’
Dubois's tone brooked no argument, even from the Doctor.
‘Oh, I can get us in, all right.’
He held up the TARDIS key, rubbing it thoughtfully.
‘But I have a few things to do first.
We'll also want to sit in on the cochon gris's ceremony tonight, if there is one.’
He clapped his hands to emphasize the decision.
‘Right.
You'd better make what preparations you need, Dubois.
Can you meet us at the university hospital in one hour?’
‘Certainly.’
‘You've been most helpful, thank you.
Come on Ace, Petion, we'd best be getting back.’
As they left, Ace looked back thoughtfully.
‘Do you think we can trust him?’
‘Yes, he's Bizango ,’ the Doctor said.
‘So?
What the hell does that mean?’
‘The Bizango are a sort of neighbourhood watch in Haiti.
They hold the odd kangaroo court to deal with those who have caused trouble but aren't what the state would consider criminals — people who con their own families out of earnings or land, that sort of thing.
Defendants often end up being zombified and forced to work as slaves.
Hard labour, I suppose.
These cochon gris , on the other hand, are zombifying purely for their own ends, not to mention interfering in the, er, governmental process.
So, the Bizango will come down on them like a ton of bricks if they get the chance, for both the unauthorized zombis and the rabble rousing.’
‘And the Secte Rouge?’
‘The cochon gris's strong-arm division.’
‘How come the Bizango aren't interested in the revolution?’
‘Because to them, one government is as corrupt as any other.
But at a local level, people's attitudes and the Bizango's system remain pretty much unaffected by what happens in the city, so they simply aren't interested in who's President.’
‘You seem to know a lot about it.’
Ace's voice turned faintly suspicious.
‘Only from the sort of dry texts that Benny hates so much.
The present situation, apart from the fact of the American invasion, is as much a mystery to me as to you.’
‘Really?’
She stopped and halted him with a hand on his arm.
‘Is it just coincidence that as soon as we arrive all sorts of weird shit starts happening?
Or have you found a new game to amuse yourself?’
She didn't even try to keep the bitterness out of her tone.
The Doctor looked at her with an air of hesitant concern.
‘No games, Ace.
Not this time.’
For a moment he looked lost.
‘Nobody knows anything about the Old Ones, not even the Time Lords.
All I do know is that it seems someone here does believe that they still have an influence.’
He smiled crookedly.
‘I suppose when you look at it that way, it could be considered that they have an influence by proxy, as it were.’
‘So that's why you want to have a look round this Mait's place?’
‘Yes….’
He took on a strange, thoughtful expression.
‘Mait…he muttered.
‘I wonder….’
Mait shrank into his chair on Henri's verandah, staring out gloomily at the glittering expanse of lake below.
Henri returned from inside with a bottle of Clairin and two mugs.
‘You'd think I would be over this by now,’ Mait said darkly, eyeing the lake.
‘A near-drowning isn't the sort of thing that one forgets easily.
It's bound to leave its mark on a man.
Even you,’ Henri added.
‘But it was so long ago, when I was a boy….’
‘It's hard to think of you as a boy.’
‘Why?
How old do you think I am, Henri?’
Mait's face took on a whimsical look.
‘I don't know, sixty, maybe sixty-five.’
For a long time Mait didn't answer, until a low chuckle gradually worked its way from his throat.
‘As young as that, eh?’
‘Well, I-’
‘Don't worry,’ Mait told him, amused by his baffled expression.
‘Suffice it to say that I'm older even than that.’
He took a swig of the spiced rum, and set the mug down carefully.
‘I am here on more important business, however.’
‘The ceremony tonight?’
‘I would like you to have your Secte Rouge followers in attendance again.
The emotions that are stirred by a human sacrifice will be useful to us, in order to be certain we have enough power for the Wete Mo Nan Dlo .
Therefore, you can perform the ceremony as set, I will attend as Empereur , and Carrefour can handle the sacrifice at the appropriate moment.’
‘One o'clock?’
‘Yes.
The Secte Rouge should have found us someone by then.’
Mait smiled to himself.
‘It's also possible, of course, that our victim may willingly come to us,’ he added mysteriously.
‘The blancs , you mean?’
‘Yes.
Make sure the guardians are alert tonight.
When the fear and agony the blancs feel is transferred through the mirror….’
He left the sentence hanging as he helped himself to more rum.
15
General Froebe was entertained by visions of a luxurious country estate as his imagined reward for services to the Kaiser, as he escorted Dr Ingrid Karnstein through the tunnels.
Karnstein had proved attractive but uninteresting company since her arrival.
She simply got on with her job rather sourly, and coldly logged reports which were clinically critical of the conditions in the complex.
Froebe had at first been surprised, thinking of how many people would kill to get a posting to the tropics.
That was before he came to recognize that Karnstein was using this by-the-book method of criticism to show displeasure at the nature of their business.
Karnstein seemed to have been born to fit the caricatured image of a hospital matron, determined to do a patient good even if it killed him.
When war was first declared, and she was co-opted into the military, he imagined that her first reaction had been that it was typical of these men to mess up her promising career like that.
In short, Karnstein appeared to feel that while she had to do her job — by the book, of course — she didn't have to like it.
Her attitude irritated Froebe more than anyone else's had ever done in his military career.
He longed for her to either finish her job and go back to Germany, or do something blatantly treacherous so he would have an excuse to get rid of her.
Anything but this fragile, walking-on-eggs relationship.
The truth was, Froebe's almost entirely military life had left him unable to cope with anyone who wasn't either a bloodthirsty volunteer, or a conscript to be whipped into  shape.
Most importantly, to his way of thinking, he preferred his staff to be men.
He reached the medical centre with a sense of relief, and pushed the door open, holding it for Karnstein, since even though he disliked her, he couldn't neglect his duties as an officer and a gentleman.
He nearly let the door shut on her face in surprise, when he saw that the woman was gone.
‘Scheisse !’
He hit the alarm button by the door, and bells started ringing throughout the complex.
Karnstein examined the cut bonds with a look of amusement; she seemed almost glad that the woman had escaped.
Froebe stormed off back down the tunnel towards the approaching sound of booted feet, shouting orders all the way.
At each junction, Benny took an upward-sloping tunnel with the strange breeze at her back.
Nevertheless, she had to retrace her steps several times, though she still made sure to pick routes which moved ahead of the breeze.
She hadn't thought about how much of her hour remained, until bells started ringing, and she realized that they must have gone for her.
She had passed numerous rooms cut into the rock during her journey, and had noted several tunnel opening with chains stretched across them, hung with danger signs.
She had no intention of following any of those routes.
She was suddenly aware of approaching hurried footsteps, and scurried back into the last room she had passed, which wasn't locked and turned out to be a storeroom for spare cables and bulbs for the lighting system.
Peeking out, she saw three white-coated figures approach, two hurrying along in front, the last trailing a few yards further back.
Hefting a large, heavy pair of cable-cutters that had lain on a shelf, she let the first two go by.
Worriedly judging her moment, and hoping fervently that the other two heard nothing, she slipped out behind the third man, and cracked him over the head with the cutters.
He fell  into her arms without a sound, and she dragged him back into the storeroom.
There, she checked for a pulse, fearing for a moment that she had killed him.
Finding a faint pulse, she divested him of his white coat, and tied him up with a length of cable.
‘See how you lot like it,’ she muttered.
Tossing her safari jacket aside with a regretful air, she shrugged on the purloined lab coat, picked up a dusty clipboard from the shelf, and stepped back out into the corridor.
She paused a moment, uncertain whether to follow the other two or go back the way they had come.
She settled for following them.
It took only a few seconds for Benny to rush on and spot her unknowing guides.
Hanging back so they were just at the limit of vision, she followed them through the tunnels of the complex, occasionally passing other personnel or soldiers, who ignored her to concentrate on their search for the fugitive.
And they're supposed to be the experts on camouflage, she thought ironically.
Eventually, they came to a large set of steel doors, watched over by a single guard.
This confused Benny at first, until she realized that they must have been going deeper into the complex, while Froebe would have assumed she was making for the outside.
They wouldn't be expecting her to go further into the lion's den.
She stopped at the corner as the two scientists approached the doors.
The guard seemed to have been daydreaming when the two scientists approached.
Unconcerned, he raised a hand to stop them.
‘Team Delta,’ one of the scientists said.
‘Here to check the potency of the first shipment.’
‘Right.’
The guard drew a notebook from one pocket.
‘Precisely on schedule.
Wait a moment —‘
‘What's wrong this time?’
‘It says here there should be three of you.’
‘What do you mean?’
The scientists exchanged weary looks and glanced back to check on their comrade.
Who wasn't there.
They looked at each other in surprise.
Then the other  scientist, silent until now, pointed back up the corridor.
‘There he is, last as usual.’
They laughed, and the guard admitted them, smiling sheepishly.
As they entered, the guard beckoned to Benny.
‘You're late,’ he called.
Benny wasn't going to pass up an opportunity like this.
Clipboard in hand, she strode purposefully up to the doors.
‘Started without me, eh?’ she asked in a passable accent.
‘I'd better not waste any more time,’ she added, pushing the door open and going through, finding herself at an entrance to the dock area that she had seen from Froebe's office.
‘Oh shit.’
Outside, the guard shook his head at the antics of the scientists, disturbed only by the niggling sensation that he'd overlooked something.
A few seconds later, he gasped in realization: hadn't the scientist referred to his tardy colleague as ‘he’?
It was but a short step from there to the deduction that the woman was the one they had been ordered to look out for, and the guard shouldered the door aside, bounding inwards.
He ran straight into Benny's outstretched foot, which slammed into his stomach.
Doubling up, he didn't even see the cable-cutters which smashed into his skull and ended his conscious thoughts in a white flash behind his eyes.
Hastily, Benny shoved the guard outside, not bothering to check whether he was alive or not, and bolted the door.
Benny found herself standing in a smooth-floored entryway that opened on to the docks about ten feet further on.
The two scientists had vanished to their destination.
When Benny moved to the end of the vestibule — striding boldly as if she belonged, hoping to attract less attention than a furtive visitor would — she was momentarily stunned at the sheer scale of what lay before her.
The cavern was so huge that Benny thought they must have hollowed out the entire mountain.
There was, however, something about the regular yet enormous features of the cavern that suggested that man could never have  performed such a feat in this time zone.
But nor did it seem natural.
She began to have a very bad feeling about the whole thing.
She briefly wondered if it was perhaps the work of Earth Reptiles, but swiftly dismissed the idea, since not only did the style not match theirs, but there was no sign of their hibernation hives.
The cave was several hundred yards across and just as high, dimly lit by lamps that stretched down from the indistinct ceiling on impossibly long cables.
Several other sets of doors were dotted around the floor and, far off to the left, a black maw opened up in the wall, with so little light coming from it that Benny was certain the tunnel beyond turned several times before reaching the outside world.
The two large and rusty freighters that were berthed in the docking area, however, were very definitely of human manufacture, as witnessed by the sweaty crewmen who swarmed all over them, almost as numerous as the dead fish which clogged the oil-choked water.
Other men bustled around on the wide dock area, busying themselves.
with large stacks of metallic drums which were stored in one deeper hollow directly under the window of Froebe's office.
All of the drums were marked with a little skull and crossbones symbol.
Only then did Benny realize how little was actually visible from that window, for in addition to the thousands of ten-gallon drums directly below, there were also large house-sized tanks like mini-gasometers on the far side of the docks.
Hoses snaked across the floor from the freighters to the tanks, while cables stretched out from blocky generators like the arms of octopi.
The shouts and calls of maintenance men and sailors echoed noticeably and there was a constant blast of noise from the generators and the ships' engines.
In the dim upper reaches of the roof, she could now make out a cylindrical object with a dulled metallic glint.
Surely not a rocket, she thought, then spotted the low-slung gondola with its attached propellers and radial engines.
This too was connected by lines to a strangely designed gantry which jutted out from the wall.
She took a pen from one pocket of her purloined white  coat, flipped to a new page on the clipboard, and wrote ‘BLOODY HELL!’ on a report form.
Putting the pen away, she considered her options.
Trying to find her way back out was obviously a nonstarter but staying here she would probably be spotted fairly quickly.
Chewing on her lip in thought, she finally set off towards the ten-gallon drums, reasoning that she might as well try to find out as much as possible while she was here, and run like hell when the time came.
This was living history, after all.
Clipboard held tightly under her arm, she strode purposefully over to the area where the thousands of drums were stacked in a sprawled, looming maze.
She passed several men, but none gave her a second glance.
She wondered wryly whether to be thankful for small mercies, or to feel insulted.
Pushing the thought away, she stepped out of sight into an alleyway whose walls were formed of stacked drums.
The death's-head symbols leered at her as she moved between them, trying to avoid brushing up against any of them — just in case.
Satisfied that she was safely hidden from view, Benny began swiftly examining the drums for labels that might give her a clue as to what was in them.
Most of the drums only showed the edges of labels, however, being turned at such an angle as to have the label obscured.
Eventually, however, she found one whose label was visible.
Smoothing out the paper, she crouched down.
‘Bugger,’ she muttered, as she saw that the labels were written in German.
She tried to recall what twentieth-century German she knew, but was too rusty, and realized quickly that she would never be able to translate the labels on her own.
The only alternative, in her view, was to simply copy the wording verbatim and hope the Doctor could translate it.
She knew from her first meeting with him that he couldn't always understand written languages the way he could speech, but if he visited Earth so often it was probably reasonable to assume that he would know languages other than English.
She had just about finished, when she began to make out footsteps approaching from deeper in the maze of  drums.
Hurriedly, she jotted down the last few words, and started back out, but it was too late.
The two scientists whom she had followed came round the corner.
‘Ah, there you—’ one of them began, before he took in the fact that it was a stranger standing in front of him, rather than the third scientist.
The scientists looked at each other in astonishment, and in that instant, Benny bolted.
The scientists pounded after her as she hurtled out on to the open floor, almost bumping into a pair of guards who were doing their rounds.
Without thinking, she elbowed through them, sending them sprawling to the floor as the scientists dashed out shouting.
Benny sprinted for the doors she had come in by, but already more guards were arriving from their stations, and the first few shots buzzed past her.
Throughout the cavern, men looked about at the commotion, and those in the vicinity scattered for cover, while the two scientists cast terrified glances at the huge expanse of drums and called in vain for the guards not to shoot.
Fighting down an abrupt rush of fear as she zigzagged across the stone floor to avoid the rifle fire, Benny pulled out one of the small plastic sample bags she always carried, and dropped the paper on to which she had copied the drum's label into it.
Some part of her tried to convince her to make for the door, but she knew they would expect that.
Realistically, she thought, there's only one way to avoid a diet of non-stop cabbage — or worse.
I just hope those fish died from the oil, not some other weird substance they're messing with here, she thought.
Ahead, as she approached the edge of the floor beyond the freighters, several men converged on her.
Gritting her teeth, she lowered her head, and barged through them, swinging the cable-cutters with wild abandon.
The men fell back, or fell down in some cases, and Benny leapt off the edge of the dock just ahead of a swarm of angrily buzzing bullets.
Hitting the water in a blast of spray, she drove herself as far under as she could, trying not to  gasp at either the impact of her mistimed dive or the surprisingly low temperature of the water.
Guards seemed to be loosing off shots blindly into the water, perhaps hoping to hit Benny by sheer concentration of fire.
Benny forced herself forward, her eyes tightly shut against the sluggish water, hoping that she was still heading towards the dark opening in the wall.
She ground her teeth with the effort of keeping her strained lungs in check, using all four limbs for propulsion through water which echoed hollowly with the slap of bullets seeking her.
After what seemed like a couple of hours, but was actually about twenty seconds, she began to rise involuntarily, and something bumped her shoulder painfully.
Barely managing to hold her breath for the extra few seconds, she hauled herself to the other side of the object first, before surfacing.
It turned out to be one of the buoys which marked the safe limits of the channel for the ships entering and leaving the cavern.
The buoy shielded her from the view of the guards, and she used that advantage to get her breath back.
The respite was not to last however for, just as she heard the guards wondering aloud if they had hit her, someone on one of the freighters pointed her out with a cry.
She didn't know how long it would take for someone with a gun to get into position to fire at her, so she took another deep breath, and threw herself away from the buoy, cutting under the surface as she headed for the opening.
The bullets were no longer coming close, however, and by the time she pulled herself into the shadow of the side of the opening, they were chipping the rock several feet away.
Though her lungs were aflame with her efforts, she rolled over and set off into the darkness of the tunnel that led outside before anyone could think to send a boat for her — though at least there were hiding places here in case they did.
Soaked in noxious-smelling slimy water, and watched only by the sightless eyes of rotting fish, Benny left the cavern.
Since the university was American funded and run, Colonel Mortimer had considered it prudent to pay it a personal visit as soon as was possible.
Captain Glen had recently reported that the university had been retaken with little opposition, and Mortimer had immediately set off.
On his arrival, he had been satisfied to see the defences that had been set up around the hospital, and had every intention of congratulating those responsible.
Until, that is, Dr Howard Phillips had pointed out that the defence of the building had been arranged and conducted by a former Haitian militia officer and an Englishwoman.
Mortimer had asked Howard for as much detail about these people as possible, since he was naturally suspicious of the Haitian's motives, and was also rather curious as to the Englishwoman's interest in matters.
He knew the British government had their own sugar and sisal companies here, of course, but it irked his militarily trained mind that they wouldn't go through proper channels.
When Ace arrived back at the hospital with Petion- and the Doctor, she found Howard talking animatedly, but not entirely cheerfully, to a hawk-faced man in Marine uniform and what she thought of as a Smokey-bear hat.
Howard seemed to be making a doomed attempt to explain the Doctor's business on the island without mentioning zombies, the Necronomicon or anything similar that the military men might find difficult to accept.
As soon as he noticed them, Howard beckoned the Doctor, Ace and Petion over with a relieved expression, and introduced them to Colonel Mortimer of the USMC.
Ace stood silently as the Doctor doffed his hat, and gave Mortimer a cheery smile.
There was something about Mortimer that made her uneasy.
His hooded eyes were lifeless, and he had the air of a killer, but there was something in his stance that spoke of a rather different man.
Perhaps it was the way his eyes flicked about as if hoping for an attacker to appear, or maybe it was the slight inclination of his head.
Whatever it was, Ace found  that she couldn't place his style of soldiery, and that made her nervous.
‘Pleased to meet you, Brigadier,’ the Doctor said.
‘Colonel actually, but thank you anyway.’
‘Sorry, force of habit.
Are you in charge of this force?’
‘I've been given the responsibility of securing the capital, if that's what you mean.’
‘Excellent.
Now, let me guess: you're to arrest rebels and militia alike?’
‘How did you know?’
Mortimer seemed momentarily puzzled, but let it go.
‘Lucky guess.
You are also to clamp down on, er, native religions?’
‘Damn right.
All that black magic foolishness of theirs stops here.’
‘That's humans for you,’ the Doctor muttered, too quietly for Mortimer to hear.
‘How would you like it if I were to let you know where you could stop the Wete Mo Nan Dlo , the biggest ceremony this year?
I imagine that would fit your duties well?’
Ace thought the Doctor sounded as if he were trying to coax a dog to do a trick.
Perhaps, she thought, that was what all this was to him.
‘I have more important —‘
‘Do you?’
The Doctor fixed Mortimer with a level gaze, catching him with those blue eyes.
Or were they grey?
‘You want to do important things.’
It was no longer a question.
‘Yes —‘
‘You will do important things; you'll save more lives than you can imagine.’
‘I'll save lives….’
Mortimer wondered why he hadn't thought of that before.
But whose lives?
‘You will stop the ceremony tonight.’
‘Stop the ceremony….’
‘That's right.’
The Doctor's voice, which had briefly seemed to come from the air all around, returned to a cheerier norm.
He looked relieved, and slightly surprised.
‘That way, my young friend won't be turned into a zombi , and neither will anyone else for the moment.’
Mortimer shook his head to clear the cobwebs, thinking that here was a chance to see some action.
‘Very well, Doctor, I'll have a squad readied.
Where and when exactly is it?’
‘I'm just about to find out.’
Taking a surprised Ace and Petion in tow, the Doctor led the way into the TARDIS.
Once inside, he took out the canister with the dust sample from the museum, and headed for the laboratory.
‘How do you do that?’
Ace asked curiously.
‘It's just a knack and a not entirely reliable one,’ the Doctor replied, ‘but of course I had a very good teacher.’
His face took on a faint expression of sad remembrance.
‘Or he was, before he took a wrong turning on one of the roads of life that we walked….’
He shook off the mood with a shrug and grinned back at them.
‘Come on, I want to get this analysed before our friendly neighbourhood houngan arrives.’
The small village was completely silent as the Marines who had landed at the small fishing jetty moved up into the plateau where the houses were built.
They advanced cautiously, wide brims shading their eyes from the climbing sun, constantly on the lookout for signs of life or opposition.
A young buck private saw the first body as they approached the village.
It was an uninjured man, lying sprawled in the dust, flies crawling over his smooth eyelids and into his gaping mouth.
The skin was unbroken and smooth, as if it were now untroubled by worries in endless sleep.
Except that he wasn't breathing.
The young private threw up on the spot — somehow that unblemished body was more disturbing than one with an obvious cause of death.
It hinted at the indiscrimination of death, that it was not just confined to the sick or injured.
Anyone could be sprawled there.
It was a matter of seconds before another body was found.
And another.
And another.
When they began to investigate the tiny houses, they found other bodies: men, women, children….
The old and the young, the sick and the healthy, all limp and lifeless in the morning heat.
Even the goats in the corrals lay in unliving sleep, and the village dogs would never bark again.
Nothing lived in the entire village, and there was no sign of what had caused the deaths.
The men began to wonder if the people whom they had laughed off as superstitious niggers weren't right after all.
The lieutenant in charge, a man called Davis, dispatched the private and another man who looked unsteady back to the jetty to guard the launch they had arrived in, while the rest formed into burial details.
Even back at the jetty, the two Marines couldn't help but shake at what they had seen, though neither dared talk about it.
So they sat wrapped in their own morbid silences, each harbouring his own private fear about what had happened to the village and how it could happen to them.
The monotonous cawing of seabirds was soon to be broken, however, and not by quite such a fearful development.
The Marines were staring morosely out to sea, when a glimmer of unusual movement caught their eyes.
They were speedily, if only temporarily, relieved of their worries when a head appeared amidst the gently rolling waves a short distance from the beach, which soon resolved into the — quite pleasing — shape of a woman struggling exhaustedly out of the sea and up the beach beside the jetty.
The Marines jogged over to her, not trusting their eyes, while the woman collapsed to her knees in the sand, coughing up water which was viscous with oil.
Shaking the water from her matted hair and sodden white lab coat while drawing a series of relieved gulps of air, the woman looked up at the Marines with a weak smile.
‘Call the newspapers,’ she croaked, ‘I've just broken every bloody speed record in swimming.
And,’ she added, ‘if any of you start singing about mango trees and honey, I'll break your kneecaps….’
16
It took only a few minutes for the Doctor to break down and analyse the strangely oily powder, using the lateral molecular rectifier to be absolutely certain.
‘A bit of an exotic mixture,’ he announced.
‘Sphoeroides and bufus venom, extracts from a variety of plants.
Some diodon in there as well, by the looks of things.
Quite a powerful neurotrope, and certainly topically active, as I suspected.’
‘Lethal?’
Ace asked.
‘Far worse,’ Petion put in sourly.
‘You could put it that way,’ the Doctor agreed.
‘It slows the autonomic nervous system to the barest limit of operation, but doesn't affect the higher brain functions.
The effect is rather like being in a sensory deprivation tank, in that you can't move or react at all.
Unlike a tank, though, you can see and hear as normal, though the nerves that transmit pain and physical feeling are completely dead.’
‘How long does it last?’
‘It depends.
The sphoeroides and bufus venom make all the difference, since they disrupt the nerves by preventing sodium ions from passing into the cells.
If swallowed it kills in seconds, if absorbed through the thinner membranes in the mouth without swallowing, it kills in hours.
If, however, it's absorbed by osmosis through the skin, it simply paralyses in a death-like state for anything between a few hours and a few days, depending on the dosage.
As for this dose —’ he frowned in thought, ‘— perhaps enough to keep her out of action for a day.’
Ace's brow puckered, as she considered this.
‘Isn't that a bit sophisticated for nineteen fifteen?’
‘No.
All the ingredients are natural ones which have  been put to use in this way for centuries.
Ah!’
He thumped the worktop sharply.
‘What's wrong?’
Ace snapped, half rising from her stool.
‘I should have realized!
When Howard and I were attacked on our way back from the hills, two of the men were carrying Lugers — they're unmistakable.’
‘So?’
‘So, the Luger's a German gun — and who were the first major users of chemical weapons on this planet?
Exactly,’ he continued, without waiting for any answer other than the look on Ace's face.
‘I wonder….’
‘But the Necronomicon , and the Old Ones?’
The Doctor sobered a little.
‘After their disappearance, all the records of their influence speak only of effects on the minds of their followers.
That's their trademark.
Rather than come and conquer physically — which they can't do anyway, since part of their consciousness is trapped — they nudge people's minds in the direction they.
want them to go in.
They plant the seeds of ideas in their followers’ minds and harvest from afar the results of putting those ideas into action.’
‘And if they put into Mait's mind the idea of crossing German willingness to use biochem weapons with the ancient potion-making skills of his own people….’
‘Precisely.
If that idea proves feasible, they could zombify most of Europe for long enough to walk in unresisted.’
‘And,’ Petion added, ‘if they are also aware of the properties of the plant called the zombi concombre —‘
‘That's a datura-related psychotrope, isn't it?’ the Doctor asked rhetorically.
‘Yes, if they added that, they could also have their conquered victims become willing slaves, so long as they give regular dosages.
I've seen similar situations on company planets run by the Usurians, but I never thought I'd see it on Earth.’
‘But wait a minute,’ Ace interrupted, ‘this could just as easily be the idea of a human as these Old Ones of yours.
How do you tell the difference?’
‘You're not supposed to, that's how they get away with  it.
Or at least, that's how we suppose they get away with it if the legends are true and they really still exist.
It's always hard to tell with these things,’ he finished gloomily.
‘You're telling me,’ she said.
‘Anyway,’ he perked up, ‘if it is the Old Ones, it would explain the telepathic pollution, and there'll be more to it that we haven't thought about yet, but we'll find out later.’
‘Isn't there always?
And if not?’
‘Then there isn't much difference.
The Old Ones never appear in person, so we don't have to worry about them anyway, but a cultist who only believes he has their powers or blessings and acts accordingly is just as dangerous as one who genuinely has their powers and blessings.’
‘Hoo-rah,’ she drawled sarcastically.
Benny awoke from a dream of Daleks and childhood memories to find herself rocking gently with the motion of a boat.
Sitting up with a groan, she saw that she was in a small motor launch, approaching a wall into which a flight of stone steps had been built.
The other occupants of the boat were a Marine sergeant and one of the soldiers who had found her at the village.
The sergeant noticed her movement, and came over with a canteen of water, which he offered wordlessly, but with a kind look.
She took it gratefully and sipped a small amount, but it was stale and she handed it back.
‘Can't say I like it much either,’ the sergeant commented, ‘but it's all we've got.’
‘I'd have preferred a bottle of Chardonnay to be quite honest, but that did the job.’
She pinched the leg of her damp coveralls with a grimace.
‘Well, these are past their best.’
She looked at the sergeant and the private, and realized that these must be two of the Marines the Doctor had talked about.
‘Have you secured the city yet?’
‘More or less, but these niggers are a feisty bunch.’
‘Niggers?
Is that an Old Earth slang term?’
Benny forgot herself in her curiosity.
‘Whaddaya mean?
You're no American, but what else do you call these black folks where you come from?’
‘Usually we call them by their names like everybody else.’
Her tone grew colder as she realized what the sergeant meant.
‘But they ain't like everybody else,’ the sergeant scoffed.
‘You sure got some weird ways.’
Benny glared, and wondered maliciously what this narrow-minded type would make of a Draconian, or a Centauran.
‘Well, at least I'll be able to get changed once we get back.’
‘Actually, I think the Colonel will want to speak to you first.’
‘And where is he?’
‘Up at the university.’
‘Perfect!’
Benny exclaimed.
‘That's where I'm going anyway.
I have some friends waiting for me there.’
If they are still there, she added to herself as a dark afterthought.
The Marines had sent her off in a small wooden-bedded truck that seemed to have no springs or shock-absorbers whatsoever.
Sitting between the driver and the sergeant, she gritted her teeth as her bones were pounded by every pothole in Port-au-Prince.
They had almost passed the Royale, when a thought suddenly occurred to Benny, and she stamped the driver's foot to the brake pedal.
‘What the hell are you doing?’ the sergeant snapped.
‘At least one of my friends might be waiting for me inside,’ Benny said.
‘If you can bear to wait here for a couple of minutes, I'll go and see.’
‘I don't know….’
The sergeant looked at her closely, obviously wondering if she planned to run off for some reason.
Finally, he seemed to decide she wouldn't risk disappearing into Port-au-Prince, and nodded reluctantly.
‘Okay, five minutes only.
Any longer and I'll have you arrested.’
Benny realized with a shock that he meant it, and began to have second thoughts.
Nevertheless, she decided not  to be put off by him, and climbed out of the truck when he slipped out to make way.
The mulatto who had greeted them the previous morning was not in evidence as Benny passed through the lobby, for which she was grateful.
She ascended the stairs and entered her own room first, but there was no one there.
Shrugging, she moved to the Doctor's door, and pushed it open, stepping lightly inside.
She was surprised to find that the room was in darkness, the window shutters closed.
As her eyes adjusted, she noticed a figure sitting cross-legged on the bed, leaning right across it to rest against the wall.
‘Doctor?’ she asked cautiously.
There was no answer.
Moving carefully, Benny stepped around the edges of the room, and opened the window shutters.
Her momentary horror at seeing the unmistakable form of General Etienne was only slightly dulled by the realization that the stiff posture he was in could only mean he was dead.
She examined the body as best she could without touching it, its contorted features being a suitable disincentive to touch it.
Strangely, one of the spars from the bed's headboard seemed to be missing.
Benny reached out to turn the body, hoping to see if there was any clue to what had killed him.
As the body flopped aside, Benny jumped back, startled by the sight of a small snake, which hissed into wakefulness when the body no longer shaded it.
‘Hiss off,’ Benny muttered, and was back in the truck well within the five minute limit.
Mait's villa was in a shady cutting on a hillside above Port-au-Prince.
The cool halls and rooms, separated from the outside by removable screens rather than walls, were silent and empty, since the few servants Mait employed were busy in the kitchens and the garden outside.
The TARDIS materialized under an arched portico, its sound not carrying far enough to attract anyone's attention.
Though the Doctor was first out, looking around in calm appraisal, Clairvius Dubois almost knocked him down in his surprisingly sprightly enthusiasm to see what Mait's home was actually like.
Ace had been amazed that  Dubois had shown virtually no reaction to the TARDIS, beyond a comment that it was ‘almost as strange as the domain of the zombi astral .’
Petion, who had already experienced TARDIS travel, simply looked uncomfortable.
‘Remember,’ the Doctor said sternly, ‘don't touch anything unless you're wearing the gloves I gave you.’
He held up his own pair of rubber gloves to emphasize the point, then turned and went into the lounge.
Petion moved down the sparsely decorated hall to keep an eye out for anyone approaching.
Dubois went to investigate a spacious bedroom, while Ace found her way into a study situated off the lounge.
The Doctor found himself in a room bordered by folding screens which opened out on to a wide area which was covered by a light wooden roof supported by thin, widely spaced poles.
The roof was perhaps twelve feet above the ground, and stretched to the far end of the open area.
For a moment he paused at the threshold, but then turned back inside, taking in the sight of an ivory chess set, a small telescope, a number of small fluted carvings, and the fine hangings adorning the wall, observing everything with a cocked head as if listening for something.
From a pocket he drew a small cylindrical probe, and he stalked slowly around the room with it, pointing it at every piece of furniture and ornamentation with a sensitive ear tuned to the probe's faint hum.
None of the items he checked affected the probe — though he gave the chess set a suspicious glance — until he moved to the wall hangings.
Receiving a faint beeping from the probe, he threw aside one of the hangings to reveal the strange arrangement of wheels, rods and mirrored lenses that was concealed in the alcove behind it.
He put the probe away and studied the device with a frown, searching in vain for recognizable wiring or circuitry.
All that was there, however, was a complex mass of brass mechanism, though many of the pieces seemed to be inlaid with solid-state etchings.
‘So,’ he muttered, ‘our friend has a focused neuro-pattern enhancer, eh?’
He sniffed disparagingly.
‘Just the sort of trinket that would make his type feel superior.’
He paused.
‘A bit like digital watches with musical alarms, and about as useful.’
He affixed a small jewellers' eyeglass to his eye, and peered in at the device's workings more closely.
With cautiously gloved hands, Ace flicked through papers from a locked cabinet, which she had opened by means of a knife she usually concealed in her boot.
The papers were incomprehensible, however, and she soon gave up on them, settling for opening cupboards in search of more obvious evidence.
The study was lined with bookshelves, which she investigated first, curious about whether Mait had one of those hoary old secret passages behind a bookcase.
There was no sign of one, but Ace did discover a locked section of one case which, upon being broken open, proved to contain the sort of books which one certainly didn't find in the local W H Smiths.
Several of them were bound in a strange dry leathery material, which Ace was happy not to know the origin of.
The titles were not ones with which she was familiar:The Book Of Dzyan, The Book of Eibon, The Golden Bough , Ludwig Prinn's De Vermiis Mysteriis, The Beginner's Guide to the Necronomicon , and others whose titles were written in so indecipherable a script that she couldn't read it.
Briefly, she wondered if this weren't the sort of thing the Doctor was after, but decided to continue searching.
It was then that she discovered that the balsa-wood screens which formed the walls could be folded open.
Outside them, by an open area and a covered section, a small flight of steps led down to a low outbuilding which faced the open area.
Curious, Ace stepped out into the sun, and went down to the door.
This door, strangely, wasn't locked, but when she removed her hand from the handle, she saw that the thick rubber glistened with some oily substance, and was glad she had put the gloves on as a precaution.
Pushing the door open, she entered a dim chamber similar to the one in which they had first met Dubois.
Above the altar, however, in place of the religious painting in Dubois's house, was a chillingly small human skull.
The chamber was also filled with rather more stoppered bottles and clay jars than Dubois had.
Ace decided that it was time to fetch the Doctor.
Swiftly, closing the door behind her, she exited the building, and returned through the study to the hall.
She was surprised, and not a little worried, to find Petion missing.
Every sense alert for trouble, she slipped silently over to the lounge door.
The Doctor stepped back from the device as Petion entered, but his welcoming words died on his lips as he saw the liveried servant who followed Petion in, a machete held loosely and comfortably in his hand with the certainty of one who knows how to use it.
‘Mait will want to talk to you,’ he said, closing the door, ‘but he'll understand if I have to cut you.’
‘Don't worry.’
The Doctor smiled placatingly.
‘We won't try to harm you.’
The servant sneered, failing to notice the door opening quietly behind him.
‘How many more of you are-’ he broke off with a stifled gasp as a hand clutched the skin exposed at the side of his neck by his wide and unbuttoned collar, and he folded to the ground.
The Doctor looked at Ace in genuine amazement until, with a smile, she raised a hand so he could see the oil glistening on her gloved fingers.
She nodded at the limp body.
‘There's a building out there with this stuff on the handle.
I figured if it was a security precaution it'd probably work fast.’
‘It would seem you were right.
We'll pay a visit there next, but first….’
The Doctor returned to the device behind the wall hanging, and began to readjust the mirrors' alignment.
‘What is that thing?’
Petion asked.
‘Well, it's a sort of focused neuro-pattern enhancer.
He most likely uses it for private communication with his lackeys, and for controlling his zombis .’
‘What, you speak into it?’
‘No, you think into it.
It enables non-telepaths to communicate by thought waves.’
He sniffed.
‘It's a rather shoddy model though, a lot of psycho-spoor left lying around when it's in operation — that must be what I was picking up.
‘And is it alien technology?’
Ace wondered.
‘Well, the actual components and manufacturing skills required are accessible to humans of this time period, but the concept and design are much further advanced.
I wonder where he got the idea for building it, eh?’
‘So, are you buggering it up now?’
‘Sort of.
It usually works by acting as an external focus for the electric fields generated by the brain, and directs them at a receptive machine or conditioned brain elsewhere.
However, if I can just shift these mirrors right ah, done it!
Now I've engendered a feedback loop, so that if Mait, or anyone else, tries to use it, the enhancer will focus his concentration, feed it back, and drain it off again in a continuous loop that should keep him rooted to the spot for the rest of his life — or until someone else separates his gaze from the lenses.
You could say he'll bore himself stiff, in fact.
Now, about this building you wait a minute, where's Dubois?’
‘The last I saw of him was as he entered the bedroom,’ Petion replied.
‘We'd better check up on him.’
The Doctor let the wall hanging fall back into place, and hurried out, turning down the hall to the bedroom.
Petion and Ace followed him, arriving just as he threw open the door of a spartan room with expensive mahogany flooring, and bumped straight into Dubois, who was backing towards them while scattering something on the floor.
Dubois jumped up with a start, and visibly relaxed when he saw who had interrupted him.
The Doctor glanced inside, and saw that Dubois had left several feathers on the bed, and had scrawled a strange symbol on the wall above the headboard.
‘What are you doing?’ the Doctor demanded.
‘Mait has committed crimes against the people of this  island, and against the Bizango itself.
I am simply passing sentence now that the opportunity has arisen.’
‘An eye for an eye?
Very human.’
Dubois glared at the Doctor with a tinge of anger.
How dare this blanc try to interfere with the way things have been done for centuries?
‘Two wrongs may not make a right, Doctor, but sometimes the second wrong helps the first rest easier.’
‘Not while I'm here,’ the Doctor said.
‘You're perfectly welcome to sweep my coup poudre back up, if you like.’
The Doctor looked for a moment as if he might continue to argue the point, but seemed to relax, and turned to Ace.
‘Let's have a look at your discovery.’
Together this time, they followed Ace out through the study.
Since they were all gloved, the Doctor wasted no time, simply pushing the door open.
‘Well done, Ace.
This is Mait's Bagi .’
‘His what?’
‘The place where he keeps his altar and spirits — disembodied spirits, that is.’
He began examining several of the clay jars and bottles, while Ace stood by, wondering what she was supposed to do in a place like this.
Petion stayed nervously by the door, and Ace joined him there, watching suspiciously as Dubois checked everything with a professional eye.
Ace wasn't willing to trust Dubois further than she could throw him, since he seemed to use much the same methods as their enemies; perhaps that meant he was no better than them.
It was Dubois, however, who called the Doctor's attention to a small ante-chamber in which several grotesque fish and toads were hung on hooks beside dried roots.
A set of bottles and jars sat below them.
When the Doctor joined him, Dubois waved a hand in their general direction.
‘These are the materials with which Mait will have trapped your friend's ti bon ange — her soul.’
‘Puffer fish and toad, just as the lab analysis suggested.
Good, that means we still have a good chance.’
The Doctor returned to the main chamber, and picked up a  bottle which he had been examining when Dubois called.
‘This explains the rest of it,’ he told Ace.
‘Mescalin.’
‘Never heard of it,’ Ace said distractedly, wondering why she had bothered coming along.
This just wasn't any fun.
‘A solution of processed peyote root.
It acts as a so-called mind-expanding drug,’ he added with distaste, ‘which opens the higher centres of the brain that humans aren't ready to use yet.
Users often report experiencing the sort of twisted non-Euclidian dimensions associated with the Old Ones, so it's reasonable to assume that this is how Mait made contact with them, or with whatever race memory remains of them, which amounts to the same thing.’
He sighed.
‘I've seen enough here.
Ace,’ he said, gesturing back into the Bagi as he exited past her, ‘your department, I think.’
Ace grinned, and drew out a pair of thin doughy wedges from the deep pockets of her duster coat.
‘What is that girl doing?’
Dubois asked slowly as the Doctor ushered him and Petion back out.
‘Ending Mait's reprehensible ways, with any luck.’
‘She knows that much of the ways of vodoun ?’
Dubois asked incredulously.
‘No, she knows the ways of ka-boom would be a more accurate description.’
‘How long?’
Ace called from the Bagi .
‘Five minutes,’ the Doctor called back.
Inside, Ace folded one piece of plastic explosive round the corner that led into the anteroom, and placed the other above the altar.
Into each piece she inserted a small two-pronged cylinder the size and shape of a small capacitor, and twisted each of them.
She then rejoined the others outside, and the Doctor led them back to the TARDIS.
‘Shall I blow the rest of the house as well?’
‘That would be excessive.’
The Doctor set the controls on the console.
‘There's a small cemetery on the slope below the other side of the house.
Bring the Colonel's men there at one in the morning.’
Without waiting for an answer, he exited the TARDIS.
Ace moved after him, ready to demand an explanation of where he was going and how he knew there was a cemetery, but before she reached the doors, they closed of their own accord, and the time rotor began its stately rise and fall.
The Doctor looked back from the short flight of steps leading down to the entry hall, and watched the TARDIS dematerialize with a feeling of pain at seeing his ship go without him.
He slipped through the house, silent and insubstantial as a shadow, and left via the front door.
A twisting road led down into the bushes, and the Doctor set off down it.
When he reached the bottom, where a large gate was permanently rusted open, he walked straight past a dozing guard, who failed to notice him.
Stopping outside, he checked his watch, and was rewarded with a sudden sharp blast from upslope, followed by a rain of small pieces of wood and clay brick which had once been a part of the Bagi .
Ignored by the guard, who was running towards the house after being startled into wakefulness, the Doctor eyed the cloud of grey smoke critically, wondering how much damage would have been done to the villa itself.
‘Show-off,’ he muttered.
17
Henri answered the insistent buzz of the telephone, almost instantly holding it out to Mait, who came in from inspecting the hounfort .
‘Yes,’ he snapped into the mouthpiece.
‘What!
When?
I'll be there immediately.’
He turned to the taller man.
‘Henri, start that car you have hidden, we must return to my house at once.’
Retrieving his hat from where he had left it, he hurried out.
The TARDIS arrived back at the hospital just as two Marines escorted Benny inside.
Howard leapt to his feet from the chair he had been sitting in.
‘Professor Summerfield!
Are you all right?
You look like a drowned rat nothing personal.’
‘I feel like a drowned rat as well.
It hasn't been a very good day for me.’
‘Evidently not.’
Howard indicated the hawk-like officer who was with him, and who was examining Benny and the Marines with a bemused expression.
‘This is Colonel Mortimer, in charge of this arm of the expeditionary force.’
‘Hello,’ Benny said without enthusiasm.
‘Report, Sergeant,’ Mortimer urged.
‘Yes, sir.
This lady here came ashore at landing point theta, and promptly collapsed.
The Lieutenant recommended that we bring her to you, as she was carrying this.’
The sergeant handed over the plastic bag with Benny's notes.
‘What sort of material is this?’
Mortimer asked.
‘A plastic bag — new invention,’ Benny said hurriedly.
Mortimer removed the papers and examined them closely.
‘These notes are written in German.
Would you  care to tell me how that can be?’
Mortimer's voice took on a purring note.
‘I saw that written on some drums — a lot of drums.
Since I don't remember enough German to translate it, I copied it down until I could find someone who could.’
Mortimer scrutinized her with narrowed eyes, then nodded to himself.
‘You're with that British agent, aren't you?’
‘The Doctor?
Yes.
I was-’ She stopped as Ace and Petion came through the office door with a black man she didn't recognize.
Ace gave a cry of relief, and even Petion smiled.
‘Where the hell have you been?’
Ace asked in a tone that betrayed the worry she'd been trying to hide.
‘It's a long story.
Where's the Doctor?’
‘Off somewhere on his own,’ Ace answered more soberly.
‘Planning something, no doubt.’
The Doctor followed the narrow road down through a small valley, before climbing back up towards a bare hilltop where he could make out a number of tiny wooden crosses, like a forest of lifeless bonsai trees.
His features reflected the grim thoughts that filled his mind, eyes flicking only briefly to right or left, secure in the knowledge that the path would be fairly safe until nightfall.
Pacing himself steadily along the dusty track, the Doctor halted when his flickering eyes fell upon an unnatural addition to the landscape.
A car was squatting on the roadside, listing heavily to one side as a pair of its wheels were in a low ditch.
Approaching cautiously, the Doctor examined the open-topped interior of the car, which was spotted with dust and bird-droppings on the cracked leather.
The black paint on the body was already peeling from the heat, though the Doctor guessed from the depth of the dust layer that it hadn't been there more than a couple of days.
He quickly checked the tyres, but they were intact, and he wondered to himself why someone would simply stop in the middle of this countryside.
Acting on impulse, he slipped into the car, and tried to  start it, but the engine simply coughed and died.
‘Bone dry, eh?’ he said.
He left the car again, and saw something else on the other side of it — a pair of legs jutting out from the bushes nearby.
The stench that the Doctor noted as he approached bore witness to the speed with which decay took place in the tropical climate, and he found that he had to clap a handkerchief over his mouth as he knelt to examine the body.
It was a white man in middle age, dressed in a light beige suit.
The tissues, especially around the torso, looked puffy and bloated as the cells within decayed into methane and other gases.
There were already colonies of maggots at work on the body, particularly, the Doctor noticed, on the stump of the right wrist, and on the hand which was severed and lay a couple of feet away.
Why cut off one hand? the Doctor wondered, before the reason struck him: the man must have carried a briefcase or similar object cuffed to his wrist, and his assailants hadn't been willing to expend time on subtleties like lockpicking.
Grimacing in distaste, the Doctor lifted the man's jacket aside to reach into the inside pocket, the flesh underneath giving way with the unnatural softness of rotting fruit.
As soon as the man's wallet was in his hand, the Doctor retreated hastily back to the car to peruse the contents.
The wallet contained a small amount of money in francs, dollars and local gourdes, but the Doctor was more interested in the identification papers which named the man as one Robert Blake, of the British Consulate.
The Doctor nodded to himself as one piece of the puzzle clicked into place, explaining why everyone thought he was looking for a missing British Consul, obviously this man.
‘I wonder what was in the briefcase that someone wanted it so badly?’ he said aloud.
Shrugging, he slipped Blake's identification into his pocket, and tossed the wallet carelessly back into the bushes beside the corpse.
Checking his watch, he set off for the hilltop once more.
Moving quickly in spite of his elderly bulk, Mait went directly up the steps leading to his peristyle, and saw the  wreckage where his Bagi had once stood.
‘Who has done this thing?’ he hissed.
Behind him, Henri silently peeled off a card.
It was the image of the young knight.
Mait entered the house through a shattered French window, and went straight towards the alcove in the study.
Flicking the Arawak hanging aside, he set his gaze on the central mirror of the enhancer.
Concentrating his will, he sent it into the mirror.
Into the mirror….
Into the mirror.
After several long moments had passed, it began to occur to Henri that something wasn't working properly.
‘Mait?’ he asked.
There was no reply, Mait simply standing and staring into the mirrored lens.
Henri frowned worriedly; Mait was the only one who knew exactly how their plans could be completed, and Henri wasn't about to let his guide to power be zombified himself.
Taking a deep breath, he grasped Mait's arm, and pulled him away from the enhancer.
Instantly, Mait came round, clutching his head with a gasp.
‘The device has been misaligned — deliberately.’
‘But who would have the knowledge to do such a thing?’
Henri asked, losing his usual composure at the thought.
‘The blanc you have been so concerned about, perhaps.’
‘The gate guard did say he saw a blanc leave shortly before the explosion.’
‘Yes….
Perhaps we can tell.
If he looked into the device, he may have left something of himself.’
Carefully turning the mirror aside so as not to be trapped again, Mait examined the intricate network of rods.
‘There it is.’
He smiled grimly.
‘It will be a simple matter to reset it.’
With a deft motion of surprisingly nimble fingers, he shifted the misaligned parts back into their correct placings.
‘Now, let us see.’
Concentrating once again on the central mirror, he focused his will on the device itself, and its past.
Slowly, an image built up in the mirrored lens.
An image of a white face under a white fedora.
Mait had  never seen the man before, but it was obvious that since no one other than himself had used the device since he had built it, this must be the man in question.
He concentrated further, trying to drag the man's thoughts which had gone into the device back out again.
Concentrate.
Focus.
Images.
Random thoughts.
Memories of other similar devices flickered for an instant.
Devices on other worlds, in other times.
Time.
The Time Winds that the Great Ones could travel were briefly remembered, as part of time travel performed by the Doctor.
The Doctor, one time traveller among others.
Others who called themselves —
‘Time Lords!’
Mait exclaimed, staggering back from the enhancer with the tiredness of expended effort.
‘So, our opponent is the Doctor, a Time Lord.’
He scratched his moustache thoughtfully.
‘What is a Time Lord?’
Henri asked confusedly.
‘I'm not quite sure,’ Mait replied with lowered brows.
‘I received…. images of what they do, but it was so garbled and confused….’
He steadied himself on the arm of a chair.
‘There was the feeling of great power, and of familiarity.
The Great Ones know of these people, and consider them a danger; that much I know.’
‘How can anyone be a danger to them ?’
‘This Time Lord is also from beyond the stars, Henri, just like them.
He may have knowledge of them.
He, or others, may have met them before, and fought against them.’
‘Then we just kill him first.’
‘A most dull and unimaginative way to proceed, but I fear you may be right.
Did the guard say which way he went?’
‘Towards the cemetery.’
‘What!
The cemetery where the ceremony will begin?
If we are quick, we may be able to stop him from desecrating the site.’
Mait lifted the telephone.
General Froebe slipped on a pair of reading glasses, and  shuffled through the papers on his desk, glancing briefly at the timetables and lists that adorned each one.
‘Why didn't you bring this sooner, Mister Richmann?’
‘This is how long your clerks took to translate Blake's work.
It seems they didn't trust me to do it for you.’
Froebe looked at Richmann, who lounged back in a chair, his feet up on Froebe's polished mahogany desk.
‘I wouldn't either,’ he growled.
‘Is that any way to talk to your officers?’
Richmann asked cheekily.
‘Subordinates,’ Froebe corrected him.
‘I can speak to subordinates in any fashion I wish — a privilege of rank, which I surely don't have to tell you about.’
He leant back and laid the papers down.
‘Besides, as a foreigner, your commission is mainly honorary.’
He knocked Richmann's feet from the desktop with a disdainful sweep of his arm.
Richmann's scowl deepened, but he restrained himself from snapping an answer back at the General.
‘Still,’ Froebe continued, ‘these observations of our movements will now never be delivered, and we have the names of his contacts in Cuba and Jamaica.
That's something, I suppose.’
‘Do you want me to take a trip and get rid of them?’
‘No.
So long as the Americans are only afraid that we might land on this island, and don't know we're already here, they will pay no attention to our activities.
If I let you wander off killing people all over the place —‘
‘I was born and bred in Philadelphia —‘
‘Your men weren't, and I'm sure the Americans would find some way to make even you talk.
Besides, Mait has decided to perform his ceremony tonight.
Only after that will he turn the remaining details of his zombi control over to us for the final phase on the island.
That means we all lie low in here.’
‘Why is he holding out until then?’
‘Religious objections, if you can call that superstitious rubbish a religion.
I'll let him have his fun tonight.’
‘And tomorrow?’
Richmann asked eagerly.
‘Tomorrow, you make sure that he can't give details of the formula to anyone else — ever.’
Richmann smiled.
The silence was broken by the sudden ringing of Froebe's telephone.
He answered it instantly.
‘Yes?
Ah, Mait, we were just talking about you.
What?’
Froebe looked puzzled.
‘The one Richmann failed to kill?
Very well, I'll have him seen to.’
He hung up the phone.
‘Trouble?’
‘That interloper who was in the car, calls himself the Doctor apparently — he's on his way to the cemetery.
Make sure he gets the maximum use out of it.’
The Doctor walked curiously around the small cemetery, noticing the patterns of footprints in the dusty ground.
They seemed centred on one particular grave, so the Doctor stepped over to it for a closer look.
On the ground in front of the simple headstone were several dark splashes, which could only have been made by blood.
Straightening, the Doctor looked around, noticing for the first time that the hill he had asked about earlier when he was with Howard, was also visible from here.
On impulse, he stepped away from the grave, and put his ear to the ground once more.
Sure enough, he could make out the same almost subsonic throbbing as he had heard earlier.
Once again, it seemed to be coming from the direction of the hill.
Sighting along his umbrella, the Doctor realized that the hill, the cemetery, and Mait's house were all in a straight line.
Trying to mentally recall a map of the island, the Doctor didn't think there was anything of importance further along the line inland, but he wondered what there might be out to sea….
He walked over to the rickety wooden gateway, drawing from his pocket a small jar he had purloined from Mait's Bagi before Ace had blown it up.
Since he wanted to delay the ceremony, but didn't want to go to the trouble of desecrating any graves, he only had one option.
Carefully, crouching to hold the jar low against the ground lest the wind whip any of the powder back towards  him, he sprinkled the contents of the jar across the end of the dirt road just before the gate.
Tossing the empty jar aside, he then pulled out a piece of chalk and drew a complex symbol full of mind-twisting curves on to each gatepost.
‘That should give Mait pause for thought,’ he muttered, straightening and stepping back into the cemetery to retrieve his umbrella.
‘I'm sure it will,’ a voice agreed in a cynical tone.
The Doctor spun around to see a German officer leaning against a skeletal tree, his Steyr automatic aimed comfortably at the Doctor.
‘Another of Mait's puppets?’ he asked.
‘Hardly,’ the man answered in a quiet yet disparaging tone.
‘The Doctor, I presume?’
‘So some people say.
You haven't introduced yourself.’
‘There isn't much point; you're not going to live long enough to have to introduce me at parties.’
‘You could always consider it a last request.’
‘I suppose.’
The man smiled wolfishly.
‘I'd have asked for a final orgy myself, but each to his own.
I'm Major Paul Richmann, and you seem to have got on the wrong side of General Froebe somehow.
You've also got yourself on my bad side; since I hate to fail on any assignment, your survival yesterday was most irritating.’
‘So naturally your answer is to shoot me now,’ the Doctor said contemptuously.
Richmann seemed to think for a moment, then smiled.
‘I think we can arrange a more amusing death for you.’
He gestured with his free hand, and several other men appeared from their hiding places, two of them grasping the Doctor tightly by the arms.
‘I think we'll send you for what you British might call a long stretch….’
Something crashed into the back of the Doctor's head, and everything went black.
17
It was dearly evening when the Doctor's eyes blinked open.
A momentary disorientation took him when he found that not only could he not move, but that he was staring straight up at the sky, and there appeared to be no ground underneath him.
Some deep throbbing vibration seemed to be keeping him in the air, and his limbs ached.
It was only by craning his neck to a painful degree that he saw that he was suspended in mid-air, a foot or so above the sea.
Suspension was provided by two thick hawsers, one attached to his ankles and firmly anchored ashore to a boulder the size of a double-decker bus, the other attached to his wrists and fixed to a large steam yacht's anchor fitting.
An approaching wooden wall resolved itself into the form of a small boat, in which Richmann sat, with another man using the oars to hold position.
‘Comfortable?’
Richmann asked with a smirk.
‘Not particularly.’
‘Good, I can see this is going to be as amusing as I had hoped.’
‘You'll forgive me if I don't die laughing?’
‘Laughter on your part is purely optional, Doctor, don't worry about that.
I believe this situation is self-explanatory, so I won't bother you with details; suffice it to say that the best engineers in Germany have convinced me that the weakest point in this chain is your body.
I expect you can figure the rest out for yourself.’
Richmann looked over at the steam yacht, and made a circling motion with his hand.
As a deep rumbling and a few wisps of smoke were produced by the yacht, he turned back to the Doctor.
‘The yacht is a rather slow model of course, so  it may take some time for you to die.’
He leaned in closer, the false cheeriness leaving his features.
‘The pain will be exquisite, Doctor, and I shall savour every nuance of your screams.
Nothing personal.’
Leaving Howard to try and persuade Colonel Mortimer to take his men to the cemetery that night — reasoning that one American to another would get a better result Ace, Benny and Petion returned to the TARDIS, where Ace indicated the remaining pilfered weapons in her shopping trolley.
‘Take those and hand them out to the hospital staff and patients — just in case,’ she said.
Petion wheeled the trolley out as Benny looked on disapprovingly.
‘You can't go about encouraging more violence, Ace,’ she said.
‘I can try to make sure they can protect themselves, can't I?’
‘That's not much of an excuse.
They could protect themselves at least as well by simply keeping their heads down.’
She sighed, realizing that Ace wouldn't be swayed, and decided to change the subject for the sake of peace.
‘Anyway, I suppose I'd better see what translation the TARDIS computer can offer of these papers.’
She held up the notes she had copied down from the drums in the German docks.
‘Yeah, sure.
I'll be in the lab if you need me.’
A steady burning sensation gnawed at the Doctor's joints as the steam yacht slowly churned the water.
He was beginning to wish he'd built another K9 to get him out of these spots.
‘I wouldn't have thought this was your way, Richmann,’ he called through gritted teeth.
‘And I'd always seen myself as leaving my body to medical science.’
‘You are.
The breaking strain of your body will be carefully noted.
Never know when the knowledge might come in useful.’
‘I'd also have thought that shooting people yourself was more fun for your type.’
‘As a matter of fact, it is.
This was Mait's idea.’
‘I've got myself on his bad side as well, eh?’
‘So it seems.’
‘It's nice to know you're so obedient, Richmann.’
‘When it suits me, I am.’
‘For the moment,’ the Doctor replied scornfully.
‘Really?’
‘Yes, really.
You'd better get used to doing what Mait and Henri tell you.’
‘Why do you say that?’
‘They don't plan to leave you and Froebe in charge when this is over.’
‘I don't doubt it,’ Richmann laughed.
‘But they're going to be dead by dawn tomorrow, so I don't think the General or I will lose any sleep over it.’
‘If your precious General sleeps tonight, he'll never wake up again.’
The Doctor began to talk faster as the pain built up.
‘Explain!’
‘Mait has a plant in your base, you kn—’ The Doctor's jaws clenched shut to bite back a cry.
Immediately, Richmann made a slashing motion with his hand, and the strain began to ease.
‘I'll tell you what, Doctor.
You tell me about this plant, and I'll kill you quick — bullet in the head, no more pain.’
Richmann leant back and waited — it was a reasonable offer, after all.
‘I tell the General, or no one at all.’
‘This sounds like a trick to buy time,’ Richmann snarled, raising his hand to signal the yacht.
‘I saw Mait's files in his house; that's what put me on his bad side,’ the Doctor added hurriedly.
‘You were in Mait's house?’
Richmann looked at the Doctor doubtfully, trying to read the inscrutable face.
‘Yes,’ the Doctor answered firmly, fixing Richmann with a penetrating gaze.
Richmann pursed his lips in thought.
This could be a trick to save his skin, he thought, but if he does know something and he dies without telling it….
‘We can always kill you later, I suppose,’ he said wistfully.
Ace was busy remachining parts from several guns as Benny rushed in, waving the print-out she had got from the computer.
‘I've found it, Ace!
The stuff in the drums!’
Ace looked up from where she was starting to fit the parts together into what looked like a home-made machine gun.
‘What is the stuff then?’
‘There are three separate substances.
One's a volatilized mixture of puffer venom and umpteen different plants — it slows the metabolic processes of the body to as near to full stop as it's possible to get.’
‘That's the same shit they used on you — the Doctor analysed some of it he scraped off the stones you'd been handling.’
‘Exactly.
The second batch has a datura-based compound that blanks out the will, making the victim a mindless vegetable who'll obey any order at all.’
‘Christ!
And the third?’
‘A less potent version of the first, with just a hint of the second.
I can't figure out what that'll do though, or why they want it.’
‘Well it's obvious why they want the first two — so they can use it as gas on the Front and turn the whole of Europe into zombies.’
‘No doubt.’
‘Ace, Benny,’ Petion called out as he entered, ‘the Colonel has decided to take a force to the cemetery.
We leave at twenty-hundred hours.
That gives us two hours to get there and two hours to prepare before Mait's people begin to arrive for the ceremony.’
Ace slammed a magazine into her finished gun.
‘Right,’ she said eagerly.
Von Stein had been checking the wall clock in the laboratory then looking back at his notes for some time.
Now, however, he lifted the internal phone, and dialled Froebe's office.
‘It's dusk,’ he pronounced when the phone was answered.
‘Time for the next phase — the use of Compound Two.’
He put the phone back.
In Froebe's office, the General rattled the telephone  hook to clear the line and dialled another number.
Moving to look out over his command, he gave a series of orders into the phone.
As the sun faded into a blood-red haze, Lieutenant Davis and his men finally sat down around a nest of campfires which a small detail had built earlier.
Rather than pile all the bodies into one large mass grave, Davis had had his men dig serried rows of shallow graves and lay the bodies into them as they were, without coffins, which would have taken far too long to make.
Some of the graves were very short.
While the sky above darkened to a deep purple, the Marines below looked about, made nervous by the steadily increasing pace and volume of drumming that floated down eerily from the surrounding countryside.
In an attempt to prove they were unaffected by this, they raised their voices as they chatted to each other, and pretended not to glance uneasily at the nearby rectangles of darker, freshly turned earth.
The sudden cessation of the drumming was, peculiarly, more unnerving than its presence.
Above the village, almost invisible against the velvet shroud of the night sky, something huge silently blotted out the stars.
The Marines got to their feet, clutching their rifles for reassurance.
Davis himself was the first to notice the mist that rolled towards them.
The wavefront of mist rolled over the Marines in a billowing carpet, though once the first rolling wave was past, the mist was much thinner, merely causing a watery distortion in everyone's vision.
While the mist rippled around them, the drumming began all around once more.
This time it was louder, closer, and of a more discernible and fervent, regular rhythm.
One or two of the young soldiers fired into the surrounding mist, but the drumming was totally unaffected, and Davis stopped the shooting with a barked order.
‘What do they want?’ he wondered aloud, drawing the attention of the nearest of his men.
They shrugged.
Suddenly alerted by something seen out of the corner of his eye, one of the young Marines felt an icy death-grip on his spine.
Turning slightly, and almost against his own will, he looked over at the dark graves.
Surely he had imagined….
A clod of earth rolled off one long mound.
The Marine tried to tell himself it was something simple like a mole, but then paused to wonder if they had moles in Haiti.
Others had noticed by now, however, and were turning to watch the makeshift graves with expressions of alarm.
Several more clumps of earth rolled off graves.
A couple virtually flew off, landing several feet away.
as if it were a natural follow-on from this behaviour, the earthen surfaces of the graves began to rise and fall like the chests of sleepers.
Some began to ripple and undulate as if snakes were spasming below.
The activity began to shake soil loose, still more clods now almost exploding off the surface of the graves.
At one of the nearby graves, there was a sudden scattering of earth away from the grave, leaving a pair of arms visible — the normally dark skin was now the grey of the fungal covering of a rotten potato, while the undersides of the arms were almost black with blood that had gathered there since the heart had stopped pumping.
The arms were moving.
The fingers clenched jerkily as the arms flailed at the sides of the grave, tossing dirt aside in an attempt to gain a purchase on the soft earth.
The Marines backed away fearfully, eyes wide.
Arms threw dirt aside, stiffly pulling torsos out of the earth, shoulders shovelling the dirt aside to allow heads to rise and turn uncertainly, glancing about blankly through bulging eyes which looked at everything and saw nothing.
With mouths open in silent pain, their muscles and ligaments cracking like gunshots, figures began pushing their way out of the graves in an obscene parody of birth.
The Marines were supposed to be afraid of nothing, but the sight of the villagers clawing their way back into the world was too much.
Some of them broke and ran, while others began shooting into the group of zombie villagers.
The villagers who had broken free of their graves began advancing on the Marines.
Their eyes bulged sightlessly from sunken sockets.
Their skin was a mouldy grey, while gravity had gathered their uncirculating blood at the lowest points — under the chin, the undersides of the limbs, and around the area of the lower ribs, buttocks and kidneys.
Trickles of earth, ridden with worms and insects, fell from their hair and rolled out of slack mouths which formed ‘O's of suffering.
Those who advanced under the rifle fire of the Marines who had remained in position did not fall.
They didn't even bleed.
Charred-edged holes appeared in their skin, while behind them little dry chunks of flesh fell into the powdery dust that covered the ground.
Slowly constrained by muscles mostly in the grip of rigor mortis, the zombies advanced inexorably on the few remaining Marines.
The Marines began to lower their guns, uncertain of what to do.
Davis watched this display in terror and wondered why his men had stopped shooting.
The thought occurred to him that he should give them some orders, but he couldn't think of any.
He wished someone would tell him what to do….
His face a mask of puzzlement, Davis sat down to wait for someone to tell him to do something.
All around, his men stood or sat, looking at their rifles, and wondering what to do with them.
Should they shoot or do something else?
No longer interrupted by shooting, the zombies continued their steady slow pace, completely ignoring the Marines other than to step around any Marine that was in their path.
Stiffly, they walked out of the village into the surrounding darkness.
Enveloped by a thin and slightly sweet-smelling mist, the Marines waited for orders.
18
Rather than disturb the patients at the hospital any more, Ace and Petion had followed the Marines to their staging area at the customs receivership, which Ace judged to be about the size of an aircraft hangar.
There, Mortimer conducted a briefing for some fifty of his men, who had volunteered to go on that night's operation.
The briefing, however, mostly consisted of Mortimer's dividing the force into groups and assigning them positions to take up in the scrub around the cemetery, which was illustrated by a simple chalk sketch Petion had done on a blackboard.
Mortimer also generously offered his three guests weapons from Marine stores, but they refused, since they were well-equipped with items Ace had hijacked from the Palace.
Petion carried a rifle, a Browning and several grenades.
Benny had elected to carry only a revolver, though she had tucked a couple of grenades in the pockets of a second safari jacket she had pilfered from the TARDIS's wardrobe.
Ace, on the other hand, still had the Browning and the knife, but had added two packs of C-4 Plus to her pockets.
Over her shoulder was slung the home-made sub-machine-gun she had assembled in the TARDIS lab.
When Mortimer had assigned everyone positions for the operation — Ace, Benny and Petion to remain with him — he checked his watch.
‘We move out at twenty-two hundred hours — that's two-and-a-half hours from now.
Until then, I suggest you all get some rest, because you're going to need it.
Dismissed.’
Drifting outside to sit in the cooler evening air, Ace, Benny and Petion chatted together.
‘There must be something we're missing,’ Benny said, ‘or else why would the Doctor think it so necessary for us to stop the ceremony tonight?’
‘I dunno,’ Ace shrugged.
‘What did he call the thing tonight?
Wet moan and low something?’
‘Wete Mo Nan Dlo ,’ Petion corrected.
‘That's it!
What is it?’
‘It is a ceremony by which the ti bon ange can be trapped in a corps cadavre .’
‘Meaning?’
Benny pressed.
‘The ti bon ange means little good angel —‘
‘The soul, you mean?’
Ace put in.
‘No, the soul is in two parts: the gros bon ange is the big good angel, the part that deals with instinct and all the functions of life that we do without thinking about.’
A vague suspicion began to tug at Benny's mind, and she frowned in thought.
Ace, meanwhile, continued the conversation.
‘The subconscious,’ she suggested slowly.
‘If you like.
The ti bon ange is the other part, that makes us individual, like the personality.’
‘Of course!’
Benny shouted, drawing startled stares from some Marines.
‘That's what the Doctor said.
These Old Ones of his that Mait's supposed to be working for, the Doctor said their consciousness — their personalities — were trapped outside their bodies, in the Vortex.’
Petion looked at her with a worried frown as he tried to link the two concepts.
‘Then Mait may be using tonight's ceremony to reunite the Old One's mind with the rest of it….’
‘He must be!’
‘No, wait.’
Petion shook his head.
‘The Wete Mo Nan Dlo must be performed one year and one day after death.
If these Old Ones were around last year, we would have noticed, I think.’
‘Time is relative, Petion,’ Ace said darkly.
‘What?’
‘You're thinking in calendar time.
But there's also sidereal time, lunar time, galactic time….’
‘If all this happened as long ago as the Doctor suggests —’ Benny thought aloud.
‘But a year is a year, surely?’
Petion said.
‘No, a calendar year is the time the Earth takes to orbit the sun.
A galactic year, for example, is the time the galaxy takes to rotate once completely-all the outermost stars orbiting the centre.
That takes a quarter of a million Earth years, or thereabouts,’ Bernice explained.
‘The galaxy is also one of a group of galaxies,’ Ace added, ‘who have an even longer year of their own.
These Old Ones probably came from one of the other galaxies in the local group.’
‘And that year?’
‘Millions of Earth years.’
‘The question,’ Benny interrupted, ‘is how he intends to do it.’
‘Well, the ti bon ange is usually brought to the corps cadavre in a canari —a protective clay jar.’
‘They couldn't shelter a — the enhancer!’
Ace slapped her forehead.
‘Of course,’ Benny nodded.
‘The Doctor said it transmitted mental power….’
‘So he'll have it at the ceremony,’ Ace concluded.
‘Assuming he's fixed the Doctor's sabotage.’
‘He will have,’ Petion predicted gloomily.
‘That must be why we have to stop the ceremony — to make sure he can't tap the mental energy of the congregation and use it to supplement the Old One's autonomic functions enough to pull the rest of it out of the Vortex,’ Ace finished, and sat back with a cheery grin.
‘The simple plans are always the best,’ Benny quipped.
The Doctor was thrown into a cell, and left alone.
He no longer had to consciously listen out for the psychic interference that pervaded the island.
This far underground, not only did Mait's enhancer have no effect, but he could sense a strong source of pure malevolence which was almost tangibly present all around.
One of the first things he did was to activate a small probe, with which  he scanned his surroundings.
‘Psychic wavelength, that's point three-three-eight microbars….’ he mumbled as he adjusted the probe's sensitivity.
When it was pointing at the far corner of the floor, it emitted a stream of high-pitched bleeps.
Thoughtfully, the Doctor put the probe away.
‘A cellar dweller, eh?
No imagination,’ he said.
It wasn't long before a guard opened the door to admit a well-built black man with an unreadable face, and an aging, overweight black man whose hair and moustache were going grey.
‘Henri, and the infamous Mait, eh?’ the Doctor said.
Not bothering to rise off the unpadded bunk, he appraised the pair critically, a slightly crestfallen look passing across his features when he considered Mait.
‘I'm not used to being so quickly dismissed, Doctor.
Perhaps it's sour grapes, since I have plainly avoided the coup poudre that was left for me.
Richmann, of course, is having the entrance to the cemetery cleared as well .
Alternatively, you may be commenting on my handling of the revolution,’ Mait said, grinning in exhilaration, ‘playing both sides off against the middle to divert attention from the construction of all this.’
He waved a hand around.
‘Backfired a bit, didn't it?
Anyway, it was nothing personal.
I was half-expecting someone else, that's all.
I'm also rather surprised the General hasn't come to visit,’
‘Unfortunately, it appears that the aide sent to inform the General of your arrival somehow forgot the message.’
‘How strange,’ the Doctor commented with a crooked smile.
‘Which is fortunate really, since the idea of your warning him about my plans isn't one I find worthy of consideration, Time Lord.’
The Doctor looked up quickly.
‘Time Lord?’
‘Your kind are known to us, Doctor, and have been for longer than you can imagine.’
‘I can imagine quite a bit.
Who exactly are ‘us’?’
‘Myself, and the one I serve.
His memories go back a long, long way.’
‘I wonder which one it is.
Or is it nameless, or unnameable even?’
He shrugged.
‘And your memories?’
‘Mine go back further than most humans'.’
‘How far?’ the Doctor pressed him.
‘How old do you think I am?’
Mait asked abruptly.
‘Sixty, perhaps.’
‘No, Doctor.’
Mait shook his head with a smile.
‘I was born,’ he began slowly, ‘in seventeen forty-four.
I was the first son of an Efik tribesman in the Kingdom of Dahomey.
When my village failed to supply the requisite number of slaves from the Araba tribe of Yaruda to the west, the entire village was cleared by the blancs .
They felt,’ Mait continued bitterly, ‘that if we had no one to offer, then we offered ourselves.
And they took us.
That was in seventeen-fifty.
Most of us never arrived here.
There was a storm as we passed the southern tip of Cuba, and the ship I was on was smashed on to offshore rocks by the weather.
Only two of us survived — myself and, as I discovered later, the Egbo-Obong of the village.’
‘Leopard Chief?’
‘Yes, the head of the leopard society and therefore the supreme tribal authority on matters of the spirit world.
It was he who went on to train me to the point where I could begin to set in motion a way to extract revenge from the blanc nations, and ensure that no one would so betray us again.
It was also he who told me of the Great Ones,’ he went on with a faraway look, ‘and how they had chosen us to be saved to do this.’
‘I see.’
‘I thought you might.
We are much alike, Doctor — firm in purpose, resourceful, ruthless…’
‘I see,’ the Doctor went on with a harder edge in his voice, ‘that you are the sort of hypocritical egomaniac who talks about betrayal when he's condemning thousands of his own people in Haiti and millions in Africa and elsewhere to living the lives of mere insects!’
‘What?’
Mait seemed taken aback by this outburst.
‘I also see that we're about as alike as chalk and cheese, because I would never sell out a whole species for the  wrongs of one group.
Have you forgotten that your tribe, the Efik, were among the most notorious slavers on the slave coast?
I know, because I was there.
In fact, myself and my two human companions were forced to take the calabar test.
It's a miracle we all survived.
No, you're just a pathetic monomaniac who's lived too long and has become obsessed with the idea of making the entire planet suffer for an ancient wrong that was perpetrated by a mindless minority!’
‘Who do you think you are, to talk to me in that manner?’
‘Ask him.’
The Doctor indicated Henri.
‘Pick a card, any card.’
Uncertainly, Henri drew forth his tarot pack and spread the cards in a fan.
Angrily, Mait snatched one, and looked at it.
Mait blanched.
‘Recognize me now?’
Speechless with rage, Mait hurled the card in the Doctor's face before storming out of the cell.
Henri followed and locked the door.
The Doctor lifted the card, studying the image of the scythe-wielding skeleton.
He crushed the card to a ball in one hand.
The sky had darkened to violet by the time Mortimer had formed up his troops for the march out of town, and a star-speckled dome was overhead when the column of fifty Marines, plus Benny, Ace and Petion marched out of Port-au-Prince at a slight jog.
Mortimer had ordered that they reach the cemetery by eleven — one hour before the ceremony would start, or so Dubois had told them before he had returned to his own hounfort .
Under a moon that hung balefully overhead like a watching skull, they left the city.
By knocking continually on the door of his cell, the Doctor had finally managed to attract the attention of the guard outside.
Glowering at having been woken from a  satisfying doze, the guard opened the eye-level flap to find the Doctor's eyes only an inch or two from his own.
He tried to tear himself away from them, but they seemed to draw him in, seeming to darken as if they were wells that were dug deep beyond the limit of the sun's rays.
Or perhaps it was his imagination.
The guard never even knew that he opened the door and locked himself in once the Doctor had gone.
Mait managed to calm himself after leaving the cell area.
‘Has the device been taken to the cemetery?’
Henri nodded.
‘Carrefour has taken it there personally.’
‘Get Froebe to let us have Richmann.
The other blancs are still on the loose and may try to interfere.’
The Doctor slipped through the tunnels like a ghost, hiding in the shadows whenever anyone approached.
Soon he began coming across doors.
Most of them opened on to storerooms, or offices, which he wasn't interested in, but eventually he found one door that opened into a chemical laboratory whose air was tangy with scents that irritated the nasal and throat passages.
Slipping inside and closing the door, he switched on the light and examined his surroundings.
To his right, stood a large walk-in cupboard marked as chemical storage, its door slightly ajar.
The Doctor tut-tutted.
‘Very careless.
Fortunately.’
Checking his watch, he stepped into the cupboard inquisitively.
When the Marine column finally reached the hill cemetery, the moonlight made the land look sparse and dead.
No one seemed to be around, but nobody was willing to take any chances, and so they left the road and approached cautiously across country.
Benny moved along with a strong sense of adventure, and had to resist whistling a jaunty tune as she crept through the scrubby vegetation that surrounded the cemetery.
Their caution was well-founded, for several pyres stood ready but unlit in the cemetery, and several members of the Secte Rouge, wearing cross-belts of sisal rope, guarded the place with wicked-looking machetes.
Ace was tempted to move in and take out the sentries, but knew that it would be a foolish move, since they would be missed by the congregation when they arrived, who would thus be alerted.
Reluctantly, she settled for striving to keep quiet and hoping the sentries wouldn't notice them.
Mortimer was also tempted to go for the sentries, but also recognized the folly of such a move.
Ever the professional, he silently directed his men with hand signals, ensuring that they took up the correct positions.
In five-man squads, they silently encircled the cemetery, and settled down to wait.
There were forty minutes to go.
The Doctor exited the laboratory with bulging pockets, carefully closing the door behind him.
‘Now for those ships that Richmann mentioned, and the gas drums….’
19
The first sign that something was happening came when the interminable drumming from the countryside began to break up into two distinct and separate cadences, one deep and threatening, the other a nerve-jangling collection of notes that seemed to have no coherent structure, but somehow managed to sound rhythmic.
The sound crept out of the hillside vegetation, and approached the cemetery with an insectile life of its own.
Checking that the straps on her equipment were tight enough to prevent anything moving and making a noise that might alert anyone nearby, Ace slipped through a stand of bushes to get a better view of the road.
Benny noted her movement and thought to intervene, but by then it was too late, and she didn't want to risk causing any noticeable disturbance.
Placing her feet carefully, Ace crept around the perimeter of the low scrub that surrounded the hilltop, finally finding a position overlooking the road, where she could keep an eye on whoever was approaching.
Sure enough, a sparkling line of firelight was twitching its way up the hill, the red gleam of flame shifting constantly in the slight breeze, and disappearing now and again as the marchers tracked up or down slopes in the road.
Below, a mass of people followed the procession, the ragged figures' bare feet pounding the dirt into a smooth surface.
In the lead was a grim-faced man with a candle.
Following him were four men carrying a coffin.
Once again there were a hat and feathers atop the lid.
Behind were two women with candles, then four robed priestesses, and finally the main group of worshippers, some  carrying candles or torches.
In the midst of the crowd was a decaying sedan chair still gilt with polished finery in that strange Haitian mixture of poverty and riches.
As a distant bell in Port-au-Prince tolled out the stroke of midnight, the drums ceased and the candle-holder in the lead halted at the rickety cemetery gates.
Lifting his arms high, he called upon Baron Samedi to admit them to the cemetery.
In the darkness outside, Mortimer tapped Glen on the shoulder.
‘Pass the word,’ he whispered.
‘Wait for my signal.
We'll let them get on with about half the ceremony — just in case there are any stragglers.’
The drums took up a slower beat now, and the procession wound its way into the cemetery.
The pallbearers laid the coffin down in the clear space at the exact centre of the cemetery, and moved to the edges, standing amidst the grave markers like ragged vultures.
The remainder of the followers now spread out around the clear area — a makeshift poteau mitan — touching their candle flames to one of the pyres and then laying their candles on the ground at the edge of the clear ground.
The sedan chair was set down in a space of its own, and the curtains drawn aside.
Within sat Mait, in plain robes, and a black woman whom Ace hadn't seen before, who was dressed in a network of silk strips that left much of her body visible.
‘Those who belong!’
Mait shouted.
‘Come in!’ the crowd replied.
‘Those who do not belong!’
‘Go away!’
The drumming now began to increase in tempo, and several followers began to sway on their feet.
The man who had led the procession stepped forward and sprinkled the coffin with spiced rum.
He then circled the poteau mitan , sprinkling rum into the dust.
Next he tossed a small coin on to the coffin.
One by one, everyone else, with the exception of Mait and the woman beside him, also stepped forward and tossed a coin.
When this was  done, the four priestesses lined up opposite four young men, and stood waiting.
As the drumming built to a crescendo, the coffin lid snapped open, scattering coins into the dust.
From the coffin leapt a tall and muscular figure; his features obscured by a goatskin devil-mask, he was dressed in almost African fittings of grass and leather, small rodent skulls dangling from his waist.
He danced around the area, shaking an Ascon , a gourd filled with snake vertebrae.
He stopped as the drums stopped.
The drums then took up a regular beat as he stalked back to the coffin.
Throwing it open, he lifted out a sinewy and almost reptilian form, holding it aloft and going down the line of young men, offering it briefly to each in turn.
Reaching the end of the line, he danced over to where Mait sat in the sedan chair, and offered him the strange object.
The drums ceased in anticipation.
Mait raised a hand as the worshippers waited expectantly.
‘Change skins,’ he said, quietly yet clearly enough to be heard by Ace and the Marines.
A cheer went up from the worshippers, who donned masks of animal heads.
Immediately, they began to throng and dance, the accompanying drums thrashing out a fervent beat that spoke of the fulfilment of man's base desires.
Like forms that briefly flicker in and out of existence in the heart of a flame, the worshippers danced to a staccato rhythm, their bodies jerking sharply yet smoothly in the infernal light of the crackling fires.
As the dance continued, some of them began to snap their limbs about with convulsive movements that Ace would have thought would have dislocated those limbs in an instant.
They seemed unaffected however, and threw their heads back, howling with unnatural laughter as they twisted their bodies in ever more contorted movements, some of them even brushing into one or other of the fires and continuing their dance as if they hadn't noticed.
It wasn't long before one of the young men dancing opposite the priestesses also began to act in this way.
As  he thrust his hands into the fire and pulled out a burning branch which he waved around without the slightest sign of discomfort, the goat-headed figure thrust his arms out for silence.
Everything stopped.
The four priestesses led the man over to a freshly dug grave, where he lay down as the goat-faced figure produced a black cockerel.
The figure halved a calabash, laying one half on the youth's navel, emptying the sacrificed cockerel's blood into it, before bidding the youth to drink from it.
Goat-mask turned expectantly to the sedan chair, and stretched out a hand.
Mait nodded to the woman beside him, who rose and made her way towards the youth.
Before she got there, however, there was a faint cracking from the surrounding darkness.
With a shout, several Secte Rouge members dashed out of the lit area, engendering sudden sounds of struggle from outside.
Soon they returned to the poteau mitan clutching a struggling figure who was bound with ropes of sisal cord.
It was Ace.
With a hissing intake of breath, Benny grabbed Petion's arm, and pointed to the figure they had seen dragged into the open.
‘We've got to go in now!’
‘No.’
He laid a restraining hand on her shoulder.
‘If we do, they'll just kill her before we can reach her.
They'll try to incorporate her appearance into the ritual, which should give me time to slip in.’
‘Ritual?
What?’
Benny glanced back at him, to find him laying down his gun and removing his tunic.
Finally, slipping off his boots and making a few tears in his trousers with a bayonet, he gave her a quick grin, and melted into the night, just one more peasant among many.
The worshippers dragged Ace before the sedan chair, throwing her to the ground.
Despite the bonds around her arms, she managed to pull herself up, determined not to show any sign of how difficult she found it.
The demonic goat-faced figure strode over, passing a hand  in front of Ace's eyes.
In the time it took to flicker across her vision, a card appeared in it, depicting a young knight.
With a strange cock of the head that made Ace certain he was grinning, the figure handed the card to the overweight, elderly man in the sedan chair.
Mait took it with a wry expression.
‘You have caused me some inconvenience, woman, do you know that?’
‘You must be the one they call Mait.’
‘Very perceptive of you.’
‘Not really.
After I saw the furnishings in your house I just knew you'd be a fat bastard.’
‘Henri here,’ he said, indicating the man in the goat mask, ‘told me you might be rather uncouth.’
In a flash, Mait backhanded Ace across the jaw, knocking her to the ground.
as if it had never happened, he continued in the same tone: ‘You are a foolish child, to come here with your toys.’
He waved a disdainful hand at her holstered gun, which they hadn't even bothered to remove.
‘Any fool can pull a trigger, girl, so it means nothing.’
Mait stepped down from the sedan chair and glanced around the worshippers.
‘Watch and learn, girl.’
Slowly, he raised a finger and pointed at a man in the crowd, beckoning him forward in a friendly manner.
Mait kept his eyes fixed on him as he approached — a malnourished skeleton of a man.
When he was a few feet away, Mait's features suddenly twisted into a malevolent burning-eyed glare, and he spat a single word at the man: ‘Die!’
Instantly, the man dropped in his tracks, and the crowd backed away from him in awe and fear.
Mait laughed as he addressed Ace again.
‘That is power!
You can't fight that with your toys.’
‘Assuming he's really dead, of course.’
‘Oh, he is, I assure you.
As is your friend, the Time Lord.’
He smiled.
‘Never!’
A thought struck her.
‘How do you know —‘
‘We have charted the progress of all who enter the Vortex for aeons.
His tampering with my mirrors was sufficient to allow us to glimpse his mind.’
‘Us?’
Ace didn't like the sound of that.
‘My master and I.’ He waved a hand in a cutting-off motion and changed the subject.
‘I was rather hoping something like this would happen, actually.
I'd rather not have to use one of my people for the sacrifice unless it is absolutely necessary.’
Ace stared at him.
‘Sacrifice?’
Wordlessly, Mait waved one of the worshippers forward.
A man approached, and was handed a machete by Mait, who indicated a chipped gravestone at the head of the newly dug grave.
Grabbing her bound hands, he shoved her towards the gravestone.
As he did so, Ace felt a brief strain and a sudden freedom as her hands were released from their bonds.
She tensed to spring at her escort, but relaxed slightly when she heard the familiar voice: ‘I hope I remember the stories correctly.’
‘Petion?
What the hell are you —‘
‘Benny and I saw you captured.
If we'd just attacked they'd have killed you immediately, so I thought it best to try and get you to a safer distance before anything happened.’
‘Right.’
‘Turn around.’
They had reached the grave, and Ace obediently turned to face the crowd, so that they couldn't see her freed hands, which had previously been hidden by Petion's body.
Petion stepped up to the gravestone, and traced a cruciform pattern over it with the machete before tapping the blade to the stone three times.
Almost immediately, the sound was answered by a low, liquid chuckle that froze Ace's spine.
Benny and Mortimer, watching from the bushes, started in surprise as a tall, lithe figure coalesced out of the darkness.
Even with the whitewash skeleton painted on to him, Benny had no difficulty recognizing the serpentine man who had kidnapped her from the museum.
All the worshippers in the area dropped to their knees, crossing themselves with a moan half of fear and half of expectation, as Carrefour slipped around the gravestone with a stately grace.
On his chair, Mait watched with a  building sense of joy as Carrefour came round to face Ace.
Extending one finger to trace a line down Ace's jaw to her jugular, Carrefour felt a trembling of excitement at the prospect of ending this one's life.
Carrefour laughed.
All hell broke loose.
Even Mortimer felt a tingle of horror as he saw the figure approach Ace and laugh, but he was momentarily taken aback when Ace's hands suddenly whipped round and grabbed the man's shoulders, and she kneed him swiftly in the groin.
At the same instant, Petion hurled the machete at the nearest Secte Rouge guard who also carried a machete.
Benny and Mortimer immediately launched themselves from the bushes, the rest of the Marines following, firing at any worshipper who had a weapon.
Ace drew her Browning and fired at Mait, but he had ducked behind the wall of the sedan chair and the bullets ricocheted off what could only be metal.
The Mambo who had sat beside Mait joined the priestesses in running for the cemetery gates, while the rest of the congregation scattered to the winds, fleeing the hail of bullets that crisscrossed the poteau mitan .
Leaping over fallen worshippers, Ace made for the sedan chair, but was forced to dive for cover when Richmann appeared from behind it with the Winchester drawn.
The shot he fired missed her by inches and killed a Marine a short distance behind.
Sheltering behind a gravestone Ace returned fire without success.
The Secte Rouge guards had been charging the Marines with their machetes, to little effect, though a couple of Marines had gone down.
Their weapons were promptly snatched up by the Secte Rouge, who added their own shooting to the confusion.
Giving up with the Browning, Ace lobbed a grenade at the sedan chair, and was rewarded by the sight of Mait  leaping out with surprising agility instants before the chair was blown apart.
Petion dropped to the ground beside her, struggling to catch his breath, and cursed as he saw Mait vanish into the night.
Ace poked her head around the stone with the idea of following, but covering fire from Richmann blasted chunks from the stone and forced her to duck back again.
Mortimer had emptied his Browning by now, and couldn't risk the time to reload.
With a rush of glee, he lifted a fallen machete and swung at the nearest Secte Rouge, biting deep into his side.
Kicking the body off his machete, Mortimer made for Carrefour, who was frantically scraping at the grave.
Ace glanced back and saw him, instantly realizing what was going on.
‘The enhancer!
Don't let him get to it!’ she shouted.
Another Secte Rouge blocked Mortimer's path, however, and no one else was in position to attack Carrefour, so Ace slammed a magazine into her Browning and fired a couple of shots.
It was too late, however, and Carrefour ducked, zigzagging off into the darkness with the enhancer clutched in his arms.
As the fighting died down, and the Marines began to drag away bodies and herd prisoners together, Mortimer came over to where Benny had joined Ace and Petion.
‘We've certainly put a stop to this disgusting display,’ Mortimer said.
‘Not really,’ Ace corrected him.
‘The main men got away.’
‘Well, it'll be a while before they —‘
‘Colonel, if we don't get them tonight, we won't get another chance.
Besides, we know where they're going.’
‘Where?’
‘A German naval base under the mountain.’
‘What!’
The disbelief Mortimer felt vied with rage at the thought that they had known this and hadn't divulged it earlier.
‘That's why we brought so many of you,’ Benny put in.
‘In the hope of following them to the base, since we don't know where the land entrance is — I only saw the inlet that allows ships in.’
‘We're going to find that rather difficult in the dark,’ Mortimer pointed out.
Ace waved a finger in a ‘wait a minute’ gesture, and slipped her hand into an inside pocket of her duster.
Grinning, she pulled a pair of infrared night goggles from it.
‘Just follow my lead.’
20
The Doctor ducked back behind a stairwell as two sailors walked by, talking loudly and animatedly in blissful ignorance of the intruder.
His face shadowed by the dim light, he crept out and slipped through a door behind the bridge.
The corridor inside was a grey conduit for numerous pipes and fittings, lit by plain white bulbs.
Pausing a moment to work out the best route, the Doctor set off to find a stair leading down.
He found one in moments, and silently went down into the hold.
Below, a tightly-packed steel chamber, dark but for a few naked bulbs, was filled with squat metal ten-gallon drums.
Listening for any sound of activity from the crew, the Doctor threaded his way through the drums, eyeing the occasional label with a scowl of revulsion.
Judging himself to be deep enough within the maze of gas drums, he drew a small waxy brick from inside his jacket.
The surface of the brick was still gelid and adhesive, so that he was able to stick it to the side of a drum near the hull, separated from the fuel tanks only by a steel bulkhead.
Next he took from his pocket a small circuit board, which had hastily soldered connections jumbled across it, linked to a small cube.
Extending a short prong from the board, he rammed it into the upper surface of the brick.
A small LED began pulsing, and the Doctor quickly took out his pocket watch and pressed a stud on it.
It began counting down from a starting position of 30:00.
Moving with the sureness of a cat on the prowl, he flitted back through the hold and outside.
Twisting the knob to magnify the image of four ghostly  white shapes amidst a field of darkly glowing emerald, Ace recognized the bulky figure of Mait and the whip-like form of Carrefour as they hurried along the edge of a sisal field.
In front of them was the black mass of the mountain, but just above the ground level was a slightly brighter irregular ovoid, whose barely perceptible light seemed to drift slightly upwards.
Pistol in hand, she paused just long enough for the others to catch up, and handed the goggles to Benny, deciding she'd probably better play it safe and not risk letting any of the inhabitants of 1915 get an idea of how they worked.
‘What do you make of that?’ she said.
Benny made a minute adjustment to configure the goggles to her own eyesight, and frowned invisibly in the darkness.
She was acutely aware of the presence of Petion and the Marines around her, and felt somewhat guilty about using the advanced technology.
‘Don't think rubbish,’ she muttered to herself, and made a mental note to castigate Ace for bringing the anachronistic device along.
It was bloody useful, though, she thought.
‘They've got three ships in there, and God knows what other generators and so on, all of which generates quite a bit of heat.
I'd say what we can see is some of that heat surviving long enough to escape through a cave mouth,’ she said to Ace.
Ace nodded.
‘That's what I thought as well.’
She held out a hand for the goggles, but when Benny returned them, she simply tucked them away.
‘Colonel?’
‘We're ready,’ Mortimer answered firmly.
‘Time to earn your keep.’
Henri reached the cave mouth first, shortly followed by Mait, Carrefour, and finally Richmann, who had been keeping a rear guard.
Two sentries stepped to intercept them, drawing back when they saw who it was.
Constantly looking back, Richmann hurried inside and waved at the sentries.
‘Seal the doors!’ he ordered.
‘Sir?
The General's permission is nee-’ The Steyr  boomed like a cannon when fired in the cave, and the sentry dropped with a bloodied chest.
The other sentry's trouser-leg darkened as he shakily but hurriedly turned the locking wheel set into the wall.
With a rusty squeak, a pair of steel doors slid inward, locking in the middle with a solid clang.
When he turned to seek approval, the four newcomers had already disappeared, leaving him alone at the doors with the corpse.
The Marines approached the cave in their usual leapfrog manoeuvre, and found themselves facing not an enemy, but the steel doors.
Benny, Ace and Petion arrived to find them milling around the door, testing it for electrification with a bayonet whose handle was securely wrapped with oilcloth.
‘Never know till you try,’ Mortimer commented, putting the bayonet away.
‘You're not going to make it to retirement taking risks like that,’ Benny chastised him.
‘Who wants to retire?’
His face took on a mask of blankness.
‘To wither away like my father?
No…
I won't be dying bedridden.’
‘Who says you would?
Benny said.
‘The doctors do.’
His mouth crooked wryly.
‘Since Coombs’ Syndrome is hereditary.’
He turned back to the door with a movement that stated the conversation was over.
Benny couldn't blame him.
‘I'm sorry,’ she murmured, too low for anyone but Ace to hear.
Ace also felt a twinge of sadness for the Colonel, but felt it best to get on with the job in hand.
She suspected that he would prefer that as well.
‘All right, nanocephs, stand well back, and I'll open this door for you,’ she said.
‘We haven't enough explosives to get through that,’ Petion protested.
‘As a matter of fact, I have, but I'd rather keep them for more important things.
Besides, if I blow this open, they just might notice,’ she finished dryly.
As the Marines  and Petion backed away, Ace knelt and looked up at Benny.
‘Stand just behind and to the left of me, to block their view,’ she whispered.
Benny was about to ask why, but before she could, Ace had produced her blaster and was busily setting it for a narrow beam to cut through the door.
Ask a silly question, Benny thought, and rolled her eyes.
Once she was satisfied that Petion and the Marines were far enough away, Ace triggered the energy beam at the base of the door, and slowly drew it upwards, describing an arch wide enough for two people to pass through.
On the other side of the door, the sentry watched in mounting alarm as a fiercely glowing spot of light hurled sparks into the cave, cutting a gap into the door.
He wasn't sure what sort of threat this presented, but was certain it definitely was a threat.
With trembling hands he thumped an alarm button set into the wall beside the door wheel, and turned and ran.
Outside, the sudden clamour of the hooting siren was clearly audible.
‘Shit,’ Ace muttered, ‘there must be a sentry.’
Flicking the blaster setting back to normal, she stepped back and loosed a couple of shots at the right-hand side of the metal, which hadn't yet been cut.
A pair of incandescent explosions ripped the metal apart, and the door was knocked spinning into the cave.
The Doctor looked around from under the stairwell when the alarm began hooting, but saw nothing.
A slow smile spread across his face as he realized that it must be Ace with the Marines.
Men appeared from every corner of the docks, some in uniform, others in civilian garb.
They bustled to and fro across the dock and swarmed on and off the ships.
Taking a chance, the Doctor stepped out of hiding and descended the gangplank of the Raubvogel quickly, but with the confident air of one who has a job to do and is doing it.
Crossing his fingers mentally, he  hoped that everyone would assume he was just someone else answering the call to action.
His ‘act as if you own the place’ approach seemed to work, and he made it to the double doors that opened into the main tunnel complex, not even pausing as he attached a circuit board to a second brick and casually tossed it into the heart of the pile of drums on the dock nearby.
No one noticed, and he walked calmly out.
The Marines swarmed into the tunnel like bubbles disappearing down a plughole, Mortimer at their head, eyes bright, looking for the first sign of the opposition.
Ace, Benny and Petion had to struggle to keep their places in the line, and the young soldiers all looked both eager and scared.
Ace glanced about at the peculiar angles that joined the walls to the floor and ceiling.
‘Those carvings in the museum must have been tossed out with the rubble when they dug this place,’ she suggested to Benny.
‘Not this tunnel, it's much older.
When constructing the docks or Froebe's office I'd say.’
Slowing to a crawl, Mortimer looked back, searching for Benny.
‘Which way?’ he said.
‘Downhill until you feel a breeze, then follow it to its source.’
‘Right.
Stay here!’
‘Drop dead molecule-mind!’
Ace called back.
Mortimer didn't answer, however, and he and the Marines trotted off down the tunnel, bayonets fixed and rounds in the chambers.
‘Mait won't have been heading for the dock,’ Ace reasoned.
‘No.
The General's office, maybe,’ Benny said.
‘You know where that is?’
‘More or less.’
‘Good enough.
Lead on, MacDuff.’
Large caverns had been fitted out as barracks and guard  room, and these were a hive of activity as the base personnel stumbled from their beds to snatch weapons, rushing into the tunnels half-dressed.
The officers' quarters in the guardroom contained a large board labelled with the names of different areas.
A bulb under the label marked ‘Main Door’ was flashing redly.
Officers joined their men, directing them to take up positions in the main access tunnels, while the main group was despatched to keep an eye on the dock area.
Soon the tunnels echoed to the rumble of many booted feet.
Froebe rushed into his office from his private quarters, which were behind a door concealed by the filing cabinet.
Lifting the phone from the desk, he demanded to know what was going on.
When appraised of the situation, he turned white, and slumped into his chair.
‘Instruct the freighters to make revolutions immediately and head for the open seas as fast as possible,’ he said.
Moving to the windows overlooking the dock, he watched his men work, a look of dismay on his face.
The image of a home in the country vanished from his mind.
His grand plans for a hero's welcome disintegrated into a mass of fears over how the High Command would view this night.
A solitary tear escaped his eye, and he cursed himself for it.
Katze dashed on to the bridge of the Raubvogel,gasping for breath.
Somehow, Kapitan Weber had got there first.
‘Urgent orders, Herr Kapitan.
We are to leave immediately — the base has been penetrated by a force of United States Marines.’
‘Make revolutions for five knots and issue the crew with side arms,’ Weber ordered unflappably.
Mortimer almost ran headlong into a patrol of Germans as he traversed a long gallery, but the Germans were hampered by uncocked weapons, and Mortimer downed  two of them with his Browning before ducking behind a turn in the wall, his men loosing a volley of rifle fire into the surviving guards.
Covering the sprawled guards constantly, Mortimer hopped over the bodies and continued downwards, his men jabbing the bodies with bayonets to make sure.
Mait drew to a halt, Henri, Carrefour and Richmann pulling up beside him.
‘Give me the device,’ Mait commanded.
Silently, Carrefour handed over the enhancer.
‘Even though the ceremony was disturbed, there should be enough power stored within the mirror to open the gateway,’
‘There are only a few minutes left,’ Henri warned.
‘I know, but I will succeed.
Then we will serve the power that guides us, and Haiti will never be exploited by the blancs again.
Carrefour, go and stay with Froebe.
Make certain the coup l'aire is safely moved away on the ships.’
He shuddered as he pronounced the last word.
‘Henri, you assist in the defence of this place.’
‘Yes, Mait’ they chorused.
Mait turned and left, taking an unlit and unused side tunnel.
Carrefour also departed, back the way they had come.
Henri looked at Richmann — who watched him in turn — with a calculating expression.
‘You, Richmann, will —‘
‘I will return to my employer as contracted,’ Richmann growled.
He had been thinking about the Doctor's earlier words, that he should get used to obeying Henri, and had come to the conclusion that doing as he said no longer suited him.
‘You will obey-’
‘Froebe, Henri.
I will obey Froebe.’
He smiled thinly as his personal dislike of the arrogant black overcame his veneer of polite obedience.
‘Tell me, did you foresee this in your cards?’
In the blink of an eye, Richmann drew the Steyr and shot Henri between the eyes.
Henri swayed on his feet for a moment, though he was already dead, then toppled over.
‘Evidently not.
That's why I stick to poker.’
Chuckling to himself, Richmann followed after Carrefour.
Benny waved Ace and Petion to a halt as the sound of footsteps approached.
Ace and Petion slipped off the safety catches on their automatics and pressed themselves in close to the walls, ready to spring.
When the footsteps reached them, they leapt out, guns levelled — directly at the Doctor's head.
Snatching her gun back to point into the air, Ace drew a startled breath.
‘Frag, I nearly killed you!’ she said.
‘Think things through next time, then,’ he snapped.
‘Nice to see you, Benny.
Have you seen Mait?’
‘He came in here somewhere, but we don't know where.’
‘I know where he's going.
Did he have the enhancer?’
‘Carrefour had it,’ Petion answered.
‘We figured that if this was all about focusing the mind's energy, he'd have it at the ceremony,’ Benny added.
‘Perfectly correct, but the thing stores energy as well as transmitting it, so if he gets it to where he's going, we're in serious trouble.’
He shifted impatiently as if annoyed at himself for having to stop to think.
‘Right.
Are Colonel Mortimer's men here?’
‘Making for the dock,’ Ace told him.
‘Excellent.
Petion, follow them and lend a helping hand.
I don't want any of the German personnel searching the dock or the ships.’
Petion nodded and set off at a trot.
‘Why not?’
Benny asked.
‘Because if they do, it's possible they might discover that they've only got their zombi gas for about another twenty minutes.
After that, it goes up with the biggest bang this side of the Manhattan Project.’
‘Excellent!’
Ace said.
‘Indeed.
You come with me, Ace.
Benny, keep an eye on Petion and Mortimer.’
‘I don't think I have anything else planned for tonight.’
Petion caught up with Mortimer just as the Marines reached the wider tunnel, into one side of which was set a pair of doors which Benny's description indicated led to the dock.
They immediately had to dive for cover, however, as the Germans had set up a pair of machine guns in front of the doors behind hastily piled crates.
Everyone pressed themselves flat to the floor as the heavier-calibre bullets smashed a spray of rock chips and dust across the floor.
Undaunted, one of the Marines took it upon himself to pop out from hiding just long enough to hurl a grenade at the gun position.
The bomb detonated with a sharp crack, sending tiny but razor-sharp pieces of metal into the backs of the gun crews.
One flew forward, obviously dead, and the others were disoriented long enough for several shots to send them sprawling across the tunnel.
As the acrid smoke cleared, the Marines advanced, keeping to the edges of the doorway, which was not locked, the mechanism apparently having jammed.
Mortimer paused to savour the moment — this was what soldiery was all about, he thought.
Heart pounding with excitement, he barged through the door and into the dock, where Germans both on the dockside and aboard the ships ran for cover, beginning to open fire at the intruders.
Soon the Marines were pouring through, blazing at the enemy as they split into groups to head for the fuel tanks, the gas drums and other targets.
The Doctor and Ace sprinted downwards through tunnels of increasingly obviously artificial, but increasingly bizarre and twisted architecture, the Doctor having taken from his pocket some kind of homing device, though he didn't say what it was homing in on.
Sure enough, they soon saw Mait, as he rushed out of the other side of a grotto they were just entering.
‘Got you,’ the Doctor muttered.
Benny ran through the tunnels, making for the dock, but soon she passed a familiar doorway.
Smiling to herself, she glanced into the room, and saw General Froebe staring out at the dock with a melancholy gaze.
It occurred to her that she really should go to the dock, but she decided that here was a chance to do something more useful.
Checking the magazine of the Luger she had tucked in her waistband, she threw open the door and leapt in, the gun aimed unwaveringly at Froebe.
His eyes widened in surprise.
‘I thought my guards had killed you,’ he commented.
‘Perhaps this is my second life,’ she quipped.
‘There's no answer to that,’ he shrugged.
‘No, I suppose not.
But, it does seem that I have you —‘
‘Right where we want you,’ a quiet voice completed her sentence from behind her.
Slowly, she turned around.
Richmann stepped out from behind the door with a gun trained on her.
Off to the side, Carrefour watched mockingly from a comfortable chair.
‘More than six feet under,’ Richmann continued, and slipped off the safety catch.
Chapter Twenty-one
Benny met Richmann's cold gaze levelly.
Inside, she was crying out that it wasn't fair for her to survive the worst technological terrors that twenty-fifth-century man could devise, only to have her short life ended by the crude but effective mechanism of an old Steyr.
‘Get your jollies from killing unarmed women, do you?’ she said.
‘Not usually, but as a special favour to you I'll make an exception this once.’
A vein pulsed in Richmann's temple, giving silent voice to his irritation.
He aimed for Benny's stomach — it would be a slower, more painful death that way.
He smiled.
Benny hawked and spat into his face.
Carrefour started, looking round from the door, the sound echoing in his mind.
He felt a peculiar sense of dislocation, and the sounds of those in the room seemed to be coming from a great distance away.
He saw Richmann wipe his face, the hand holding the gun shaking almost imperceptibly with suppressed rage.
Benny straightened.
‘Get on with it then,’ she jeered.
She was determined not to give Richmann the satisfaction of seeing her cry, beg or show fear.
To Carrefour, her face seemed to darken, perhaps in shadow.
He saw Richmann's clubbing motion with the gun almost before it happened, and a voice from the past called for him to run.
He no longer saw Benny standing before him, but a dark-skinned woman, whom he barely recognized after such a long time.
There was a sure sense of kinship, however, and he knew that this was his mother.
But she was dead…as was her killer, who had taken weeks to die of Carrefour's poison.
Richmann brought the gun round again, his mouth  twisting, and Carrefour recognized the look of murderous anger from the scenes being simultaneously played and replayed in front of his eyes.
He could almost see Richmann's anger — that of the other man who had killed his mother in a similar fit of rage all those years ago.
This was the emotion he had tried to purge himself of by identifying with the snakes that had taken up residence in the ashes of his family's land.
He hadn't purged himself as completely as he had thought.
Richmann never noticed the sudden widening of Benny's eyes, or if he did he must have assumed it was fear at her imminent death.
As a result, he was taken completely by surprise when twelve stone of lean muscle powered into him at snake-like speed and wrenched the gun aside, the shot slamming into a very surprised Froebe, who staggered back, the impact of his body cracking one of the windows.
Richmann tumbled to the ground, warding off blows from Carrefour's flailing arms.
With a sharp pang of defeat, he noticed Benny dive headlong through the weakened window, ending up in the water below with a huge splash.
In fury, Richmann threw Carrefour aside, and snatched up the gun which had skittered across the floor.
Carrefour was on his feet again.
Whipping out a dagger that glistened wetly with venom, he lunged for Richmann with a speed as close to that of a striking cobra as is humanly possible.
There was just too much distance between him and Richmann, however, and Richmann needed only to move his hand a few inches before firing.
Carrefour faltered, doubling over as the bullet caught him just below the sternum.
Strangely, he felt more pain from crashing to the floor than from the shot.
Eyes wide with surprise, he found that he couldn't draw another breath, though the growing pain forced him to try.
He couldn't move as Richmann passed out of his field of vision, not caring enough to even notice Carrefour any longer.
Carrefour smelled the burning flesh of his memory once more, but was no longer sure whether it was truly  his memory or was a result of the hole in his chest.
The shadows took on forms and approached him, wreathed in the phantom smoke that matched that which had taken them from his life.
Mait had trained him to be the personification of Death, his own private Baron Samedi.
Carrefour was surprised that he could die.
As his fading vision blanked out all but the shadowy wraiths which welcomed him, Carrefour's last thought was that his family would be whole again.
The Doctor and Ace pounded breathlessly through the grotto and down the tunnel after Mait.
In short sharp breaths, Ace asked him how such an old man could run so fast.
‘Because,’ the Doctor answered, a little hoarse himself, ‘the enhancer works both ways, and the Old One's survival instinct is letting him draw on its excess life-force to try and bring it back into the world.
At this point in time, he could win every gold medal in the book.’
‘Can a human body take that much?’
Ace asked incredulously.
‘Not for long.
He must be both desperate and close to the end to take such an enormous risk.
How much explosive have you got?’
‘Two packs of C-Four Plus.’
‘Give me them both,’ he demanded urgently, halting at a junction.
Ace handed him a pair of canisters.
‘What are they set for?’
‘Instant, fitted with motion sensors.
Will they be enough to kill this whatever it is?’
‘No, they can't be killed at all, or at least not in this dimension.
I just hope this is enough to bring down enough of the tunnel to stop Mait getting to that full-sized enhancer.
Now give me that blaster you didn't bring with you.’
Wordlessly, she drew the twenty-sixth-century weapon from behind her back, and handed it over.
‘Good.
Projectile weapons will kill anyone you want, but I'd find it rather difficult to drill through the tunnel  floor with an old Browning.’
He held up a hand to silence the protest she was about to make.
‘I want you to get back to the docks and get everybody out as fast as you can.
Got that?
And I mean including the Germans, if you can drive them out.
I don't want to be responsible for needless deaths.’
His tone indicated that he didn't hold out much hope, and that his conscience had already grown that little bit heavier in anticipation.
–And if I have to defend myself?’
‘Well, any Germans who don't get out are dead anyway…
But think twice before doing anything rash.’
‘Right.
But the Marines won't have taken the base yet.’
‘Doesn't matter, I only brought them as a diversion anyway.
Here, take this.’
He handed her his watch.
It read 11:14,and counted down continuously.
‘That's how long you've got to get everyone away from here.
Now go!’
He waved her away, and set off further down the tunnel.
Ingrid Karnstein swept a row of glass beakers to the floor with one gloved hand, the crashing sound muffling the noise of the door.
Next, she tossed a lit match into the lowermost drawer of the nearest filing cabinet, and slammed it shut.
‘What the hell are you doing?’
It was von Stein.
He rushed at her, knocking the remaining matches from her grip.
His eyes bulged in fury at the destruction that had been wreaked on his lab.
Everything was smashed, overturned or burnt.
Making sure those Americans don't piece all this together.’
She fixed him with a stare, defying him to think otherwise.
‘Just an excuse.
I know you've thought about this for a long time,’ he hissed, gripping her shoulders tightly to prevent movement.
‘You know something?
You're absolutely right.’
Without any warning signs, she kneed him in the groin, and dashed for the door, one flailing arm smashing a gas tap  from the bench.
A low hissing filled the room as she bolted out and slammed the door.
Von Stein had fallen to his knees, and stared dazedly about him at the ruined lab.
He was frozen there with an appalled sense of waste, that his cohort had denied him his greatest discovery.
He looked around in alarm when he began to smell the escaping gas, and quickly noticed the smashed tap.
Stumbling to his feet, he fumbled with the broken pieces, trying to staunch the gas flow.
He failed to notice the flames licking around the drawers of the filing cabinet.
A wave of hot air rushed around the fleeing Karnstein and down the tunnel.
She barely noticed.
Everyone on the bridge of the Raubvogel ducked as a pane of glass was blown apart.
Weber scurried to the ship's blower, and shouted down it in fury, while Katze knelt below the shattered windowpane and took potshots at the dock with his Luger.
Weber slammed the blower shut angrily, obviously disappointed at something.
‘Katze!’ he shouted above the din.
‘Get down on deck and have the machine guns uncovered and lay down support fire.’
‘Wouldn't the cannons —‘
‘No!
Shellfire might bring the roof down on us.
Go now!’
‘Yes, Kapitan.’
Katze ducked out of the door, keeping his head down.
Weber looked thoughtfully out at, the battle-torn cavern, and slowly reached out to the ship's telegraph, ringing up the order to start engines.
Mortimer crouched at the corner of the short tunnel through which Benny had entered the previous day.
Bullets bounced off the rock with alarming frequency as he tried to get a look at the situation.
Several other men crouched beside him, a couple leaning out to give covering  fire.
‘Lieutenant,’ he began, ‘wouldn't that ship-’he indicated the Raubvogel ‘— give us an excellent field of fire across the cavern?’
‘If we could take her,’ the lieutenant said doubtfully, ‘which I don't think —‘
‘It's only a merchantman at port, young man.
There are probably only a few crewmen on board, not combat trained.
That gangplank is still there, so we should take the opportunity, I say.’
‘Er, yes, sir….’
‘Excellent.
Let's go.’
Without further ado, he slipped around the corner, and rushed towards the gangplank, ignoring the shots that zipped past.
His men followed, shooting up at the ship's railings, and elsewhere at the other Germans in scattered positions.
Halfway across the dock, however, there was a metallic scraping, and the sheet metal forming the outer skin of the oddly shaped bulges in the hull at deck level fell away.
Behind each of the two was a two-inch naval gun, and a pair of Schwarlose model 07 machine guns.
Realizing there was nowhere to run in time, the Marines concentrated their fire on the crouching figures behind the guns, but they were too well protected.
A hail of gunfire responded, ripping through the Marine ranks, and bloodily smashing men to the ground.
Mortimer hurled a grenade upwards, blasting one gun and tossing its crew aside, but the others were unharmed.
Mortimer continued to shoot upwards with his automatic, a manic grin on his face as he realized he was finally being granted his quick and glorious death.
His body virtually disintegrated under the sheer concentration of machine-gun fire.
The Doctor hurried along the tunnel, Ace's blaster held loosely in one hand, a little black box in the other.
The box gave out a constant stream of beeps as the Doctor walked, occasionally doubling back on himself.
Eventually, satisfied that he had found what he wanted, the Doctor halted, waving the box around for final confirmation.
After another series of beeps, he put it in his pocket beside the explosives, and made some adjustments to the blaster's power setting.
Carefully measuring out distances and angle of fire, the Doctor triggered the blaster on its constant wide-beam setting, directing it at a spot on the tunnel floor a few feet ahead, where there was a sharp corner.
Slowly, like melting toffee, the rock began to soften and bubble while clouds of acrid smoke streamed out.
Mait limped painfully down a connecting gallery, desperately clinging on to the enhancer, which was getting heavier with every passing moment.
The mere fact that he was still alive was surely a sign that he was destined to succeed wasn't it?
He grinned to himself, certain that soon, with the power of the Great Old One behind him, all the blancs would be at his mercy.
Kicking aside a shattered bone, he hurried on.
Moments after he had passed around the corner, a section -f the wall near the roof glowed a fierce red and burst with a scattering of sparks and molten droplets.
The glow faded in mere moments, during which time the Doctor dropped into the corridor, snatching his hands back from the sides of his newly created tunnel with sharp gasps.
Pausing to get his bearings, he blew furiously on his fingers to cool them down.
From the corner of his eye he noticed Mait's footprints in the dust.
Listening carefully, could just make out sounds of movement from somewhere down below.
‘Less than a minute ahead,’ he muttered ‘With any luck, I should overtake him this time.’
weeping the black box around this new tunnel, he picked spot, and began firing again.
Returning to the main cavern at a dead run, Ace threw herself to the side as a cluster of boxes not far off exploded with a sharp blast, hurling several of the defenders into he oily waters.
She found herself next to Petion, who  was trying to pick off men on the nearest freighter.
‘Bloody hell,’ she muttered, ‘it's all go around here.’
‘A group of them are concentrated around the gas drums.’
‘Forget them, then.
They'll be dead in ten minutes and so are we if we don't get out by then.’
Ace glanced cautiously over the rock barricade, taking in the positions of the defending Germans, and several groups of Marines.
‘How many frags have you got?’
‘Frags?’
‘Grenades.’
‘About half a dozen.’
‘Excellent!
Give me a couple.’
She held out her hand for the Mills bombs.
‘What are you going to do with those?’
‘Most of the er, dastardly Huns, I think you call them in this time period, seem to be up by the door to the General's office which, according to Benny, is also a quicker route out.
These should be effective against such a tight group.’
‘If you can get there alive,’ Petion said pointedly.
‘That's the one slight problem with this plan,’ she said cheerily, ‘which is why I brought this.’
She held up an extremely odd-looking weapon that looked like a cross between a Sten gun and a stick insect.
‘The local shooters are too slow, so I cannibalized some from the palace armoury to build this in the TARDIS.
Fully automatic, fairly rapid fire, and my own special recipe in the hollow tips.’
‘Astounding,’ he said admiringly.
Then, his smile turning sour, ‘More efficient death.’
‘No shit.
Listen,’ she said seriously.
‘I don't like doing this, but nowadays it's about the only thing I'm much good at.’
She looked slightly wistful.
‘Perhaps when I was younger, I should have —’ She broke off, clamping down hard on the thought.
She didn't need any what if's.
‘Anyway, it needs to be done.’
She started to rise, but froze when his hand clamped on her arm.
‘Ace, be very sure about that sort of need.
If you don't  you'll start to enjoy it, and see that need everywhere.
I've seen it happen.’
She looked at his imploring face, and felt a stab of guilt, that he was right, that she'd better take care….
But she was Ace; she knew the score, and could keep an eye on herself.
‘Hey, it's me, right?’
She slid back the bolt on her home-made gun.
‘Keep the ones on the ship busy.’
With a troubled look in his eyes, Petion nodded, and turned his attention to his targets.
With a deep breath, Ace slipped out from behind the rocks, and ran in a crouch down the length of the wall, keeping up a steady rate of fire from her gun.
Small blooms of fire exploded all around the sandbagged post and the steel door, the defenders huddling down for cover.
Petion saw her go from the corner of his eye, and fired at the crouching figures on the freighter's deck with grim determination.
The thought that Ace could go bad rankled him for some reason, and he mouthed a silent prayer that her judgment would remain sound.
Stray shots buzzing all around, Ace threw herself behind a large fallen stalactite a few yards from the sandbags, just as her ammunition ran out.
Shouldering the gun in the sure knowledge that the Doctor would be seriously pissed off if she let it fall into local hands in this time zone, she drew the grenade from her pockets, and poked her head up just long enough to check the distance.
Myriad chips of shattered stalactite flew in her face as the Germans opened fire on her position.
With clenched teeth, Ace pulled the pins on the grenades, paused for a couple of heartbeats, and hurled them over at the German position.
From the enemy there came a sudden clamour of shouts.
They tried to leap over the sandbags, but were too slow.
The grenades exploded sharply, the heated fragments of their steel casings ripping through the fleeing bodies, sending them sprawling in pools of blood.
Swiftly, Ace clambered over the red-stained sandbags, and checked the door.
It had been blasted loose from the  lock.
‘Petion!’ she called.
‘The door's open, get everybody out!’
Petion waved in reply, and called the message down the line towards the Marines at the far end of the docks.
They began to fall back towards Ace and Petion, pausing where there was cover to shoot back at the Germans on the freighters or on the other side of the docks.
Someone threw a stick grenade into the middle of the Marine column, which exploded to put half a dozen men out of action, though Ace was too far away to tell whether they were dead or wounded.
Petion returned fire, and the grenade thrower pitched into the water with another grenade at the ready.
It exploded as he hit the water, sending a geyser of water and blood into the air.
Resetting a fallen Maxim machine gun to lay down covering fire, Ace stepped out to meet Petion and the first of the arriving Marines.
Most of the Marines were experiencing their first combat, and the strain of combating the fear as much as their enemies was telling on their pale faces.
Petion's jawline was set as he forced his emotions under control, and Ace envied him that, for if anyone had asked she would have had to admit she was terrified.
This didn't stop her, however, from loosing a stream of automatic fire across the water to the other side of the docks, where men were smashed backwards by the force of the impacts.
She was so busy with the Maxim, however, that she failed to notice the door opening fully behind her, and Richmann stepping through like some black-cloaked angel of death, his shortened Winchester being raised into position.
‘Ace!’
The warning cry came from Petion, who got off a single shot at Richmann before the mercenary major swung the Winchester around and fired it with a roar.
Ace spun round in time to see Petion drop his rifle and spin to the ground in a spray of blood, while Richmann swung his gun back to her, working the lever action.
Ace was faster, however, and had her Browning out of the holster in time to fire before Richmann.
The bullet took Richmann in the shoulder, shocking the shotgun from his grip.
Seeing only the spray of Petion's blood, Ace fired again and again, the shots punching continually into Richmann's body and causing him to jerk like a marionette before toppling backwards into the steel door.
The look frozen on Richmann's dead face mirrored his shock that a mere woman could outshoot him .
Ace's finger remained clamped down on the trigger even after all seven bullets had gone and the slide had locked back in the ‘empty’ position.
A blast of superheated rock fragments heralded the Doctor's arrival into a huge circular chamber.
Several supports broke up the smooth appearance of the walls, and joined the floor and ceiling at angles that didn't seem really workable.
A number of squat triangular doors opened on to other rooms and tunnels.
A quick glance through the nearest showed it to be an empty chamber built of oddly fitted blocks of Cyclopean size.
A larger block, perhaps an altar or sarcophagus, crouched in the centre with a strangely organic air of menace.
Turning back, the Doctor examined his surroundings with a growing feeling of horrified awe.
The chamber was almost as large as the cavern above in which the Germans had built their base.
A number of thick pillars, shrouded in a miasmic fuzz of mould, were placed around as roof supports while, in the centre of the chamber, was a circle of more squared-off pillars, as if someone had decided to use a megalithic circle as a set of buttresses.
Set into the floor were several open pits, which exuded a dank stench even as they pulsed with the chill luminescence of putrefaction.
Cautiously, the Doctor approached the central circle of pillars, slipping between them as quietly as possible, despite the fact that there was no one around.
Inside the circle was a huge altar stone, about thirty-feet across, upon a raised dais.
Carved into the stone was more of the same type of repulsive alien art that had become so familiar over the past couple of days.
Most  impressive, though, was what was hanging from the ceiling directly above the altar stone.
Slowly rotating, like an old gibbet, was an enormous concave mirror, surrounded by satellite mirrors and infinitely complex arrangements of rods and cogs.
It was a gigantic version of the same type of enhancer that Mait had.
Set in the centre of the altar stone's upper surface was a small depression that was just the right size for a normal-sized version of the device.
The Doctor let out a long slow breath, and considered his options, since even if he succeeded in stopping Mait, there was always the risk of someone else finding this place the next time the stars were in the correct alignment.
Briefly, he raised the blaster, but swiftly lowered it again.
‘If I blast an enhancer that size,’ he muttered, ‘I could blow the whole Caribbean off the map.
I can't reach it to perform the same trick as on Mait's….’
Suddenly, he grinned, and clambered up atop the altar stone.
Setting the blaster to low power, he directed it at the indentation, melting the rock slowly and gently.
In a few moments, he shut the beam off, and admired his handiwork.
The top of the stone was now all at the same level.
Shifting slightly, he drilled a new indentation a few inches from the original.
‘That should do it, just in case,’ he murmured.
He jumped down off the stone.
A faint vibration briefly throbbed through the floor, and the Doctor looked around in alarm.
He stepped from the dais and glanced back, only now noticing that the altar stone wasn't quite set in place, and that there was a thin gap beneath one end, which seemed to indicate that there was another pit beneath the stone.
He told himself that he should go right now and plant the explosives to bring the tunnel down, but the Doctor's curiosity was one of his strongest features.
Almost against his own will, he knelt by the gap, and peered in.
The space underneath was filled with a harsh light of burnished gold.
There wasn't a wide enough field of vision to make much out, beyond the slime-laden walls of the  pit, but, just for an instant, the Doctor could have sworn that something moved in the reflexive way of an uncomfortable sleeper.
The Doctor couldn't quite make out what it was that had moved, but going by the gelid fluidity of the apparent movement, he didn't really want to.
Jerking back from the dais, the Doctor slipped back through the circle of megaliths.
Stiffly, he walked towards the entrance tunnel.
‘Time Lords are supposed to remain calm,’ he told himself, ‘but then again, I don't want to risk being late to meet Mait, do I?’
Glad of the excuse, he ran from the chamber.
He didn't run far, however, because all too soon he heard Mait's dragging footsteps.
He removed Ace's explosives from his pockets, and fixed the first pack to the ceiling directly above him, flicking the arming switch with the sensor positioned ahead.
Moving a few yards along the tunnel, he found a crevice into which to wedge the second pack, with the sensor directed behind.
When that too was armed, he moved further forward, and waited for Mait to appear.
It wasn't a long wait.
In a matter of seconds, the aged bocor limped around the corner, and approached warily.
‘What kept you?’ the Doctor asked.
‘How did you get ahead of me?’
‘I took a more direct route.’
‘There isn't one.’
The Doctor drew the blaster and drilled a shallow hole in the wall by way of demonstration.
‘There wasn't one.’
‘And now you're going to kill me with that?
Ruthless, as I said.’
‘I'm not going to shoot you with this or anything else.
I'm just going to ask you to see sense and leave.’
‘And if I refuse?’
‘Then I'll step aside and let you pass.’
‘Really?’
Mait laughed, feeling that the Doctor must have lost his mind.
‘Yes really, because I know that if you go down that tunnel, you'll be dead.’
Mait faltered slightly, then perked up.
‘Nonsense.
If there was such danger, you'd be dead, wouldn't you?
I heard you come out of the Hall.
I suppose it's possible you've set tripwires,’ he went on, ‘but I have excellent night vision.’
He stepped towards the Doctor.
The Doctor frowned as if having second thoughts, then stepped aside as promised.
Mait hesitated again, instantly suspicious.
Much to his surprise, the Doctor simply turned and left, heading back the way Mait had come.
Mait had gone only a short distance when he heard the faint beep from above.
Looking up, he saw the explosive wedged into a crevice, and thought it fitting that the blancs ’ devices should fail them now.
He didn't realize that Ace's motion sensors were set only to be triggered by an approaching movement source.
It took only another few steps for Mait to come within range of the other bomb.
It detonated with enough force to bring down huge chunks of rock from the ceiling.
Fragments of rock, and of Mait, flung backwards by the blast, also set off the other bomb and in moments, several tens of yards of ceiling had collapsed in.
The Doctor retraced Mait's footsteps in the dust.
Each time he passed an opening into a tunnel he had drilled, he loosed a couple of shots at its roof to collapse it.
A hand falling on Ace's shoulder startled her back to reality, and she found herself facing a dripping Benny.
‘That's the second time in twenty-four hours I've had a swim in that damned water.
Are you all right?’
Benny said.
‘Yes!’
Ace snapped savagely, causing Benny to step back from the unexpectedly vicious tone in her voice.
Ace looked down at Petion, who had taken the blast meant for her, and the gaping hole in his chest.
‘I'm always  all right,’ she snarled derisively, ‘because I'm Ace.’
And it seems, she added in silent self-reproach, that I stay all right at the expense of everybody else.
‘I didn't mean it that way,’ Benny apologized.
She hadn't missed the way Ace's hands shook, and the slight guilty lowering of her head as she glanced at Petion.
‘You didn't have a choice.’
She knelt beside the young mulatto, and checked for a pulse.
There was one, but it was weak.
‘He's still alive, just.’
Ace's head snapped up.
‘Stretcher party!’ she yelled.
‘How is he?’
‘I wouldn't like to say.
His heart's still beating, but going by that gurgling I'd guess he's got a collapsed lung.
I wouldn't give any odds on him keeping that right arm, either.’
Ace didn't speak, but instead picked up Richmann's fallen Winchester, and checked it.
It was empty.
Dropping it on the red-pooled floor, Ace stared back at Richmann's body and the sticky smear it had left on the grey metal of the door.
‘What are you thinking about?’
Benny asked quietly.
Ace remained silent for a moment, unable to tear her eyes away from Richmann.
‘Maybe my future,’ she finally answered with a shudder.
With a sudden flash of rage, she hurled the Browning far out across the dock, where it splashed into the water and disappeared.
Benny reached forward and twitched the hem of Richmann's jacket aside, so that Ace could see the Steyr in its shoulder holster.
‘No choice, Ace, not this time.’
She pulled Ace upright.
‘Come on, time to get out of here, there can't be long until your bombs go off.’
‘What?’
Ace shook herself to clear her mind.
‘Oh yeah, right.’
She glanced at her watch.
‘About four minutes.’
She turned to wave to the approaching Marines.
‘Hoi, you lot!
Drop everything and get over here now, the whole place blows in four minutes!’
The Marines didn't wait to be told twice, but simply began running for the door, firing as they went.
Either someone on the German side understood English or the  TARDIS's telepathic circuits were at work again, because the Germans also began dashing for the exits on their side of the cavern.
As the gunfire ceased, Ace and Benny ushered the Marines through the door, the group including a pair of medical orderlies who added Petion to their own collection of wounded, and followed after them through the tunnels that led upward more steeply than the others.
About twenty Marines accompanied Ace and Benny out through the tunnels.
The lights flickered on and off, illuminating others bustling back and forth, too busy in their own rush for the exits to bother with the intruders.
As they ran, mentally counting down the seconds, both Benny and Ace's thoughts were of what had happened to the Doctor.
The Doctor passed the door to the main cavern with approximately a minute and a half to go before Ace's explosives detonated.
Rubble and bloodstained corpses were scattered across the dockside, and acrid smoke from burning oil filled the air.
The Raubvogel had just entered the short tunnel that led out of the cavern, when Katze finally found what he'd been looking for.
Attached to the bulkhead between the hold full of gas drums and the fuel pumps, there was a large brick of strange pliable material with a wired board and cube set into it.
Katze had never seen this type of explosive, but it didn't take a scientific genius to work out what the thing was.
Having no idea of the detonation mechanism, he mentally called up the shortest route to the deck, while grasping the device and pulling it off the wall.
The explosion lifted the ship a few feet clear out of the water, smashing the superstructure against the low tunnel roof even as the hull burst open with a blaze of fire.
As the freighter slammed back down, the solid rock above began to loosen, huge boulders crashing into the decks.
Soon, the whole tunnel roof was collapsing on top of the ship.
The shock wave deafened the Doctor, and caused him to stumble on his way.
The lights died altogether, and he was forced to use precious seconds to dig a small torch from his pocket, even as he wondered why that explosion had come early.
Benny and Ace also had torches, with which to help lead the Marines out.
‘Somebody must have tried to move or defuse one of the bombs,’ Ace shouted above the noise.
‘How long till the rest go?’
‘Thirty seconds.’
They hurried on.
Froebe's eyes opened weakly, and he coughed in a huge racking spasm.
Spitting out a gobbet of blood, he dragged himself over to the window, to look down on the devastation below.
‘You may have won the battle, Doctor, but not the war,’ he hissed.
The other explosives went off.
Within seconds of each other, the two remaining freighters were ripped apart in great swathes of flame, sending white hot metal and sprays of burning oil through the cavern.
The remaining gas drums were torn apart in a huge blast, and a series of titanic explosions ripped through the fuel tanks in their area, the shock wave breaking loose enormous chunks of rock from the roof.
Those, in concert with fiery remains of the ships and tanks, consumed the airship in a sun-like conflagration.
The cavern began to fill with falling rock, even Froebe's entire office overhang splitting from the living rock and falling into me inferno below.
The Doctor pounded along the tunnel as hard as he dared, when he was suddenly pitched to the ground by a huge invisible hand.
A blast of heated air rushed past, and poisonous smoke belched towards him.
Abandoning  all cares and concerns, he dashed headlong for the surface, dodging rocks that were jarred from the ceiling.
Benny and Ace also staggered as the main explosions hit, dust pouring on to them from above.
A white opening was visible, however, and they redoubled their efforts, tumbling out on to the gentle open slopes within seconds.
The Marines, gasping for breath as much as they were, followed, virtually racing, charging headlong away from the mountain.
They stopped at the edge of the sisal fields, turning to look back.
The mountain shook for several long seconds, after which time they were delighted to see the Doctor hurtle out of the cave mouth and hurl himself down towards them.
The barest instant after he was free, a tongue of flame blasted out of the cave at his heels, and pieces of the higher slopes disappeared inwards as flames and gouts of smoke exploded out of the weaker points of the mountain.
The Doctor flung himself down beside them just as a final blast scattered small chips and stone fragments over them.
The deep rumbling of the explosions dying down to a hissing of falling dust, everything grew quiet, and the twenty or so survivors collapsed against a low wall to get their breath back.
The Doctor grinned up at Ace and Benny's grime-streaked faces.
‘You know, I think we're going to need another holiday to recover from this one,’ he said.
‘Not yet,’ Benny said slowly.
‘Look.’
They followed her pointing arm with their eyes, and were chilled to see a group of thin figures form out of the darkness all around, shambling towards the group of tired combatants.
Remnants of rags hanging from their stiff and unresponsive bodies, the population of the nameless village shuffled mindlessly towards them….