

The lands of the South Slavs
The lands which the South Slav tribes first entered, in the middle of the first millennium AD, were geographically very different from their earlier homelands north of the Carpathians, in the Vistula basin and the Ukraine.
South-east Europe is a region of great geographical diversity, in which several major physiographic and climatic zones converge.
The topography and drainage patterns suggest certain routes by which invaders have penetrated from all directions into the Balkan heartland.
In the north, the Pannonian lowlands, drained by the Danube and its tributaries, the Drava and the Tisa, extend across the great Hungarian Alföld to the foothills of the Carpathians and to the southern entrance of the Moravian gate near Bratislava on the Danube.
It is well established that the prehistoric amber trade, from Samland on the Baltic coast, used this route, and it was probably also used by German pastoralists and barbarian invaders.
The Danube itself provides an opening into Wallachia, via the Iron Gate at the south-eastern corner of the Pannonian plain.
Trajan's arch at the entrance to the Gate commemorates the Roman conquest of Dacia in AD 102.
The same passage, despite the narrow constriction of the valley at Djerdap, as the Danube forces its way between the Transylvanian Alps to the north and the Stara Planina to the south, may also have been a route for invaders into the Roman province of Pannonia, although the Iron Gate Pass, some 130 km (80 miles) further north, afforded a better route for the Goths who descended on Pannonia from Transylvania in the middle of the fourth century AD.
Belgrade stands at the meeting place of these Danubian routes and of two other historic highways.
Southward the Morava-Vardar corridor leads to the Aegean at Salonika (Thessaloniki).
This, too, was an element in the amber route.
Archaeologists have been able to follow this trade route across Europe from the Baltic to the Mediterranean by analysing pieces of amber with unique chemical properties which identify the source area in Samland.
As in some majestic paperchase, they have traced the amber carriers back from the Greek islands to the pine forests and sandy heaths of  the Baltic littoral.
The Vardar-Morava corridor not only carried traders, it carried cultural influences from the Byzantine Greek world into the Danube basin, most notably the Christian faith as practised by the apostles of the Slavs, Kiril and Metodije.
It was also used by the armies of the eastern emperor, Theodosius, when he marched through the Balkans in AD 394 to overthrow Eugenius and make himself master of both eastern and western empires.
The army of Theodosius followed the Sava valley from Pannonia to confront the Romans in the Vipava valley (then known as the Frigidus), which is on the line of another historic routeway.
This leads from the neighbourhood of modern Ljubljana (Roman Emona) by way of the Pear Tree Pass (Hrušica) to the Vipava and thence to the head of the Adriatic at Aquileia near present-day Trieste.
Gibbon records that on the day of the decisive battle a ‘violent tempest’ blowing in the faces of the defending Romans ‘disordered their ranks, wrested their weapons from their hands, and diverted or repelled their ineffectual javelins’.
This was a bura (Italian bora ), the wind which originates when an area of low pressure over the Adriatic attracts cold air from the continental interior.
The funnelling effect of such gaps in the mountains as the Pear Tree Pass or the adjacent Gate of Postojna increases the ferocity of the wind, which in local gusts can reach velocities of over 160 km per hour (100 mph) and cause falls in temperature of 22°C (40°F) within a few hours.
A major route between the eastern and western empires, the Via Egnatia, involved a ferry crossing of the Adriatic from Brindisi to Durazzo.
From Durazzo the way ran across Albania to Ohrid and Bitola (Heraclea Lincestis) in Macedonia, and then via Salonika to Byzantium (Constantinople).
Further north, another route later used by Ragusan merchants followed the Neretva valley, across the Ivan Pass, to Sarajevo.
The historic importance of these routeways owes much to the fact that they connect the contrasting environments of Alpine, Mediterranean and continental Europe.
The movement of goods, the interaction of cultures and the clash of empires have, by the accident of geography, been channelled through a relatively small area of south-eastern Europe, imposing an indelible imprint on its peoples.
The range of natural environments contained within Yugoslavia itself is far greater than one might expect in an area only 5 per cent larger than the United Kingdom.
Alpine Yugoslavia
Alpine fold mountains make its northern and western land frontiers.
Near the meeting place of the Austrian, Italian and Yugoslav borders in north-east  Slovenia the Carnic, the Karawanken and the Julian Alps come together.
Triglav, 2,864 m (9,400 ft) in the Julian Alps, the highest point in Yugoslavia, no longer, as in pre-war days, marks the frontier with Italy.
The post-war frontier changes have brought the Alpine valley of the Isonzo (Soča) within the confines of Yugoslavia, and the present frontier follows the ridges to the west of the Soča to the point where the river enters Italy at Gorizia (Gorica) and flows across the Friulian plain to enter the Adriatic near Monfalcone (Tržič).
Another Alpine valley, that of the Sava Dolinka, occupies a deep trench between the Karawanken ranges which separate Slovenia from Austrian Carinthia and the majestic limestone peaks of the Julian Alps to the south.
Another branch of the Sava, the Sava Bohinjka, rises on the southern flanks of Triglav, flowing through subterranean passages under the valley of the Seven Lakes to emerge from a cave halfway up the sheer wall of Komarča as the waterfall of Slap Savica.
After passing through the 45-metre-deep (150 ft) glacial basin of Lake Bohinj, it flows northward to join its sister stream near Lake Bled, and then through Slovenia and Croatia to join the Danube 940 km (587 miles) away at Belgrade.
Other Alpine ranges, following the east-west trend line of the main European Alpine complex, occupy the area between the Sava valley and the Austrian frontier.
These include the Savinjski and Kamniški Alps, which attain heights of over 2,000 m (6,560 ft), and the high plateau of Pohorje, near Maribor, which rises to over 1,300 m (4,260 ft).
Notrajnsko
South of the Julian Alps lies an area of limestone plateaus which extend southward towards Trieste and the Istrian peninsula and eastward towards the Kupa river.
The Slovene name for this area is Notrajnsko (Interior).
The area behind Trieste carries the Slovene name Kras.
This is more widely known to geomorphologists by its Germanic corruption,Karst .
It displays the classic erosional features of limestone areas, and because of the pioneer work of the Serbian geographer Jovan Cvijić (1865–1927), the Slavonic terminology which he devised is still used by geomorphologists throughout the world to describe limestone scenery.
Polje , the Serbo-Croat word used for a field, bears the special connotation of a large, flat-floored depression.
Dolina (literally a valley) is a shallow, saucer-shaped depression, often leading to a sink-hole or ponor .
Many of the larger depressions are filled with the characteristic Mediterranean soil,terra rossa , and are cultivated, mainly for fodder crops and vegetables.
Others are subject to flooding when underground streams, swollen by  winter rains and melt waters, emerge from sources  vauclusiennes  (Slovene vrelo ).
The celebrated intermittent lake of Cerknica covers an area of 28.4 sq km(11 sq miles ) and persists for several months.
On the open surface of the plateau, soils are thin and in many areas almost devoid of cover, the bare rock surfaces displaying the appearance of a limestone pavement, dissected by a rectangular grid of fissures.
Intermittent drainage, underground watercourses and vast cave systems are features of the karst.
The caves of Postojna and Škocjan are notable tourist attractions, and there is even a castle, Predjamski Grad, built into the mouth of a cave halfway up a sheer limestone cliff, to which access can be gained by way of a labyrinth of underground passages.
The nature of the underground drainage can give rise to international problems when streams cross under frontiers.
This is the case with the Reka (Timavo) river, which disappears underground at Škocjan and emerges to enter the Gulf of Trieste, near Monfalcone, 40 km (25 miles) away.
Before the invention of refrigeration, peasants on the Slovene Karst stored blocks of ice in the depths of the caves, whence they could be transported in spring and summer to the fish market of Trieste, to be exchanged for the copper sulphate needed to treat the vines in order to control the ravages of the deadly aphid Phylloxera .
Although parts of the karst are barren and treeless, there are other areas where a covering of marls and sandstones known as flysch , derived from the deposits of the bed of an Eocene sea, provides the basis for surface drainage and soils.
Tree growth is possible and, until the depredations of humans and goats destroyed much of the forest cover, timber cutting provided a much-needed additional source of income to supplement the meagre subsistence of the peasants.
The forests of the Trnovski Gozd, above the Vipava valley, supplied timber to the shipyards of Trieste during the nineteenth century.
The Dinaric region
In the plateau lands of Notranjsko the north-west to south-east trend line of the Dinaric system may be discerned, in contrast to the east-west line of the main Alpine system.
The western Dinaric system consists of a series of parallel limestone ranges which run behind the Adriatic coast for 720 km (450 miles) from Slovenia to the Albanian border and continue through Albania to the Pindos mountains of Greece.
The predominant rocks are Cretaceous limestones, although in the Velebit mountains of northern  Dalmatia the rocks are of Jurassic age.
The narrow coastal plain between the mountain rampart and the sea is covered by Eocene flysch , and in the largest area of flat land in Dalmatia, the plain between Zadar and Šibenik, the underlying limestone is almost entirely masked by flysch .
This is of great importance in providing a basis for the cultivation of cereals and the grazing of animals in an area where opportunities for agriculture are severely restricted.
The scores of islands which lie off the Adriatic coast are the crests of mountain ranges which foundered during periods of tectonic disturbances.
Their alignment follows the same direction as the adjacent mainland ranges, to which they are structurally related.
The same process of foundering has created along the shore a number of deep-water natural harbours by the inundation of the lower courses of streams.
Where a breach has been made in the outer coastal ranges, the sea has penetrated into the depressions which run behind them parallel to the main Dinaric trend.
Such features are found at Bakar, Šibenik, Split and Kotor.
Unfortunately the commercial value of these natural harbours is somewhat vitiated by the difficulty of communication inland across the Dinaric ranges to the centres of population in the interior of Yugoslavia.
There are few rivers which are able to maintain a course across the grain of the land to penetrate from the interior to the sea.
The most important are the Cetina, which enters the sea at Omiš; and the Neretva, between Dubrovnik and Split.
The lower Cetina flows in a narrow, steep-sided gorge between bare mountains rising to heights of over 1,000 m (3,280 ft) which render it useless as a line of communication into the interior.
The best access from this area of central Dalmatia to the upper course of the Cetina in Sinjsko Polje is from the coast at Split via Solin (Salona) and the steep defile at Klis.
The Neretva offers a better line of communication from its delta on the shores of the Neretvanski Kanal, a sheltered stretch of water lying between the coast and the Pelješac peninsula.
The route inland, now followed by a railway and a modern road, leads to Mostar and then over the Ivan Pass to Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia.
All the features of karstic topography found in Slovenia are displayed on a grand scale in the Dinaric system.
Between the parallel ranges lie a series of polja extending for over 640 km (400 miles) and reaching inland in a belt 100 km (64 miles) wide.
The individual polja can be over 65 km (40 miles) long, but are seldom more than a few kilometres across, their long axes conforming to the north-west to south-east direction of the Dinaric trend lines.
Life in these karstic polja is an unremitting struggle against a cruel  environment.
In pre-war times the Croatian economist Rudolf Bićanić undertook a survey of life on the Dinaric karst for the Croat Peasant Party, which he published under the title Kako živi narod (How the People Live).
It describes the life of peasants in some of the poorest polja — Livno, Lika, Imotski and Sinjsko.
To the natural hazards of intermittent drainage, alternate floods and droughts, and infertile, stony soil were added the human obstacles of antiquated systems of land tenure, primitive methods of farming, neglect of welfare services, poor communication and exploitation by moneylenders and merchants.
The situation has improved in many ways, but it is not easy to overcome the problems created by natural obstacles and compounded by the legacy of centuries of neglect.
These regions are still amongst the poorest and least developed in Yugoslavia.
Visitors to the resorts on the Dalmatian coast do not always realise the poverty and backwardness which lie over the mountains only a few kilometres away from the bright lights of Split, Zadar and Šibenik.
The Adriatic coastlands
Relatively isolated from the interior of Yugoslavia by the mountain barrier which rises above them, the Adriatic coastlands and islands belong geographically to the Mediterranean world.
The way of life of the Dalmatian peasants and fisherfolk, and of the citizens of the former Venetian colonies of Split, Šibenik and Zadar has for centuries resembled that of the Italians on the western shore of the Adriatic rather than that of their Slav cousins who inhabit the Balkan interior.
The sea was a link not only with Italy but also with a wider world beyond the Mediterranean.
Merchants from Ragusa (Dubrovnik) traded with the Levant and with northern Europe.
Dalmatian sailors served in many fleets — with the Spanish Armada, with the Dutch, the English and the French during the period of their colonial rivalries in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with the Venetians during the heyday of the maritime republic, and even with the Americans during the War of Independence.
When Trieste became the major outlet for the trade of central Europe, Dalmatians were found in ships of the Lloyd Triestino line.
E. A. Freeman's description of Dalmatia as ‘a Slavonic land with an Italian fringe’ refers to the cultural geography of the Adriatic coastlands, but it might also be applied to the physical geography (as ‘a Dinaric land with a Mediterranean fringe’).
The regime of the vine and olive is restricted to a zone varying in width from a few hundred metres under Velebit to 30 km (18 miles) near Zadar.
Just as the coastal cities were subjected  throughout the centuries to incursions from the interior by the forces of whichever power held sway beyond the mountains — Byzantines, Hungarians, Serbs and Turks — so the tranquillity of the Mediterranean climate is brutally violated from time to time by the icy blasts of the bura .
The islands present a bare and inhospitable face to the mainland, as their landward slopes receive the full force of the wind.
The sheltered, seaward-facing slopes support a typically Mediterranean vegetation, composed of aromatic shrubs (the maquis) and evergreen woods of Aleppo pine.
The cultivated plants include figs, olives and vines.
This vegetation pattern is also found on the sheltered lowland strips which lie in the shadow of the coastal mountain ranges.
The Dinaric ranges
There is an abrupt change in climate and vegetation once the coastal ranges are crossed.
The height of the polja floors varies between 1,000 m (3,280 ft) in Glamočko Polje in the north and 400 m (1,300 ft) in Sinjsko Polje in central Dalmatia, descending to under 50 m (165 ft) at Titograd.
In a few places, as in the lower Neretva valley, a breach in the mountain wall permits a gulf of Mediterranean air to penetrate inland, but more commonly the unbroken barrier shuts out the ameliorating influences from the sea.
The contrast between the conditions on the coast and in the interior is illustrated by the climatic statistics for two stations less than 30 km (18.5 miles) apart.
Ostra Point (Rt.
Ostra) at the mouth of the Bay of Kotor enjoys a hot, dry summer, with average July temperatures of 25°C (77°F), and has warm, moist winters, with average January temperatures of 9°C (48°F).
Of the annual rainfall of 975 mm (38.4 in), more than two-thirds occurs between October and March.
In July and August the average number of rain days is only four per month.
Cetinje, 720 m (2,205 ft) above sea level, the old capital of the kingdom of Montenegro, lies only 30 km away, on the landward side of the Lovčen range.
Here January temperatures are below freezing point (-0.5°C, 31°F) and only in the three summer months does the average temperature rise above 15.5°C (60°F), July attaining 21°C (70°F).
Total rainfall is 3,550 mm (139.7 in), over three times the amount received at Ostra.
Further inland, from the Dalmatian hinterland, in Bosnia and the Sandžak, strong continental influences are apparent, with a marked rainfall maximum in early summer — Sarajevo's wettest month is June — and much colder winters.
The Pannonian region
The full rigours of the continental climate are experienced in the Sava-Danube lowlands.
Winters are cold, with biting winds sweeping in from the Hungarian plain.
Summers are hot, with monthly averages of over 77°C (70°F).
Total rainfall is low — Belgrade has only 609 mm (24 in)— and the wettest period is March-June.
Summer thunderstorms are common, but the torrential downpours which they often bring are soon evaporated in the hot sun and are of limited value to agriculture.
Irrigation is necessary to sustain the crops which grow on the fertile, loess-covered lowlands of one of Europe's richest grain-growing regions.
Paradoxically, large-scale drainage and flood-control measures are also needed at other times of the year.
The Danube and its principal tributaries, the Sava, Drava and Tisa, rise in areas where heavy rainfall is supplemented by melt water from Alpine glaciers, causing frequent inundation on the low-lying ground further downstream.
The Vardar region
The Vardar river, which flows through the centre of the Macedonian republic, reaches the Aegean Sea near Salonika.
It provides the corridor through which the cold Vardarac wind — a cousin of the Dalmatian bura — brings continental influences from the Danubian lowlands in winter.
Average January temperatures are below freezing point, even as far south as Bitola, which lies in the same latitude as Naples.
By contrast, summers are very hot, with monthly averages above 22°C (70°F).
Mediterranean influences penetrate northwards into the Vardar valley and the lowlands of Pelagonija.
In these inland basins, separated from each other by rugged mountain ranges of crystalline rocks, sub-tropical crops such as rice, tobacco, cotton and opium poppies are grown.
Total rainfall is low, with many places receiving under 500 mm (20 in) a year, but irrigation is possible, the water being provided by the Vardar and its tributary the Crna Reka, which rises in areas of higher rainfall.
The Vardar region contains some of Yugoslavia's largest natural lakes — Ohrid, Prespa and Dojran, which occupy tectonic basins.
Ohrid, the deepest lake in Yugoslavia (286 m (935 ft) at its greatest depth) is of great scientific interest, as it contains a species of trout which, like the omul in Lake Baikal, has survived from before the last Ice Age, the lake having being formed during the Tertiary period.
The rich variety of geographical environments provides a background to  the diversity of ways of life and traditions of the Yugoslav peoples.
Each region offers different opportunities and imposes different kinds of restriction on its inhabitants.
Although certain routeways of international importance cross through their territory, many Yugoslav communities have lived in isolation from each other, developing unique cultural characteristics.
The problem which faced the rulers of royal Yugoslavia and now faces the present communist-led society, is to create a sense of common loyalty amongst peoples whose geographical circumstances and historical experiences have tended towards diversity.
The early Slav settlers
The Roman occupation
When the Romans first began to expand into the Balkans in the third century BC, the area was inhabited by Thracian, Illyrian and Celtic tribes.
The Thracians and Illyrians had been to a great extent Hellenised during the fourth century BC, when the Macedonian empire of Philip and Alexander flourished.
Greek colonies had been established along the Adriatic coastlands even earlier.
The Celts, who migrated into the Balkans in the fourth century BC and settled mainly in the northern lowlands, became assimilated into the Illyrian community, the chief legacy of their presence being numerous Celtic elements in place names.
For a time before the Roman invasions several powerful Illyrian or Graeco-Illyrian kingdoms existed in places as far apart as modern Albania and Macedonia in the south and the upper Sava basin in the north.
Remarkable examples of the wealth, power and high cultural attainments of the Illyrians have been found in the excavations of royal tombs.
The friezes which decorate the situla discovered at Vače, near present-day Ljubljana, depict scenes of ritual sacrifices, feasts, battles, sport and pastimes which suggest that a highly organised, metal-using society existed in this area in the fifth century BC.
There are signs of both Greek and Etruscan influences.
The Illyrians were the first to feel the power of Rome.
During the third century BC Roman attacks began on Illyrian tribes settled in the Neretva valley, followed by raids on the Greek cities on the Albanian coast.
Most of the coastlands were brought under Roman rule during the Illyrian wars of Octavian in 35–33 BC.
Further advances were made following a rising of the Illyrians in 9 BC, and the final subjugation of the Illyrians in the western Balkans was achieved under Tiberius in AD 9.
At the same time, Rome extended its rule over Celtic tribes in Serbia and Bulgaria, and by AD 14 the whole of the Balkans south of the Danube was in Roman hands.
The logic of imperialism forced the Romans to extend their frontiers continually, invading territories from which their ‘barbarian’ enemies  launched attacks on the frontiers of the empire.
Trajan, in AD 101, crossed the Danube and incorporated the province of Dacia (modern Wallachia and the Banat) into the empire in AD 105.
Although this extension of the frontiers beyond the Danube, even to the banks of the Dniester, gave Rome access to the rich grain-growing areas of Wallachia and the mineral wealth of Transylvania, it also stretched the imperial lines of communication and made central control from Rome more difficult.
It was Gibbon's opinion that Trajan's conquest of Dacia was maintained for reasons of prestige, and that it contributed to the weakening of the empire.
Dacia was not strong enough to beat off the barbarians, and not rich enough to satisfy them once they had conquered it.
In AD 272 the Romans were forced out of Dacia by Goths invading from across the Dniester.
The frontier was again placed on the Danube, but the loss of the buffer zone of Dacia threatened the security of Moesia, the province which covered modern Serbia and Macedonia.
The defences on the Danube had been neglected, for as long as the frontier lay on the Dniester the inhabitants of Moesia believed themselves to be secure.
In AD 285, shortly after the withdrawal from Dacia, Trajan's successor, Diocletian, himself a native of Dalmatia, divided the empire into two administrative areas, a western half governed from Rome and an eastern half based on Constantinople.
Constantine effected a reunion, but, on the death of Theodosius in AD 395, a second division was made, between the emperor's two sons.
The ‘great and martial praefecture of Illyricum’ was divided between Arcadius and Honorius.
The dividing line ran north-south from the Sava near Sirmium (Sremska Mitrovica) to Lake Scutari (Skadar) on the present Montenegrin-Albanian border.
This line became a permanent feature on the cultural map of Europe, separating Byzantium from Rome, the Greek from the Roman cultural heritage, the Eastern Orthodox from the Roman Catholic Church and the users of the Cyrillic script from those of the Latin.
The legacy of Rome
Roman culture absorbed that of the Illyrians.
Those Illyrians who did not assimilate probably moved to the less hospitable mountainous areas, but little is known of their fate.
They are as mysterious as the Etruscans, the pre-Roman occupants of the Italian peninsula.
Albanian historians believe that the modern Albanians developed from the ancient Illyrians and that there is a continuity of Illyrian settlement in their country from the Bronze Age to the present time.
Under Roman rule the Illyrians were drawn into the mainstream of European culture.
Those who were assimilated adopted Latin speech, enrolled in the Roman army and became citizens of Roman towns such as Salona, the capital of Roman Dalmatia and birthplace of the emperor Diocletian.
Diocletian (reigned 284–305) was one of five sons of Illyrian peasants who were to wear the imperial purple.
He retired from the imperial throne in AD 305 and spent the last nine years of his life in cultivating the soil of his native Dalmatia, constructing the city which still forms the heart of modern Split and, according to Gibbon, enjoying the ‘most exquisite trout’ which were bred in ‘the little stream of the Hyader’(now the Jadro).
The city, the aqueduct and the trout are still there.
The Romans found an existing road pattern which went back to Neolithic times and which followed the natural corridors of movement suggested by the topography.
In many cases the Romans merely paved the existing roadways, but their needs were not always those of their predecessors, and they were obliged to pioneer new routes.
There were two overriding needs which had to be met by the Roman road network — military and economic.
The Via Militaris ran from Singidunum (Belgrade) to Byzantium (Constantinople) via Naissus (Niš) and Serdica (Sofia), following the Morava valley for the first 200 km (125 miles) of its 924 km (575 mile) length.
As its name implies, the Via Militaris was a major line of communication for the Roman armies defending the eastern frontier, and as a stage in one of the links between Italy and Byzantium it already had an important role to play in the vital intercourse between the eastern and western halves of the empire.
More important in this connection, however, was the Via Egnatia, which was in effect a continuation of the Via Apiae (Appian Way).
This led from Rome to the ferry port of Egnatia, between Bari and Brindisi.
From there travellers took ship to Dyrrachium (Durres) and then followed the road across Albania and Macedonia to Salonika.
This was the most direct route from Rome to Byzantium.
Roman roads ran the whole length of Dalmatia, linking Salona with the main seaports.
Where the terrain demanded, as under Velebit, the roads left the coast to follow the interior polja behind the coastal ranges.
Branch roads linked the main mining centres, enabling the lead, silver, iron and copper products of the interior to be brought to the coast for export across the Adriatic or, in the case of the Serbian and north Bosnian mines, to be transported to the Danube.
Abundant archaeological evidence — milestones, cobbled surfaces, artefacts related to mining — bears witness to the existence of a network of main  roads linking the coast with the main Sava-Danube-Morava-Vardar axis.
It is only in recent decades that anything resembling this framework has been re-established.
Along the roads urban settlements grew up.
Those along the coast and in the north-west were primarily civilian and commercial establishments.
Further inland, and especially in the Pannonian lowlands and along the Vardar-Morava corridor, the military character of the Roman settlements became more pronounced.
Most of Yugoslavia's main cities can trace their origins back to Roman foundation or, where earlier settlements can be identified, to a revival of activity in Roman times.
Ljubljana (Emona), Sremska Mitrovica (Sirmium), Belgrade (Singidunum), Niš (Naissus), Skopje (Scupi), Osijek (Mursa), Mostar (Andetrium) and Bitola (Heraclea) are some of the principal Roman settlements which are still important urban centres in modern Yugoslavia.
Most of the coastal towns, from Pula in Istria, with its magnificent amphitheatre, to Stari Bar in Montenegro were Roman ports, some, like Epidaurus (Cavtat), being built on Greek foundations.
The arrival of the Slavs
The Slavs first appeared in the Balkans in the late fourth century AD as marauders who raided the Romanised settlements south of the Danube from their temporary resting place in Hungary.
They had moved southwards from their previous homeland in the area between the Pripet marshes and the Carpathians, in what is now Poland and the Ukraine, during the third and fourth centuries.
The impetus which drove them to expand in all directions from this base is not fully explained.
It may be that the same forces impelled the Slavs which affected the Asiatic peoples who moved into Europe from the east during the period of folk migrations which accompanied and contributed to the fall of the Roman empire.
It was during this period of what used to be called the Dark Ages that the ethnic map of Europe began to assume a character which in the main survives today.
The nations of modern Europe can be discerned in embryo by the end of the first millennium, after the upheavals which accompanied the disintegration of the Pax Romana.
The Slavs were one of a score of peoples who ravaged the Roman world, but they are one of the few whose cultural identity has remained intact.
The Goths, the Avars, the Lombards, the Huns, the Franks became absorbed in the Romanised populations they dominated.
This happened to some extent to the Slavs who invaded Greece in the sixth century, but in the Balkans three distinct Slav groups may be  identified by the tenth century — the ancestors of the present-day Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes.
These South Slavs became separated from related groups in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Russia and the Ukraine by a wedge of non-Slavs — the Germans of Austria, the Romanians of Wallachia and the Magyars of Hungary.
Once they had settled in the Balkans they also became separated from each other, partly because of the geographical obstacles to easy movement within the peninsula, and partly because of the historical circumstances of foreign occupations.
The term South Slav (or Yugoslav) is primarily a linguistic category which came into use in the eighteenth century.
It gained currency during the period of national reawakening in the nineteenth century.
It is probable that the linguistic differentiation which separates the South Slavs from the Western Slavs (Poles, Czechs, Slovaks) and the Eastern Slavs (Russians, Bielorussians, Ukrainians) had not become apparent at the time of the migration.
It is equally probable that the separation of the South Slav languages into Serb, Croat, Slovene, Macedonian and Bulgarian was then in an early stage of development, if it had occurred at all.
The first records of Slav incursions into the Balkans refer to plundering raids on the Byzantine settlements and fortresses of the Danubian lowlands and the Vardar-Morava corridor.
In 517 a major invasion occurred when Slav horsemen advanced as far as Thermopylae and Epirus.
The attacks increased in intensity and duration in the reign of Emperor Justinian I (527–65).
One ancient chronicler, Prokopie Kesarinski, refers to the Slavs and Antii crossing the Danube almost every year and attacking Illyria, Thrace and ‘all the regions of the Ionian Gulf as far as the outlying districts of Constantinople’.
In 548 they stayed in the Balkans for a whole year and destroyed many towns and fortresses, including the Byzantine centre of Lychnidus (Ohrid).
Gradually groups of Slavs moved in to colonise areas which they had occupied during their raids.
Around AD 570 the Slavs of the Pannonian basin were subjugated by an invading Turkic people, the Avars.
Slavs accompanied the Avar hordes who invaded the Byzantine empire in the late sixth century, laying waste cities as far south as Tiveropolis (Strumica in south-east Macedonia) and enslaving or slaughtering the indigenous population.
The Avars also raided westward into Italy, following the routes taken in previous centuries by Theodosius and his Gothic allies in 394; by Alaric the Goth advancing towards Rome, which he sacked in 410; by Attila the Hun in 452; and by Alboin and the Lombards in 568.
Unlike the earlier horders who crossed the Julian region to descend upon the rich plains of Venetia, the Lombards settled, and fortified the passes through which they had  invaded, to secure their eastern boundary against the infiltration of further invaders.
They remained long enough to give their name to the region of Italy where they settled, and to create the marcher duchy of Friuli as a buffer zone against attacks on their kingdom by the occupiers of the Sava-Danube lowlands — the Slavs and their overlords, the Avars.
In 610 a combined Avar-Slav army thrust across the karst, following the route of Theodosius over the Pear Tree Pass (Hrušica) and the Vipava valley.
Although the Avar army withdrew after sacking towns in Friuli and killing the Duke of Friuli, the raid of 610 appears to mark the beginning of Slav colonisation of the upper Sava valley.
In 677 a Slav prince, Samo, appears as ruler of a Slav empire which endured until after his death in 658.
Samo's empire, about which little is known, held sway over the Sava valley from Zagreb to the Julian Alps, and northward from Ljubljana across Austria, Bohemia and Moravia into Saxony.
This was the first occasion on which the ancestors of the modern Slovenes found themselves included in a political unit which extended into central Europe.
A century later, when Charlemagne, the Frankish Christian king, accepted a papal commission to subdue the rebellious Lombards, he included the remnants of Samo's kingdom in his new state, from which the Holy Roman Empire developed.
Charlemagne proceeded to the conversion of his new subjects to Christianity.
The old Roman city of Aquileia, the seat of a patriarchate under the archbishopric of Salzburg, was the religious centre for the conversion of the Slovenes.
Thus the Slovenes were drawn into the cultural and religious life of western Europe under German princes and within the spiritual jurisdiction of the Roman Church.
The imprint of these deep-rooted influences still stamps the national character of the Slovenes.
The only attempt to revive the Slav kingdom of Samo, which Ottokar of Bohemia made in the thirteenth century, was decisively crushed by the Holy Roman Emperor at the battle of Marchfeld (1278).
Thenceforward, until the Slovenes broke with the Habsburg empire and joined the newly formed Serb-Croat-Slovene state in 1918, the fortunes of this small Slav community were linked to those of Austria.
At the end of the eighth century most of the area of present-day Yugoslavia south of the Sava-Danube line was colonised by Slav tribes, whose influence also extended into Albania and central Greece.
Byzantine writers referred to this area as Sclavonia, the land of the Slavs.
This should not be confused with the later usage of Slavonia, which, in a geographical sense, refers to a region of south-east Croatia centred on Slavonski Brod, but in a wider context is used to cover the historic Habsburg province of Slavonia, which lay between the valleys of the Sava and the Drava.
In the  north, Charlemagne's empire covered Slovenia — the land of the Slovenes — the mid-Sava valley and the northern Adriatic coast from Istria to the neighbourhood of Šibenik.
The Byzantine empire controlled enclaves on the coast around Split and Dubrovnik and the whole of the Albanian and Greek coasts, the Aegean islands, southern Macedonia and Bulgaria south of the Stara Planina.
To the east and north of Sclavonia, in modern Hungary, Romania and northern Bulgaria, the Bulgars, the Avars and the Magyars were to be found.
Within the territory occupied by the Slavs were many non-Slavs.
Some were survivors of the Illyrians, others were Vlahs, a people of Romance speech whose name is related to Wallachia.
The Vlahs were sufficiently numerous in south-west Serbia for their name to survive in the Stari Vlah region, south of Titovo Užice.
Some Vlah communities survive today in the mountainous regions of Macedonia and in northern Greece.
In Pannonia, beyond the limits of Slavonia, there were many Slav subjects of the Avars.
The coastal cities of Dalmatia, whether under Byzantine or Slav rule, still contained many Romanised Illyrians who retained their Latin culture.
During the ninth century a struggle developed for the souls of the Slavs between the two Christian confessions, the Eastern Church based in Byzantium and the Western Church based in Rome.
The Slovenes and some Croats had been converted during the time of Charlemagne, and the Croats of Dalmatia were converted by missionaries from Rome during the early seventh century.
Although Byzantium made some inroads in Dalmatia during the next two centuries, the issue was finally settled in favour of Rome at the end of the ninth century by the Croatian prince Branimir (879–92).
Christianity came to the Macedonians and Serbs from the east, under the influence of the Byzantine emperors, who were the nominal overlords — and in some cases the real rulers — of the Slavs in the southern Balkans.
There may have been a formal recognition of Christianity by the leaders of some Serbian tribes as early as the seventh century, but the real beginnings of Christianity in this area date from the last decades of the ninth century and are associated with the ‘Apostles of the Slavs’, the brothers Constantine-Cyril (Kiril) and Methodius (Metodije).
In 863 the ruler of Moravia, Prince Rastislav, sent to the Byzantine emperor, Michael III, a request that missionaries should be sent to instruct his people in the Christian faith, through the medium of the Slavonic tongue.
Michael, although reputedly a licentious and irreligious man, sent Cyril and Methodius on a mission which had far-reaching consequences for the future of Christianity, although their mission to Moravia achieved only a temporary victory for the  Byzantine cause.
After the death of Methodius in AD 885 the other members of his mission, including Clement and Naum, who were later canonised for their work amongst the Macedonians, were driven out of Moravia.
Cyril's great contribution was to devise an alphabet, the glagolitic (glagol =verb), in which the Gospels could be written in Slavonic.
The glagolitic alphabet was probably an adaptation from the old Greek cursive script.
It was a phonetic alphabet, in which each sound in the spoken language of south-east Macedonia was represented by a symbol.
This language, which formed the basis of Old Church Slavonic, was diffused throughout the Balkans and into central Europe, as far as Moravia and southern Poland, through the missionary activities of Constantine-Cyril and Methodius.
Its use in the liturgy was at first opposed by the papacy, but, following the Council of Split in 1079, both the Old Church Slavonic language and the glagolitic script were permitted to exist in central Dalmatia.
In the mid thirteenth century Pope Innocent IV reaffirmed the right of the diocese of Senj and the island of Krk to retain their traditional usages.
A slow process of diffusion then took place and glagolitic spread into Istria, Slovenia and Slavonia.
In the fourteenth century it even penetrated as far as Prague and Krakow.
Meanwhile, in its home area of Macedonia it had been replaced by the Cyrillic alphabet, named after Cyril, even though he probably played no direct part in its development.
Cyrillic, which was also a phonetic alphabet, was based on the Greek uncial script.
It appeared at the end of the ninth century and spread during the next two centuries throughout the Eastern (Byzantine) Church.
Adaptations were made in order to incorporate the idiosyncrasies of the evolving Slavonic languages Bulgarian, Serbian, Macedonian and Russian — within the domain of the Orthodox Church.
The Old Church Slavonic became ossified and bore a relationship to the vernacular tongue of the people similar to that which church Latin bore towards Spanish, Italian and French.
At the time of its first dispersal, however, the languages had sufficient in common for Cyril and his followers to be understood by the Moravians, who were subjects of Prince Rastislav.
The fate of glagolitic became involved with the ecclesiastical politics of Dalmatia, where Byzantine and Latin religious influences overlapped.
In some areas of Dalmatia and Croatia the use of glagolitic was encouraged by Benedictine and Franciscan monks as a weapon in the battle against Greek Orthodox influences.
Thus glagolitic became known as a Croatian script, although its origins were in Macedonia.
A ‘Glagolitic’ Seminary  existed until 1820 in Priko, in the district of Poljica, which lies between the lower Cetina valley and the coast between Split and Omiš.
In fact, it was no longer a glagolitic institution, as Cyrillic had replaced glagolitic in most of Dalmatia south of Split by the fifteenth century, and Cyrillic was in its turn replaced by the Latin script during the next few centuries.
The statute of the independent principality of Poljica, the earliest parts of which date from 1444, is written in a form of Cyrillic known as Bosančica.
Poljica's independence was suppressed by Napoleon in 1806, and its incorporation first into the Illyrian Provinces and later into the Austrian province of Dalmatia assisted the spread of the Latin script, which by this time had become common throughout Dalmatia.
Nevertheless, the last documents from the seminary at Priko, before its dissolution in 1820, were written in a form of Cyrillic.
The exact relationship between glagolitic and Cyrillic is a matter of dispute amongst scholars.
According to Blaže Koneski, the foremost authority on the evolution of the Macedonian language, the existence of the glagolitic script was a precondition for the development of Cyrillic.
One of the most devoted of the pupils of Cyril and Methodius, Clement (Sveti Kliment) of Ohrid, built a monastery on the shores of Lake Ohrid, which was to be a centre of Christian learning for the last thirty years of his long life (he died in 916).
In 893, Tsar Simeon appointed Clement to be the first Slav bishop of the diocese of Velika (Titov Veles), but he still maintained regular contact with the Ohrid School.
Clement and his successor Naum established the Slav tongue then spoken in Macedonia instead of the Greek of the Byzantine Church as the language of worship.
The great days of the Macedonian Church culminated in the creation of the patriarchate of Ohrid in 976, during the reign of Tsar Samuel (Samuilo), but the whole picture changed after the defeat of Samuel by the Byzantine emperor, Basil II, in 1014.
The patriarchate was reduced to an archbishopric, Greek replaced Slavonic in the liturgy and a process of Hellenisation began.
Eastern influences also dominated the Serbs in the ninth century.
They were officially placed under the jurisdiction of Byzantium by the župan (ruling prince) of the Serbian principality of Raška in 891.
Although during the next three centuries the Serbs were victims of a struggle between Rome and Byzantium, the Eastern Church finally triumphed during the reign of Stephen Nemanja in the late twelfth century.
In 1196 Stephen retired to become a monk, and in 1199 he and his younger son, Rastko (St Sava), founded a Serbian monastery on Mount Athos.
Although Stephen's older son, who succeeded him, was crowned as the first Serbian king by a  representative of Pope Honorius III in 1217, the allegiance of the Serbs to the Eastern Church was not affected.
Two years later St Sava was created the first Bishop of the autocephalous Serbian Church by the Patriarch of Byzantium.
In the next century, during the reign of Tsar Dušan, a Serbian patriarchate was established at Peć.
Although the patriarchate was annulled and restored again on several occasions during the Turkish occupation it was not finally abolished until 1766.
Peć is still the spiritual centre of the Serbian Orthodox Church, but it lies in a remote corner of Yugoslavia, close to the Albanian border, in the Albanian-speaking province of Kosovo.
The Bogomils
The Bogomil heresy, which first appeared in Macedonia during the tenth century, was a disruptive force not only to the Byzantine Church but also to those rulers — Bulgar, Serb or Byzantine — whose authority was derived from the spiritual sanction of the Patriarch of Constantinople.
In the last two centuries it has also been a source of scholarly controversy amongst historians, theologians and philosophers.
The view of Dmitri Obolensky, a leading authority on the Bogomils, is that they are the first European manifestation of a tradition which extends for over a thousand years from the teachings of Mani in third-century Mesopotamia to the Albigensian heresy, which appeared in southern France in the thirteenth century.
Manichaeism is a dualistic faith which believes in the existence, from the time of creation, of two opposed and independent principles — God and Matter, Light and Darkness, Soul and Body.
The liberation of the soul from the body, the separation of the light from the darkness, is the basis of Manichaean ethics.
It involves an attitude of extreme asceticism and a hatred of all worldly things — especially the pleasures of the flesh.
The first wave of Manichaeism swept over the Levant and Asia Minor in the third and fourth centuries — Bogomilism was the first manifestation of a neo-Manichaean movement which penetrated into southern and western Europe between the ninth and thirteenth centuries.
Some modern Macedonian historians see Bogomilism as a reaction by oppressed Macedonian serfs against the imposition of feudalism by the Bulgarian emperors Simeon and Peter.
Taken from this viewpoint, the priest Bogomil who roused the people of the village of Bogomila on the slopes of the Babuna mountain above Prilep was a revolutionary who found a ready response from the oppressed peasantry when he denounced the system.
There were, certainly, revolutionary implications in the Bogomil heresy, implications  which both Church and state authorities recognised as the heresy spread into Serbia, Bosnia-Hercegovina and even Dalmatia during the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
Both Byzantium and Rome felt themselves threatened and attempted to suppress the Bogomils.
Hungarian kings, with papal blessing, attempted to conquer Bosnia and Hercegovina, in order to destroy the Bogomils, at the same time winning territory for themselves and souls for Rome.
Hungarian pressure was particularly strong during the reign of Kálmán (1095–1116), who in 1102 became King of Croatia and Dalmatia.
At that time Croatia extended southward to the Neretva and covered most of Bosnia.
A century later, a Bosnian state emerged under the legendary Ban Kulin (1180–1204).
Kulin abandoned Rome and embraced the Bogomil heresy, but was forced to recant a year before his death, under pressure from Hungary.
Bogomilism in Bosnia revived in the fourteenth century during the reigns of the Kotromanić rulers, Stephen II and his son, Tvrtko, who was crowned King of ‘Serbia, Bosnia, the Primorje and the western lands’ in 1377.
Stephen owed his election as ban in 1322 to the Bogomils, but after he had been persuaded by the Hungarian king to submit to Rome, the Bogomils looked to Tsar Dušan of Serbia for help.
In the fifteenth century, when Christian Europe was threatened by the Turk, the Bogomils turned to the Crescent rather than the Cross, and many eventually accepted Islam.
The absorption of the heretic Bosnian (Bogomil) Church into the Islamic world did not come about as a result of a dramatic act of mass conversion, but, if Ottoman statistics are to be believed, it was a relatively rapid process.
According to a census of 1489, only 18.4 per cent of the population of Bosnia practised the Islamic faith.
The census of 1520–30 records 46 per cent in the whole of Bosnia, and 100 per cent in the newly built city of Sarajevo.
It has been suggested that the rapid increase in the Muslim population during this period cannot be attributed to the mass conversion of Bogomils, as the greatest increases were recorded in the areas where Bogomils were fewer in number, especially in the towns.
Nevertheless, the Bosnian Church gradually disappeared and a native-born, Slav-speaking Muslim aristocracy came into existence.
The 1.5 million Muslims in modern Bosnia, who are listed in the Yugoslav census as ‘Muslims of ethnic origin', are the descendants of those early converts.
Islam and Christianity
During the heyday of the Ottoman rule in Europe the Bosnian Muslims played an important part in the administration of the empire, one of them, Mehmet Sokolović, rising to be grand vizier to the sultan, Suleiman the  Magnificent, in the sixteenth century.
Bosnian Muslims also provided the Ottoman bureaucracy in Hungary after the battle of Mohács in 1526.
At lower levels of administration, the Orthodox and Roman Catholic Christian peasants of the raya were governed by Slav Muslim landowners, who, whilst retaining their Slavonic speech, adopted the manners and dress of the Turkish court.
Like many converts, they often ‘out-Ottomaned the Ottomans in their religious zeal’.
Outside Bosnia, in the Ottoman-occupied territories of Serbia, Macedonia and Albania, the Muslims were a thin stratum of Turkish immigrants, landowners and administrators, ruling over a mass of Christian peasants.
Although there were some examples of forcible conversion, the Ottomans on the whole left their Christian subjects alone, recognising their right to practise their faith, although subjecting them to social and economic disabilities.
Perhaps the harshest imposition was the forcible enlistment of young Christian boys into the corps of janissaries (yeni çeri = new troops).
This system, known as devşirme , began in the fifteenth century and died out in the late seventeenth century.
It was an extension of the old Ottoman practice of enslaving prisoners of war.
In the Balkans the burden fell most heavily on the Slavs of the Orthodox community.
The conversion of the Albanians was achieved during the seventeenth century largely through a discriminatory taxation system, the djize , which imposed severe burdens upon those who remained Christians.
Systematic persecution of non-Muslim religious minorities was not, however, a part of Islamic religious teaching nor, for the most part, of Ottoman state practice.
The Ottomans took over and extended the old Byzantine practice of placing religious communities (for example the Jews) under the supervision of their religious leaders, who were responsible for maintaining order, administering justice and collecting taxes within their community.
The religious communities — or millets — occasionally petitioned the sultan for redress if their religious leaders behaved in an oppressive manner, but on the whole they were left alone, provided they paid their taxes and caused no trouble.
The Balkan Christians were placed within the millet-i-Rum , no distinction being made between Orthodox and Roman Catholic believers — most were in fact Orthodox.
The system enabled the Orthodox Church to survive amongst the Serbs, Macedonians and Bulgarians throughout ‘the long Turkish night’.
The close involvement of religious leaders with the civil affairs of their followers had fateful consequences during the nineteenth century when the declining Ottoman empire faced the rising tide of Slav nationalism.
Orthodoxy and national identity were inextricably intertwined, and religious leaders became the spokesmen of national revolt.
It was during this  period that savage Turkish reprisals against Balkan nationalist movements gave the last of the sultans an unsavoury reputation for religious persecution which has coloured the writings of some western historians in their assessment of the whole record of the Ottoman empire.
The Ottoman conquests of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries brought the Turks to the line of the Sava and the Danube, a line which held for almost five hundred years.
In the great days of Suleiman the Magnificent the sultan's armies reached the gates of Vienna in 1529, having already subdued Hungary at the battle of Mohács three years earlier.
They again reached, but did not capture, Vienna under Mehemet IV, in 1683, but by 1791 the border was back to the Sava-Danube line.
As the Ottoman threat advanced northward through Bosnia and Serbia during the fifteenth century, Christian Europe prepared to resist.
The standard bearer of Christendom was the Austro-German House of Habsburg.
The Habsburgs acquired Styria after the defeat of Ottokar of Bohemia by the Holy Roman Empire at the battle of Marchfeld in 1278.
A few years later the duchy of Austria was awarded to one of the sons of Rudolph of Habsburg.
Carinthia and Carniola were acquired in 1335, and during the next half-century the Tyrol, Istria, part of the  Vorarlberg and the city of Trieste were added.
In the early fifteenth century Albrecht II became Holy Roman Emperor and the title remained with the House of Habsburg from 1437 until 1806, when Napoleon abolished the institution which by that time was, in Voltaire's words of 1756, ‘neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an empire’.
Whilst the Habsburgs were consolidating their power in central Europe they were confronted on the east by Hungary and in the south by the Venetian republic.
The Hungarians acceded to the throne of Croatia in 1102. and the link remained through many vicissitudes until the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian empire in 1918.
The death of the Hungarian king, Lajos (Louis) II, at the battle of Mohács created a vacancy.
A dynastic struggle conducted under the hovering threat of Turkish occupation eventually led to Ferdinand of Habsburg gaining the throne, but his effective authority existed over only a fragment of Hungary and Croatia-Slavonia.
In 1522 the first attempts were made to establish a border defence zone — the military frontier — to protect the Habsburg lands against the Turks in Bosnia and Serbia.
This zone, which at its greatest extent ran from Transylvania to the Adriatic, following the line of the Danube and Sava rivers, was not finally abolished until 1881.
By this time the Ottoman empire had long since ceased to be a threat to Christian Europe.
The threat to European peace arose from the consequences  of the slow decline of ‘the sick man of Europe’ and to the rivalries of the Christian powers over the disposal of the Ottoman patrimony.
The awakening of national consciousness amongst the subject peoples was a major factor in undermining the power of the sultans.
Serbia became an independent kingdom in 1882, after a struggle which began with Karadjordje's revolt in 1804.
Montenegro trebled its area at Turkey's expense by the Treaty of San Stefano in 1878, but the treaty was never ratified, and the Congress of Berlin a few months later forced Montenegro to surrender some of its gains.
At the same time Bosnia-Hercegovina came under Austro-Hungarian occupation, and Turkey's waning power in the lands of the South Slavs was confined to Macedonia.
In the Habsburg lands Slav nationalism assumed different forms from those it displayed in the Ottoman empire, but it eventually had the same disruptive force in challenging the five-hundred-year-old supremacy of the imperial institutions.
A potent  influence in shaping national consciousness arises from the perception of their history which the subject peoples nurture, and which is fed by folk traditions, by the preservation of the vernacular language and by the influence of traditional religious beliefs.
Throughout the nineteenth century the national movements which developed within the great multinational empires which dominated eastern and central Europe were inspired by the sense of deep historical roots which went back into an imaginary golden age before the Ottomans, the Habsburgs, the Romanovs and the Hohenzollerns enslaved the ancient nations of medieval Europe.
The Poles looked back to two periods of greatness — the kingdom of the Piasts, which disintegrated in the twelfth century, and that of the Jagiellonians under whose rule Poland's frontiers were extended from the Baltic to the Black Sea.
The Magyars drew inspiration from the history of the kingdom established by St Stephen (István) in AD 1000.
The South Slav nationalists of the nineteenth century could also boast of medieval greatness under Slav rulers.
For them, however, there was no single champion who had forged a South Slav empire which flourished before the arrival of the alien invaders, for until 1918 the Yugoslav peoples had never been united in a single state.
Each national group had its own glorious epoch which it did not share with its neighbours; in fact, the glories of one medieval kingdom were often achieved at the expense of its neighbours.
The cynical definition of a nation as ‘a group of people united by a common error as to their origins and a common dislike of their neighbours’ has a tragic relevance in the history of the Yugoslav peoples.
The early Slav kingdoms
Serbia
The Serbs are first referred to as a distinct group in the Balkans in the writings of the Byzantine emperor Constantine VII (Porphyrogenitus, nominally emperor from 913 to 959 but effectively so from 945) His massive work De administrando imperio , written in the tenth century, refers to Serbs who were subjects of his predecessors and who were converted to Christianity in the ninth century.
They appear to have been settled in the seventh century in areas now known as Kosovo, Montenegro and Bosnia.
Their early attempts to create some kind of political unity from the scores of minor clans, each under its own chieftain or župan , were continually beset by difficulties arising from the attempts of both the Byzantines and Bulgars to dominate them.
In the middle of the ninth century one of the Serbian chieftains, Vlastimir, became grand župan (veliki župan ) of a Serbian principality which owed allegiance to Byzantium.
Vlastimir enlarged his domain by marrying the daughter of the neighbouring župan of Travunija, which gave him access to the Adriatic coast in the Kotor region.
After Vlastimir's death internal quarrels and invasions by both Bulgarian and Byzantine forces seriously weakened the Serbs, but in the eleventh century a revived Serbian kingdom emerged, centred on the old Roman town of Doclea, near the present-day site of Titograd.
This is known to historians both as Duklija (after Roman Doclea) and Zeta, after the river which flows between Nikšić and Titograd.
After a brief period of independence in the second half of the eleventh century — an independence recognised by Pope Gregory VII in 1077 — Zeta was eclipsed by a new Serbian principality, known as Raška, situated in the wild mountainous districts of southern Serbia, which later became known as the Sandžak of Novi Pazar.
Raška, whose name survives in a small town at the confluence of the Raška and Ibar rivers, was the nucleus from which grew the great medieval Serbian empire.
In 1169 Stephen Nemanja became Grand Župan of Raška.
For the next twenty  years of his reign he fought against the Byzantines to establish Serbia's independence.
He added Zeta to his realm in 1186, and forged a strong alliance between his state and the Church.
In 1196 he retired in order to become a monk, first at Studenica and later at the Serbian monastery of Hilendar on Mount Athos, both of which religious houses had been founded by him.
The tradition of piety was followed by his sons, Sava and Stephen.
The former became the first Serbian archbishop of the autocephalous Church established at Žiča in 1219, and later moved to Peć.
The latter succeeded his father as grand župan and in 1202. received the symbols of royalty from Pope Innocent III.
Stephen the First Crowned (Prvovenčani) was a worthy successor of his father, both in piety and in organising ability.
He consolidated the economic and political base of the Nemanjić dynasty, and when he died in 1227 he left behind a secure and well-organised state which was able to survive both the external pressures from the rising power of the revived Bulgarian empire and the internal quarrels of the subordinate Serbian županates.
Medieval Serbia reached its zenith in the fourteenth century during the reign of Dušan (1331–55), who was crowned Tsar (Emperor) of ‘the Serbs and Greeks’ in Skopje in 1346.
He later moved his capital to Ohrid.
He extended the boundaries of his empire in the north at the expense of the Hungarians and to the south by wresting territory from the Byzantines.
At its greatest extent Dušan's power reached from Belgrade to the Aegean, taking in Albania, Epirus, Thessaly, Macedonia and most of the Adriatic and Ionian coasts from the mouth of the Neretva to the Gulf of Corinth.
Dušan built on the foundations laid by his predecessors during the previous century.
The Serbian Church, founded by his pious ancestor St Sava, was given an enhanced status and Peć became the centre of a patriarchate.
The economy was strengthened and German miners were brought in from Transylvania to develop the copper, tin, gold, silver and lead mines of the interior.
Merchants from Ragusa and Venice transported the produce of Serbia throughout Europe and the Near East.
Agriculture flourished on the fertile soils of Kosovo and Metohija.
Dušan the Mighty (Sihi) is known to history as the Lawgiver because of his introduction of a legal code between 1349 and 1354.
This combined elements of Byzantine law with the traditions and customary practices of the Serbs.
Although it included the Byzantine penalties of blinding and mutilation for certain offences, it was far in advance of the legal practices of many medieval states, and it was the first comprehensive legal code amongst the South Slavs.
Dušan's ambition led him to aspire to the throne of Byzantium.
The  empire was in a state of decline which had begun with the havoc wrought in 1204 by the Fourth Crusade and was made worse by internal conflicts.
Between 1341 and 1343 Dušan gave his support to a claimant to the Byzantine throne, John Cantacuzenus, whose daughter married the Ottoman ruler Orhan.
After Dušan's agreement with Cantacuzenus broke down, the Byzantines called on the Ottoman Turks to assist them in holding the Serbs at bay.
It was a tragic irony for the Byzantines, and for Christian Europe, that the first Ottoman incursion into Europe, in 1345, should have been at the invitation of one of the rulers of Constantinople.
Dušan withstood the eastern invaders both in 1345 and 1349, but within thirty years of his death in 1355 most of his empire had been overrun by the Turks and Serbia awaited the coup de grâce , which came in 1389 with the defeat of Prince Lazar at Kosovo Polje.
Dušan never achieved his ambition to take over Byzantium.
After his death his empire quickly disintegrated.
His son, Stephen Uroš (1355–71), was unable to hold the Serbs together despite the growing Turkish threat.
His authority was disputed by two brothers, Vukašin and John Ugleš, great feudal landowners who controlled Macedonia.
Both brothers perished at the battle of Marica in 1371, and a few months later, with the death of Stephen Uroš, the last Serbian tsar, the Nemanjić dynasty came to an end.
Many of the Serbian nobles accepted the Turkish yoke and became vassals of the sultan.
One of the most famous was Vukašin's son, Marko, the ruler of Prilep.
As the legendary Kraljević Marko, he became the hero of a cycle of popular ballads, embodying all the heroic and tragic characteristics of the Serbian people.
Marko served with the sultan's army, as did other Serbs who accepted the status of tributary princes, including Prince Lazar's son, Stephen Lazarević.
The ruler of the much reduced Serbian state was Prince Lazar Hrebeljanović.
Aware of the danger from the Turks, he attempted to create alliances with his northern and western neighbours, the Bosnians, the Hungarians, the Croats, the Ragusans, the Venetians and the Albanians.
He won an initial victory in 1386, but his cosmopolitan army was no match for Sultan Murad I when battle was joined at Kosovo Polje on Vidovdan (St Vitus' Day), 1389.
Murad himself was murdered by a Serb on the eve of the battle, and Lazar also perished.
The Turks were not able to follow up their victory immediately.
Murad's successor, Bayezid I, was forced to turn his attention to the threat to his base in Asia Minor posed by the advance of the Mongol hordes of Timur the Lame (Tamerlane).
Although it was almost a century before the Ottomans eradicated the  last traces of the medieval Serbian empire by taking the Serbian fortress of Smederovo on the Danube in 1459, the battle of Kosovo sounded the death knell for independent Serbia.
The Serbian rulers who followed Lazar were forced to accept the Turks as overlords and to supply soldiers to the sultan's army.
Stephen Lazarević, Lazar's successor, actually fought for Bayezid's Turkish army at the battle of Ankara in 1402 when Timur defeated the Turks and so gave the Byzantines a half-century respite before the conquest of Constantinople by Sultan Mehmed II in 1453.
One consequence of Timur's victory was a temporary revival of Byzantine power.
On his way home from Asia Minor Stephen Lazarević called on the Byzantine emperor, Manuel II Paleologus, who conferred on the Serbian leader the title of despot.
Under Stephen and his successor, Djuradj Branković (1427–56), Serbia enjoyed a ‘silver age’, in which Serbian national culture displayed a vigour and intensity which seem like a brave defiance in the face of the overwhelming pressures from all sides which led in 1459 to the extinction of the Serbian state.
The Turks made a swift recovery after their defeat at Ankara and by 1413 Stephen Lazarević was again compelled to submit to Turkish suzerainty.
His nephew, Djuradj (George) Branković, sought help from his Christian neighbours, the Ragusans, Albanians, Hungarians and Venetians.
The attempts of the Serbs to form a Christian coalition against the advancing Turks were as ineffective as those of the great Albanian leader, Skanderbeg, who, like Djuradj Branković, found that the would-be allies often exacted a heavy price for their help and were quite capable of deserting the cause when it suited them.
Thus in 1428 it suited the Hungarians to make a pact with the Turks, who were then fighting the Venetians in Greece.
Part of this settlement was to create a Servian buffer state, and both Sigismund and Murad agreed to recognise Djuradj Branković as the legitimate ruler of an independent Serbia.
The Serbs were forced to accept Hungarian occupation of Belgrade and the capital was shifted to Smederovo, where an impressive fortress was built on the banks of the Danube, 50 km downstream from Belgrade.
A few years later the Turks attacked Hungary in sporadic raids which culminated, after the death of Sigismund in 1437, in a full-scale expedition.
Serbia was occupied in 1439 and became a Turkish province, but Murad's siege of Belgrade in 1440 was repulsed by the Hungarians.
In 1443 a Hungarian army under János Hunyadi advanced into Serbia.
The Turks were forced to retreat, and agreed to the re-establishment of the independent Serbian buffer state as a condition of peace with Hungary.
The young king, Ulászló, Hunyadi's master, was persuaded by the papal legate that  treaties made with non-Christians could be broken, and Hunyadi was ordered in 1444 to attack the Turks once more.
This time, something like a Christian front emerged, albeit temporarily, and the campaign took on the character of a crusade, the so-called Crusade of Varna, under the blessing of Pope Eugenius IV.
The Christian army which crossed the Danube in 1444 included Hungarians and Wallachians under Hunyadi's command, Albanians under Skanderbeg, and Serbs led by Djuradj Branković.
They were joined by Byzantines and by the Venetian fleet when they reached the Dardanelles.
Murad II came out of retirement to inflict a severe defeat on this motley force when he confronted them at Varna.
The Hungarian king was killed in the battle, and Hunyadi fled back into Hungary with the remnant of his army.
In 1448 Murad's army routed Hunyadi once more, this time on the historic field of Kosovo Polje.
These Turkish victories at Varna and the second battle of Kosovo sealed the fate of the Serbs and the Byzantines.
Constantinople fell in 1453.
In 1456 Djuradj Branković died, and his squabbling successors were pushed across the Danube when the Turks took Smederovo in 1459.
The Serbian state ceased to exist.
Croatia
The Croats first settled in their present homeland in the seventh century and were converted to Christianity in the first half of the ninth century, shortly after they accepted the suzerainty of the Holy Roman Emperor, Charlemagne, in 803.
The early history of the Croats is obscure.
References in the work of Constantine Porphyrogenitus, written in the tenth century, indicate that they were settled in Dalmatia in his time and had probably been there for two hundred years.
An inscription on a stone at Nin, dating from the end of the tenth century, refers to a Slav prince ('Slavenski Knez').
Nin, which lies on a sheltered bay 20 km north of Zadar, was the seat of the first Croatian bishopric and was under the authority of the Patriarch of Aquileia, which indicates that Christianity came to the Croats from the west.
The patriarchate of Aquileia was under the protection of Charlemagne, and the influence of the Frankish kings was felt both in Dalmatia and in the Pannonian region, where Croat tribes were established to the east of the Slovenes, in the middle Sava valley.
In the late ninth century the Byzantines temporarily reasserted their control over the Croats, but in 924 Tomislav,župan of Nin, declared himself King of the Croats and established a kingdom free from both Frankish and Byzantine rule.
The exact extent of the Croatian kingdom, which flourished during the tenth and eleventh centuries, is a matter of dispute.
For a time it probably controlled the Adriatic coast from Rijeka to  the Neretva and extended inland to the Hungarian border north of Zagreb and to the Drina valley in the south, where it faced the Byzantine empire and the Serbian principality of Raška.
In 1089 the death of the ruling Croat prince, Zvonimir, was followed by a dynastic dispute which was finally settled in 1102, when Prince Kálmán of Hungary, a nephew of Zvonimir's widow, succeeded to the crown of Croatia.
In 1106 Kálmán acceded to the Hungarian throne, and so began the long and often troubled relationship between Croatia and Hungary which lasted for over eight centuries.
The Croats have always maintained that they were never legally part of Hungary.
In their eyes Croatia was a separate state which happened to share a ruler with the Hungarians.
The degree of Croatian autonomy fluctuated from time to time, as did its borders.
At times Slavonia in the north and parts of Bosnia in the south were detached, and in the sixteenth century the whole inland area south of the Sava fell to the Turks.
Croatia was confined to a small area round Zagreb and a stretch of the northern Adriatic coast.
Hungary was overrun by the Ottomans and in 1527 the Croatian Sabor elected Ferdinand of Habsburg as its king.
Ferdinand also acquired the throne of Hungary, although after 1526 most of that country was under Ottoman occupation.
The claims of the Hungarians that the personal union of crowns did not imply the loss of separate Hungarian sovereignty are similar to those which the Croats asserted and the Hungarians denied with respect to Croatia.
These claims became burning issues in the nineteenth century, when Magyar nationalism asserted its right to equal status with Austria within the Habsburg empire, and when Croat nationalists fought a bitter struggle against Hungarian domination.
Montenegro
During the two centuries before the Turkish invasions the territory of present-day Montenegro comprised the Serbian principality of Zeta.
The inhabitants were culturally indistinguishable from Serbs elsewhere in the Balkans.
They spoke the Serbian language and, as members of the Eastern Church, they used the Slavonic liturgy.
The development of a separate Montenegrin political and cultural entity came about as a result of the forcible separation of Zeta from the main body of the Serbs after the death of Tsar Dušan in 1355.
As the Ottoman tide swept across Macedonia, Serbia, Bosnia, Hercegovina and Albania during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, Zeta remained an island which was never completely submerged.
Zeta's administrative separation from Serbia began with the break-up of  Tsar Dušan's empire, some thirty years before the battle of Kosovo.
A local feudal family, the Balšići, seized their opportunity and established themselves as rulers of Zeta.
By playing off the rival ambitions of the Venetians, the Turks and the Serbs, the Balšići managed to retain their power until the death of Balsa III, the last of the male line, in 1422.
Although Zeta was then formally incorporated into the Serbian despotate, the chieftains of Zeta resented Serbian overlordship, and in 1455 a number of them, led by Stevan Crnojević, placed themselves under Venetian suzerainty.
The death of the Serbian despot, Djuradj Branković, in 1456, followed by confusion in Serbia as the Turks advanced towards the Danube, created a new situation in Zeta.
The Crnojevići attempted to win Venetian support for a determined stand against the Turks, but the astute Italians, with an eye on their future prospects, chose not to offend the increasingly powerful Muslims in the interests of a tiny Christian principality.
The Venetians had already gained control of the Montenegrin coast and were developing the trade between the Adriatic ports and their Ottoman-held hinterland which was to bring them so much wealth during the ensuing centuries.
Stevan's son, Ivan Crnojević, known as Ivan the Black, was forced to leave his country in 1475, but he returned in 1481 to recover territory lost to the Turks.
His success was short-lived and within a few years Ivan had to accept Turkish suzerainty.
He remained in Zeta, however, as a subordinate prince to the sultan and had de facto control of the inner heartland of Zeta, centred on Ivan's capital, Cetinje.
Although the coast was lost to Venice and the eastern territories of Zeta to the Ottomans, the forebears of the modern Montenegrins were able to maintain their traditional culture in their remote redoubt inland from the coastal ranges of Lovčen and Paštrovići.
The Crnojević dynasty lasted for less than a century, but during this period the foundations of a separate Montenegrin nation, with its own forms of government and its own culture, began to crystallise.
Ivan founded a monastery at Cetinje, and it was from the monks who lived there that the orthodox bishops were chosen.
During periods when the ruler was absent from Cetinje — often trying to persuade the Venetians to help him to resist Turkish pressure — the bishop took charge of the government.
After the expiry of the Crnojević line in 1516, the bishops acquired a permanent hold on the machinery of government, electing one of their number as ruler.
These prince-bishops were known as Vladikas.
Ivan's son Djuradj is honoured as the first man to introduce a printing press into the Balkans.
This invention came to Obod, near Cetinje, from Italy in 1493, only twenty-five years after the death of Gutenberg and within the lifetime of Caxton.
It was used to print religious texts in Cyrillic characters  and was able to function even during the period of Turkish overlordship after 1499, when Cetinje was incorporated into the sandžak of Skadar.
Bosnia-Hercegovina
The inhabitants of this area of the interior of modern Yugoslavia never had the same clearly defined national identity in the Middle Ages as the Serbs and Croats.
This may partly be explained by the geographical circumstances.
On the west the present-day boundary between Bosnia and the Dalmatian region of Croatia corresponds roughly to the historic boundaries of Roman Dalmatia, and later of the Venetian and Ottoman empires.
Bosnia is a landlocked area, shut off from the Adriatic by the parallel ranges of the Dinaric Alps.
On the landward side, however, there is no clear geographical divide.
The valleys of the rivers which drain northward to the Sava, following the trend lines of the Dinaric system, afford access into the heart of Bosnia.
Hercegovina looks to the Adriatic, with the valley of the Neretva providing a route from the capital, Mostar, to the sea.
The relative openness of Bosnia to influences from Croatia in the north and from Serbia in the south and east facilitated invasion and conquest from Croats, Hungarians, Serbs, Macedonians, Byzantines and Turks.
Much of Bosnia belonged to the medieval Croatian kingdom between the ninth and eleventh centuries, at a time when Hercegovina was largely incorporated into the contemporary Serbian kingdoms.
For a time the Macedonian ruler Samuilo held power over parts of Bosnia-Hercegovina until he was defeated by the Byzantine emperor Basil in 1014.
The Hungarians acquired the mastery of Bosnia when they acceded to the Croatian crown in the early twelfth century.
The first distinctly Bosnian state emerged in the late twelfth century under the legendary Ban Kulin (1180–1204).
Kulin's adherence to the Bogomil heresy provoked the papacy to interfere.
During the half-century after Kulin's death his successors, who either sympathised with or were unable to control the heretic Bosnian Church, were the object of crusades led by the Hungarian kings with the blessing of the pope.
For over a century the Bosnian chieftains (bans) were forced to accept Hungarian overlordship.
In an attempt to win the people over from Bogomilism, the Hungarians introduced the Franciscans into Bosnia, and their influence continued into the twentieth century.
Internal dynastic disputes in Hungary in the fourteenth century, and the advance of the Turks into Serbia following the fall of Dušan's empire, weakened Bosnia's opponents and provided an opportunity for the revival of the spirit of independence.
In 1322 a Bogomil, Stevan Kotromanić, was  elected ban.
Stevan's son, Tvrtko (1353–91), assumed the title ‘King of Serbia, Bosnia and Primorje’ in 1377.
During the next decade he expanded his kingdom to include central Dalmatia, Hercegovina and part of the old Serbian kingdom of Zeta.
After Tvrtko's death the Bosnian nobles quarrelled and, although the Kotromanić family continued to reign for the next seventy years, their power rapidly declined.
Squeezed between the conflicting pressures from their own nobles and from the Hungarians and Venetians, and with the ever present menace of the Turks threatening them from the south, they gradually sank into oblivion.
Venice reasserted its power in Dalmatia.
Hercegovina achieved a degree of autonomy under Stevan Vukšić, who gave himself the title Duke ('Herceg') of St Sava (1448) in honour of the Serbian royal saint of the thirteenth century.
When the Turks finally overthrew the last of the Kotromanić rulers in 1463, Vukšić continued to resist for another twenty years.
The Hungarians attempted to create a marcher zone to protect their frontier against the Turks by supporting Bosnian resistance in the area between Jajce and the Sava, but after the battle of Mohács in 1526 these pockets of resistance soon collapsed and virtually all Bosnia and Hercegovina lay under the rule of the sultans until the late nineteenth century.
Many Serbs and Croats who had lived in Bosnia fled to the Venetian-occupied coastal areas of Dalmatia or to Habsburg territory north of the Sava.
The former, known as the uskoks , continued their resistance to the Turks by border raids and guerrilla attacks from fortresses such as those at Klis near Solin and at Senj in northern Dalmatia.
The latter were organised by the Habsburgs into graničari (frontiersmen), who were given special privileges in return for military duties.
The militärgrenze (military frontier zone) established in 1578 was largely settled by refugees from Turkish-occupied Bosnia and Serbia.
The existence today of a large Serbian minority in southern Croatia goes back to this period.
Many of those who stayed behind, especially the adherents of the Bogomil faith, accepted Islam, and their descendants form the nucleus of the Islamic community which embraced 37 per cent of the population of the republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina at the time of the 1981 census.
Macedonia
Macedonia, lying across the southern end of the Vardar-Morava corridor which connects the central Danubian lowlands to the Aegean coasts, has always been fought over by rival powers.
In the classical world of ancient Hellas, the strategic importance of this area which controlled the neck of  the Greek peninsula was turned to advantage by Alexander the Great in his bid to conquer the known world.
From the time of the first Slav settlements in the seventh century until the Second World War Macedonia has always been a meeting place of contrasting cultures and a cockpit of rival political ambitions.
Greeks, Romans, Byzantines, Bulgars, Turks, Albanians and Vlahs all at different times during the medieval period made their cultural, political and ethnic contributions to the Macedonian melting pot.
The original Slav settlers came under Byzantine influence until, under the emperor Simeon (893–927), they were forced to submit to Bulgarian rule.
The Byzantines struggled to reassert their authority and succeeded in subduing the eastern half of Simeon's former realm, but the western half passed to the control of a Macedonian empire under Samuilo (Samuel)(976–1014).
In a brief period of energetic expansion, Samuilo enlarged his empire, from its centre in the Prespa/Ohrid area, so that by the end of the century it extended from the Black Sea to the Adriatic and into Greece, even as far as the Peleponnesus, although the Aegean port of Salonika successfully resisted his attempts to occupy it.
Whilst Samuilo was extending his power at the expense of Byzantium, the emperor Basil II was preoccupied with internal problems and with the advance of the Fatimids into his possessions in Asia Minor and the Levant.
He overcame the challenge to his authority at home by enlisting the support of the Kievan ruler, Vladimir, who sent a band of 6,000 Varangian mercenaries from Sweden to the emperor's assistance.
They stayed on in Constantinople and became the nucleus of the Varangian Guard, which lasted for many centuries.
Having subdued the Fatimids and re-established his authority in Antioch, Basil then returned to deal with the challenge in the Balkans.
After over a decade of fighting, Basil defeated Samuilo at the battle of Kleidon in 1014.
The cruel vengeance which Basil exacted from the thousands of prisoners taken at Kleidon — he blinded all save one in every hundred, and compelled the sighted ones to lead their blind comrades back to Prilep, where Samuilo died of shock at the piteous sight — earned him the name of Bulgaroctonos (Slayer of the Bulgars).
In 1018 Basil entered in triumph Samuilo's castle at Ohrid and Macedonia came once more under the Byzantines.
Despite several revolts during the eleventh century, Macedonia remained under Byzantine rule until this was challenged by the rising power of Serbia in the late thirteenth century, in the reign of Milutin (1282–1321), and eclipsed by Dušan in the mid fourteenth century.
Macedonian religious and cultural life continued to flourish under the  Byzantines, with Greek and Bulgarian influences fusing with the original Slav elements to produce a rich tradition in literature, wall paintings and wood carving.
No separate Macedonian political unit emerged, however.
Byzantine rule was followed by Serbian and then by Turkish occupation.
Macedonia did not re-emerge from the shadows until the twentieth century.
The memory of its brief period of medieval glory is still a source of inspiration to modern Macedonian nationalists, although their interpretation of its significance has been challenged by Bulgarian, Greek and Serbian historians.
In the foregoing pages the history of five medieval South Slav states has been briefly outlined.
Reference has also been made to the early history of the Slovenes, who never controlled a state of their own, apart from the brief episode of Samo, the ruler of a seventh-century Slavonic empire which includes part of modern Slovenia.
The Slovenes were under Austrian/German rule for most of their long history, from the Middle Ages until the twentieth century, yet they retained their distinct Slav culture; their national revival in the nineteenth century could draw on a rich cultural heritage.
Some of the non-Slav peoples within the present Yugoslav borders can trace their ancestry back to settlers who entered their present homelands in the centuries before the area was divided between the Ottoman and Habsburg empires, but many more owed their settlement to colonisation sponsored or tolerated by the imperial rulers.
The South Slavs under foreign rule
The Ottoman occupation
Osman (Uthman) I, who gave his name to the Ottoman empire, inherited the crumbling Seljuk patrimony at the end of the fourteenth century.
Within 150 years of Osman's death in 1324 his successors had overrun what remained of the Byzantine empire and had occupied almost all the territory of present-day Yugoslavia which lies south of the Sava-Danube line.
Only Dalmatia and a tiny enclave in Montenegro remained outside Turkish control.
Within the next 50 years Ottoman armies crossed the Danube and even penetrated into Hungary and Romania, laying siege to Vienna in 1529.
For another 150 years after this, the Ottoman empire continued to expand northwards and westwards until a high-water mark was reached in 1683, with Ottoman forces assembled for the second time before the gates of Vienna.
They were driven back and confined to the area south of the Sava-Danube-Una line, where the frontier remained for almost two centuries.
The southern area, comprising present-day Serbia, Bosnia-Hercegovina, Kosovo and Macedonia, was incorporated into the Turkish system of government, whilst Slovenia and Croatia-Slavonia, north of the military frontier, were under the dominion of the Habsburgs.
Vojvodina was recovered from the Turks at the end of the seventeenth century, and was reunited to a liberated Hungary, also under Habsburg rule.
Vojvodina was the chief area of settlement of refugee Serbs fleeing from the Ottomans.
Although the very name of the province derives from the promise of Emperor Leopold I that the immigrant Serbs would be given the right to elect their own vojvoda , or duke, the Habsburgs did not honour this pledge, and the area was incorporated into the military frontier under direct Habsburg control.
Nevertheless, Vojvodina became the cradle of the Serbian renaissance.
Thus, for hundreds of years before the formation of the first Yugoslav state in 1918, the South Slav peoples were subjected to different forms of political and cultural pressure.
There were four main elements — the two  multinational empires, divided by the Sava-Danube line; the coastlands, including the independent state of Ragusa, under strong Venetian influence; and the tiny independent principality of Montenegro.
The legacy of the different cultures which evolved within these four areas still influences the attitudes and ways of life of Yugoslav people today.
The ‘millet’ system
The incorporation of the occupied lands into the Turkish system of government involved two important features which made a deep imprint on the social life of the Balkans.
They were the millet system and the devşirme .
Islam teaches its adherents that the prophet Mohammed was the last of a long line of prophets who proclaimed the one true God.
These included the Jewish prophets of the Old Testament and also Christ himself.
Thus, although non-Muslim monotheists, like the Christians and the Jews, had not travelled as far along the road to truth as the Muslims, they were travelling in the same direction.
There was, therefore, no sanction in Islam for the persecution of the religious minorities within the Turkish empire.
Each religious community — or millet — was placed under the supervision of its own leaders, who acted as agents for the imperial government in collecting taxes and maintaining order amongst their people.
The Christians belonging to the millet-i-Rum were under the authority of the Patriarch of Constantinople at the top level, and locally under their own bishops.
When Mehmed the Conqueror took the city of Byzantium in 1453 he personally invested the new patriarch, Gennadios II.
The Jewish community continued to be led by the Chief Rabbi, as it had been under the Byzantine emperors.
On the whole, the system worked as well as any of the administrative systems which functioned in contemporary Christian Europe.
The Ottomans depended upon their non-Muslim subjects to conduct the trade of the empire and to provide most of the leading medical practitioners and other specialists.
In return, the non-Muslims, although officially regarded as second-class citizens, were free to practise their religion and most were not conscripted for military service.
There are many cases recorded in which Christian subjects petitioned the sultan to redress grievances which they suffered at the hands of overbearing church leaders, and where the sultan acted in the interests of the petitioners.
Until the Ottoman empire began to decline in the late eighteenth century, Christian subjects in the Balkans were probably treated no worse  than were the peasants of central Europe by their Christian feudal overlords.
The unsavoury reputation which the last of the sultans acquired during the late nineteenth century — especially Abdülaziz (1861–76) and Abdülhamid II (1876–1909)— has coloured the view which many western historians have taken of the Ottoman empire as a whole, but to many Christian subjects the Ottoman empire in its heyday was far from the horrific picture conjured up by the use of the phrase ‘the long Turkish night’.
‘Devşirme'
One of the least attractive features of Ottoman rule was the compulsory enrolment of Christian boys into the military and administrative service of the empire.
They were not only pressed into service, but were forced to become Muslims and to learn Turkish, and they were not allowed to marry.
A system of military service had been introduced for Turkish Muslims in Anatolia in the early days of the House of Osman.
Land was provided to maintain the families in peacetime, and the males were required in turn to rally to the colours in time of war.
During wartime a money payment was made from the sultan's coffers to supplement the spoils of war.
In addition it was permitted to enslave prisoners of war in order to provide ancillary troops and labourers for the Turkish smallholder/soldiers.
These slaves could be admitted into the ranks of the sultan's ‘New Troops’— the yeniçeri or janissaries.
In the fifteenth century these methods of raising an army proved insufficient and a new method of collecting men was introduced — the devşirme .
At intervals of a few years recruiting officers were sent out with powers to conscript young Christian boys between the ages of eight and twenty.
There were strict rules which the recruiting officers were required to follow.
For example, they were not to recruit Muslims, Jews, members of certain skilled trades, orphans, only children and married men.
In practice most of the devşirme boys came from Orthodox Christian families of Slav, Greek and Albanian origin.
Even if the rules were obeyed, the system was clearly oppressive both to the families whose best sons were torn from them and to the young boys who would never see their parents again.
But, as with the press-gang system for recruiting sailors in eighteenth-century England, the rules were often not obeyed.
Bribery and the corrupt use of power by unscrupulous recruiting officers were all too common.
There are, however, cases which suggest that the Christian communities  who were potential victims of the system did not always look upon devşirme as being wholly evil.
It was possible for yeniçeri to rise to the highest offices in the state.
Several grand viziers entered the Sultan's service via the devşirme , including Ibrahim, the Greek who served Suleiman the Magnificent from 1523 to 1536; the Macedonian Koçu Bey, adviser to Murad IV in the seventeenth century, who has been called the Turkish Montesquieu; and Mehmed Sokolović (Sokollu), the Bosnian who held the post from 1564 to 1579, serving Suleiman, Selim II and Murad III.
Sokolović is well remembered in his native Bosnia and in Serbia.
He was instrumental in persuading the sultan to allow the revival of the see of Peć, and had his brother installed as metropolitan.
Some Christian families saw the advantage of having a son who was a power at court, and attempted to bribe the recruiting officers — the yaya-başis — to take one of their own.
Although many of the yeniçeri forgot all about their origins and became fanatical Muslims, behaving oppressively to their former compatriots when they were posted back into the Balkans, others, like Sokolović, kept in contact with their people and tried to help them.
In addition to the forced conversions of Christian boys through the devşirme system, there were also voluntary conversions which took place gradually between the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries and which help to explain the presence in modern Bosnia of a large Slav-speaking Muslim community.
The administrative system of the Ottoman-occupied areas
The rural areas
Estimates based on contemporary data suggest that about 90 per cent of the population of the Balkans in the sixteenth century lived in rural areas.
A form of feudal tenure governed the relations of the Christian peasantry to their Ottoman overlords.
As elsewhere in Europe, the feudal order was based on the principle that landholding was tied to certain duties.
At the pinnacle of power the sultan owned all the lands in ‘the domain of the House of Osman’ and was the absolute master of all who dwelt therein, whether Muslim or Christian.
They were his flock (or raya ) and could be shorn by him at will.
The sultan was expected to be a good Muslim and to act justly in accordance with Islamic teaching.
He was served by a professional class of Ottoman civil servants and soldiers.
Between these officials and the mass of the peasantry were the mainly urban-dwelling traders, merchants and manufacturers, on whom the feudal obligations (which bore heavily on the country folk) were somewhat lightened.
The  sultan's army was supplied with troops by the timarli — the holders of fiefs known as timars .
In the early days of the system, the majority of timarli were cavalrymen — the spahis — but during the seventeenth century the janissaries (yeniçeri ) began to replace the spahis and the timar system was allowed to decay, being replaced by iltizam , a form of leasing under which the obligation to raise troops was replaced by a monetary payment.
An important source of revenue to the sultan's exchequer was the poll tax, or cizye .
Although Muslims in some areas paid cizye , the burden of this tax bore most heavily on the Christians, who were required to pay for every male of twelve years of age on a sliding scale, according to his assessed wealth.
The justification for the discrimination between Muslim and non-Muslim was that the latter were not usually drafted into the army and were therefore required to contribute in cash towards their defence.
In addition to the poll tax, there was a complex system of taxes based on land and on crops, some paid in kind, which could amount to as much as 25 per cent of the harvest.
For example, a tax was levied in fodder crops, to pay for the upkeep of the spahis ’ horses.
Certain lands were set aside for the upkeep of religious and charitable foundations — the vakifs .
The element ‘vakuf’ in place names in Bosnia and Serbia (e.g. Skender Vakuf, Gornji Vakuf) is derived from the Ottoman vakif .
At first, the Ottoman taxation system, although it bore more heavily on the Christian peasantry than on other inhabitants of the raya , was not as oppressive as were the arbitrary and often extortionate levies made by the medieval Christian rulers in western and central Europe.
There was an orderly system of collection, monitored by the Christian bishops, and it was possible to appeal to the sultan's court in cases of abuse.
Later, however, the system became corrupt and capricious.
A particular form of abuse which was greatly resented was the levying of extra taxes to pay for imperial ceremonies — for example the assumption of power by a new sultan — and for the increasing costs of the wars which the empire was forced to fight as its power was challenged by its enemies, notably the Habsburgs during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
The consolidation of these extra taxes into a regular additional impost (the bedel ) was a cause of peasant revolts, which increasingly provoked savage reprisals from the threatened Turkish authorities.
In rural Serbia a form of local self-government, based on the zadruga , the extended family often comprising all members of a village, kept alive the traditions of Serbian culture and religion.
Groupings of villages, under a knez of local origin, formed the next tier of local administration, the knežina .
By the eighteenth century the heartland of Serbia, the district  known alternately as the sandžak of Smederovo and the pašalik of Belgrade, contained between forty and fifty knezine , each subject to control by a council of village elders, drawn from the heads of the zadrugas , who influenced the actions of the knez .
Urban life
The self-government of the knežina was limited to internal matters concerned with the Serbian peasantry.
Any issues affecting the relations of the Serbs with the imperial authorities or with their Muslim landlords and neighbours had to be dealt with by the Muslim authorities, most of whom operated from the cosmopolitan cities.
As well as containing the Muslim legal, military and administrative officials, the cities were the homes of craftsmen, organised in guilds whose members could be either Muslim or zimmi (non-Muslim citizens under the protection of the sultan).
There were also large colonies of traders of Greek, Jewish, Turkish and, especially, Ragusan origin.
The last group were important not only for their commercial activities but also because of their different religious and cultural background, which influenced those with whom they came into contact.
A well-known Serbian-American historian, Michael Boro Petrovich, considers that the most far-reaching effect of the Ottoman occupation was the isolation of Serbia from the main currents of western thought and western social development.
This included the Renaissance and the Reformation, the development of science and the beginnings of capitalism and modern industrialisation.
There is much truth in this bleak picture of Serbia under Ottoman rule and, to varying extents, of Macedonia, Bosnia, Hercegovina and Montenegro during the same period.
The harsh outline is modified, however, when one considers the cities.
The Dalmatians from Ragusa represented the most important of the outside influences which penetrated into the heart of the Balkans.
They were Roman Catholics and they brought their own priests, their own life style and a cultural heritage which owed much to Italy.
Ottoman law required them to live separately in their own quarter of the town, and forbade their priests to proselytise.
Nevertheless, it is because of their influence that Roman Catholic adherents were found in the seventeenth century as far east as Bulgaria.
The Ragusans represented a way of life which was completely different from that imposed upon the Balkan peoples by the Ottoman occupation, and their influence on life in the cities was of great historic significance.
The proportion of Christians and Jews in the urban population varied from city to city.
According to a census in the sixteenth century, Sarajevo  was 100 per cent Muslim, but in Bitola (Monastir) in Macedonia 20.2 per cent were Christian and 4.8 per cent Jewish, and in Skopje the proportion was 23.7 per cent Christian and 1.5 per cent Jewish.
In the countryside, however, apart from the special case of Bosnia, the overwhelming majority of the sultan's European subjects were Christians, Slavs and peasants.
The economy under the Ottomans
The Ottoman empire has been described as ‘a cosmopolitan military feudal theocracy’.
For most of the period, from the first conquests in the fourteenth century until the rise of the South Slav nationalist movements in the nineteenth century, the empire was either preparing for a war against its Christian neighbours, fighting a war or recovering from a war.
The whole administrative machine was geared to raising taxes and levies of men to fight to defend the Islamic realm against the encircling infidels.
Little regard was given to the economy.
When the Turks occupied the old Serbian and Bosnian kingdoms they acquired rich natural resources.
Under Dušan the Serbs had encouraged German miners (known as Saxons) from Transylvania to develop the mines of Kosovo, some of which had been worked in Roman times.
Copper, lead, zinc and silver were the chief minerals extracted, although in places iron was also worked.
Bosnia and Serbia possessed rich forest resources, which were used to provide charcoal for the metal workers' furnaces as well as timber for the construction of houses.
A fifteenth-century French traveller refers to the wealth and sophistication of Serbian life, comparing the life style of the upper classes to that enjoyed in France.
After the Turkish conquest the non-agricultural economy withered.
The Turks despised trade and commerce and left it to the Christian zimmi to conduct such activities.
Many of the urban craftsmen were also zimmi .
Some Turkish administrators, such as the grand vizier Sokollo, encouraged public works, building bridges, mosques,medreses and aqueducts, but little was done to encourage industry.
Writing of Bosnia in the late nineteenth century, that intrepid English educator Adelina Pauline Irby noted the neglect of the province's economy under Turkish rule, and the sufferings of the poor, burdened by heavy taxation from their Turkish masters and by the exactions of their own Christian clergy.
Thus, according to the British consul, writing in 1873, after four centuries of Turkish rule the commercial life was contemptible, ‘plums being the most valuable article of trade in the province’.
This sorry state of affairs existed despite the fact that, in Miss Irby's words, ‘The soil of  Bosnia teems with various and valuable minerals; her hills abound in splendid forests; her well-watered plains are fertile and productive.’
The same picture could be painted of Serbia and Macedonia under Turkish rule.
The modern paradox, that the areas of Yugoslavia which are most richly endowed with mineral resources and other industrial raw materials are the least economically developed, can only be understood in the context of the long centuries of neglect from which Yugoslavia south of the Danube-Sava line suffered during the Ottoman period.
The ‘çiftlik’ system
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries there was a rapid growth of large privately owned estates known as çiftliks .
Strictly speaking they were contrary to Islamic law, as private land ownership was not allowed.
In its original meaning çift referred to the smallest unit of land which could support a family, and in the early days of the timar system the çift was the core holding which the timarli farmed himself for the benefit of his own family.
The timarli did not own the çift , but he could pass on to his eldest son the right to cultivate it.
The size of a çift varied from place to place, according to the fertility of the soil, and ranged between four and thirty-five acres.
The growth of çiftliks undermined the timar system and eventually replaced it.
Subsistence agriculture, based on a feudal system of land tenure, gave way to large private estates owned by Muslim lords and worked by Christian tied labourers.
This major social and economic change can be attributed to two main causes.
First, the old system of raising funds for maintaining the sultan's war machine proved inadequate when the technology of war changed and the spahi cavalry ceased to be the indispensable core of the army.
Infantrymen bearing firearms and artillerymen became more important than horsemen.
The sixteenth century saw the Ottoman conquest of Hungary, the surrender of the Morea and Cyprus by Venice, the sieges of Malta and Vienna and the battle of Lepanto.
During this period of rapid territorial expansion the empire was almost continually at war.
The cost of these wars put an intolerable strain on the economy, and was mainly responsible for the inflation which afflicted the empire during the second half of the sixteenth century.
A second impulse which prompted economic change came from outside the empire.
Despite the fact that the sultans were more often at war than at peace with their Christian neighbours north of the Danube-Sava line, trade with Christendom flourished.
The intermediaries in this trade were often  merchants from Ragusa, Venice and the city states of northern Italy.
The growth of population and the urbanisation of western and central Europe, which occurred during the Age of Discovery and throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, created a growing demand for the importation of basic foodstuffs and agriculturally derived raw materials such as cotton, wool and hides.
Ragusa became an important entrepôt, which, in the words of Sir Paul Rycant, a shrewd English observer, writing in 1668, was ‘the port for transmitting the manufactures of Venice, and all Italy, into Turkey’, and in return received the necessities of life for distribution to the rest of Europe, often in its own ships.
Rycant's book The Present State of the Ottoman Empire was published a year after the earthquake of 1667, which marked a downturn in the fortunes of Ragusa.
Thereafter the Ragusans began to lose their control of the carrying trade to British, French and Dutch merchantmen.
Concerning the goods carried, records of the Ragusan Lazarette for 1626 show that 120 ships left the port, carrying insured cargoes of 400,000 kg of assorted wool and 70,000 kg of cattle and buffalo hides.
The demand for primary products from Austria-Hungary and western Europe encouraged the change from subsistence agriculture to market-oriented farming, and this was best achieved under the çiftlik system rather than under the medieval timar or prebendary system.
Large estates, often based on virtual monoculture, provided grain, wool, hides and, later, cotton and silk to Christian Europe.
The high cost of transport meant that areas with access to the sea or to navigable rivers such as the Danube were better placed than inland areas.
For example, in southern Macedonia, within easy reach of the port of Salonika, the çiftlik system was more fully developed than in Bosnia and Serbia.
The growth of private estates increased the burdens for the Christian peasants of the raya and, increasingly during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, protests against the extortion and virtual peonage which the çiftlik system imposed on them provided fuel for the fires of peasant revolts.
The culture of the South Slavs under Ottoman rule
The millet system enabled the Christian Slavs to maintain their churches and monasteries.
Their religious leaders even had a defined role to play within the Ottoman system.
During the first century after the fall of the Serbian despotate in 1459, the Serbian Church was placed under the authority of the Greek archbishop of Ohrid, although the local parish  clergy remained Slav.
The autonomy which the Serbian Church had enjoyed since the creation of the patriarchate in 1346 was replaced by centralised control from Constantinople by the compliant Greek Phanariot clergy, who were considered by the Turkish administration to be the proper representatives of their Christian subjects.
The Serbs resented the imposition of alien bishops.
The struggle between the Greek and the native Slav influences within the Byzantine Church goes back to the time of Cyril and Methodius, and it continued into the nineteenth century in both the Serbian and Bulgarian churches.
The identification of the Serbian Orthodox Church with the Serbian nation is deeply rooted in the national consciousness.
The medieval rulers of the Serbs were closely identified with the struggle for the autonomy of the Serbian Church.
Several members of the Nemanjić dynasty founded monasteries, some became monks, and the pious St Sava, son of Stephen Nemanja, in 1219 became the first archbishop of an autocephalous church, freed from the jurisdiction of the Greek-led archbishopric of Ohrid.
This autonomy was extinguished in 1459.
The national Church re-emerged from its subjection to Greek influences in 1557, thanks to the intervention of the Bosnian-born grand vizier, Mehmet Sokolović.
The first four heads of the newly created patriarchate were members of the Sokolović family.
The area of the patriarchate was much greater than its medieval forerunner.
It bordered the much reduced archbishopric of Ohrid on the south, but Tetovo and Skopje were within its jurisdiction.
To the north it extended beyond the Sava and Danube, to take in the sultan's newly conquered lands in Hungary and Transylvania.
Virtually all the Serbian nation came under its authority.
Although later boundary changes occasioned by the fortunes of war effectively restricted its jurisdiction, the patriarchate remained until 1766, when, together with the archbishopric of Ohrid, it was placed under the Greek Patriarch of Constantinople.
The importance of the Serbian Church as a rallying point for Serbs, both within and outside the Ottoman empire, cannot be too strongly emphasised.
It was the only institution which was able to keep alive the sense of national identity during three and a half centuries of subjugation to foreign rule, which stretched between the fall of Smederovo in 1459 and the revolt of Karadjordje in 1804.
Many Serbs fled from the advancing Turks and settled north of the Sava in the Hungarian-held lands which came to be known as Vojvodina.
Some of the Serbian nobles, like Djuradj Branković, their ruler, actually owned land in southern Hungary and were able to move to their estates across the river.
Others became refugees and provided the Habsburgs with some of  their frontiersmen.
With them came priests and bishops, and Serbian monasteries and churches were established, especially in the hills of Fruška Gora, near Novi Sad (Ujvidék).
The Turkish occupation of this area, which lasted from the sixteenth century to the eighteenth, did not cause these Serbian communities to be dissolved.
They received an influx of new blood in 1691, during one of the many episodes in the interminable struggle between Austria and Turkey for control of the Balkans.
The patriarch Arsen III, fearful of Turkish reprisals following an abortive Austrian advance into Serbia, organised a mass migration of Serbs — probably over 30,000 families — to follow the retreating Austrians back across the Danube, where they joined their compatriots in Vojvodina.
The flowering of Serbian national culture which occurred in the late eighteenth century and which led to the national awakening and later re-establishment of a Serbian state, owes much to the Orthodox monasteries in Fruška Gora.
The oral folk traditions
If the Church provided the institutional framework within which Serbian national culture could be nurtured, the oral folk traditions of the peasants provided a rich source of inspiration to those who needed reassurance that the nation would eventually rise against its oppressors.
This reassurance came from the epic poems (the pesme ) which celebrated the heroes of the struggle against the Turks after the tragedy of Kosovo.
The singing of the pesme was accompanied by the music of the gusle , a one-stringed fiddle, or a tambura , a two-stringed mandoline.
The best-known of the folk heroes was Kraljević Marko, son of ‘King’ Vukašin (Mrnjavčević), who ruled at Prilep until his death in 1371.
Marko in real life succeeded his father as ruler of Prilep, but after 1385 became a Turkish vassal, served in the Turkish army during the battle of Kosovo, and was probably killed fighting for the Turks at Rovine in 1395.
This may seem an odd background for a Serbian national hero, although it was part of Marko's obligation as a Turkish vassal (see above, p. 26).
In any case, the Marko of the epic poems bears little resemblance to what is known of the historical character whose name he bears.
The legendary Marko is an embodiment of all that the Serbs wanted to believe of themselves — his heroism, his gentleness, his respect for the religious and social customs of his people, his ‘machismo’, even his cruelty, but above all his fierce opposition to the Turks and his intense national pride.
The poems reflect the life and times of the people who created them, their moral values, their understanding of their own history, their hopes  and fears for themselves as individuals, and, above all, their consciousness of belonging to a community under threat from alien forces.
The thread that runs through the epics, from the medieval roots to the nineteenth century, is of the struggle for survival of the Christian Slavs against the Turks.
Svetozar Koljević, in his study The Epic in the Making , has also drawn attention to the importance of the oral tradition in a peasant society, most of whose members had no access to the written word.
‘In a largely illiterate society this oral epic singing also had the function roughly corresponding to the modern mass media — it spread the political news, much more slowly but perhaps not less reliably than the modern press, radio and television.’
The process of oral transmission across many centuries led to modifications and even radical changes in the themes and in the characteristics of the main actors.
Kraljević Marko's exploits, for example, span more than two centuries after Kosovo, and different attributes of this many-sided hero appealed to different generations of singers.
Most of the songs originated with the Serbs, but they also influenced the other Slav peoples of the Balkans, including the cultivated literati of Ragusa and the Dalmatian cities.
The songs can be conveniently classified into four main groups — those originating in pre-Turkish times; the cycles relating to Kosovo and the adventures of Kraljević Marko; the struggles of the hajduks and uskoks against the Ottoman occupation; and the wars of independence of the Serbs and Montenegrins during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Some of the poems were written down and became known to the outside world before the end of the eighteenth century.
Richard Knolles, writing in 1603, refers to the ‘country songs’ of the Serbs which tell of the alleged duplicity of the faithless George Branković who betrayed Christendom to the Turks.
The translations by Alberto Fortis, an Italian traveller and scholar, of fragments of epic poems which he had collected in Dalmatia and published in 1771, brought the rich oral tradition to the notice of men like Herder and the western European scholars of the Romantic movement.
Vuk Karadžić's systematic compilations in the early nineteenth century brought them into the mainstream of European culture.
The chief figures in the Kosovo cycle are the Serbian prince Lazar and his sons-in-law Miloš Obilić and Vuk Branković.
Obilić is depicted as a hero who sacrificed his life to murder the Turkish sultan after Vuk had taunted him with treachery and cowardice.
The Turkish version of the battle of Kosovo Polje differs from that which is presented in the epic songs and is probably closer to the historical truth.
According to a firman sent by Sultan Bayezid, the murdered Murad's son, to the Kadi of Brusa, Murad's murder  by Obilić took place after the battle.
The victorious Murad was supervising the execution of the Serbian nobles, including Lazar, who had been captured in battle.
Bayezid writes, ‘We enjoyed the greatest pleasure in seeing how the severed heads of the Christian dukes rolled under the horses’ hooves, and how many of them with tied hands, and others with broken legs, stood by.’
In the midst of this appalling scene, Obilić appeared and approached the sultan to declare his conversion to Islam.
As he stooped to kiss Murad's feet he drew a poisoned dagger and stabbed the Turkish leader, causing ‘the illustrious sultan to drink the sherbet of martyrdom’.
It is, perhaps, of minor importance whether Lazar was slain in battle or ignominiously beheaded in the presence of the dying sultan, or whether Obilić and Vuk Branković were traitors.
It is of far greater historical significance that the legends of Kosovo helped to keep alive for centuries the spark of Serbian national consciousness which burst into flame with the Karadjordje revolt of 1804, and which led  ultimately to the founding of an independent Serbian kingdom.
The Kosovo legends are peculiar to the Serbs.
The anniversary of the battle, 28 June, is still commemorated as Serbia's national day.
It was also the day of Serbia's national saint, St Vitus (Vidovdan).
It was on this symbolic day in 1914 that Gavrilo Princip shot the heir to the Habsburg throne, during a state visit to occupied Sarajevo.
It was also chosen in 1921 by the rulers of the kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes as the day on which to promulgate the Vidovdan constitution, a fact which emphasised the primacy of the Serbs within the Triune Kingdom.
The Kraljević Marko legends have had wider currency amongst the Yugoslav peoples, appealing to Croats, Slovenes, Macedonians and Bulgars, and even Turks and Albanians.
They formed a strand in the cultural tradition which drew the different peoples together in the formation of the Yugoslav Movement of the early nineteenth century.
The oral tradition lived on into the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
An Englishwoman married to a Serb (Mrs Lawton-Mijatović) wrote of a visit to the old Serbian royal capital, Kragujevac, in 1873.
The Skupština (Assembly) was in session, and each day a deputy of peasant origin came into the square outside the building, to deliver to a large audience a blank-verse poem, giving a highly coloured account of the debates on a bill to reform the currency!
Epic poems were sung to commemorate such events as the battles against the Turks during the Balkan wars of 1912–13 and (shades of Kosovo) the defeat of the Serbs in 1915 at the hands of the Habsburgs and their allies.
The Slav Muslims also had their oral traditions, the most celebrated of their ballads being the Hasanaginica , which was first written down in the eighteenth century.
English versions of this tragic tale affected the writers of the Romantic period, and amongst the English translations are those which appear under the names of Lord Byron, Sir Walter Scott and Lord Lytton (Owen Meredith).
‘Hajduks’ and ‘uskoks'
Resistance to the Turks did not end with the overthrow of Djuradj Branković's Serbian kingdom and the occupation of Bosnia and Hercegovina.
Many of those who fled across the Danube became graničari (frontiersmen) in the military frontier zone set up by the Habsburgs; others manned fortresses in Dalmatia, combining defence against the Turks in the interior with piracy in the Adriatic.
These were known as uskoks .
From amongst those who stayed behind, bands of outlaws, known as hajduks , took to the woods and hills in order to harass the Turkish officials and landowners.
When Austrian raids were made into Turkish-occupied Serbia and Bosnia,hajduks joined forces with the raiders.
As with the resistance movements of occupied Europe during the Second World War, many hajduks outwardly collaborated with the occupying administration, whilst clandestinely supporting the resistance.
The hajduks of popular legend were Robin Hood figures, robbing the rich Turks in order to give to the poor Serbs.
In real life the distinction between sheer brigandage and patriotic guerrilla activities was often blurred.
In most cases the pesme sing of tragic heroes who met violent deaths, martyrs to the national cause.
Such were the Bosnian hajduks of the seventeenth century and Serbian hero Banović Strahinja.
Not all the theses of the pesme were concerned with large national issues.
The heroes come across as people who lived their lives to the full and knew how to love and laugh as well as how to fight.
Although Serbian society was patriarchal, there are some impressive female characters, like the tragic mother of the nine Jugovići sons in the Kosovo cycle and Banović Strahinja's spirited wife.
The stories about Strahinja tell of a classic conflict between love and duty when the hero's wife falls in love with the Turk who has abducted her from the family home whilst her husband is away in Kruševac visiting his wife's relatives, the powerful Jugovići family.
This legend forms the basis of a compelling play by the modern Serbian writer Borislav Mihajlović, which achieved a notable success when first produced in Novi Sad in the early 1960s.
A film on the same theme has also been made.
The rich oral tradition of the pesme made a great impression on writers  and folklorists during the Romantic revival of the nineteenth century.
Jakob Grimm called them Homeric in their epic majesty and Goethe compared the Kosovo pesme to the Song of Songs.
Their importance to the history of the Yugoslav peoples is that they kept alive the spirit and culture of a downtrodden nation during the centuries of foreign occupation.
Slovenes, Croats and Serbs under Habsburg rule
The link between the Habsburg dynasty and the South Slav peoples began in the late thirteenth century, following the defeat of Ottokar, the Przemysl king of Austria-Bohemia by the German prince Rudolf of Habsburg at the battle of the Marchfeld near Vienna in 1278.
Within fifty years Habsburg rule had penetrated southward from Inner Austria and Styria to the Adriatic, incorporating Carinthia and Carniola in 1335.
Istria was added in 1374 and Trieste in 1387.
The Slovenes of these newly acquired territories were no strangers to German rule, which they had first experienced under Charlemagne.
Hungary first came under Habsburg rule in 1437, when Albrecht II of Austria was nominated by the Holy Roman Emperor, Sigismund, to succeed him.
From then until the dissolution of the Empire by Napoleon in 1806 the Imperial crown was effectively the hereditary possession of the Habsburg family.
With Hungary went also the crown of Croatia.
Dynastic disputes followed the death of Albrecht, who died from dysentery in 1439, whilst preparing an army to keep the Turks at bay, and the Habsburgs were temporarily eclipsed as incumbents of both the Imperial and Hungarian thrones.
The succession to the Empire was soon re-established in the Habsburg line and the link with Hungary came again after the battle of Mohács in 1526, when Ferdinand I of Austria succeeded the last Jagellonian King of Hungary and Bohemia, Ludovic, who was drowned while fleeing from the battlefield.
In 1527 the Croat Diet also elected Ferdinand as King of Croatia.
Although Ferdinand's domain was much reduced by the advance of the Turks into Hungary and Croatia, the association of the Hungarians and Croats with the Habsburgs remained until 1918.
Hungary also included the Vojvodina, with its considerable population of Serbs, many of whom had crossed the Danube in front of the advancing Ottoman armies.
During the next 150 years most of Hungary lay under Turkish rule, but the Habsburgs held on to Slovenia and parts of Croatia and Slavonia, including the Zagreb region.
In 1578 the military frontier (Militärgrenze ) was established as a defensive zone protecting the Habsburg lands from the Turks.
As the Habsburgs were the standard bearers of the Holy Roman Empire, they saw  this frontier as the protective wall which shielded Christendom from the infidel Islamic hordes.
The geographical position of the frontier fluctuated with the fortunes of war.
At its greatest extent it stretched from the Adriatic coast below the Velebit mountains, across the northern Dinaric ranges to the Sava, along the Sava to the Danube and along the Danube to the western margins of Transylvania and Wallachia.
The western end of the line held firm for most of the three centuries of the frontier zone's history, although there were frequent Turkish raids into Carinthia, Carniola, Styria and Croatia.
The eastern end was not fully established until the early eighteenth century, when the Turks were driven from Hungary, Transylvania and the Banat.
The lands which formed the military frontier had suffered greatly from the passage of armies in both directions during the fierce fighting of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and when the defensive zone was established many of the villages had been depopulated.
One of the first tasks of the Habsburgs was to induce settlers to occupy the empty lands.
Amongst those who took advantage of the privileges offered, the majority were Serbs, but others also moved in, notably Germans, Hungarians and Slavs from other parts of the multinational Empire.
They were offered lands, homes and a relaxation of feudal obligations in return for military service in defence of the frontier.
The eighteenth-century historian and topographer Freiherr Johann von Valvasor describes the life of the frontiersmen: ‘Whenever a man was working in the fields he always carried his arms with him and kept a horse saddled near his plough.
When the Turks appeared he immediately mounted, either to give battle, or, if they were too numerous, to ride off and raise the alarm.’
The descendants of those who occupied the military frontier form a large element of the 550,000 Serbs who still live in Croatia.
There are villages in Lika, Kordun, Banija and Gorski Kotor, between Zagreb and the northern Adriatic coast, where over 70 per cent of the present-day inhabitants are Serbs.
Other old-established Serbian communities are found in the Dalmatian hinterland.
The place name Srpsko Polje, on the route across the Velebit mountains from the old uskok castle of Senj, is one example.
The Slovenes
During the Habsburg period the territory inhabited by the Slovenes was divided into six administrative areas, all of which formed part of Austria.
These were Styria (Steiermark), acquired by the Habsburgs in 1278; Carniola (Krain) and Carinthia (Kärnten), which came to the Habsburgs in  1335; and Trieste, Görz-Gradisca and Istria, which were absorbed into the expanding Austrian realm later in the fourteenth century.
With Habsburg rule came a strengthening of German cultural influences.
Austro-German barons acquired lands in the newly won territories and built their castles on their estates.
German-speaking bishops appointed by the Archbishop of Salzburg administered large tracts of Church lands; other areas belonged to the bishoprics of Brixen and Freising.
German-speaking settlers moved into Slovene-speaking districts as landowners, merchants and craftsmen.
In 1360 Rudolf IV organised a mass settlement of thousands of German colonists in the Gottschee (Kočevje) area of Lower Carniola.
Their descendants remained until they were expelled to Austria at the end of the Second World War.
Many Slovenes were absorbed into the dominant German culture and into the Austro-German nobility.
Yet, with remarkable tenacity, the mass of the Slovene peasants retained their Slav culture and language.
The Reformation
In the early sixteenth century the Reformation made considerable progress amongst the Slovenes, and Protestant schools and churches were established in Laibach (Ljubljana) and other Slovene towns.
Although the Habsburg-led Counter-Reformation eventually extinguished this movement, it bore fruits which were of enduring significance in the cultural history of the Slovenes.
In 1555 Primož Trubar made the first translation of the New Testament into Slovene and in 1584 a Slovene grammar was produced.
The works of Trubar and his collaborators were printed in Germany and circulated not only amongst Slovenes but also amongst Croats and Serbs.
This early manifestation of a Yugoslav cultural movement lay dormant until the late eighteenth century, when, during the reign of Joseph II (1780–90), the apostle of the Enlightenment, there was the reawakening of the national cultures of the Slavs within the Empire.
The works of Trubar and his contemporaries were rediscovered and had an influence on such figures in the Yugoslav renaissance as Kopitar and Vuk Karadžić.
As elsewhere in Europe, the Reformation in Slovenia coincided with a period of social unrest which was characterised by a number of peasant revolts.
In Slovenia and Croatia a serious peasant rising, led by Matija Gubec, threatened the city of Agram (Zagreb) in 1573.
The rallying cry of the rebels, ‘za stare pravice ’(for the old rights), does not suggest that the peasants were inspired by Protestant ideas.
In fact, in so far as religion was involved, the contrary was probably the case, as the ideas of the Reformation  affected the nobles and the town dwellers more than the peasants.
There is some evidence of an organised conspiracy to spread the revolt throughout the Slovene-speaking areas of Styria, Carniola and Istria, and evidence that Gubec was only one of a number of local leaders in different areas.
In fact, the rising was limited to the Zagorje region of north-western Croatia and the adjoining Slovene areas.
The centre of the revolt was the village of Donja Stubica, some 24 km (15 miles) north of Zagreb.
The first encounter took place there on 29 January 1573.
Within a few days the Slovene peasants of the Krka valley between Novo Mesto and the Croatian border had also risen.
In all, some 8,000 to 10,000 peasants were involved in both Slovenia and Croatia.
Gubec was executed on 15 February.
The revolt was suppressed with abominable cruelty.
Gubec was taken to the cathedral in Agram (Zagreb), where he was crowned ‘King of the Peasants’ in the presence of a jeering congregation.
The iron circle which was placed on his head was first raised to white heat, and the peasant leader expired to the taunts of ‘Ave rex rusticorum’(Živio seljački kralj ).
His remains were then hung on a gibbet as a warning to others.
Although the revolt lasted less than a month and its effects were confined to a small region, Gubec became a folk hero to the peasants.
Later, Slovene and Croat historians depicted him as a martyr to the cause of Slav resistance to foreign rule, because the nobles against whom he rebelled were Germans, Hungarians or Slavs who had adopted the culture of their Habsburg masters.
The great Croat writer, the late Miroslav Krleža, in his Ballade Petrice Kerempuha , written in the kajkavski dialect of the Zagreb region, was one of many who drew inspiration from the terrible events of 1573.
The Reformation came to Slovenia and Croatia at a time when the Turkish threat was at its height.
The divisions amongst the Christians weakened their power of resistance and may have contributed to the Ottoman victories of the sixteenth century.
At the eastern end of the Habsburg-Ottoman line there was a total collapse, leading to the occupation of Vojvodina and most of Hungary and Slavonia by the Turks.
In the centre and west, in Croatia and Slovenia, the military frontier held, but throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries these areas were the victims of frequent raids by marauding bands of Turks, who even penetrated as far as Graz.
Slovene churches in the path of these invasions had defensive walls built around them, behind which the inhabitants of a threatened village could take refuge until the storm passed.
In the more vulnerable areas there was serious depopulation as villages were abandoned.
By the end of the seventeenth century the danger had receded, and the eighteenth century saw steady economic progress in an atmosphere of stability and calm.
The Slovene literary language
The Counter-Reformation crushed the spirit of Protestantism in Slovenia, but it did not completely suppress the influence of Trubar and his contemporary Slovene writers.
Even the Jesuits, who were called upon in 1573 to lead the Kulturkampf against the Protestant heresy, were forced to provide devotional literature and hymns in Slovene.
The first known secular literature in Slovene was composed of the baroque poems of an Augustinian friar, Marko Pohlin, written in the mid eighteenth century.
Although modest in their poetic achievement, they helped to sustain the tenuous thread of the Slovene literary language which led back to Trubar.
In the late eighteenth century the influence of the Josephine Enlightenment encouraged the pioneer Slovene industrialist Baron Žiga Zois to patronise the Slovene literary movement.
Further impetus was given during the brief Napoleonic occupation of the Illyrian Provinces (1809–13), when the Slovene language was encouraged in the schools.
It is significant that one of the figures to emerge from this period, the poet Valentin Vodnik (1759–1819), wrote poems in praise of Napoleon.
Another was the first Slovene playwright, Anton Linhart.
Vodnik was in many ways a typical figure of the European Romantic movement, drawing inspiration from the oral folk tradition of the peasants, which had a vigour and directness often lacking in the more formal literary tradition.
The generations of poets who followed him, notably Prešeren (1800–49) and Stritar (1836–1923), were able to combine a familiarity with the central European literary heritage with an ear for the cadences of peasant speech.
After them the literary scene in Slovenia throughout the nineteenth century resembles that of many of the small nations of Europe struggling to free themselves from the shackles of the great multinational empires which straddled the continent from Finland to the Aegean.
The rediscovery of rich veins of vernacular literature, which had been kept alive in the oral traditions of the peasants during centuries of domination by alien cultures, gave a feeling of self-confidence to the national movements which were striving for independence.
In many cases the touch of Napoleonic France's magic wand awoke the sleeping nations to the call of destiny.
The Slovenes had the added advantage of a literary language which was three centuries old.
The Slovene economy under the  Habsburgs 
The Slovene lands formed part of the Austrian polity, both in an administrative and economic sense.
Although the provincial assemblies of the Estates, representing the nobility, the clergy and the burghers, had at certain times some degree of local responsibility, for the most part the life of the realm was directed from the Austrian capital.
This became increasingly  the case under the centralising regimes of Maria Theresa and Joseph II in the second half of the eighteenth century.
A description of Carniola in the late seventeenth century by the Germanised Slovene nobleman Von Valvasor depicts a vigorous economic life, based on the exploitation of local mineral and agricultural resources.
A major Imperial trade route passed through Slovene territory, linking Vienna, via Graz, Marburg (Maribor) and Laibach (Ljubljana), to the Adriatic port of Trieste.
Foreign trade played an important part in the Slovene economy, Italy and the German states being important trading partners.
Slovenian-made goods such as iron utensils from the forges in the forested uplands which lay alongside the Laibach-Trieste artery; timber; quicksilver from the mines at Idrija; farm produce, notably wool, cattle, fruits, grain and honey, were the principal exports.
Many of the ships built at Trieste used timber from the slopes of the Trnovski Gozd above the Vipava valley.
The forests also supplied charcoal for the forges.
As the pace of economic exploitation quickened in the nineteenth century the forests were depleted, the ravages of the woodmen being supplemented by the destructive habits of the goats kept by the peasants.
In return for these exports the Slovenes were able to import a range of goods not only from Italy and Germany but also from the Levant and the Far East, via Trieste and Venice.
Silk, spices and, later, coffee were amongst these overseas imports.
This provided a richer and more varied diet and a grander life style for those in the middle and upper ranks of society than would have been possible if they had been dependent only on the products of a self-contained peasant economy.
Already by the end of the eighteenth century a substantial educated Slovene middle class had come into existence.
They were in touch with the main currents of European political and cultural life and were able to send their sons to universities such as Göttingen, Tübingen, Vienna and the Sorbonne.
They were infected by the ideas of the Enlightenment and were ready to welcome the Napoleonic soldiers and administrators who incorporated the Slovene lands into the Illyrian Provinces in 1809 for a brief, but fateful sojourn of four years.
One of the most outstanding figures was Baron Zois, who owned iron workings at Stara Fužina, on the shores of Lake Bohinj (Wocheiner See) in the Julian Alps.
Mention has already been made of his influence on the Slovene literary movement.
As an industrialist and landowner he was a forward-looking innovator who, like his English contemporaries, the improving landlords of the eighteenth-century agricultural revolution, introduced new farming techniques on his estates and exploited the mineral resources which he found under his lands.
The dissolution of the monasteries by Joseph II also had important economic consequences for Slovenia.
It gave an opportunity for entrepreneurs to acquire the lands, workshops, fishponds and mines which the monks had worked, and to integrate them into the developing secular economy.
Some of the effects of this can be seen at the Slovene technical museum housed in the old monastery buildings at Bistra, on the edge of the Ljubljansko Barje (Ljubljana Heath).
Other economic achievements of the late eighteenth century were the draining of the marshes in the old lake bed of the Ljubljansko Barje — work which had been started in Roman times and is still not completed — the introduction of maize and potatoes into the crop rotation, the expansion of viticulture and the development of the textile industry.
Although the Slovene economy developed during the nineteenth century as a satellite economy to that of Austria, at the end of the eighteenth century it had a sufficient degree of autonomy to sustain a self-reliant, Slovene-speaking middle class which could act as a spokesman for the national movement.
When the ideas of the French Revolution concerning the rights of nations to self-government reached the Slovenes, they already had many of the attributes of a modern nation, but it was to take them over a century to achieve a form of self-determination within the wider Yugoslav state.
The peculiar circumstances of the Slovene nation's historical experience help to explain why Slovenia today enjoys a higher standard of living, a higher level of industrial and educational achievement, and a greater degree of ‘westernization’ than do the other Yugoslav republics.
The Croats
The personal union of the crowns of Croatia and Hungary which began in 1102 did not, according to Croatian historians, subordinate the Croats to the Magyars.
They resist the Hungarian claim that the three regions of Slavonia, Croatia and Dalmatia were annexed to Hungary.
The Croats point to the fact that they retained their own chief executive — the ban; their own assembly, the Sabor; and their own judicial system.
They even had some control over their own finances and their own armed forces.
It would seem, however, that real power rested in the hands of the feudal nobility which acknowledged the suzerainty of the Hungarian king, but held considerable power independently.
The dominant families did not display any strong national feelings, Croat or Hungarian.
They were more concerned with the consolidation of their estates and with the expansion of their personal power.
Two of the leading families, the Zrinski and the  Frankopani, held land in both countries and moved freely between their lands.
The power of the crown was severely restricted, and the magnates usually elected weak rulers in order to safeguard their own privileges.
In 1458, however, fear of the Turkish menace overcame their fear of a strong king, and they elected the ruthless and able Matthias Corvinus (Matyas Hunyadi).
Matthias, for the first time, summoned Croat nobles to the Hungarian Diet and reorganised the defences against the Turks, building fortresses along the Sava and Kupa in what later became the military frontier zone.
The Croatian nobles were forced to supply troops and funds for the defence of the frontier, although the Sabor was permitted to appoint the supreme army commander.
The death of Matthias in 1490 left the succession in dispute, as he had no legitimate offspring.
A dynastic struggle between Jagellonians and Habsburgs drew in the Croat magnates, who generally supported the Habsburg cause.
This was despite the fact that one of the claimants, John Zápolya, who was crowned King of Hungary in 1514, was of Slavonian origin and was known to the Magyars as the Slav King.
A period of anarchy followed, in which the Turks were able to take advantage of the divisions amongst their Christian enemies to raid into both Croatia and the Slovene lands of Carniola.
In 1493 a battle between the Croats under Ban Mirko Derenčin and a force of 8,000 Turkish cavalry occurred near the town of Udbina in the Lika region.
Ten thousand Croats fell to ‘the red wind of the Moslem scimitars’ and, with them, the flower of the Croat nobility.
Stanko Guldescu, the historian of  medieval Croatia, has described this disaster as having ‘more significance for the subsequent fate of Europe than the more publicised Serbian debacle’ at Kosovo Polje in 1389.
A contemporary writer from Lika compared it to the Mongol invasions and the depredations of the Goths and Attila the Hun.
Even today the district between Udbina and Titova Korenica is known as Krbava (krv = blood) and the valley between Udbina and Bunic, where the battle occurred, is called Krbavsko Polje, the Field of Blood.
The dynastic struggle was eventually resolved in favour of the Habsburgs, but not before the death of Zápolya in 1540.
Ferdinand of Habsburg secured the votes of the Croatian Sabor on 1 January 1527, three months after Suleiman's victory at Mohács, but Zápolya, referred to by the sultan as his vassal, continued to dispute the throne of Hungary and refused to recognise the vote of a section of the Hungarian Diet in favour of Ferdinand.
Zápolya had, after all, been crowned with the iron crown of St Stephen, the sacred symbol of Hungarian sovereignty.
In practice, however, the real power in Hungary and much of Slavonia and Croatia lay in Turkish hands.
The Habsburgs took the Turkish threat more seriously than Matthias had done.
In 1522 the emperor Charles V, head of the House of Habsburg, and since 1520 Holy Roman Emperor, entrusted to his younger brother, Archduke Ferdinand, the government of the Austrian province, which included the Slovene areas of Styria, Carinthia and Carniola, and the march lands along the Croatia-Slavonia border.
In return Ferdinand renounced his claims to the Spanish and Burgundian lands held by the Habsburgs, but he later acquired the crowns of Bohemia and Hungary and ascended the Imperial throne on the abdication of Charles in 1558.
Ferdinand gave high priority to the defence of his realm, and of Christendom itself, against the Turks, and he intervened directly in Croatian affairs to ensure that adequate preparations were made.
He created a chain of fortified villages and strongpoints and established a corps of mercenary troops to guard them.
These villages were settled by colonists who were given exemption from feudal obligations to the local Croatian nobility in return for their willingness to take up arms against the Turks.
This was the beginning of the Militärgrenze system, which was not finally abolished until 1881.
This system suited Ferdinand in several ways: it was relatively cheap: it gave defence against small border raids and a trip-wire to provide early warning against major invasions; it also broke the power of the remaining Croatian noble houses, which had survived the massacre of Krbavsko Polje; and it might provide a corps of Kaisertreu troops in case of trouble from rebellious Hungarian magnates.
This last point was still valid two centuries later, as referred to in a report by the governor of the Varaždin district in 1737: ‘diese granitz nicht allein als ein antemurale contra Turcam, sed etiam contra Hungarum in casu rebellionis anzusehen ist’('this frontier is not only a defensive outwork against the Turk, but can also be seen as protection in case of rebellion in Hungary').
The ideal settlers for the zone, which was directly administered by the Austrians, were refugees from Serbia, the so-called uskoks .
They had reason to hate the Turks, who had driven them from their homes; they were grateful for the grants of land which enabled them to settle down in their new homes, and they owed no allegiance to the Croatian and Hungarian nobles.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the frontiersmen (graničari ) were regarded as being amongst the most loyal of the Emperor's troops.
This tradition persisted even after the dissolution of the military frontier in 1881.
During the First World War, General Boroević's graničari , serving on the Isonzo front, were responsible for the defeat of the Italians at Caporetto in 1917.
The existence of the military frontier, which was eventually extended eastward to Transylvania, did not save Croatia-Slavonia and Hungary from Turkish occupation.
From the mid sixteenth century until the Treaty of Karlovci (Carlowitz) in 1699, only a small portion of western Croatia, extending along the borders of Styria and Carniola from Zagreb to the Gulf of Kvarner (Quarnero), remained effectively under Habsburg control.
The year 1699 marked the turn of the tide.
As the Habsburgs advanced step by step, with occasional setbacks, the Turks were gradually pushed back south of the Sava and Danube, and the military frontier was re-established along the full length of the line from Transylvania to the Adriatic.
As more of Croatia-Slavonia came under Habsburg control, the old links between the Croat and Hungarian nobility were re-established.
Whilst they no longer had need to make common cause against the Turks, they now had a new common enemy in the Austro-German Habsburgs, whose centralising tendencies during the reigns of Maria Theresa and Joseph II stimulated resistance from the non-German nobility.
The Croat nation had taken a severe battering between 1526 and 1699, but that portion which flourished in Dalmatia kept alive the spirit and culture of the people.
Dalmatia and the Adriatic littoral
The Adriatic coast and the offshore islands form a distinct geographical zone, separated from the interior of the Balkan peninsula by the formidable barrier of the Dinaric Alps.
The Mediterranean climatic zone, and the mode of life associated with it, is restricted to a thin fringe extending only a few miles inland.
Communications by sea across the enclosed waters of the Adriatic has always been easier than by land routes across the mountains or along the narrow coastal strip.
Even until after the Second World War, the cities of Dalmatia could more easily maintain contact with each other by sea than along the tortuous roads and tracks which were the only means of land transport.
It is not surprising, therefore, that cultural influences from Italy have, until comparatively recently, had a greater effect than have those emanating from the Balkans.
The Romans found the Dalmatian environment congenial, and the traces of their colonisation are still to be found in coastal cities such as Zadar, Šibenik and, above all, Split.
The Byzantines inherited Dalmatia from the Latins, and their sovereignty, although often disputed, was recognised, however nominally in later centuries, for as long as five hundred years.
The two chief rivals for Dalmatia from the ninth century to the twelfth were the Croats and the  Venetians.
The medieval Croatian kingdom which emerged in the early tenth century under Tomislav (AD 910–30) had its base first of all at Nin, 15 km north of Zadar, and later at Biograd-na-Moru, 75 km to the south.
Both of these early Croatian capitals occupied sheltered sites on the coast.
Behind them lay the fertile,flysch -covered lowlands of the Ravni Kotari region, the largest area of flat land in Dalmatia.
Although requiring constant attention to water management, it provided a geographical base for the infant kingdom superior to that offered by the bleak, intermontane valleys inland, across the high limestone ranges of the Velebit mountains.
Tomislav's contemporary, Bishop Gregory of Nin (Grgur Ninski), is regarded by modern Croat historians as being one of the early heroes of the Croatian nation.
He fought a vigorous battle for the right of the Croat Church — at this time under the patriarchate of Aquilaea, which owed allegiance to Byzantium — to use the Slavonic liturgy and the glagolitic alphabet, in opposition to the Roman influences of the neighbouring bishopric of Split.
Although the bishopric of Nin was abolished and the Latin rite eventually triumphed in Croatia, Grgur Ninski's assertion of the individuality of the Croat nation provided a spiritual sanction to Tomislav's claims to kingship.
At its greatest extent in the late eleventh century the Croatian kingdom reached down to the Neretva, where its frontier met that of medieval Serbia.
For most of the two centuries after Tomislav's accession in AD 900, the effective authority of Croatia lay in the coastal region north of Šibenik.
Inland it extended into Slavonia, where it came into contact with Hungary.
In 1102 the crown of Croatia passed to Hungary, and this land-locked power achieved its long-held ambition, to possess an outlet to the sea.
For the next three centuries the history of Dalmatia was dominated by the rivalry between Hungary and Venice.
For Venice, the freedom of navigation along the Adriatic was vital to the maintenance of its seaborne trade with the Levant.
The possibility of a potentially hostile power occupying bases in Dalmatia was a matter of life and death to the republic.
Even if the Hungarians or the Turks could be kept at bay, there was also the threat of piracy to be met.
Venice, therefore, had an imperative need to extend its influence over the Dalmatian coastal cities.
The first decisive blow struck by the Venetians was in AD 1000, when the doge, Pietro Orseolo II, defeated the Croats and advanced to the mouth of the Neretva, where his fleet destroyed the nest of pirates, the Neretljani, who menaced the shipping routes in the southern Adriatic.
Orseolo stopped short at Pelješac, and did not attempt to attack the independent city state of Ragusa (Dubrovnik).
The Croatian cities conquered in this expedition retained a  degree of local autonomy by playing off Venice against Hungary as the fortunes of Dalmatia oscillated between the two rival powers.
In 1202 the Venetians persuaded the armies of Christendom to divert their attention from the Fourth Crusade to assist in the subjugation of Zadar, whose citizens had risen against Venice.
During the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries the Dalmatian cities changed hands many times, but despite these upheavals they enjoyed long periods of prosperity and their commerce and their arts flourished.
A complication was introduced in the fourteenth century by the rise of the Serbian and Bosnian kingdoms, which briefly controlled parts of the coast, the Serbs during the reign of Dušan in the middle of the century, and the Bosnians under Stevan Tvrtko after 1390.
The Turkish occupation of the Balkans created a new situation.
Hungarian power was broken, the Slav kingdoms were crushed, and a single, powerful occupying power threatened the coastal cities from beyond the mountains.
For the next three centuries Dalmatia's fortunes were determined by the struggles between the sea power of Venice and the land-based might of the Ottoman empire.
The northern area from Rijeka to Zadar was incorporated into the military frontier, which was under the control of the Habsburgs.
Dalmatia proper extended from Zadar to Ragusa.
The Turkish conquest of the Balkans impelled large numbers of Serbs and Bosnian Croats to flee into the neighbouring lands of Croatia, Slavonia and Dalmatia.
Many of those who settled in Dalmatia mixed with the existing Croat population.
Thus the Slav element in Dalmatia increased at the expense of the Italians.
The presence of a mixed Serb and Croat population who had lived and worked together for centuries was a factor of some importance in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when Serb and Croat deputies in the Austrian parliament worked together, first for the reunion of Dalmatia and Croatia, and later for the creation of a South Slav state.
Between 1468 and 1718 Turkey and Venice were officially at war seven times, the period of hostilities totalling forty-two years.
Between the wars there were periods of comparative peace, but the Turkish occupation of the hinterland was an ever present menace.
In the face of a common enemy, Serbs, Croats, Italians and Vlahs were able to unite in defence of the Dalmatian city states which owed allegiance to Venice.
An important defensive position against the Turks was the fortress of Klis, which stands on an isolated pinnacle of rock overlooking the route which leads from Solin (Salona) to Sinj, in a gap between the Kozjak and Mosor mountains.
It was the route by which the Turks could penetrate the mountain barrier separating the coastal lowlands around Split from  Turkish-held Bosnia.
The Croat feudal lord Petar Kružić gathered together a garrison composed of Croat refugees, who used the base at Klis both to hold the Turks at bay and to engage in marauding and piracy against coastal shipping.
Although nominally accepting the sovereignty of the Habsburg emperor Ferdinand I, who obtained the Croatian crown in 1527, Kružić and his freebooting uskoks were a law unto themselves.
When a large Turkish force invested the castle at Klis in 1536, Kružić appealed to Ferdinand for help, but the Emperor's attention was diverted by a Turkish invasion into Slavonia and he was unable to prevent the surrender of the garrison.
With Kružić dead and the sultan in possession of Klis, the Turks were soon able to overrun most of Dalmatia between Split and the Ragusan border.
Split, under Venetian control, was not taken, and the northern coastlands and islands between Zadar and Rijeka remained under Austria or Venice.
The surviving uskoks were able to settle in the fortified town of Senj, on the rugged Velebit coast, opposite the southern tip of Krk island.
War between Venice and Turkey broke out in 1571, following the participation of Venetian ships in the Christian fleet which defeated the Turks at Lepanto, but it resulted in a stalemate in which neither side gained territory.
For the next seventy years an uneasy truce prevailed, until hostilities were resumed in 1644.
The peace which ended this episode was not concluded until 1669.
Although Venice lost territory elsewhere, including the island of Crete, there was little change in Dalmatia.
Turkish fortunes began to decline after the raising of the second siege of Vienna (1683), and the Treaty of Karlovci (Carlowitz) in 1699 recorded the first major Ottoman defeat and the beginning of the slow retreat of the Turks from Europe.
The Venetians gained a large area inland from the coast, including the Neretva valley below Mostar and the towns of Sinj and Knin in the central Dalmatian hinterland.
The frontier settlement agreed to in 1699 included an arrangement whereby the Turks were given two tiny footholds on the coast.
One, at Neum near the root of the Pelješac peninsula, separated the Venetian settlements at the mouth of the Neretva from the northern boundary of the Ragusan republic.
The other, at the southern end of Ragusan territory, gave the Turks an even smaller strip of the shoreline at Sutorina on the Gulf of Kotor, again with the object of keeping the Ragusans and Venetians apart.
The Sutorina strip was abolished in 1918, but the traveller heading southward to Dubrovnik may still wonder why a 5 km strip of the Magistrala motor road passes through Bosnia.
After the seventh war with the Turks (1714–18) the Venetians were able to advance up to the present Bosnian border, taking in the whole of Sinjsko Polje and Imotski.
Thereafter the Turkish menace was laid to rest  and Venice had no serious challenge to its authority in Dalmatia until Napoleon extinguished the republic itself in 1797.
Social and cultural life in Dalmatia
Whilst Croatia and Slavonia were being laid waste during the centuries-long struggle between the Habsburgs and the Ottomans, Dalmatia, although not entirely at peace, enjoyed relative prosperity and order.
In the Venetian cities and in the republic of Ragusa there was a unique flowering of the arts, blending the spirit of the Italian Renaissance with the native culture of the Slavs.
The genius of the Dalmatians showed itself particularly in architecture, sculpture and literature, and their artistic output was sustained over many centuries from the builders of the early Christian churches of the seventh and eighth centuries to the eighteenth-century cathedral of Dubrovnik, and from Historia Salonitana , by the thirteenth-century Thomas, Archdeacon of Split, to the black comedies of Vlaho Stulli-Stulić, written in the closing years of the Ragusan republic and still performed today.
There is an even older architectural tradition, going back to Roman times.
The magnificent palace of Diocletian at Split, which inspired Robert Adam, the English designer of the eighteenth century, and also influenced the contemporary Georgian styles, still forms the outer shell, a square mile in area, which surrounds the vibrant city which has grown up over the centuries within and around its protective walls.
The greatest creative period was between the thirteenth century and the seventeenth.
The debt to Italy, and particularly to Venice, is apparent in many of the finest buildings in Šibenik, Trogir, Split and Dubrovnik, and one does not need the constant reminders of their origins which are provided by the many replicas of the winged lion of St Mark's which adorn them.
Architecture and sculpture
Dalmatian architects and sculptors developed a style which built on the Romanesque tradition but which blended elements from the later Gothic and Renaissance styles.
The cathedral of Split, which dominates the Roman peristyle in the heart of Diocletian's city, is built on the site of the emperor's mausoleum.
A church was first consecrated there in AD 649, but the present cathedral dates from the thirteenth century and is a monument to the Split school of architects who gave new life to the Romanesque style in Dalmatia.
One of the great sculptors of the period was Andrija Buvina.
The reliefs  on the walnut folding door which Buvina decorated in 1214 represented a fusion of the classical inheritance and the realities of the contemporary Slav environment of the fifteenth century.
As Milan Prelog, the Croatian art historian, has written in Enciklopedija Jugoslavije , ‘Buvina's masterpiece is a proof of the progress achieved in a local sculptor's workshop at the beginning of the thirteenth century.
It relates to the Byzantine tradition and also to contemporary trends in art; towards the Graeco-Roman heritage and towards the immediate reality.’
Following Buvina came the Trogir-born sculptor Radovan, whose most famous work is the Romanesque doorway of the cathedral at Trogir.
The humanity and realism expressed in the faces and attitudes of the figures which decorate the doorway are in contrast to the stylised figures of the earlier Romanesque carvings.
Zvane Črnja has written of Radovan's Adam and Eve that they ‘are not Biblical personages at all.
They are simple, honest Dalmatian labourers, humanly ashamed because surprised in a proscribed, yet human, act.’
The Latin inscription engraved on the doorway states, ‘This doorway was made by Radovan, the best of all the masters of this art, as witnessed by his sculptures and reliefs, in the year one thousand two hundred and fifty.’
Radovan may not have completed the work on the doorway, but his pupils continued in his style.
They were also responsible for the reliefs decorating the campanile of the cathedral in Split.
Two centuries after Radovan, the cathedral at Šibenik, 50 km up the coast from Trogir, was being built under the guidance of Juraj Dalmatinac (Georgius Mattei Dalmaticus), who was born in Zadar in the early fifteenth century.
In 1441 he took over the work from two Venetian architects and supervised the work for the next three decades.
Dalmatinac, like many of the Dalmatian artists of the time, had worked in Italy.
There was a relatively easy interchange between the city states of Dalmatia and Renaissance Italy, and the work of Italian artists, especially from Venice, can be found throughout Dalmatia.
Evidence of Dalmatians (whom the Italians called Schiavone or Slavs) working in Italy goes back at least to the time of Radovan.
One thirteenth-century artist was Simun Dubrovčanin (Simon of Ragusa), who carved the main door of the cathedral of Santa Maria Maggiore at Barletta on the western shore of the Adriatic, opposite Dubrovnik.
One of Juraj Dalmatinac's early works was the Loggia dei Mercanti at Ancona.
Painters
Although the art of painting was not as well developed as architecture and sculpture, there were, nevertheless, a number of Slav artists from the  Adriatic coastlands who displayed considerable talent and whose works are to be found in church frescoes and other paintings on both the Italian and eastern shores.
Nikola Schiavone from Bar, whose work was described by the Italians as ‘fantasticus et barbarus’; Andrija Meldol-Medulić Schiavone, who achieved a European reputation; Stjepan Crnota from Rab, who was celebrated in Venice; and Juraj Klović (Don  Guilio Clovio), a miniaturist, who was heralded as ‘a small and new Michelangelo’, are a few of the Dalmatian painters who settled in Italy between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries.
An interesting fifteenth-century painter was Vincent of Kastar (Vincent iz Kastva), who was born near Rijeka.
His frescoes in the central Istrian church of Sv.
Marija na Škriljna, near Beram, painted in 1471, display a naive vitality and a medieval peasant's sense of the harsh realities of life which are in contrast to the more cultivated products of the Italian Renaissance painters.
The whole interior walls of the church in this little Istrian village are covered with paintings on such themes as the Dance of Death (Mrtvački ples ), the Adoration of the Magi (Poklonstvo kraljeva ) and Christ on the Mount of Olives (Krist na maslinovoj gori ) in which the poetic idealism of the painter shines through the simple techniques employed to convey his vision of spiritual truth.
Literature
The fusion of cultural influences from Italy — both the original Latin and the Renaissance elements — with those of Slavonic origin, which was a feature of the plastic arts, also characterised the literature of Dalmatia.
It is epitomised in the use of three different alphabets — Latin, Cyrillic and glagolitic — in early Croatian literature.
One of the earliest literary works emanating from Dalmatia is the Historia Salonitana , written in Latin by Thomas the Archdeacon (1200–68), a native of Split, who was partly educated in Bologna.
In Italy he was impressed by the preaching of St Francis of Assisi on the virtues of poverty.
When he returned to Split, however, he joined the Latinised clergy of the Metropolitan Church and became a fierce opponent of the poor Slavs and their culture.
During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries a school of Dalmatian humanists, still writing mainly in Latin or Italian prose and poetry, broke away from the narrow ecclesiastical concerns of men like Thomas and became part of the mainstream of the European Renaissance.
They wrote on such subjects as education, art, philosophy and science.
Juraj Sizgorić (Georgius Sisgoreus) of Šibenik was the first Croatian to publish a volume of Latin verse, which appeared in Venice in 1477.
In his wide-ranging  survey of the cultural history of his native land,De situ Illyriae et civitate Sibenici , he described the Illyrians (meaning Croats) as possessing superior intellectual gifts, especially those of Dalmatia.
This was not simply a boastful assertion of the worth of his own cultural background, for there is no doubt that at this time the Dalmatians included theologians, philosophers, poets and lawyers whose ‘minds were admired by Italy itself’.
Sizgorić, even though he wrote in Latin, was aware of the rich vernacular folk poetry of the Slav peoples and himself translated a volume of folk sayings and proverbs into Latin.
In the late fifteenth century and throughout the sixteenth a number of Slav scholars from Dalmatia achieved European fame in a wide range of intellectual and artistic fields.
Ilija Crijević from Ragusa (Aelius Lampridius Cervinus) became a member of the Quirinal Academy in Rome in 1484 at the age of twenty-one years, and was crowned poet laureate for a treatise on Virgil.
He was also renowned for his unconventional, erotic poetry.
 Antun Vrančić (1504–73, Antonius Verancius) of Šibenik, a truly Renaissance man, travelled widely as a diplomat, had love poems published in Krakow and became Primate of Hungary.
He also made translations from Turkish to Latin.
His nephew, Faust Vrančić (1551–1617), invented machines, wrote texts on logic and ethics and compiled a dictionary in Latin, Italian, German, Croatian and Magyar.
The development of a specifically Croatian literature in Dalmatia is normally attributed to the high-born, Italian-educated Marko Marulić (1450–1524) from Split, although many of his predecessors and contemporaries spoke Croatian and were aware of the vernacular tradition.
Antun Vrančić, for example, always regarded the ‘Illyrian’ language as his mother tongue, but, following the customs of civilised Europe at that time, he wrote in Latin.
Marulić also wrote in Latin, as might be expected from a man who had studied in Padua.
Some of his Latin works were translated into the major European languages.
He is remembered with particular pride in Yugoslavia, however, for his epic poem Judita (Judith), written in the čakavski dialect in 1501 and published in Venice in 1521.
At about the same time several young Ragusan aristocrats were writing love poems in Croatian, in the manner of Petrarch's Canzoniero and of the troubadours who followed the Tuscan tradition.
These included Šiško Menčetić and Djore Držić.
A powerful figure in Ragusa was the Benedictine friar Mavro Vetranović, who was born in 1482 and who lived for over eighty years.
His output included fierce denunciations of the secular character of the erotic poetry of the troubadours, but his fierce inner  struggle against the pleasures of the flesh, which found expression in his moral sermons, concealed a passion which he could not always contain.
As an ascetic he was in the mould of the medieval Christians, but when his heart overruled his intellect he would write warm, sensuous love poetry under the cloak of religion.
He also wrote Biblical dramas which display a deep love of nature.
Djore Držić's nephew, Marin Držić (1508–67), was a poor scholar who was sent to the University of Siena on a stipend from the Ragusan Senate.
When he returned home he was given employment as a personal companion to an Austrian count, who took him to Vienna and Constantinople.
The count found Držić a witty and entertaining companion, and Držić, a poor cleric, benefited greatly from sharing in the cosmopolitan life of his master.
His first poems followed the Petrarchan tradition of his uncle, but he soon established himself as a versatile playwright, capable of producing dramas, pastorals, masques and, above all, comedies.
His Skup (The Miser) was, like Molière's L'Avare a century later, based on Plautus.
This may explain why Držić was known as ‘the Croatian Molière’.
Ragusan literature reached its highest point in the early seventeenth century.
The greatest figure of that period was Ivan Gundulić (1588–1638), who became Rector of the Republic.
He is best known for his epic poem Osman , which, although running to 11,000 lines, was unfinished at his death.
It was inspired by the victory of the Poles over the Turks in Bessarabia in 1621 and sings of the heroism of the Slavs in their long fight against the infidels.
Gundulić also wrote dramas, masques and pastorals.
A contemporary of Gundulić was Junije Palmotić (1606–57), a Ragusan noble who lived for a time in Bosnia, and who drew upon the Slav folk tales as well as on contemporary Italian and ancient classical traditions for the abundant outpouring of songs, satires, verse epics and dramas which he composed.
His near contemporary and namesake, Jaketa Palmotić (Dionović), is best known for his long epic poem Ragusa Restored , which describes the tragedy of the 1667 earthquake, in which the author's wife and children perished, and the efforts of the republic to rebuild the city.
It is interesting to note that neither of the Palmotićs receives even a passing mention in Zvane Črnja's standard Kulturna historija Hrvatske , although Jakita is described by Sir Arthur Evans as one of ‘the most celebrated names in the long annals of Ragusan literature’ and Junije is referred to by one English historian as ‘the creator of the national drama’.
The golden age of Ragusan literature was not the only manifestation of Dalmatian literary energy in the seventeenth century.
In Hvar, Zadar and the other cities, poems and dramas continued to appear.
Works produced  at the theatre in Hvar, rebuilt in 1612 after its destruction in 1571, five years before London's first theatre was built, carried on the literary traditions of the Hvar literary school established in the previous century.
Nor was Dalmatian writing confined to poetry and drama.
There was a remarkable output of scientific and philosophical writing, which culminated in the renowned Rudjer Bošković (1711–87), an all-round scientist who had a European reputation for his writings on optics, physics, mechanics, astronomy, mathematics and philosophy.
He held the chair of mathematics at Pavia, taught in Paris, was director of optics in Louis XV's ministry of marine, ran an observatory in Milan, and was elected to the Royal Society in London and the French Academy of Science in Paris.
Despite this cosmopolitan background he never forgot his humble origins in Ragusa, and proudly affirmed his Slav language and culture when mistakenly referred to as an Italian.
The creative activity went on to the end of the Venetian and Ragusan republics at the turn of the nineteenth century and even beyond.
By then the Turkish menace had receded.
The revival of Croatia-Slavonia and the development of the Croat national movement in the nineteenth century saw a merging of the distinct Dalmatian tradition with the invigorated culture of the northern Croatian region to form the modern Croatian mainstream.
The city state of Ragusa (Dubrovnik)
Both names — the Latin Ragusa and the Slavonic Dubrovnik — have been used since the end of the first millennium to designate the settlement which was established on a rocky site below the limestone cliffs of Mt Srdj (412 m), facing the island of Lokrum.
Although there may have been a settlement of Illyrian-Greeks there before the second century BC when the Roman occupation of Dalmatia began, there is little evidence of continuous use of the site until the seventh century AD.
The destruction of nearby Epidauros (Cavtat) by the Avars in the mid seventh century, and of Salona, near Split, some thirty-five years earlier, may have contributed an influx of Romanised refugees who swelled the population of a pre-existing community of Slav fisherfolk.
The fact that Cavtat was later known as Ragusavecchia (Old Ragusa) supports the view that some of the town's early inhabitants originated in Cavtat.
For the purposes of the present work, it is sufficient to know that by the end of the seventh century a town inhabited mainly by people of Latin culture existed on the site, and that the surrounding countryside was peopled by Slavs.
In the early ninth century, when northern Dalmatia was brought under the influence of the Holy Roman Emperor, Charlemagne, Ragusa and southern Dalmatia were included in the Byzantine sphere.
The city was fortified and was able to repel raids by pirates and a siege by the Saracens in 866–7.
Already at this time Ragusa's influence as a trading centre was being felt throughout the Mediterranean.
An important item in this trade was timber for the construction of ships.
The wooded slopes of the mountains inland from Dalmatia supported forests of oak and pine, in contrast to the barren interior, which lay behind the southern (African) shore of the Mediterranean, where the Arab empire was established in the seventh and eighth centuries.
The export of wood by merchants from Ragusa and other Dalmatian cities to the Arabs in Egypt, North Africa, Spain and Sicily contributed to the deforestation of the immediate hinterland.
As Byzantine power waned, the Venetians advanced.
Ragusa was seen as a rival which had to be subdued and brought under Venetian control.
In 948 an attempt by Venice to conquer Ragusa was repulsed, according to legend, with the miraculous help of St Blaise (San Biagio; Sveti Vlaho), who in England is known as the patron saint of woolcombers.
As a result, the Ragusans adopted him as their patron saint and his effigy still gazes out over the Stradun.
Fifty years later, however, the Venetians succeeded, and forced the Ragusans to pay tribute to them, although the local laws and customs were not interfered with.
The Ragusans became adept at knowing how to bend the head to powerful rivals without losing the substance of their autonomy.
During the ensuing eight centuries they recognised, at different times, the suzerainty of the Byzantine, Habsburg and Serbian emperors, the King of Hungary, the Doge of Venice and the Sultan of Turkey, but in the main they kept their own internal self-government.
The longest period of Venetian ascendancy lasted from 1204 to 1358, during which time there was constant friction because of the restriction placed on Ragusa's maritime trade by its great rival.
Ragusa was able, however, to develop its overland trade with the Balkan hinterland, as this activity did not bring it into direct competition with the seaborne trade of Venice.
Territorial growth
Between the eleventh and fourteenth centuries the republic of Ragusa was able, by treaties with its neighbours and by purchase, to extend its territorial base.
This growth was achieved mainly by diplomacy and by playing off, at the appropriate times, the contending powers of the Slav kingdoms — the Byzantines, the Venetians and the Turks.
In 1050, for example, Stephen, who claimed the title of ruler of Bosnia and Dalmatia, made a grant of land along the coast which extended the boundaries of Ragusa to Zaton, 16 km north of the original city, giving the republic control of the abundant supply of fresh water which emerges from a source vauclusienne at the head of the Ombla inlet.
The driver who enters modern Dubrovnik by the Magistrala road from the north follows the shores of this inlet, 5 km long and in places only 400 m wide.
The shore is lined with the majestic warehouses (factories) and residences of Ragusan merchants.
Stephen's grant also included the harbour of Gruž, which is now the commercial port for Dubrovnik.
Two further important acquisitions were in 1333 and 1419.
The first allowed Ragusa to take control of the Pelješac peninsula on payment of an annual tribute to Tsar Dušan, ruler of the Serbian empire.
In 1419 Stephen Ostojić, King of Bosnia, made a grant of land to the south, which took in the fertile Konavli valley, which runs parallel to the coast from Cavtat to the Gulf of Kotor.
The islands of Mljet (1345) and Lastovo (1252) and the string of smaller islands between Pelješac and Ombla had already been acquired.
Thus, by the early fifteenth century Ragusa's authority extended from the delta of the Neretva in the north to the Gulf of Kotor in the south, a distance of 190 km (120 miles) as the crow flies.
The Pelješac peninsula provided an easily defended rampart to the north, and the screen of islands protected the central zone in which the city itself lay.
These frontiers held with minor changes until the republic was abolished by Napoleon in 1808.
For a few years after 1413 a lease on the islands of Korcula, Hvar and Brac was obtained with the agreement of the Habsburg Emperor, Sigismund, but the Ragusans failed to maintain their position in face of the hostility of the islanders and the rivalries of their Venetian, Hungarian and Slav neighbours.
In 1700 minor frontier adjustments created two Turkish corridors to the sea which separated the Ragusan republic from Venetian territory.
Hungary and Venice
A turning point in the history of the republic came in 1358, when Ludovic of Hungary forced the Venetians to cede to him the whole of Dalmatia, except for Ragusa.
Nevertheless, the Ragusans thought it prudent to accept the nominal suzerainty of the Hungarian king.
In reality the change of allegiance brought almost total autonomy in return for an annual payment of 500 ducats and the support of the Ragusan fleet in time of war.
The position changed again in the early fifteenth century, when Ladislas of Naples, who aspired to the throne of Hungary, sold his claims over  Dalmatia, Zeta and Albania to the Venetians.
It took the Venetians until 1420 to win control of all the territory promised to them by Ladislas, who in fact never realised his ambition to wear the crown of Hungary.
Although Venice was again in a position to dominate the Adriatic, Ragusa never reverted to the degree of subordination which had existed before 1358.
Trade
The Ragusan Senate became the elected council of an independent trading city state.
It had the foresight to see the possibilities of trade with the newly arrived Ottoman power which had moved into the Bosnian hinterland, and, armed with a papal dispensation from Urban V, Ragusa became the first Christian power to enter into treaty relations with the infidels.
It also had the acumen to remain neutral in most of the wars fought between Venice and Turkey and between Austria and Turkey between 1420 and the Austro-Turkish war of 1737–40.
Later, in the eighteenth century, it also kept aloof from the War of the Austrian Succession (1741–48) and the Seven Years' War (1756–63).
Ragusa's heyday as a trading city was between the mid fourteenth and early sixteenth centuries.
Its principal function was as an intermediary between the Ottoman provinces in Europe and the shores of the Mediterranean.
Silver, lead, copper, iron and mercury were the most important metals which were brought in from the mines some of which were owned by Ragusan merchants — in Bosnia, Serbia and Kosovo.
They were exported by sea to Italy, Greece, Turkey, Egypt and the Levant.
Another important item which followed the same route was white slaves, who were more highly prized in Italy than the Africans who were supplied by the Arabs.
Many of the slaves were Bosnian children from Bogomil families, whose human rights were disregarded because of the heretical beliefs of their parents.
This trade came to an end during the fifteenth century.
Other Balkan products distributed around the Mediterranean in Ragusan ships were hides, timber, wax and wool.
Commodities which travelled in the opposite direction were salt, which came by sea from Cyprus, the Greek islands and Albania, and which was distributed by means of pack animals to Bosnia and Serbia; and cereals brought in from the Aegean, Cyprus, Asia Minor and Sicily, and used mainly for local consumption.
Ragusa, in common with Venice and Genoa, played an important part in the transportation of spices from the Middle and Far East to southern and western Europe.
The city's trading connections extended outside the Mediterranean to Antwerp, London, Southampton and the Hanseatic towns of Germany.
Cloth — mainly wool and linen — was the mainstay of this trade.
In the  sixteenth century it was found more convenient and safer for these goods to be transported overland to the ports of northern Italy, where they were picked up by Ragusan merchants.
A change in the character of Ragusan trade came in the century following the Age of Discovery.
Once the route round Africa to the Far East was established and the Muslims who controlled the land across the Middle East had been outflanked, the spice and silk trade of the Mediterranean began slowly to decline.
The opening up of colonies in the West and East Indies and America shifted the focus of world trade to the maritime nations of western Europe — Portugal, the Low Countries, England and France.
Economic changes within the Balkans, following the consolidation of Ottoman power, led to a decline in the trade in minerals, but the exports of raw wool and hides increased, as did the imports of textiles from northern Europe.
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the pace of Mediterranean commercial life slackened and the inland sea, which had once been the major artery of European trade, became a cul-de-sac.
Venice and Ragusa, Genoa and Leghorn all suffered from this change in the patterns of world trade.
When the Mediterranean again became an important routeway after the opening of the Suez Canal, the city states around its shores had all disappeared.
The Ragusan republic fell to Napoleon in 1806 and was incorporated into the Illyrian Provinces between 1808 and 1814.
Following the Congress of Vienna in 1815 all Dalmatia, including Dubrovnik, was placed under Austrian administration, where it remained until 1918.
The development of independence
The Serbian revolts
The century following the Peace of Carlowitz (Karlovci) between the Habsburgs and the Turks in 1699 saw many changes in the relations among the European powers, some of which directly affected the South Slav peoples, and others which had delayed and indirect effects on them, the significance of which did not become apparent until well into the nineteenth century.
The most obvious direct result of the treaty was the repossession by the Habsburgs of Hungary, Transylvania and the Turkish occupied areas of Slavonia and Croatia.
In 1718, by the Treaty of Passarowitz (Požarevac), the Banat, Little Wallachia, Belgrade and the Serbian regions of Šumadija, Posavina and Mačva were ceded by Turkey.
These last three territories lay south of the Sava-Danube line and represented the first Habsburg advance across that symbolic divide since the catastrophe of Mohács in 1526.
A Turkish recovery twenty years later re-established Ottoman control south of the line (Treaty of Belgrade, 1739), but the Habsburgs remained in the Vojvodina, Croatia and Slavonia.
The Turks never again crossed the Danube-Sava line.
In 1791, by the Treaty of Sistova, Belgrade was restored to Turkey, briefly reoccupied by Austria in 1789–92, and was not formally surrendered until the last Turkish garrison withdrew in 1867, although effective Turkish control had ceased some fifty years earlier.
The expulsion of the Turks from Vojvodina gave an opportunity for the Serbs of that area, many of whom were descendants of the refugees who had fled across the Danube in front of the advancing Ottomans during the previous two or three centuries, to develop their national culture in a freer atmosphere than had existed under Islamic rule.
The Orthodox monasteries of the Fruška Gora were the cultural centres of the Serbian renaissance which culminated in the Serbian revolts of the early nineteenth century and, eventually, in the establishment of a Serbian state.
The reforms of Joseph II (1780–90), which were carried through in the spirit of  the Age of Enlightenment, included a secularisation of education and the recognition of the rights of the Slav subjects of the Empire to instruct in their own language.
In 1791, during the brief reign of Joseph's successor, Leopold II (1790–2), the first Serbian secondary school was opened in Sremski Karlovci (Karlowitz).
One of its pupils in 1805 and 1806 was the philologist Vuk Stefanović Karadžić, the father of the modern Serbian language.
During the eighteenth century there were signs of the first rumblings of the tectonic upheaval which shattered the old order in Europe, and from its ruins created a group of nation states out of the submerged nations which lay under the surface of the great multinational empires.
It was not until the First World War that the last vestiges of the Habsburg, Ottoman and Romanov empires finally crumbled, making way for a tier of nation states which lay across the map of Europe from the Baltic to the Aegean.
The process began with the Serbian revolt of 1804 and culminated in the rebirth of Poland and the creation of the new Czechoslovak and Yugoslav states in 1918.
The changes in the constellation of European powers which occurred during the eighteenth century had an indirect bearing on the destiny of the South Slav peoples.
Russia under Peter the Great and Catherine began to take a major part in the affairs of Europe.
Peter's initiative in opening Russia to western influences, his modernisation of the administration and his development of industries were in sharp contrast to the Muscovite traditions of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The territorial expansion of Russia during Peter's reign led to the incorporation of Karelia, Estonia and Latvia.
His successors, during the seventy-five years after his death in 1725, added Lithuania, parts of Poland and the Ukraine, Bessarabia, the Crimea and the Kuban region.
The expansion of Russia to the south gave control of the north shore of the Black Sea from the mouth of the Danube to the Caucasus.
This was achieved at the expense of Turkey, following a series of wars.
That which ended in 1774 resulted in the Treaty of Kutchuk Kainardji (Kücük Kaynarca), which wrested the Khanate of Crimea from the Turks and gave the Russians the right to protect the Christian subjects of the sultan.
The involvement with Turkey raised the question of Russian access to the straits connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean.
It also raised the question of the Christian Slav subjects of the sultan.
Peter had already made contact with the Montenegrins early in the century.
The Slavs were mainly adherents of the Orthodox Church, and many of the Slav clergy saw in the Russian Church an ally in the struggle against the Phanariot Greek clergy, backed by the sultan, who wished to  remove Slav influences both from the liturgy and from the administration of the Church.
In 1727 the Synod of Moscow sent a mission which spent ten years amongst the Serbs of Vojvodina and Srem, forging strong links with the Serbian Orthodox clergy and their flocks.
As Russia advanced westward and began to play a role alongside the major European powers in the determination of the affairs of the continent, the Slavs of the Balkans turned to St Petersburg for diplomatic and military support, which was usually forthcoming.
The industrial revolution of the eighteenth century brought England into the ranks of major European powers, and although the English were somewhat detached from the affairs of the continent, and more concerned with imperial expansion overseas, the events of the French Revolution and the wars with Napoleonic France forced them to play an ever increasing role in Europe.
The movement of Napoleonic France into central and south-eastern Europe had a dramatic impact on the South Slavs.
The direct occupation by French troops of Slovenia, Istria and Dalmatia, followed by the creation of the Illyrian Provinces, was welcomed by the leaders of Slav opinion within both the Habsburg and Ottoman empires.
The effect was greatest, however, amongst the liberal-minded Slovene and Croat intellectuals.
The poet Vodnik, once a Franciscan friar, even held office in the administration of the Illyrian Provinces in Carinthia between 1809 and 1813.
The Illyrian Movement which developed during the early nineteenth century adopted the idealistic stance that all Slavs were one people, with four dialects Russian, Czech, Polish and Illyrian.
The ‘Illyrian language’ which they advocated was the štokavski dialect used by the great writers of Dubrovnik.
It happened that this was also the form advocated by Vuk Karadžić in Serbia, and for a time Ljudevit Gaj (1809–72), the leader of the Illyrian Movement in Croatia, warmed to the idea that Serbs and Croats shared a common language and culture.
Vuk, however, was less enthusiastic, and wrote of his own people, ‘It is hard to induce them to acknowledge that they are Serbs, and we would be crazy if we agreed to abandon our famous name and to adopt another one [Illyrian], which is dead and today has no meaning in itself.‘
The ideas which influenced the liberal-minded intellectuals and the small but growing commercial middle classes amongst the Slovenes, the Croats and, to a lesser extent, the Serbs, were those of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment, which developed into the democratic liberalism of the French Revolution.
Many of the leading scholars amongst the South Slavs during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were widely  travelled and had studied in France, Germany, Austria and Italy, where they were caught up in the intellectual ferment which was abroad at that time.
An essential element in the movement was the discovery of the rich vernacular traditions of the submerged nations, and the assertion of the right of people to use their own language instead of the German, Magyar or Latin — or even Old Church Slavonic in Serbia — which were the languages of the cultured classes and the church leaders in the respective occupied territories.
With recognition of the language came the assertion of separate national identity.
It was the remarkable achievement of Napoleon to carry the principle of nationhood throughout Europe, including the lands of South Slavs.
The first Serbian revolt
There were, of course, other forces at work which were driving the subject peoples to oppose their alien overlords.
Romantic nationalism based on the demand for recognition of cultural identity was a sentiment which moved the educated middle classes.
The peasants, who still constituted the majority of the population, were more affected by their feelings of material oppression and their opposition to the arbitrary rule of their masters.
The dam broke in Serbia in 1804 and at first took the form of a protest by Serbian peasants against the janissaries.
The janissaries, who were once the elite corps of the sultan's army, had degenerated by the end of the eighteenth century into an unruly and lawless rabble, who were at best an embarrassment and at worst a threat to their rulers.
The system of devşirme (see above, pp. 37–8), by which Christian boys were forcibly enlisted, was abandoned in the seventeenth century.
Sultan Mahmud I (1730–54) attempted to disband the janissaries and to put in their place a modern force, modelled on the standing armies of his European enemies.
Unfortunately for the Serbs, he was only partly successful.
In an attempt to remove the influence of the janissaries from Istanbul, where they naturally formed a powerful opposition to his reforms, Mahmud tried to buy them off by offering them a virtually free hand in garrisoning the remote provinces of the empire.
There they could plunder and abuse the local Christian peasantry with impunity, even dispossessing them from their lands.
The pashalik of Belgrade was one such province to which the janissaries were dispersed.
Mahmud may have bought time for himself, but he stored up trouble for his successors.
Matters came to a head during the reign of Selim III (1789–1807), the reforming sultan, described by Geoffrey Lewis as ‘one of the most enlightened members of the House of  Osman’.
Selim was the first Turkish ruler to attempt to understand the currents of thought in western Europe and to come to terms with the contemporary world.
Even as heir-apparent, he had been in correspondence with Louis XVI of France concerning his plans for reorganising the army, and the overthrow of the French monarchy in the year of his accession, 1789, did not diminish his enthusiasm for learning from the west.
In fact, for a time he saw in the New Order in France a possible source of ideas which he could implement in the construction of his New Order (Nizam-i Cedit ) in Turkey.
France was the main foreign influence: French military advisers came to establish military training schools, the French language was made compulsory for all students, and libraries of mainly French books were opened.
In 1793 the first Republican French ambassador received a rapturous welcome when he arrived off Seraglio Point, his ship flying the Ottoman, Republican French and American colours, ‘and those of a few other powers that had not sullied their arms in the impious league of tyrants’.
Selim had formidable obstacles to overcome, however, in modernising the archaic structure of the Ottoman empire.
The chief centres of resistance were the ulema (learned religious functionaries who were custodians of the Şeriat or Islamic holy laws) and the janissaries.
Eventually they defeated him.
In 1806 the ulema roused the people of Istanbul against him, and his untried, partly reformed army was defeated by the janissaries.
To prevent him from making a comeback after his deposition, his successor, Mustapha IV, had him strangled in 1808.
Lewis referred to him as ‘a man martyred for his belief in the destiny of his country, a man whose worst fault was that his courage outran his prudence’.
He was, perhaps, the nearest approximation which the Ottoman empire could produce to the eighteenth-century enlightened despots of the stamp of Joseph II and Frederick the Great.
Selim became sultan during the disastrous war with Russia and Austria, into which his predecessor, Abdülhamid I (1773–89), had been precipitated by Potemkin's seizure of the Crimea in 1783.
The war between Russia and Turkey broke out in 1787.
Austria joined in 1788, taking advantage of Turkey's weakness to seize the pashalik of Belgrade.
The Austrians armed a corps of Serbian volunteers under an Austrian major of Serbian origin, Mihailo Mihaljević, to fight the Turks.
One of the many Serbs who gained their first military experience during the brief Austrian interlude was Djordje Petrović (Karadjordje)(kara in Turkish = black), a pig dealer from the Šumadija, who was later to lead the Serbian revolt of 1804 and to be the founding father of one of the Serbian royal houses.
The war of 1788–91 is known to Serbian historians as ‘Koča's War’, after Koča Andjelković, the  military leader of the Serbian bands which joined in the insurrection against the Turks in Šumadija.
Unfortunately for the Serbs, the Austrians abandoned them when they settled their differences with the Turks at the Treaty of Sistova (1791).
Belgrade was returned to the Turks in exchange for minor territorial concessions to the Austrians in northern Bosnia.
Selim, aware of the strength of feeling amongst the Serbs against the janissaries, attempted to prevent the return of these unruly troops to the pashalik.
The janissaries defied the sultan's order and were soon involved in a struggle for power with the Turkish governor of Belgrade.
They enlisted the help of a rebellious warlord from Vidin, in Ottoman-occupied Bulgaria, Osman Pazvant-oglu, and the governor was able to maintain his position only by arming the Serbs to defend themselves against the invaders.
Selim did not have the power to punish the rebels, and in 1798 he made peace with Pazvant-oglu and a year later permitted the janissaries to return to Belgrade.
The hapless governor, who had vainly tried to uphold the sultan's authority, was beheaded by the janissaries in 1801.
The forced retreat of Selim III indicated the extent to which the authority of the Sublime Porte had declined since the glorious days of Suleiman in the sixteenth century.
In the first decade of his reign Selim had attempted to appease the Serbs by granting them a degree of self-government.
The local oborknezovi were given greater authority, the rights of the Orthodox Churches were respected, and a local Serbian militia was permitted.
The tax system was reformed and the peasantry was given greater protection against the arbitrary actions of some of the local Moslem spahis .
By 1799 the position was entirely reversed.
The lawless janissaries and their local Turkish supporters were now appeased at the expense of the Christian peasants.
The Serbs, however, had learned something from their experiments, and the taste of self-government, however limited, had given them a self-confidence which could not be crushed by the cruelty of their new masters.
In fact, the behaviour of the janissaries bred a smouldering resentment which erupted from time to time into acts of armed resistance.
The mistrust which their recent sufferings had engendered against all Turks made it impossible for the Serbs to collaborate with the more reasonable spahis , who were themselves the victims of the janissaries, whose leaders were known as dayis .
Thus in 1802 when a group of spahis called on the Serbs to join them in resisting the dayis very few Serbs responded.
They were already planning the Serbian revolt, which broke out in 1804.
Their plans included an attempt to enlist the support of the Vladika (Prince-Bishop) of Montenegro and of the Austrian military command in Vojvodina.
The event which prompted the revolt was the brutal murder, on the orders of the dayis , of scores of prominent Serbs.
This ‘slaughter of the knezes ’ in January and February of 1804 was met by a spontaneous rising of the Christian peasant (the raya ), who joined forces with the hajduk bands in the hills.
At first they were leaderless.
Many of the knezovi who had survived the massacre were unwilling to risk further reprisals, should the revolt fail.
The occasion produced the man.
At a meeting of local Serbian leaders in Orašac, in mid February, the thirty-six-year-old Djordje Petrović (Karadjordje) was asked to lead the rebellion, although legend has it that he twice refused, excusing himself on the ground that his violent temper would make him an unsuitable leader.
He had an impeccable record of anti-Turkish activity, from the time he had enlisted in Major Mihaljević's forces at the age of twenty, fighting with the hajduks after the Austrian desertion in 1791, and serving as an officer in the Serbian militia which fought off Pazvantoglu's attack in 1797.
In the intervals between his military activities Karadjordje had carried on a successful business as a livestock trader, selling pigs across the border into Austria, and he had acquired a modest level of prosperity.
He had also made contacts amongst the Austrian administrators and the Serbian exiles over the river.
At first the rebels appealed to the sultan, whose authority they claimed to be upholding against the janissaries.
Both the Austrians and the Russians responded to Karadjordje's appeals for help.
The latter sent material aid, the former attempted to mediate between the Serbs and the Turks in order to win by negotiation the reforms which the Serbs desired — a degree of autonomy and the restoration of Selim's reforms of 1783.
In May 1804 a meeting was arranged in the presence of an Austrian field-marshal in Zemun (Semlin), the Austrian-occupied town across the Sava from Belgrade.
Appeals were sent to the sultan, and also a Serbian delegation went to Tsar Alexander I in St Petersburg.
The sultan responded by sending an army of 7,000 men under Bekir Pasha, the Vizier of Bosnia, to discipline the dayis .
The Serbs welcomed them as liberators and the dayis fled, pursued by Karadjordje's men.
The most prominent of the dayis were captured and beheaded, their heads being sent to the sultan (except for one which was carried away by the Danube whilst being washed by a gypsy in preparation for the journey to Istanbul).
By the end of August it seemed that the revolt was over.
The dayis had gone.
Belgrade was in the hands of Bekir Pasha, a man whom the Serbs trusted and who had promised to implement the sultan's reforms.
Karadjordje himself was less sanguine than the Serbian knezovi in their expectations that the Porte would, or even could, carry out the promised  reforms.
He still dreamt of avenging the shame of Kosovo and of ending for all time the ‘long Turkish night’.
He had encouraging pledges of support from Petar I of Montenegro and from sympathetic Serbs in Bosnia and Hercegovina.
He also expected support from Russia, but the tsar was too preoccupied with the affairs of Europe, where Napoleon was at the height of his powers, and Adam Czartoryski, the Russian foreign minister, advised negotiations with the Turks, rather than war.
Napoleon was at this time trying to push the Russians into war with Turkey, and Czartoryski, aware of this, had no wish to see Russia involved on Serbia's side in a conflict with the sultan.
Napoleon himself, despite his general blessing on movements of national independence, gave no encouragement to the Serbs.
The sultan suspected that Karadjordje's demand that Serbia should be accorded a status similar to that of the other semi-autonomous tributary provinces within the Ottoman empire — Wallachia, for example— was but the first step towards a declaration of complete independence.
In August 1805 he ordered Hafiz Pasha to advance from Nis and to crush the Serbs, but his plan misfired when the Serbs withstood the attack.
The Serbs followed their victory with the establishment of an elected government, composed of representatives from each district, chosen by an assembly of ‘elders, officers, monks, priests, village heads and the common people’.
Karadjordje had previously received support from local assemblies which had been convened at his request, but this was the first time that an embryonic, partly elected government of Serbia had come into existence.
In the winter of 1805–6 the Serbs went on the offensive and soon gained control of the whole of the pashalik, including the city of Belgrade.
The sultan, afraid of Russian support for the Serbs, and shaken by Karadjordje's military victories, agreed to terms laid down by Serbia in September 1806.
There was no consensus amongst the Serbs as to the form of government they wanted if they were to be able to force recognition of Serbian autonomy from the sultan.
Karadjordje, as a man of action and a mighty leader, was impatient with the idea that he should submit his unbridled power to the arbitration of assemblies, courts and councils.
In the early days of the insurrection he made his position clear when Božo Grujović (formerly known as Filipović) lectured an assembly of Serbian leaders on the rule of law at Borak in September 1805.
Grujović, an Austrian Serb, had been professor of law at Kharkov, and had acted as secretary to the Serbian delegation which had been sent to St Petersburg to enlist the support of the Russians.
The delegation, headed by Karadjordje's rival, Prota (Dean) Matija Nenadović, returned with a proposal that the Serbs should establish  a central council (soviet) and a constitution based on the rule of law.
Karadjordje's response was to declare: ‘It is easy for the Sovereign Law of yours to rule in a warm room, behind a table, but let us see tomorrow, when the Turks strike, who will meet them and beat them.
A hobbled horse cannot run a race.’
A soviet (or governing council) representing each of the twelve nahijes (districts) within the pashalik was established, but its powers were vaguely defined and it became an instrument which Karadjordje could use or ignore as he felt fit.
Karadjordje's dictatorial tendencies came into conflict with the older tradition of peasant democracy, which was itself in conflict with the patriarchal structure of Serbian village life.
Karadjordje had to contend with a group of strong-willed oligarchs who enjoyed considerable power within their own territories and who jealously guarded the various perquisites which they had acquired, such as the levying of ferry tolls and local taxes.
In a clan society based on the extended family, or zadruga , the elements of patriarchal oligarchy and crude democracy were inextricably interwoven.
Karadjordje's attempt to impose himself on this structure by having himself declared ‘Supreme Leader’ created tensions which were never resolved during the nine years of his rebel regime.
In 1811 the Assembly (Skupština) not only confirmed him as supreme leader, but also recognised the hereditary principle by pledging loyalty to ‘his lawful heirs’.
Another complicating factor in the situation was the growing interest of the European powers, and especially of Austria and Russia, in the position of Serbia within the declining Turkish empire.
The eventual collapse of Turkey would raise the question of the disposal of the assets of the corpse.
The prospective legatees even produced schemes for the partitioning of the Ottoman lands in Europe amongst themselves.
When Napoleon wrested the Slovene lands and Dalmatia from Austria, and established the Illyrian Provinces in 1809, France began to take major interest in Balkan affairs.
A year earlier, at Erfurt, Napoleon had agreed with the tsar to accept the right of Russia to Wallachia and Moldavia, but to leave Serbia within the Ottoman empire.
After the Treaty of Schönbrunn in 1809, the hope of the Serbs was that France, now firmly established on the Adriatic shore of the Balkan peninsula, would be sympathetic to their claims.
Karadjordje wrote to Napoleon, praising him for his treatment of ‘our compatriots’ in Illyria, and in 1810 he sent his emissary, Rade Vučinić, to Trieste and Paris to request French support.
The French, like the Austrians and the Russians, were quite ready to consider the exclusion of the Turks from Serbia and, indeed, from all their European provinces, if they could see an advantage for themselves, but they also saw the danger of a  disastrous confrontation if any of them moved before the time was ripe.
It might be better for them to prop up the Ottoman empire for a while longer, but at the same time to keep their options open by maintaining contact with the various factions amongst the Serbs.
The British, having no territorial ambitions in the Balkans, and being anxious to preserve the balance of power in Europe, tended to favour the continued existence of the Turkish empire in Europe.
The Serbs were aware that the powers were not genuinely interested in Serbian independence, and tried to play one off against the other.
On the whole, however, they had greater hopes of Russia than of Austria.
In 1807 the tsar sent a representative, Constantine Rodofinikin, to assist the Serbs in drafting a constitution.
Rodofinikin had a hopeless task, as his instructions were drafted in the light of a Russo-Serbian agreement which presupposed a Russian victory over the Turks.
The convention included the following plea to the tsar: ‘The Serbian people humbly beg His Imperial Majesty to appoint a capable governor who will bring order to the people, administer the Serbian land, and devise a constitution in consonance with the customs of the people.’
Even before Rodofinikin arrived in Belgrade, Russia had concluded the Peace of Tilsit with Napoleon, which required,inter alia , Russia to make peace with Turkey.
In 1810 Russia, again at war with Turkey, sent troops up the Danube and helped the Serbs to clear the Turks out of the pashalik of Belgrade.
The Serbs even gained territory in Bosnia and advanced towards Nis.
Again the Serbs were disappointed, for in 1812 at the Treaty of Bucharest the Russians again made peace with the Turks and agreed that Serbia should remain within the Ottoman empire.
Tsar Alexander I ratified this treaty on the day that Napoleon began his Russian campaign.
The Serbs were not consulted about the terms of Article VIII of the Treaty, which stated:
It has been deemed just, in consideration of the share borne by the Servians in this war, to come to a solemn agreement respecting their security.
Their peace must not in any way be disturbed.
The Sublime Porte will grant the Servians, on their petition, the same privileges which her subjects in the Islands of the Archipelago, and in other parts, enjoy; and will moreover confer upon them a mark of her generosity, by leaving the administration of their internal affairs to themselves — by imposing upon them moderate taxes, and receiving them only direct from them and by making the regulation requisite to this end in an understanding with the Servian nation themselves.
The Turks took advantage of the situation to reoccupy Serbia and they exacted a terrible vengeance on the helpless Serbs.
Karadjordje, the  Metropolitan of Belgrade, Leontius, and many of the Serbian leaders fled across the Danube to Zemun, and some found refuge in the Orthodox monasteries in the Fruška Gora, where the prečani (= across the river) Serbs kept alive the culture and traditions of Serbdom.
At Bucharest the Turks had promised an amnesty for the Serbian rebels, but before the sultan's authority could be established, the Turkish, Albanian and Bosnian Muslims who formed the occupying army pillaged and looted in a reign of terror which included the killing of all males over the age of fifteen in some areas, the enslavement of women and children, and the brutal torture of any Serbian leaders who fell into their hands.
One account describes the impalement of scores of men on wooden stakes, where they were left to die along the side of the roads leading to Belgrade.
Some lived for several days in this pitiful condition, their feet gnawed by dogs, until they died in agony.
The Grand Vizier Hursid Pasha, who entered Belgrade in late October 1813, was powerless to stop this holocaust, but once he was able to assert his authority he attempted to conciliate the Serbs.
He declared an amnesty for those leaders who had survived, even those who had fled across the river, although the metropolitan and Karadjordje himself were specifically excluded.
One of those who took advantage of the amnesty was Miloš Obrenović, who was made oborknez of his home district of Rudnik, and was later made the chief (bašiknez ) of the neighbouring nahijes of Čačak and Kragujevac.
The second Serbian rising
The second Serbian rising broke out in 1815 in the Valjevo district, and soon spread throughout the Šumadija.
Its leader was Miloš Obrenović, a man who had played a part in the Karadjordje revolt, but who had remained in Serbia when many of the leaders of the first rising had fled across the river to Austrian territory.
As the most prominent Serb who served in the administration after the restoration of Turkish rule in 1813, he might be thought to have compromised too far with the enemy to be considered as the leader of a national revolt.
This would be a misreading of the situation in Serbia between 1813 and 1815.
After the initial excesses which followed the reoccupation of Belgrade, the grand vizier declared an amnesty, and many Serbs who had fled into the hills and the impenetrable oak forests of Šumadija returned to their homes.
Others returned from exile in Austrian-held Vojvodina.
Miloš was not the only one of the former rebels who was given a post in the new administration.
Even the hajduk leader, Stanoje Glavaš, was given command of the troops guarding the main road along the Morava valley which formed part of the imperial highway between Belgrade and Istanbul.
The Turkish garrison in Belgrade remained, but the army of occupation was withdrawn by the end of 1813.
The Serbian oborknezovi and bašiknezovi who ran the local administration were left very much on their own by the Turks as long as they maintained order and collected the taxes required of them.
Given the primitive road system connecting Belgrade with the interior, it was impossible for a garrison of 5,000 troops in Belgrade to maintain order without the support of the Serbian knezovi .
The 130-km journey from Belgrade to Kragujevac took three days on horseback and five by horse-drawn carriage, but in 1814 only Miloš, the metropolitan and the Turkish governor had such vehicles.
Thus, the local Serbian chiefs had considerable freedom of action, and most, like Miloš, used it arbitrarily and grew rich and powerful by the exercise of their power.
Miloš, like Karadjordje before him, was not an attractive personality.
Although he was more in control of his temper than had been his predecessor, Miloš was cruel, greedy, corrupt, devious and also illiterate.
He did, however, have one quality which proved to be an asset to his country — he knew how to win by craft and diplomacy what he could not gain by force.
Before the successful insurrection of 1815 there had been several isolated incidents in which bands of Serbs attacked and murdered Turkish officials.
One of Karadjordje's former commanders, Hadži-Prodan of Požega, attempted to lead a national rising.
He appealed to Miloš to join him, but Miloš judged that the time was inopportune and promptly told the Turkish governor in Belgrade of the plot.
Süleiman Pasha accepted Miloš's offer to suppress the revolt, which he did without difficulty.
He had hoped by this gesture to spare his people the customary vengeance which the Turks exacted indiscriminately against the population when Serbs defied them.
In this he was disappointed.
Several Serbian leaders who had remained loyal to their Turkish masters were savagely butchered, including Glavaš, whose head was on display in the Kalemegdan fortress when Miloš went to a conference of the knezovi called by Süleiman Pasha.
Rumours spread amongst the Serbs that a massive punitive expedition against them was being prepared.
At a meeting in the church at Takovo, near his home town of Rudnik, on Palm Sunday 1815, Miloš accepted the leadership of a new insurrection.
The Serbs took the Turks by surprise, and the local garrison troops were soon isolated in Belgrade, whilst the rest of the pashalik was firmly in Miloš's grip.
He also beat off attacks from  Turkish forces who moved in from Bosnia in the west and Rumelia in the south-east.
After six months Miloš made a ceremonial entry into Belgrade to parley with the newly appointed Turkish governor, Marasli, who had been given a mandate by the sultan to make concessions in order to pacify the Serbs.
Throughout 1815 Miloš maintained that his quarrel was with the oppressive regime of Süleiman Pasha and not with the sultan.
He did not ask for independence and never attempted to repudiate the suzerainty of the sultan.
He did not, however, rely solely on the strong right arm of the Serbian forces.
Through the intercession of the Serbs in Vojvodina he made contact with the representative of the European powers, and especially with the Austrians and Russians.
At first the powers showed little interest, as they were preoccupied with the post-Napoleonic settlement, following the Emperor's final abdication on 22 June after his defeat at Waterloo four days earlier.
By the autumn, however, the Russians, through their ambassador in Istanbul, Andrei Italinskii, began to threaten the sultan that if he did not make concessions to the Serbs they would intervene to enforce the disputed Article VIII of the Treaty of Bucharest (see above, p. 81).
Neither the Austrians nor the Russians, and still less the British, wanted to see a complete dismemberment of the Turkish empire, but they were prepared for de facto autonomy for Serbia.
Miloš and Marasli negotiated a settlement which provided for a Serbian administration, based on a national council of the knezovi of each of the twelve nahijes , who in their own districts would work alongside a Turkish administrator (müsellim ).
The müsellim would have no power to interfere with the right of the Serbs to collect taxes and, in cases where Christian subjects were being judged in the courts, the müsellim would have to sit with a Serbian knez .
The national council at its first meeting on 21 November 1815 proclaimed Miloš as ‘supreme knez and leader of the Serbian people’.
During the following twelve months the sultan issued a series of decrees which gave formal recognition to the Miloš-Marasli agreement.
During the next few years Miloš gradually increased his influence within the administration of the pashalik, using the considerable wealth at his disposal to bribe Turkish officials.
Miloš was himself a rich man, with large estates in Wallachia as well as his Serbian lands.
He also found it possible to direct public funds to his own use.
Marasli wanted nothing but a quiet life, and turned a blind eye to Miloš's encroachments.
When he died in 1821 the Serbs had acquired in practice, if not in law, the right to appoint the local Turkish officials, to collect customs and ferry duties and to levy special  taxes.
Miloš used these funds to buy estates from the Turks, and then he transferred them either into his own hands or into those of his Serbian friends.
Thus he began to erode the Turkish feudal system.
Miloš did not have the support of all the Serbian chiefs, especially those, like Dean Matija Nenadović and Petar Moler, who had crossed into Austrian territory with Karadjordje in 1813 to return later to share in Miloš's success.
In 1817 Miloš discovered that Karadjordje himself was back in Serbian territory.
Miloš ordered the murder of his rival, which was carried out on 25 July 1817 by Karadjordje's host and kum (godfather), Vujica Vuličević, who axed him to death whilst he slept.
Miloš had his victim's head stuffed and sent to Istanbul as a present to the sultan.
This savage act was not simply an act of mindless brutality against a rival for power.
Miloš knew that Karadjordje had been in contact with the representatives of the Greek nationalist organisation Philike Hetairia (Society of Friends), which was planning a general rising of all the sultan's Christian subjects.
Miloš feared that this would fail and that the reprisals which the Turks might take would result in the loss of all the gains which the Serbs had made since 1815.
In 1821 revolts broke out in Moldavia and Wallachia, Turkish provinces ruled by a Greek aristocracy under Constantine Ypsilanti.
In this case, however, the Romanian peasantry under Tudor Vladimirescu took arms against their Greek masters.
The start of the Greek war of independence shortly afterwards was a more serious affair for the sultan.
Its immediate effect was to harden the Turkish attitude to the demands of the Serbs.
The Greek revolt focussed the attention of the European powers on the plight of the Christians under Ottoman rule.
The newly enthroned Tsar Nicholas I moved troops up to the Turkish frontier and forced the sultan to sign the Convention of Akkerman (October 1826), by which the Turks agreed to implement the clauses of the Treaty of Bucharest which recognised the rights of the Romanians and Serbs.
Britain and Austria gave diplomatic backing to this move.
By Article V of the Convention, the sultan promised to negotiate with the Serbs on their demands for freedom of worship; the right to establish their own schools and printing presses; the return of areas won during the first revolt and forcibly returned to Turkish rule in 1813; the right of Serbian merchants to trade freely throughout the Ottoman empire; a prohibition on any new Turkish settlement outside the major towns; and an increase in the powers of Serbian government.
Serbian delegates were in Istanbul discussing the implementation of the Convention when British, French and Russian ships blasted the Turkish  fleet out of the water as it lay at anchor in the enclosed natural harbour at Navarino (Pylos) in the southern Morea on 20 October 1827.
The first reaction of the sultan was to order the arrest of the Serbian delegates and to repudiate the Convention.
He changed his mind, however, when Russia declared war in 1828 and advanced through Bulgaria to take Adrianople the following year.
The Treaty of Adrianople, signed in September 1829, required the sultan to implement the Convention within a month.
A hatti şerif (edict) of October 1829 implemented most of the terms demanded by the Russians, and on 6 February 1830 Miloš read out its terms at a ceremony in Kragujevac and Serbian autonomy was officially proclaimed.
It required a further hatti şerif a year later which recognised Miloš as hereditary Prince of Serbia, established a commission to settle the boundaries, and regularised the payment of the annual Serbian tribute to the Sultan.
By 1830 Miloš was the internationally accepted ruler of a virtually independent state.
During the years between 1813 and 1830 Serbia, under Miloš, had experienced a social, cultural and economic transformation which brought it from the medieval obscurity of a declining oriental despotism to the threshold of modern European statehood.
Miloš was a man nurtured in the old society, and his regime and life style still bore the marks of his origins.
In 1830 in his house — or konak — there were no tables, chairs or beds.
Visitors squatted on the floor or sat on low, Turkish-style divans.
Miloš dressed in Turkish clothing.
He was unable to read or write and books in Serbian were almost unknown.
The main streets of the towns were rough mud tracks.
Window glass was not used even in the ruler's konak .
There were no street lights and at night the streets were deserted.
Modernisation came mainly through the activities of foreigners or Serbs who returned from exile.
As the Turks moved out, their estates in the rural areas were bought by Serbs and their houses in the towns were occupied by diverse groups of immigrants, who also took over their occupations.
One such group were the Cincars, descendants of a people of Romanian origin who moved into the Balkans during the early days of Turkish rule.
Their alternative name, Vlah (Wallachian), suggests their origin but by the nineteenth century most had become Hellenised, speaking and acting as intermediaries between the Greek clergy and their Serbian parish priests.
The Cincars were also prominent in commerce, as also were native-born Greek immigrants and Jews.
Most of the Balkan Jews were of Iberian origin and were thus of the Sephardic branch of Jewry.
They found refuge in the Ottoman empire from Morocco to Moldavia when the Catholic monarchs of Spain and Portugal drove them out.
The Sephardic community  in Belgrade dates back to the early sixteenth century and was well established in the commercial life of the city.
They lived in the Turkish quarter and in outward appearance resembled the Turks, although their religious and cultural life was very different from that of their neighbours.
Another group whose origins and way of life marked them out from the Serbs were the gypsies (cigani or romi ) who are still to be found throughout Serbia and Macedonia.
Their total number at the 1981 census was about 168,000, 90 per cent of whom are found in Serbia proper, Kosovo and Macedonia.
Their rate of natural increase is more than twice the national average, and their numbers increased by 214 per cent between 1971 and 1981.
The most important elements in the new Serbia, however, were those Serbs who lived within the Habsburg empire, especially those on the opposite banks of the Danube and Sava rivers, in the province known as Vojvodina.
Some were descended from refugees who had fled before the advancing Turks in the fifteenth century; others had forebears who were led out by the Patriarch Arsenije of Peć in a mass migration of an estimated 100,000 Serbs in 1691.
A third group were followers of Karadjordje, who fled in 1813 when the first revolt was crushed.
Some of the early settlers had been integrated into the life of the Habsburg empire — like Metropolitan Stefan Stratimirović of Karlovci, who was a privy councillor of the Austrian court.
Two figures who have been described respectively as the grandfather and father of Serbian literature were Dositej Obradović (1743–1811) and Vuk Karadžić (1787–1864).
Both also played an active part in the national movement.
Dositej was minister of education in Karadjordje's administration and Vuk was involved with both Karadjordje and Miloš.
Dositej entered the Hopovo monastery in the Fruška Gora at the age of sixteen, but he soon became disillusioned with the restricted life of a monk and two years later he escaped.
He travelled widely throughout the Balkans, then went to Vienna in 1771, where he was employed as a language teacher.
After five years in Vienna he taught in Trieste, Greece and Moldavia before studying philosophy in Halle.
He also spent a year in England and became fluent in English.
He read widely in all spheres of learning and became inspired with the idea that he had a mission to introduce the learning of western Europe to his countrymen in Serbia.
He wrote works of philosophy in Serbian, which were published in Germany and Austria and circulated amongst the scholars in the Serbian gymnasium at Karlovci and amongst literate Serbs in the pashalik.
He also translated English, French and German classics into Serbian.
Despite his cosmopolitan  background and his great linguistic ability, he never forgot that he was a Serb.
His advocacy of the ideas of the Enlightenment aroused the suspicion of the Orthodox Church leaders in Karlovci when he returned there after the Karadjordje revolt.
Not only was ‘Dositejism’ denounced by Metropolitan Stratimirović because of its anticlericalism, its suspected ‘Protestantism’and its attachment to an alien western culture, but it was also seen as a threat to the language.
Until the mid eighteenth century the language of the Church was based on Old Church Slavonic, but after the Suvorov mission sent by the Synod of Moscow in 1727 (see above, p. 74) a form of Russian was adopted, known as ‘Serb-Slavonic’.
Dositej wrote in a language which was closer to the everyday speech of the Serbian people.
The Orthodox Church had played a more important role in keeping alive the culture of the exiled Serbs in Catholic Austria than had the Greek-speaking hierarchy of the Orthodox communities in the Ottoman empire.
This was particularly the case after the extinction of the patriarchate of Peć in 1766.
In those latter areas it was left to the Serb-speaking parish priests, many of whom were illiterate, to act as upholders of Serbian culture.
By the time of Dositej, the Austro-Serbian Church was led by narrow conservatives whose attitudes were a hindrance to the development of a popular Serbian culture appropriate to the needs of the nation struggling to be born.
Vuk Karadžić continued the work of Dositej, whose writings had influenced the younger man during his formative years.
They both worked in the administration of the Karadjordje regime, Dositej as a minister and Vuk as a more humble clerk and customs official.
Despite his lame leg, he also served with the hajduk leader Veljko in the last months of the Karadjordje revolt, and fled across the Danube when the Turks recaptured Belgrade in 1813.
Vuk had not completed his education when he crossed the river in 1807 to join Karadjordje, although he felt he had learned all he could from his teachers in Karlovci.
When he left Serbia in 1813 he joined the South Slav community in Vienna, where he came to the notice of the imperial censor for Slavonic languages as a result of an article he wrote for the newspaper Srpske Novine (Serbian News).
The censor, Jernej Kopitar, a Slovene who had worked in the household of Baron Žiga Zois, the patron of the Slovene literary revival (see above, pp. 53–4), became a close friend of Vuk.
They shared many intellectual attitudes: both were anticlerical, both believed in the encouragement of a Slavonic culture within the Habsburg lands, and both had an interest in the development of a South Slav language based on the everyday speech of the common people.
In 1814, inspired by Herder's Stimmen der Völker , Vuk produced a volume of Serbian national songs, in the preface to which he drew attention to the need for standardisation of the language, for ‘no two people approve of each other 's ways and write alike, but also no single man writes consistently…so it will be without cease, until our learned men…can agree amongst themselves, and in cooperation write a Serbian grammar and a single dictionary’.
Vuk himself took up the task, and his first effort appeared in October 1814.
It was badly received by the Church authorities, although it was enthusiastically reviewed by Kopitar.
In 1815 he returned to  Karlovci to collect material for a second song book, which later inspired a glowing review from Jakob Grimm, in which he compared the Serbian love songs to Solomon's Song of Songs and wrote that the ‘Serbs are by virtue of their language…the most blessed with poems, songs and stories, and it looks as if the good God had, by this rich gift of popular poetry, wished to make up to them for their lack of books.’
Vuk's next project was a Serbian dictionary, and to help him in collecting words to include in it he made a journey to Serbia in 1816 on his way back to Vienna, calling on his old friend the archimandrite Lukian Mušički in the monastery at Šišatovac in the Fruška Gora.
The archimandrite was rebuked by Metropolitan Stratimirović for keeping ‘that blasphemer amongst your priests’.
Stratimirović tried to prevent Vuk from publishing his grammar by invoking an order of Leopold II giving a monopoly to the publishing of books in Serbian to the Serbian press in Buda, which, unlike that in Vienna, was under the influence of the Church.
Eventually Vuk and Kopitar found a way to get the book published and it appeared in 1818 as a Serbian-Latin-German dictionary.
In his efforts to secure funds to finance the publication of his dictionary Vuk wrote to Miloš, but received a derisory offer in return.
In the summer of 1820, after a visit to Russia the previous year to promote his recently translated New Testament, which eventually saw the light of day in 1847, Vuk again approached Miloš, this time offering to teach the ruler to read and write.
He had hopes of following in the footsteps of Dositej and becoming minister of education.
Whilst in Russia he had been in contact with representatives of the Russian Bible Society, and through them had learned of the monitorial system of schoolteaching pioneered by Lancaster and Bell in Britain.
He hoped to introduce this method into Serbia.
Miloš, however, was not interested, and after wasting Vuk's time for over a year he let the scholar return to Austria empty-handed.
He returned later to Serbia, and hoped then to secure the support of Miloš by writing a  biography of the ruler.
However, Vuk was too honest and too independent-minded to please Miloš, and when he again crossed over to Zemun in April 1832 he wrote a frank letter, telling Miloš what he believed to be wrong with his regime and advising him to introduce a constitution.
Miloš exploded with anger when the letter was read out to him.
He tore it into pieces and then sent three messengers to Zemun to confront Vuk.
In the presence of a large crowd in a public square the messengers shouted vulgar abuse at Vuk.
The mildest of the printable epithets were that Vuk was a traitor, a ‘wretched, shameless and malicious creature’ and a ‘lame imp of hell’.
Miloš also wrote to the Austrian authorities and Metternich thought it advisable to remove Vuk from Zemun, first to Buda and then to join his Austrian wife and their two children in Vienna.
Whilst in Vienna he had the good fortune to meet Petar II Petrović-Njegoš, the Vladika of Montenegro, who was passing through on his way to St Petersburg for his consecration as bishop.
The Montenegrin poet and the Serbian philologist made friends immediately, and in 1834 Vuk was invited to Cetinje to assist in the establishment of a new printing press, using Vuk's phonetic orthographic principle.
Two years after his return from Cetinje, Vuk received official confirmation of rumours and hints that Miloš was considering giving him a pension.
This eventually materialised and a kind of reconciliation took place.
The abdication of Miloš in 1839 temporarily interrupted the payment of the pension, but the new government eventually continued it.
The deposed Miloš (from his Wallachian exile) also supported Vuk, and in 1844 he persuaded Toma Vučić, the power behind the coup d'état which brought Alexander Karadjordjević to the throne in 1842, to give him a pension.
His financial position was secure for the first time, and for the last twenty years of his long life he was able to devote himself to his work of creating a Serbian literary language and bringing to the notice of his countrymen and the world the riches of the Serbian oral tradition.
His collaboration with the Croatian Ljudevit Gaj, and his contacts with literary figures such as Petar Petrović-Njegoš in Montenegro, helped to create a sense of Yugoslav cultural unity.
The phonetic orthography of both the Cyrillic alphabet of Serbia and the Latin alphabet of Croatia and Slovenia made for easier communication and understanding among the Yugoslav peoples and led to common political action.
The Literary Agreement signed in Vienna in 1850 by Vuk and a number of Serb, Croat and Slovene authors — including Miklošić, the Slovene who succeeded Kopitar as imperial censor — attempted to create a common literary language based on the South Serbian dialect, written in either Cyrillic or  Latin.
Echoes of this declaration were revived over a century later with the Novi Sad Agreement of 1954.