

Editorials
Paracelsus, and 500 years of encouraging scientific inquiry
Stood for sensitivity to the environmental, social, spiritual, and moral dimensions of health
Theophrastus von Hohenheim, otherwise known as Paracelsus, is vaguely remembered as an innovative but controversial figure, deserving a place in medical history, but distinctly on the alternative fringe.
The 500th anniversary of his birth provides a convenient moment to consider whether he deserves wider recognition.
The well remembered afterdinner speech made in his presidential capacity by the Prince of Wales to the BMA in December 1982 linked the name of Paracelsus with the holistic approach to medicine.
The prince's intervention prompted the BMA into action and ultimately into a more constructive position on questions relating to complementary medicine.
The recent switch of terminology, replacing ‘alternative’ with ‘complementary,’itself indicates a new spirit of tolerance and openmindedness.
Paracelsus's influence on homoeopathy and holistic medicine is genuine, but the paracelsian legacy is much wider.
More than any other person Paracelsus prevented the consolidation of the influence of classical medicine and the imposition of galenic orthodoxy by the powerful renaissance establishment.
To underline his break with tradition Paracelsus (a native of Zurich) wrote in the vernacular and adopted a non-academic style accessible to a wide public.
The first contest of the scientific revolution was fought by Paracelsus, well ahead of the more famous initiatives of Vesalius and Copernicus.
More forcefully than Vesalius, Paracelsus called for the abandonment of galenism and its replacement by a new system of scientific knowledge and medicine based on sound empirical foundations.
His call for a new spirit of experimental investigation was later codified and converted into a more concrete programme by Francis Bacon.
Bacon's well known appeal for the intellectual elite to abandon various forms of intellectual ‘idolatry,’ including their dependence on classical authority, in favour of the productive methods of the skilled artisan was imitative of Paracelsus.
Also taken from Paracelsus was the idea that the new science and medicine were biblically sanctioned and destined to attain a new level of control over nature.
This conception of experimental science and medicine as the divinely appointed arbiter of human destiny provided an enormous impetus to scientific effort and was basic to the ideology of the Royal Society.
The authoritative Latin edition of the collected writings of Paracelsus appeared in 1658, four years before the foundation of the Royal Society.
The great spate of English translations of Paracelsus also belonged to the 1650s, confirming that the peak of his influence in England connected with what is arguably the unsurpassed golden age of British science and medicine, coinciding with the formative years of such figures as Boyle, Sydenham, and Willis, all of whom were affected by paracelsian influences.
As in the case of Bacon, the central importance of Paracelsus rests on the general impetus he gave to the reform of science and on the development of a comprehensive religious and ethical framework for scientific and medical endeavour.
Unlike Bacon, however, Paracelsus was not writing from the standpoint of a scientific and medical amateur.
As a practical clinician he sought to describe the normal and the pathological without resorting to either the abstractions of galenism or the incomprehensible mythological and numerological symbolism of contemporary alchemy.
He turned instead to naturalistic analogies drawn especially from chemistry.
With hindsight this explanatory framework often seems inadequate, inappropriate, and inconsistent.
Yet it also provided a basis for the dynamic interpretation of biological processes, leaving room for a high degree of psychosomatic interaction.
Regardless of its limitations, the system of Paracelsus seems more satisfactory than the highly regarded but crude reductionist models that came into vogue in later generations.
Of paramount importance were Paracelsus's conception of disease as a specific entity, taking up its residence in localised sites and possessing a distinct natural course, and the hypothesis that a specific remedy could be applied to counteract such an intrusion.
This recognisably modern concept of disease was entirely at odds with galenism.
Armed with admittedly provisional hypotheses, Paracelsus explained in naturalistic terms and offered the possibility of relief to conditions that the Galenists treated as incurable, the church identified as demonic possession, or the public treated with fatalistic resignation.
Paracelsus made intractable problems such as plague, syphilis, epilepsy, mental disorder, and learning disabilities central to his preoccupations.
Although in the case of learning disabilities he accepted that he was dealing with congenital conditions incapable of radical improvement, his regimen called not only for humane  treatment but also for an appreciation that disabled people deserved special understanding because of their superior spiritual status.
In a similar revolutionary manner Paracelsus confronted the contemporary craze for seeing witchcraft everywhere and claimed this phenomenon for psychiatry.
He pioneered the investigation of diseases of mineworkers and in 1520, aged 27, produced the first monograph ever written on occupational disease.
The longest section of this work dealt with the signs and symptoms of mercury poisoning.
This experience laid the foundations for his application of compounds of mercury and other metals for therapeutic purposes.
Arguably this advocacy of mercurials for the treatment of syphilis laid the foundations for the success of the paracelsian movement, because the newly arrived scourge of syphilis was the most feared disease of the sixteenth century, occupying a similar position to AIDS in Africa today.
The paracelsian mercurials represented one of the small handful of important therapeutic advances made before the present century.
Paracelsus therefore made a significant contribution to medical knowledge across a broad front.
He represented a new mood of therapeutic optimism and outlined a scientific approach capable of giving reality to his ambitious aspirations.
The new science was guided by his conviction that the ‘light of nature’ endowed the human race with the capacity to attain dominion over nature and, indeed, command over the stars.
The twentieth century has witnessed the realisation of these objectives, perhaps even beyond the horizons of Paracelsus's fertile imagination.
Despite all its achievements, modern medicine has failed to capture Paracelsus's sensitivity to the environmental, social, spiritual, and moral dimensions of medical intervention.
This outlook was a consequence of his exploitation of the neoplatonic belief of the analogy between the macrocosm and microcosm and his belief that humans were linked with God and nature in a dynamic cosmic order.
Modern scientific medicine has of course dispensed with such speculative constructs, but thereby it may also have sacrificed therapeutic insights available to our renaissance predecessors.
In this respect orthodox medicine may have placed itself at some disadvantage to its complementary counterparts.
Hypertension and cancer
Correlation or coincidence?
Two papers by Fletcher et al (p 622) and Hole et al (p 609) in this week's journal constitute the latest chapter in the slowly unfolding chronicle on hypertension and cancer.
Persuasive evidence linking these two conditions first surfaced in 1975, but nearly two decades later their association remains enigmatic.
Given the serious clinical ramifications, most attention has been justifiably directed at determining whether antihypertensive treatments are carcinogenic.
Firstly, retrospective studies implicated reserpine in breast cancer, but the drug was later absolved by prospective analyses.
Similarly, limited case-control data suggested an association between use of diuretics and renal cancer, but larger series and the outcomes of randomised clinical trials have not confirmed this.
More recently, the accusing finger has shifted to the β blocker atenolol.
The Medical Research Council's trial of antihypertensive treatment in elderly people found that death from cancer was nearly twice as common in men receiving atenolol as in men receiving placebo.
This association was not observed in women, and because it was noted in an unplanned subgroup analysis the authors urged that the finding should be interpreted cautiously.
Against this backdrop come this week's studies of hypertension, antihypertensive drugs, and cancer.
Both reports constitute post hoc analyses of data on several thousand patients followed up for varying periods at regional hypertension clinics.
Cancer rates according to type of antihypertensive treatment are reported, with particular attention being paid to atenolol.
Both groups of investigators adjust for age, sex, and current smoking habit, although without more thorough consideration of known risk factors for cancer (for example, past smoking habit, use of alcohol, and occupational exposures), the validity of the results remains in some doubt.
Fletcher and colleagues report that patients receiving atenolol have the same mortality from cancer as those not receiving atenolol.
Diuretics are also not associated with cancer.
Hole and colleagues report the incidence of cancer as well as mortality, and they compare rates observed in hypertensive patients with normative data on incidence from national figures and from a survey in Renfrew and Paisley.
Although their abstract states that neither men nor women taking atenolol experienced an increased rate of cancer, subgroup analysis shows that non-smoking men receiving atenolol had a significantly increased risk of dying of cancer (relative risk 1.58).
Though this again represents an unexpected finding on subgroup analysis, more than three quarters of men in the Medical Research Council's trial were non-smokers, and one could argue that both studies observed increased cancer mortality in non-smoking men treated with atenolol.
Other large clinical trials have not described any increase in cancer after treatment with other β blockers, but reporting of such unanticipated outcomes is often incomplete.
Both of the new studies replicate the previously reported association between renal cancer and hypertension.
The small number of cases, however, precludes examination of the effects of different antihypertensive drugs, which is important because some epidemiological evidence suggests that the increased rate of renal cancer in hypertensive patients is attributable, at least in part, to their use.
Irrespective of any effects of antihypertensive drugs, systolic blood pressure itself correlates with risk of cancer.
Though an increased incidence of cancer could be due to ascertainment bias because hypertensive patients are under closer medical surveillance than normotensive patients, this would not account for the association between mortality from cancer and blood pressure.
Instead, it is typically hypothesised that this association is attributable to other confounding factors.
For example, salt intake contributes to hypertension and is implicated as a causal factor in gastric cancer.
Here, the concomitant decreases in salt intake, gastric cancer, and hypertensive cardiovascular disease during the twentieth century in most industrialised countries are noteworthy but fall short of establishing causality.
Analogously, heavy alcohol consumption contributes to both increased blood pressure and many malignancies.
A powerful risk factor for hypertension is obesity.
Because increased consumption of fat results in an increase in both weight and blood pressure and has also been implicated as a risk factor for some forms of cancer, dietary fat may explain the correlation between blood pressure and cancer.
Similarly, low socioeconomic status simultaneously confers an increased risk of high blood pressure, certain cancers, and exposure to known carcinogens (for example, alcohol and tobacco).
Nonetheless, no epidemiological study has yet shown (by multivariate analysis) that one or more of these hypothesised mechanisms truly accounts for the association between high blood pressure and cancer.
Lingering concerns therefore remain about the potential contribution of hypertension and its treatment to the incidence of cancer.
Any increase in cancer with a particular antihypertensive drug will be difficult to detect because of both the dearth of large scale clinical trials which directly compare different treatments and the relative infrequency of cancer in prospective studies.
Still, such evaluation is important because, for example, if the incidence of cardiovascular complications of hypertension is 5/1000/year and if a drug reduces risk by 30% (that is , by 1.5/1000/year) then with an increase in cases of cancer of just 2/1000/year a particular drug could do more harm than good.
It becomes important, therefore, that any new antihypertensive drug should be compared with other agents in clinical trials that are large enough to detect infrequent adverse morbid events.
With respect to first line treatment with diuretics and β blockers, consolation is available in the fact that meta-analysis of large, randomised clinical trials have not identified any increase in deaths from cancer and the use of these drugs seems to reduce total, as well as cardiovascular, mortality.
Diabetic care in general practice
Adding quality to quantity
Treating eye, kidney, and foot lesions early in diabetic patients can prevent blindness, renal failure, and amputation, and the sheer number of patients who would benefit from early diagnosis means that general practitioners have to play a part.
Early papers on the topic showed that effective surveillance depends on an up to date register, a recall system, and a simple checklist, and many primary care teams are now grappling with Tudor Hart's challenge of ‘doing simple things well, for large numbers of people, few of whom feel sick.’
Some teams have made great progress: if well organised they can screen diabetic patients at least as well as outpatient clinics.
Moreover, several different approaches have been found to be effective, including all day clinics, nurse coordinated care, and miniclinics.
But what of practices that still do not have the infrastructure or confidence to offer diabetic surveillance?
On page 624 Hurwitz and colleagues report on a prompting system for diabetes surveillance independent of practices themselves.
This development meets the needs of local practitioners for support in personal education, patient recall, and retinal screening; flexibly integrates generalist with specialist care; and, perhaps best of all, puts patients first by sending the prompt directly to them.
The evaluation shows that two thirds of surveillance activity shifted from hospital clinics to primary care, with more effective coverage in the prompted group than in the control group and acceptance levels well above 80%.
Although these findings are encouraging, only people regularly attending diabetic outpatient clinics were studied and only half of those eligible took part.
Nor is it clear how much health gain resulted from this screening programme.
Surveillance may be carried out adequately by a skilled practitioner in 10 to 14 minutes once or twice a year, but, to have any impact, discussions about management and lifestyle to reduce the risk of complications will take longer.
Health gain has been rather narrowly defined in primary care studies of diabetic care to date.
When audits have gone beyond counting activity alone they have focused mainly on blood glucose concentration as a proxy measure of outcome.
Pringle and coworkers do this in their large descriptive study of possible associations between a range of variables related to the patient, doctor, practice, and process of care and the concentrations of glycated haemoglobin in diabetic patients in Nottingham (p 630).
Attempts to capture the contribution of more than 25 factors possibly associated with glycaemic control left 85% of the variance in glycated haemoglobin concentrations unexplained.
Among modifiable factors only access to a dietitian and an interested general practitioner featured significantly in the final multiple regression analysis.
Such a study raises many questions.
The findings support other evidence of the importance of doctors' attitudes towards helping patients to achieve good glycaemic control and that skilled strategies to support dietary change can make an appreciable contribution to glycaemic control and may even affect survival.
The study also raises the question of which are the right outcomes to measure and how psychosocial variables should be taken into account.
Future studies might pay more attention to the beliefs and behaviour of patients, doctors, and nurses as these probably strongly affect morbidity and mortality in diabetes.
We might also base management more firmly still on a multifactorial model of the risks of microvascular and macrovascular disease, paying particular attention to smoking, blood pressure, and lipids as well as blood glucose.
At the same time we need to remember that interventions, particularly those aimed at minimising hyperglycaemia, can themselves impair the quality of life.
The increasing recognition that diabetes frequently coexists with other chronic diseases and may originate in early life suggests an increasing role for primary care in the management and prevention of the condition in future.
Attention to surveillance and the rational use of primary and secondary resources are still needed, but as we try to add ‘quality to quantity’ we may need to look to social science as well as to epidemiology.
Its methods may improve our understanding of our patients and ourselves and form the basis for behavioural changes, on which reduction of the risks of the disease still largely depend.
Treating hypoglycaemia in general practice
Glucagon is the drug of choice for unconscious, agitated, or uncooperative patients
Severe hypoglycaemia is probably the commonest metabolic emergency seen in general practice.
People with diabetes are mainly affected, but other causes (except in neonates) include excess alcohol consumption after inadequate food intake and insulinomas and non-islet cell tumours, especially mesotheliomas.
These and other uncommon causes should be considered when hypoglycaemia is suspected in non-diabetic patients.
Diabetic hypoglycaemia occurs mainly in insulin treated patients.
It has been estimated that mild, self managed episodes may occur about twice weekly; severe episodes without unconsciousness but requiring help from another person twice yearly; and episodes of unconsciousness three times in 40 years.
Proper education of patients should reduce the incidence of severe hypoglycaemia.
All patients with diabetes and their relatives or carers should understand the range of hypoglycaemic symptoms, appropriate self treatment, and when to call for help.
In patients taking insulin this may mean deliberately inducing hypoglycaemia under controlled circumstances.
Patients in whom there is a loss of warning of hypoglycaemia, possibly linked with the use of human insulin, should be identified, counselled, and given the choice of switching to animal insulins (specific advice is available from the British Diabetic Association).
Medical help is likely to be sought only when hypoglycaemia is severe and the patient is unconscious, agitated, or uncooperative.
These are genuine emergencies as prolonged hypoglycaemia can be damaging.
Ideally, the diagnosis should be confirmed before treatment, and this can be done with capillary blood glucose test sticks.
Although an unconscious patient is likely to have biochemical hypoglycaemia (blood glucose concentration <3.0 mmol/l), the relation between symptomatic and  biochemical hypoglycaemia may be poor, with one study showing biochemical confirmation in less than a third of symptomatic patients.
Ultimately, the diagnosis must therefore be clinical.
These patients should be treated parenterally because attempted oral treatment may be hazardous.
The choice of treatment is between intravenous 50% dextrose (usually 50 ml) and subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intravenous glucagon (0.5 mg in children and 1 mg in adults); intranasal glucagon is also effective.
Both treatments produce a good response, though dextrose acts almost immediately and glucagon takes one to two minutes.
This time difference may be outweighed by the need to secure intravenous access for  dextrose — a serious disadvantage in agitated patients because extravasation of dextrose may cause considerable pain and tissue necrosis.
Glucagon has few side effects, with headache and gastrointestinal upset being occasionally reported.
It is ineffective in hypoglycaemia induced by alcohol, in which liver glycogen is already depleted.
When patients recover after being given glucagon, oral glucose or carbohydrate should be given to replenish glycogen stores and prevent recurrent hypoglycaemia.
If there is no response to glucagon after 10 minutes intravenous dextrose should be given.
In most cases glucagon is very effective and, being easier to give, is suitable for self administration or to be given by relatives.
Dextrose has been successfully used by trained ambulance staff, as has glucagon with or without a glucose drink.
Another study has confirmed the safety and effectiveness of glucagon as prehospital treatment for hypoglycaemia.
A prepacked 1 mg glucagon unit is convenient to carry, unlike dextrose, which is bulky and needs more protection.
Many general practitioners will know the unpleasant effect that a broken phial of dextrose has on the inside of a medical bag.
Glucagon has a shorter shelf life (30 months) and costs more (£4.62 net per unit) than dextrose, which has a shelf life of 36 months and costs £2.10 for a 50 ml phial.
Its convenience and ease of use, however, together with its lack of serious side effects, should encourage use of glucagon as the first line treatment for hypoglycaemia.
Non-medical use of ketamine
Dissociative states in unprotected settings may be harmful
Several reports have recently appeared of the use of ketamine (‘vitamin K,’‘super K’) at ‘rave’ parties and night clubs.
As ketamine is a powerful anaesthetic its uncontrolled use in social settings is a cause for concern, although there is little documented evidence, as yet, that its non-medical use has greatly increased as suggested by media reports.
These reports suggested that ketamine was initially introduced as an adulterant in 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (‘ecstasy’) tablets and is now sold in its pure form.
As an anaesthetic agent, ketamine has a good safety profile.
Unlike most other anaesthetics it is a cardiorespiratory stimulant rather than a depressant, and its wide margin of physical safety has resulted in the drug's use in paediatrics and as a battlefield ‘buddy drug.’
Its main problem is that it can cause psychological dissociation, resulting in hallucinations and phenomena which may include subjective experiences of being out of the body or states similar to the near death experience.
(These states differ from those produced by hallucinogens such as LSD and emotional enhancers such as 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine.)
Although these phenomena may frighten some patients, others find them tolerable or pleasant.
There may also be effects on movement such as stereotypies (persistent repetition of acts or words), a severe loss of coordination, and pronounced analgesia.
The psychological effects are brief, depending on dosage and route of administration, but usually last about 30 minutes.
The doses used for surgical anaesthesia vary between 2 and 10 mg/kg.
Psychological dissociation, however, is produced by much smaller doses — for example, 50 mg by intravenous injection can produce a pronounced dissociative state.
In current social usage the drug is taken intranasally or orally.
As ketamine has a good physical safety profile and an established place in medicine within current indications what are the reasons for concern about its non-medical use?
The first and most important reason is that ketamine can readily induce a state of virtual helplessness, within the dose range normally taken by users, to a far greater extent than most other substances of abuse.
The dissociation can be very dramatic, such that awareness of the environment is completely lost while the user experiences a ‘separate reality,’ a marked reduction in sensory input in all modalities, and difficulty with movement.
This is almost never the case with substances such as 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine.
The helplessness of the dissociative state may not be a problem for a patient in a protected setting, but at a large social gathering the chances that a disconnected person experiencing incoordination and analgesia may come to harm are substantially increased.
A further cause for concern is that ketamine can sometimes result in a state where the users are unconcerned whether they live or die.
This is not a depressive or suicidal phenomenon but is related to the particular effect of the dissociative state upon the mind: ‘If you have a full-blown experience of K, you can never believe there is death, or that death can possibly influence who you are.’
Again, this may not be a problem in a protected setting but is cause for concern in a public place.
In some people ketamine has the potential for compulsive, repeated use; cases of self administered injections several times daily over prolonged periods have been reported.
Long term use of high doses of ketamine has the potential to interfere with memory, learning, and attentional mechanisms due to blockade of the N -methyl- d -aspartate receptor, although there is no clear evidence of this at present.
Ketamine has been associated with recurring phenomena (‘flashbacks’), although whether these result from drug induced physiological changes or are a functional response to anxiety in predisposed personalities is still unclear.
(In these cases flashbacks may involve little more than a ‘graininess’ of vision under anxiety provoking circumstances.)
People coming to medical attention under the influence of ketamine are best placed in a quiet, darkened room until they recover.
Diazepam may be given for unresponsive panic attacks.
The use of ketamine in a social context can be discouraged by educational measures, some of which have already commenced.
The disturbing qualities of the state itself may prove sufficient to prevent the non-medical use of ketamine from becoming an entrenched public health problem.
Rescheduling the drug would inconvenience those doctors, veterinarians, and scientists who use ketamine in their work and hopefully will not be necessary.
Meeting local needs
The private sector must be included in data collection
‘District health authorities can then concentrate on ensuring that…the health needs of the population for which they are responsible are met; and that their population has access to a comprehensive range of…services.’
This quotation from Working for Patients shows that health authorities are required to determine the needs of their populations and the services required to meet them.
In order to do this health authorities must have comprehensive information about the existing use of health care.
In most cases patients' needs will be met from within the NHS.
But what if some are being met in the private sector?
If a high proportion of its population obtains private treatment should a health authority purchase the same pattern of care from the NHS as one whose population does not have access to the private sector?
To do so would risk purchasing care inappropriately and, by wasting money, could exacerbate inequalities.
But how is a health authority to know whether some of its population's needs are being met in the private sector?
At present it cannot.
That would not matter if the private health care sector was very small, but it is not.
Almost one in 10 of the population of Britain is currently covered by private insurance.
One recent estimate was that the private sector carries out 15% of elective surgery and 59% of abortions and provides 58% of long term care of the elderly and 7% of acute psychiatry.
In some regions these figures are very much higher.
Purchasers of health care have tried to adjust their expected intervention rates to allow for activity in the private sector, but the calculations have been extremely crude because local data have not been available.
There are four pathways by which information on health care should be received by purchasers.
Firstly, NHS funded care in trusts or directly managed units is identified by way of the contract minimum data set.
Secondly, this is also the case, in theory at least, where patients are treated in private hospitals as part of a health authority contract.
Thirdly, when patients are funded privately in NHS pay beds data are collected by regional health authorities as part of their NHS monitoring, but the information is not passed on to purchasers since it is not covered by contracts.
The collection and analysis of data are even less clear cut for those facilities situated within NHS hospitals but managed by private companies.
Finally, when patients receive privately funded care in private facilities health authorities have no access to data at all.
Yet if they are to fulfil their responsibility to monitor their population's access to health care the authorities must have all of this information.
The private sector has shown willingness to help solve this problem.
When, however, in one district, private hospitals attempted to provide data they found that in most cases they could not identify patients' districts of residence (S Israel, personal communication).
These difficulties should not be insurmountable; for example, there is now a national agreement by BUPA to supply cancer registration data.
Other countries with more pluralist systems of provision have recognised this problem and dealt with it.
In the United States 35 states have legislation requiring all hospitals to provide a standard data set on each patient treated.
Purchasers and providers recognise that sharing of information can contribute to the shared aim of improving health care.
There is no reason why the same approach could not be adopted here.
If the National Health Service Management Executive was to tackle this issue it might find that it was pushing at an open door.
PAPERS
Incidence of and mortality from cancer in hypertensive patients
Abstract
Objectives —
To assess incidence of and mortality from cancer in hypertensive patients taking atenolol, comparing the findings with two control populations and with hypertensive patients taking other drugs.
Design —
Retrospective analysis of patients first seen in the Glasgow Blood Pressure Clinic between 1972 and 1990.
Patients' records were linked with the registrar general's data for information on mortality and with the West of Scotland Cancer Registry for information on incident and fatal cancers.
Cancers were compared in patients and controls and in patients taking atenolol, β blockers other than atenolol, and hypotensive drugs other than βblockers.
Subjects —
6528 male and female patients providing 54355 years of follow up.
Setting —
Hypertension clinic in Glasgow.
Main outcome measures —
Observed numbers of cancers in clinic patients were compared with expected numbers derived from cancer rates in two control populations adjusted for age, sex, and time period of data collection.
Results —
Cancer mortality was not significantly different in clinic patients as a whole and controls.
Incident and fatal cancers were not significantly increased in male or female patients taking atenolol.
Cancer incidence did not rise in the clinic after a large increase in prescriptions for atenolol after 1976.
Conclusion —
This analysis does not suggest a link between atenolol and cancer.
Introduction
A recent Medical Research Council trial shows higher cancer mortality in elderly hypertensive men treated with atenolol.
The excess was not present in women and the finding in men came from one of several subgroup analyses.
As the authors point out, it could well be a chance finding.
We compared the incidence of and mortality from cancer in patients of the Glasgow Blood Pressure Clinic taking atenolol and other hypotensive drugs and in two control populations.
The analysis is based on record linkage of clinic patients with the West of Scotland Cancer Registry and with the registrar general's data.
Methods
definition of cohort
The Glasgow Blood Pressure Clinic has a computer record of 7509 hypertensive patients seen since 1968.
Our study is based on 6528 men and women first registered between 1 January 1972 and 31 December 1990, providing 54355 patient years of follow up.
cancer mortality
When patients register with the clinic a copy of their record is flagged by the registrar to ensure that we know of deaths and their certified cause.
An earlier test showed that flagging is reliable.
incident cancers
The West of Scotland Cancer Registry holds information on incident as well as fatal cancers in the area.
To identify clinic patients developing cancer, all patients seen between 1972 and 1990 were linked by computer with the registry with a method described previously.
Validation before linking showed that 92% of fatal cancers known to the clinic were also known to the registry.
Also, 94% of deaths from cancers known to the registry were known to the clinic.
Linking the clinic and registry identified 436 clinic patients with cancer diagnosed between 1972 and 1990; in 50, cancer was diagnosed before treatment for raised blood pressure began and these patients are excluded.
Thus, our analysis is based on 386 incident cases all diagnosed after the introduction of treatment.
treatment
Three mutually exclusive groups were defined (tables I and II).
An atenolol group of 2676 patients given the drug irrespective of whether they also received other hypotensive drugs provided 16 592 patient years of exposure to atenolol (table II).
Exposure to a drug was taken from the date of its first prescription to date of death or to 31 December 1990, whichever came first.
The other β blocker group comprised 1164 patients receiving a βblocker other than atenolol with or without hypotensive drugs of other types.
A group not given βblockers included the remaining 2688 patients, none of whom at any time received a β blocker of any sort, including atenolol.
statistics
Comparison of cancer mortality and incidence was based on the ratio of observed and expected cancers.
‘Observed’ cancers were those seen in clinic patients.
Two sets of ‘expected’ numbers were derived, the first from cancer rates in the general population of the west of Scotland (first control group) standardised for age, sex, and time period of observation.
Standardisation of time was necessary because cancer incidence is rising slowly in the west of Scotland and because prescribing atenolol increased greatly during the period of study (fig 1).
The second set of expected values also included  an adjustment for smoking habit derived from data in our second control group — the Renfrew-Paisley study.
This general population survey was of 15 411 men and women screened between 1972 and 1976 and providing 231 888 subject years of follow up to 31 December 1990.
Expected numbers were calculated for each group standardised for age, sex, and time period Observed numbers were treated as data from a Poisson distribution with mean equal to the number expected.
Probability values were derived from the Poisson distribution and were two tailed.
No adjustment was made for multiple tests of significance.
Standardisation for age, sex, and smoking habit was needed because patients in the atenolol group were slightly older, less commonly smokers, and more commonly male than patients in other treatment groups (table I).
An earlier study had shown that patients at the Glasgow clinic did not contain a higher proportion of smokers than did Renfrew-Paisley controls.
Results
Analysis in 1983 had shown no excess of cancer deaths in Glasgow clinic patients compared with Renfrew-Paisley controls.
Because prescriptions for atenolol have increased since 1983, we repeated the analysis, including data up to December 1990.
As before, cancer was not significantly more common in clinic patients than in controls though, as expected in a hypertension clinic, cardiovascular causes of death showed a greater than twofold excess in men, and slightly less in women (fig 2).
Cancer mortality was not higher in patients receiving atenolol than in controls (table II), nor was it higher in the atenolol group than in the other β blocker group, adjusted for age, sex, smoking status, and time period (relative hazard ratio 0.71; 95% confidence interval 0.45 to 1.11) and with the non β blocker group (0.88; 0.61 to 1.28).
Comparison with and without adjustment for smoking gave similarly negative results.
Cancer mortality was not higher in the subgroup of interest in the MRC trial, male smokers taking atenolol.
Cancer incidence was not increased in patients taking atenolol as compared with controls and with patients taking other forms of treatment (table III).
Confidence intervals in this analysis make unlikely a risk of cancer greater than 15% in patients taking atenolol.
Subgroups taking atenolol alone, atenolol with other drugs, and β blockers other than atenolol had risk ratios not significantly different from 1.0 (table III).
The group taking hypotensive drugs other than β blockers had a significantly lower risk than the general population.
Smoking and differences in men and women — Apart from one subgroup, no significant excess of incident cancer was seen in the three treatment groups, in men and women, and in smokers and non-smokers (table IV).
The exception, a significant excess of 58%, was in male non-smokers taking atenolol.
However, this was one of 24 analyses (table IV) and the excess, of 13 patients only, was balanced by a deficiency of 12 cancers in male smokers taking atenolol.
Combining smoking and non-smoking men taking atenolol gave a risk ratio of 1.01.
Age had no significant influence on the relation of cancer incidence and drug treatment, apart from a 76% excess of cancers in the oldest age group taking βblockers other than atenolol (table V).
This group contained the smallest number of cases,(19) and the excess was based on eight patients only.
Sites of cancer — Kidney cancer was the only type to be significantly increased (table VI).
As some kidney cancers cause hypertension an increased frequency of kidney cancer is to be expected in a hypertension  clinic.
Lung cancer, which contributed most to the excess seen in the MRC trial, was not more common in clinic patients as a whole or in the subgroup taking atenolol (table VI).
Timing of cancer in relation to timing of atenolol prescription — First prescriptions for atenolol in the clinic were in 1976.
By 1980, 77% of new prescriptions were for the drug (fig 1).
Cancer incidence showed no increase in clinic patients after 1976 and no increase relative to controls at any time (fig 1).
Survival time — Theoretically, a drug may increase cancer incidence either by causing new cancers or by accelerating the growth of existing cancers.
The second effect would appear earlier than the first and would be manifest by a reduction of survival time — the interval between diagnosis of cancer (incidence date) and death.
Using Cox's proportional hazards model and adjusting for age, sex, and site of cancer, we found that survival time in the atenolol and β blocker groups was no different from that in the group not taking β blockers (risk ratios 1.02 and 0.88, respectively).
The hazards model also showed no reduction of survival time in a comparison of the period when atenolol was prescribed (1977–90) with the period in which it was not prescribed (1972–6).
Discussion
The MRC study showed higher cancer mortality in men randomised to atenolol.
A report by Coope and Warrender also suggests an excess of cancer in patients taking the drug.
In contrast with these, we found no excess of incident or fatal cancer in male or female hypertensive patients taking atenolol; similarly, Fletcher and colleagues found no difference of relative risk for cancer in patients taking atenolol, other β blockers, methyldopa, or diuretics.
Patients in the MRC trial were over 65 years of age, but only a small proportion of cancer deaths in our study were in patients in this age group.
In these, there was no excess in those taking atenolol, but the number of cancers was small (22).
The MRC trial was a randomised comparison of two forms of active treatment and placebo.
Our study did not have these important advantages.
Although lack of randomisation may introduce bias, a bias relating to cancer is unlikely to have influenced either referral of patients to our clinic or choice of treatment within the clinic.
Patients known to have cancer before treatment were excluded.
Ascertainment bias might lead to earlier detection of cancer in regularly supervised patients, but against this as a factor in our case the survival times in cancer patients and the frequency of incident and fatal cancers were not different in clinic patients and controls (figs 1 and 2; table II).
The number of events in a study determines its statistical power.
In our analysis and in that of Fletcher and colleagues, the number of events (incident and fatal cancers) exceeded that in the MRC trial.
We have the additional advantage of data on incidence, which is important because incidence rises before mortality when a newly introduced drug does cause cancer.
In the MRC trial cancer mortality was assessed during prescription of atenolol for five to six years.
Our analysis covers a 19 year period and includes some patients who took atenolol for over 10 years.
The incidence of cancer did not rise during this time (fig 2).
The authors of the MRC trial suspected that the significant excess of cancer seen in men taking atenolol was a chance observation.
Our findings and those of Fletcher et al strongly support this.
Hypoxaemia in young Kenyan children with acute lower respiratory infection
Abstract
Objectives —
To determine the prevalence, clinical correlates, and outcome of hypoxaemia in acutely ill children with respiratory symptoms.
Design —
Prospective observational study.
Setting —
Paediatric casualty ward of a referral hospital at 1670m altitude in Nairobi, Kenya.
Subjects —
256 Infants and children under 3 years of age with symptoms of respiratory infection.
Main outcome measures —
Prevalence of hypoxaemia, defined as arterial oxygen saturation <90% determined by pulse oximetry, and condition of patient on the fifth day after admission.
Results —
Over half (151) of the children were hypoxaemic, and short term mortality was 4.3 times greater in these children.
In contrast, the relative risk of a fatal outcome in children with radiographic pneumonia was only 1.03 times that of children without radiographic pneumonia.
A logistic regression model showed that in 3–11 month old infants a respiratory rate >=70/min,; grunting, and retractions were the best independent clinical signs for the prediction of hypoxaemia.
In the older children a respiratory rate of >=60/min; was the single best clinical predictor of hypoxaemia.
The presence of hypoxaemia predicted radiographic pneumonia with a sensitivity of 71% and specificity of 55%.
Conclusions —
Over half the children presenting to this referral hospital with respiratory symptoms were hypoxaemic.
A group of specific clinical signs seem useful in predicting hypoxaemia.
The clear association of hypoxaemia with mortality suggests that the detection and effective treatment of hypoxaemia are important aspects of the clinical management of acute infections of the lower respiratory tract in children in hospital in developing regions.
Introduction
Acute infections of the lower respiratory tract are a major cause of preventable death, causing about one third of all deaths in childhood.
Systems of treatment based on simple clinical signs have been developed and validated for the management of respiratory infections.
Whereas several studies of acute infections of the lower respiratory tract in developing countries have defined the use of clinical signs to predict diagnosis by a doctor or by radiography or to predict death, only one study of the prevalence and clinical prediction of hypoxaemia has been reported from developing regions.
Oxygen is recommended for use in children admitted to hospital with severe pneumonia but the recently suggested clinical criteria for treatment with oxygen have not been validated in a clinical setting.
We are not aware of reports from developing countries of the outcome of hypoxaemia in children with acute lower respiratory tract infection.
We prospectively determined the prevalence and outcome of hypoxaemia in children with respiratory illness presenting to an urban referral hospital in Kenya and sought to correlate clinical signs with its presence.
Our hypothesis was that hypoxaemia occurred more often than suspected clinically from the presence of cyanosis and that selected clinical signs, including respiratory rate, would be useful to predict its presence.
Patients and methods
This study was carried out from March to December 1989 at the Kenyatta National Hospital, which is the only free public hospital in Nairobi, a city of 1.28 million residents.
Infants and children from the age of 7 days to 36 months who presented to the paediatric casualty unit of the hospital with a history of cough and other symptoms of acute infection of the respiratory tract for less than seven days were eligible for inclusion in this study.
Exclusion criteria were the presence of moderate or severe dehydration or evidence of cardiac, renal, or metabolic disease, disease of the central nervous system, or severe anaemia.
Each weekday morning no more than the first three eligible children presenting to the casualty unit were recruited by the study physician (SW), who explained the nature and purpose of the study to parents and obtained their consent.
A history was obtained from the mother or guardian about the presence of rapid breathing, chest retraction, grunting, fever, refusal to breast feed or drink, difficulty in arousal, and blue appearance.
The study physician also recorded respiratory rate, pulse, temperature, central cyanosis, chest retractions, grunting, nasal flaring, wheezing, crepitations or rhonchi on auscultation, and the state of consciousness.
After the clinical assessment a portable battery powered oximeter (N-10, Nellcor, Hayward, California) was used for oximetry and pulse readings with an appropriately sized sensor on the finger or toe.
Three oximetry readings were taken while the child was breathing room air and the average reading was used.
All children entered into the study had a posteroanterior chest radiograph after the above data were recorded.
All radiographs were interpreted by a single radiologist (JK), who did not have access to the clinical data.
The study protocol was approved by institutional review boards at the Johns Hopkins University and the University of Nairobi.
To determine the range of oxygen saturation in healthy children in Nairobi, which is 1670 m above sea level, oximetry was carried out in 87 normal healthy children aged 7 days to 36 months who were attending child welfare clinics for immunisation.
In these children the range of arterial oxygen saturation was 89.3% to 99.3% and the mean was 95.7% (SD 1.6%).
Eighty six of the 87 normal children had an arterial oxygen saturation of greater than 90%; one child had a saturation of 89.3%.
Outcome definitions — Hypoxaemia was defined as arterial oxygen saturation less than or equal to 90%.
(A publication which appeared after the preparation of this manuscript reported the normal range of arterial oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry at 1610 m altitude in Denver.
In 150 healthy infants aged <3 months 88% to 89% saturation was the lower limit of normal.)
Radiographic pneumonia was defined as the presence of an alveolar or interstitial infiltrate in a chest radiograph.
The outcome of the illness in children admitted to hospital was recorded as clinically improved, clinically worse, or causing death before the fifth day after entry into the study.
Statistical analysis — The findings were analysed in the following age groups: newborn infants (0–2 months), infants (3–11 months), and children (12–36 months).
Each clinical finding was assessed by χ 2 test for association with the outcomes of hypoxaemia and radiographic pneumonia.
Sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy were calculated for each finding for each age group.
Individual signs and symptoms that seemed useful in the χ 2 analyses were evaluated for their independent ability to predict hypoxaemia with a multiple logistic regression technique.
For each age group we evaluated a series of prediction models in which hypoxaemia was the dependent variable and selected predictor variables were added in a step wise manner with an inclusion rule of p <=0.05.; 
Results
findings in ill children
The data from 256 children were evaluated; 209 were admitted to the hospital.
Pneumonia was the most common clinical diagnosis followed by bronchiolitis; these two syndromes comprised 86% of the diagnoses.
Table I shows the outcome in each age group of children.
The overall mortality of 10% and the prevalence of radiographic pneumonia of 53% indicate that this was a group of severely ill patients.
Although there was a trend for mortality to be lower in the older children, the differences between age groups were not significant (χ 2 test for trend=3.32, p=0.07).
A total of 151 (59%) children had hypoxaemia.
All the enrolled patients with clinically evident cyanosis were under 12 months of age, but of all the hypoxaemic infants, only 13 out of 117 (11%) were cyanotic.
Twenty one children died within five days of admission; most deaths were within 48 hours of admission.
Nineteen of the children who died were hypoxaemic on admission with arterial oxygen saturations ranging from 88% to 40%.
Children admitted with hypoxaemia were 4.3 times more likely to die within five days than children without hypoxaemia (95% confidence interval of relative risk 1.03 to 17.8, χ 2 =5.1, p=0.02).
Hypoxaemia on admission thus predicted short term hospital mortality with 90% (68% to 98%) sensitivity and 34% (26% to 41%) specificity (table II).
Among children who survived for at least five days arterial oxygen saturation on admission ranged from 41% to 98%.
In contrast, the relative risk of death in hospital in children with radiographic pneumonia compared with those without was only 1.03 (0.5 to 2.3, χ 2 =0.004, p=0.9).
In these infants and children the presence of hypoxaemia predicted radiographic pneumonia with a 71% sensitivity, a 55% specificity, and an overall accuracy of 64% (p<0.0001).
prediction of hypoxaemia: univariate analysis
Table III shows the association of individual signs or symptoms with hypoxaemia.
In newborn infants a respiratory rate of >=70/min; was 48% sensitive and 70% specific in predicting hypoxaemia.
Other individual signs that seemed useful were the observation or history of cyanosis and the finding of crepitations on examination.
Retractions were sensitive but not specific, and grunting was not significantly associated with hypoxaemia in these newborn infants.
Although many signs were associated with hypoxaemia in infants 3–11 months of age, retractions, grunting, and unresponsiveness seemed to be the most useful signs of hypoxaemia in this age group.
Among the children >=12; months of age a respiratory rate >=70/min; had a specificity of 90%, a sensitivity of only 32%, and an accuracy of 61%, but a rate of >=60/min; had an accuracy of 70%.
prediction of hypoxaemia: logistic regression
With multiple logistic regression a mother's report of ‘blueness’ was the best predictor for hypoxaemia in the newborn infants, with an accuracy of 62%.
Inclusion of respiratory rate greater than 60 or 70/min or refusal to breast feed, grunting, chest retractions, or cyanosis on examination did not significantly improve prediction in these infants.
Among the infants 3–11 months of age, a multiple logistic regression model including retractions, respiratory rate >=70/min,; and grunting was the best predictor, with an accuracy of 70% (table IV).
Cyanosis, refusal to breast feed, and the other signs in table III were not independently useful predictors in the regression model in the infants aged 3–11 months.
In the children older than 12 months a respiratory rate of >=60/min; alone was the  best discriminatory sign, with an odds ratio of 5.1 (1.19 to 22.1) and an overall accuracy of 70%.
The ability of the model to predict hypoxaemia in this older age group was not significantly improved by the addition of any other symptoms or signs to the model or by the use of a respiratory rate criterion of 70/min.
Discussion
We found that over half the children presenting to this hospital with respiratory symptoms were hypoxaemic.
In addition, we have shown that the physiological measurement of hypoxaemia is significantly related to prognosis and to clinical signs.
The presence of hypoxaemia is predictive of short term mortality, indicating that the detection and treatment of hypoxaemia may be a crucial part of clinical management of severely ill children in hospital.
Conversely, the absence of hypoxaemia predicts a low risk of death, even in the presence of radiographic pneumonia.
Other studies of young children with lower respiratory tract infections and wheezing illnesses in developed and developing countries have shown that hypoxaemia was a better predictor of outcome than individual clinical signs.
None of the cited studies of children evaluated the prediction of mortality.
Several studies in adults in developed countries, however, have shown that hypoxaemia on admission is a predictor of death in hospital.
We have shown that central cyanosis is seen in few hypoxaemic children.
We were, however, able to identify a group of clinical findings which seem useful in predicting the presence of hypoxaemia in this clinical setting.
After we started this study the World Health Organisation published recommendations for hospital management of pneumonia in developing countries, suggesting that with limited availability of oxygen only children with central cyanosis or inability to drink should be given oxygen.
When oxygen is readily available the following criteria were suggested for starting oxygen treatment: severe indrawing of the chest; restlessness (if improved by giving oxygen); respiratory rate >70/min in children 2 months to 7 years; and grunting in infants less than 2 months of age.
In severely ill children presenting to a referral hospital at 1670 m altitude the logistic regression prediction models we have developed indicate that for newborn infants and those up to 2 months of age history of cyanosis reported by the mother was the best predictor of hypoxaemia; a respiratory rate of >=70/min,; retractions, and grunting were the best predictors in infants 3–11 months old; and in children 12 months and older a respiratory rate of >=60/min; was the best predictor of hypoxaemia.
Our findings in infants aged 3–11 months in essence confirm and validate the suggested WHO criteria for provision of oxygen when readily available.
The use of multiple logistic regression allowed the selection of the most useful clinical signs which are predictive of hypoxaemia.
We studied only a few newborn infants up to 2 months old, which made it difficult to assess fully the usefulness of the WHO criteria for detecting hypoxaemia in this age group.
Further studies are needed to validate the suggested criteria for newborn infants.
In children older than 11 months both the univariate and multivariate analyses suggest that a respiratory rate of 60/min is preferable to the suggested 70/min as a cut off value for the prediction of hypoxaemia.
We have evaluated the prediction models in the patients from whom they were derived, a procedure which maximises their apparent predictive ability.
Therefore, to prove their usefulness the suggested criteria for hypoxaemia will have to be prospectively validated in other clinical settings, at sea level and above, and in groups of patients with a range of severity of disease.
We recommend that the WHO clinical indicators of hypoxaemia (which we have validated) be used to institute treatment with oxygen in referral hospitals where oxygen is available.
This study and a previous study indicate that hypoxaemia predicts radiographic pneumonia with a sensitivity of 70–71% and a specificity of 55–71%, a degree of accuracy equivalent to that of recommended algorithms and prediction by doctors.
We have suggested further examination of the role of the oximeter as a diagnostic and screening tool.
What are the implications of our data showing hypoxaemia to be an important predictor of short term mortality of children admitted to hospital with symptoms of acute lower respiratory tract infection in Nairobi?
Although this study was not designed to evaluate treatment, a review of hospital records showed that all the children who died received antibiotics, and the hypoxaemic children received this hospital's standard treatment with oxygen, which is by face mask without monitoring of arterial oxygen saturation.
The provision of oxygen may have benefited some of the hypoxaemic children.
Although effective treatment will probably prevent a proportion of deaths in hypoxaemic children, we are unaware of controlled trials to prove that treatment with oxygen will influence outcome in these severely ill children.
Indeed, studies of adults with bacteraemic pneumococcal pneumonia in the United States suggest that the institution of intensive care with intubation, mechanical ventilation, and careful monitoring does not influence mortality.
A proportion of hypoxaemic children may be so physiologically compromised late in the course of illness that treatment with oxygen will not prevent death.
These considerations indicate that well designed studies of the clinical effectiveness of appropriate treatment with oxygen in the prevention of death of hypoxaemic infants and children in hospital are now required.
Although many children with pneumonia are hypoxaemic, the limited availability of oxygen in developing regions indicates that the clinical studies should be designed to determine which hypoxaemic children will benefit most from treatment.
Case-control study of leukaemia and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among children aged 0–4 years living in West Berkshire and North Hampshire health districts
Abstract
Objective —
To investigate the relation between parental employment in the nuclear industry and childhood leukaemia and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Design —
Case-control study.
Setting —
West Berkshire and Basingstoke and North Hampshire District Health Authorities.
Subjects —
54 children aged 0–4 years who had leukaemia or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma diagnosed during 1972–89, who were born in the study area and were resident there when cancer was diagnosed.
Six controls were selected for each case: four from hospital delivery registers and two from livebirth registers maintained by the NHS central register.
Controls were matched for sex, date of birth (within six months), and area of residence at birth and time of diagnosis.
Main outcome measures —
Parents' employment by the nuclear industry and exposure to ionising radiation at work.
Results —
Five (9%) of the 54 cases and 14 (4%) of the 324 controls had fathers or mothers, or both, who had been employed by the nuclear industry (relative risk 2.2, 95% confidence interval 0.6 to 6.9).
Nuclear industry employees who work in areas where exposure to radiation is possible are given film badges to monitor their exposure to external penetrating ionising radiation.
Three fathers of cases and two fathers of controls (and no mothers of either) had been monitored in this way before their child was conceived (relative risk 9.0, 95% confidence interval 1.0 to 107.8).
No father (of a case or control) had accumulated a recorded dose of more than 5 mSv before his child was conceived, and no father had been monitored at any time in the four years before his child was conceived.
A dose-response relation was not evident among fathers who had been monitored.
Conclusions —
These results suggest that the children of fathers who had been monitored for exposure to external penetrating ionising radiation in the nuclear industry may be at increased risk of developing leukaemia before their fifth birthday.
The finding is based on small numbers and could be due to chance.
If the relationship is real the mechanisms are far from clear, except that the effect is unlikely to be due to external radiation; the possibility that it could be due to internal contamination by radioactive substances or some other exposure at work should be pursued.
The above average rates of leukaemia in the study area cannot be accounted for by these findings.
Introduction
We previously found an increased incidence of childhood leukaemia in the West Berkshire and Basingstoke and North Hampshire District Health Authorities during 1972–85.
The excess was concentrated in children under 5 years who were living within 10 km of the atomic weapons establishments at Aldermaston and Burghfield.
We report here the results of a case-control study set up to investigate whether the excess was related to parents' employment in the nuclear industry.
Subjects and methods
The study was carried out in the West Berkshire and the Basingstoke and North Hampshire District Health Authorities.
Information about children under 5 years old living in the study area who had leukaemia or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma diagnosed between 1972 and 1989 was ascertained from multiple sources.
Children with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma were included because of the current understanding, based on immunological studies, that acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma represent opposite ends of the same spectrum of disease.
Most cases were notified by consultants at the Royal Berkshire District Hospital, the Basingstoke District Hospital, and hospitals in the surrounding districts.
General practitioners within the study area also provided details of children with cancer.
In addition, listings of children with leukaemia or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma were obtained from the childhood cancer research group's national registry of childhood tumours.
All diagnoses were histologically confirmed.
We studied only children who were born and had cancer diagnosed in the study area.
The mothers of 56 of the 71 children diagnosed during 1972–89 were living in the study area at the time of their child's birth.
Two of these 56 children are not included in the analyses; both died in the early 1970s shortly after  having non-Hodgkin's lymphoma diagnosed, and we were unable to verify their parents' names or dates of birth.
Six control children were selected for each case: two from birth registers maintained by the NHS central register and four from delivery registers in the two district hospitals in the study area.
The two birth registry controls were chosen by staff employed at the central register in Southport.
The entry for the case was located in the birth register and the first preceding and the first succeeding entries were selected who matched the case with respect to sex, date of birth (plus or minus six months), district of birth registration, and family health services authority of the child's first general practitioner.
Controls were further matched with cases for residence in the study area at time of diagnosis.
Control children who were found to have died or to have moved out of the study area before their matched case had cancer diagnosed were replaced.
Mother's address is not recorded in the birth registers maintained by the central register.
To allow matching for proximity of mother's residence to a nuclear establishment at the time of her child's birth a further series of controls was selected from locally held hospital delivery registers.
Mother's address as recorded in the delivery register was used to assign births to 5 km bands round the nuclear establishments in the study area, and controls were chosen from the same 5 km band as their associated case.
These 5 km bands correspond to the boundaries used in our previous analyses.
Selecting controls from delivery registers also enabled matching for mother's age (plus or minus five years), child's sex and date of birth (plus or minus six months), district health authority of birth, and residence in the study area at the time of diagnosis.
Controls selected from the delivery register were chosen by locating the birth entry of the case and selecting the two closest preceding and the two closest succeeding entries fulfilling the matching criteria.
For the 10 case children who were not born in maternity units within the study area (eight were born at home and two in hospitals in adjacent health authorities) the place in the register where the birth would have been entered was located and controls were chosen as above.
Children were considered ineligible to be controls if they were a twin, were adopted, or had a serious congenital defect.
Controls whose mother had died (two) or was unavailable because of ill health (one) and controls whose father could not be identified (eight) were also considered ineligible.
As control families were traced through their general practitioner with the facilities offered by the central register, families who emigrated before the study began (five) and those whose current family health services authority was not recorded (five) or incorrectly recorded (11) were replaced by the next eligible control in the series.
One control was selected from both the delivery register and birth register.
This child was assigned to the delivery register series and another control was chosen from the birth register.
data collection
Information about case and control children and their parents was obtained from four sources: the child's birth certificate, personal interview of parents, mother's obstetric notes, and employment and health physics records held by the nuclear industry (table I).
Birth certificates of cases and controls were obtained from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys.
Mother's and father's names, mother's address, and father's occupation are routinely recorded on the birth certificate.
This information was used to confirm residential details and parental names.
Father's occupation and social class were coded by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys 1980 classification scheme.
Father's occupation was assigned to one of eight groups on the basis of knowledge of the industries in the area and of previous reports of association between parental occupation and childhood cancer.
Parents of cases and controls were interviewed by a trained nurse interviewer using a structured questionnaire.
Separate questionnaires were used for mothers and fathers.
A full residential and occupational history, including specific questions about employment at nuclear establishments, was recorded for each parent.
To improve the quality of information obtained at interview, a form asking parents to list the places in which they had lived and the jobs they had had was sent out in advance of the interview.
Parent's social class and occupation was coded in the same way as the information on birth certificates.
During the interview, mothers and fathers were also asked to confirm their own names and dates of birth and about their own health and habits.
Additional questions about pregnancies, the index child, and other children in the family were incorporated in the mother's questionnaire.
Because of the seriousness of the disease, interviewers knew whether they were approaching the parents of a case or control child.
The parents of three case children did not wish to be interviewed, and interviews with the corresponding controls of these children were not arranged.
All mothers of the remaining 51 case children were interviewed but two fathers were not (table I).
Of the parents of the 306 matched controls for these 51 cases, 223 (73%) mothers and 219 (72%) fathers were interviewed.
Among the 83 controls for whom neither parent was interviewed, 58 sets of parents declined an interview, 14 were not approached on the advice of their general practitioner, and the current addresses of the remaining 11 were not traced.
For each of the 51 case children whose mother was interviewed at least one mother of a corresponding control was also interviewed: the numbers of cases having one, two, three, four, five, and six corresponding interviewed control mothers were one, three, three, 21, 15, and eight respectively.
For the 49 case children whose father was interviewed the numbers of cases having one, two, three, four, five, and six corresponding interviewed control fathers were one, three, five, 18, 15, and seven respectively.
We located the obstetric notes of 37 of the 42 (88%) mothers of case children born at the Royal Berkshire District Hospital or the Basingstoke District Hospital.
The obstetric notes of 196 of the 222 (88%) controls associated with these 37 cases were also obtained (table I).
Information about the pregnancy and delivery and about the name and date of birth of the father (where recorded) were abstracted from the obstetric notes.
Obstetric data were abstracted for  at least one control for the 37 cases.
The numbers of cases having one, two, three, four, five, and six controls with obstetric data were one, none, two, two, 11, and 21 respectively.
Parents' names, including mothers' maiden names, and dates of birth were checked against the employment and health physics records of past and present employees held by the Atomic Weapons Establishment, the Atomic Energy Authority, and the National Registry of Radiation Workers.
These records were primarily compiled for epidemiological studies of the health of nuclear industry workers.
Parents' surname, forename(s), sex, and date of birth were linked to these databases by industry staff.
Different spellings of names were also checked.
Eight potentially matching people with the same or similar names but missing or incomplete dates of birth were eliminated as true matches after thorough cross checking.
Details about dates of employment and health physics records were obtained for all parents confirmed as having been employed at a nuclear establishment before their child's cancer was diagnosed (or for controls, before the date of diagnosis of the corresponding case).
analysis of data
Data were entered on to a microcomputer with the database management system FOXPRO, and tabulations were produced with the statistical program SPSS.
Relative risks were estimated as matched odds ratios by conditional maximum likelihood methods.
Information on exposure was considered up until the time of diagnosis for cases and until the date of diagnosis of the corresponding case for controls.
Confidence intervals and p values for relative risks were calculated by conditional exact methods based on the binomial distribution with the computer package EGRET.
Two sided p values (given to two significant figures) and 95% confidence intervals are presented throughout.
Results
Table II gives the characteristics of children who had leukaemia or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma diagnosed during 1972–89 and who were born in the study area and resident there when their cancer was diagnosed.
Fifty children had leukaemia diagnosed (39 had acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and 11 other forms of leukaemia) and six had non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Of the 11 children with other forms of leukaemia, seven had acute myeloid leukaemia, two chronic granulocytic leukaemia, and two undifferentiated leukaemia.
Two of the children with acute myeloid leukaemia, and both of the children with undifferentiated leukaemia, had Down's syndrome.
The numbers of children diagnosed and born each year fluctuated, but the numbers were small and there was no noticeable trend with time.
At the time of their child's birth, the parents of case and control children were similar with respect to their age, distance of residence from a nuclear establishment, and social class (table III).
As expected, the matching to cases was best for controls selected from delivery registers.
In the analyses which follow relative risks were estimated by using data from all available controls.
Analyses were also performed with birth register and delivery register controls separately.
The findings were similar, although the number of controls per case was small.
employment by nuclear industry
Fathers of children with leukaemia or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma were more likely than fathers of control children to have been employed by the nuclear industry, but the excess was not significant.
Linkage to nuclear industry databases identified four (out of 54) case fathers and 10 (out of 324) control fathers who were employed at some time before their child had cancer diagnosed (relative risk 2.5, p=0.25; table IV).
All four fathers of case children and nine of the 10 fathers of control children were employed by the industry before their child was conceived (relative risk 2.8, p=0.20).
Employees who work in areas where exposure to ionising radiation is possible are issued with personal film badges or other dosimeters to monitor their exposure.
The risk of leukaemia or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma was significantly increased in children whose fathers had been thus monitored: four fathers of cases and three fathers of controls had been issued with monitoring devices before their child's illness was diagnosed (relative risk 8.0, p=0.02), and of these, three fathers of cases and two fathers of controls were monitored before their child's conception (relative risk 9.0, p=0.047).
The figure summarises information on timing of  father's employment in the nuclear industry and radiation exposure, in relation to the birth of his child, for the seven fathers (four cases and three controls, of whom three and two respectively had been employed at the atomic weapons establishments in the area) who were issued with dosimeters.
No fathers were monitored for exposure at around the time of their child's conception, or in the four years preceding their child's conception.
The recorded doses of external radiation received by the seven fathers were low.
Of the five fathers issued with badges before their child was conceived, two (of three) fathers of cases and one (of two) father of a control accumulated a whole body dose of less than 1 mSv.
The remaining two fathers (one case and one control) accumulated a whole body dose of 1–5 mSv.
Data on dose for individual fathers are not presented because this information might enable them to be identified.
As well as wearing film badges, some employees are investigated for internal contamination by radioactive substances if this is believed to have occurred, and one father of a case was tested for internal contamination by uranium in the year before his child had leukaemia diagnosed.
The malignancies in children whose fathers were monitored for exposure to ionising radiation were not unusual.
All four children had acute lymphoblastic leukaemia diagnosed between the ages of 2 and 4 years, the year of diagnosis ranging from 1972 to 1988.
None of the 11 children who had other forms of leukaemia and none of the four who had non-Hodgkin's lymphoma had fathers with a record of employment at a nuclear establishment.
We found no association with mother's employment in the nuclear industry.
One mother of a case and seven mothers of controls were employed by the nuclear industry before their child's diagnosis (relative risk 0.9, p=1.0).
No mother of a case had worked at a nuclear establishment before her child's conception, and no mother had a record of being monitored for exposure to ionising radiation at any time before diagnosis (table V).
In our study of the incidence of childhood leukaemia during 1972–85 the excess was concentrated in the 50 electoral wards in which half or more of the area was within 10 km of the atomic weapons establishments at Aldermaston and Burghfield.
All four case children whose fathers were monitored for exposure to ionising radiation were born within this 10 km circle.
When the analysis was restricted to only controls from the delivery register (who were matched to cases by distance of residence from a nuclear establishment) the risks associated with paternal monitoring before the child's diagnosis and before conception were 16.0 (95% confidence interval 1.6 to 788.0; p=0.013) and 12.0 (1.0 to 630.0; p=0.054) respectively.
The questionnaire administered to parents included specific questions about work at nuclear establishments and monitoring for exposure to ionising radiation.
All employees identified by linkage to industrial records also reported that they had worked in the nuclear industry and no additional parents reported having been an employee.
Employees' reports of monitoring for exposure to ionising radiation agreed with the industrial records, except for one mother of a case who reported being monitored, but there was no record of this in the industry databases.
Employees of outside contractors sometimes work on nuclear sites, and information about them is not held on nuclear industry's employee databases.
Three additional parents reported that they worked on contract at nuclear sites and had been monitored for exposure to radiation before their child was diagnosed (one father of a case, after conception; one father of a control, before conception; one mother of a control, before conception).
The risks estimated on the basis of information recorded at interview were consistent with those estimated on  the basis of information obtained from the nuclear industry.
other risk factors
Table VI compares the occupations of fathers of cases and controls who were assigned to one of seven occupational groups where potentially hazardous exposures might have occurred.
The information recorded on the birth certificate refers to one point in time — when the child's birth was registered — whereas the information reported at interview refers to a period of employment of three months or longer, at any time from three years before the child's birth up until diagnosis.
Hence, fathers are counted once only in the birth certificate analysis, but may appear more than once in the interview analysis.
For the two sets of analyses the findings are similar, but the data overlap.
None of the fathers' job descriptions given on the birth certificate referred to work at a nuclear establishment.
Mother's occupation is not routinely recorded on the birth certificate.
No notable associations between paternal or maternal occupation and leukaemia or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in their children were evident from the birth certificate data or that collected at interview.
Information on possible risk factors for leukaemia and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma reported at interview and recorded in the obstetric notes are summarised in table VII.
Of the 37 cases and 196 controls for whom obstetric notes were retrieved, 34 (92%) cases and 140 (71%) controls were interviewed and are included in both analyses.
The relative risks estimated on the basis of data collected at interview and on the basis of data from obstetric notes are generally similar.
The only significant association was an increased risk of leukaemia and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma associated with first pregnancy.
No differences were detected between case and control parents with respect to their own health or the numbers of diagnostic radiographs they reported before their child was conceived, or habits such as swimming in local rivers or canals, or in the children's histories of being breast fed, their preschool activities, allergies, or viral infections.
Discussion
This study was set up to investigate whether the raised incidence of leukaemia in children aged 0–4 years in the West Berkshire and North Hampshire health districts, which was 60% above the national average in 1972–85, was related to parental employment in the nuclear industry.
The fathers of four and the mother of one of the 54 children who were born in and had leukaemia or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma diagnosed in the study area had been employed in the nuclear industry before their child was diagnosed (relative risk 2.2, 95% confidence interval 0.6 to 6.9).
This excess was not significant and was insufficient to account for the increased rates of leukaemia in the area.
After this study began, Gardner and colleagues reported the results of their case-control study of childhood leukaemia and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma around the Sellafield reprocessing plant.
They found that children of men who had been exposed to external penetrating ionising radiation before their child was conceived were at an increased risk of leukaemia.
Our results can be interpreted as supporting Gardner and colleagues' finding in that the fathers of three (out of 54) cases and two (out of 324) controls had been monitored for exposure to ionising radiation before their child was conceived (relative risk 9.0, 1.0 to 107.8).
validity of data bias and chance
Although our result for paternal preconceptual exposure could be affected substantially by the play of chance because of small numbers, they are unlikely to be biased.
Cases were ascertained from multiple sources, and it is doubtful that any were missed, although we cannot be certain.
The exclusion of two children with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (whose parents could not be traced) probably did not affect the results.
Information about parental employment and monitoring for exposure to ionising radiation was obtained from nuclear industry files and is likely to be complete and unbiased.
The names and dates of birth of all parents of case and control children (regardless of whether or not they were interviewed) were cross checked against three databases of employees held by the nuclear industry, the completeness and accuracy of which are known to be high.
Employment and exposure records date from before the occurrence of leukaemia in the children, and the link to industry files was done by industry staff who did not know who were the parents of cases and who were the parents of controls.
Not all parents were interviewed and self reported details on radiation exposure could be biased, so emphasis is given here to results obtained from industrial records.
The apparent excess of fathers monitored for radiation among children with leukaemia does not seem to be because the number of such fathers in the control group was unusually low by chance.
On the basis of estimates of the size and composition of the nuclear workforces in the study area, national fertility rates, and local migration rates, we estimate that the expected numbers of control fathers who were employed and monitored for exposure to ionising radiation are in broad agreement with the numbers observed.
Nevertheless, our results should be interpreted cautiously as they are based on only three monitored fathers and it is not possible to assess reliably how many of the three leukaemias, if any, were caused by paternal preconceptual exposure to some occupational factor.
cause of the effect
If the association between paternal preconceptual exposure to radiation and childhood leukaemia we found is not a chance finding, the effect is unlikely to be due to paternal exposure to the forms of external penetrating ionising radiation measured by monitoring devices.
A more plausible explanation is that exposure to external radiation is a marker of exposure to some other hazard, such as internal contamination by a radioactive substance or a chemical.
The external doses recorded for the fathers in our study are orders of magnitude lower than the external doses received by survivors of the atomic bombs at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, whose children are not at an increased risk of childhood leukaemia.
No father (of a case or a control child) in this study had a recorded cumulative external exposure t penetrating radiation above 5 mSv before his child was conceived, and such low doses could accumulate from background radiation in about five years.
Important differences between the exposures of atomic bomb survivors and nuclear industry workers are that nuclear industry workers are more likely to be contaminated internally by the ingestion, inhalation, or other intake of radioactive substances; to be exposed to other types of external radiation such as neutrons; and to be exposed to chemicals at work.
Film badges monitor exposure to external penetrating and sparsely ionising radiation but not internal or other forms of radiation, and the fact of being issued with a film badge to monitor external penetrating radiation could, for certain workers, be a marker of exposure to other forms of radiation.
Insufficient is known about the radiobiological effects of many types of radiation and radioactive substances to which workers may be exposed, other than external penetrating radiation.
Certain workers have been monitored for internal contamination by radionuclides and exposure to other forms of radiation such as neutrons since the 1950s, but this is not done routinely and monitoring methods can be unreliable.
comparison with other studies
If being monitored for exposure to external penetrating radiation can be a marker of other exposures in the workplace, some of which might be hazardous, studies of the relation between men's exposure to external radiation and leukaemia in their children could yield apparently inconsistent results.
Two other case-control studies have not found evidence of an increased risk of leukaemia in association with fathers' preconceptual exposure to external ionising radiation.
This could be because exposure to the hazardous substance or substances did not occur in those populations or that being monitored for exposure to external radiation was not a marker of the relevant exposure.
The fact that Gardner et al found a dose-response relation between fathers' preconceptual external exposure to penetrating ionising radiation and childhood leukaemia and we did not could be because the cumulative dose was a marker of exposure to some hazardous substance or substances at Sellafield but not elsewhere.
Apart from the apparent relation with fathers' preconceptual exposure to ionising radiation, we found no other notable associations.
The age and sex distribution of children who had acute lymphoblastic leukaemia diagnosed in the study area conformed to expected patterns, with slightly more boys and a peak age at diagnosis of 3 years; the excess of Down's syndrome in young children with non-lymphocytic forms of leukaemia is as would be expected.
The relation with pregnancy order is also compatible with the results of other studies, although its meaning is unclear.
Among the 50 children diagnosed with leukaemia, no suggestion of an unusual distribution of leukaemic subtypes was found, although diagnostic information in the form of chromosome studies and cell markers became available only in recent years.
The malignancies of children whose fathers were monitored for exposure to ionising radiation did not seem to be atypical: all had acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, their ages at diagnosis were not unusual, and the time of their diagnosis was not concentrated in any particular period.
conclusions
The findings from this study, taken together with those of Gardner et al , suggest that the children of certain men who are monitored for exposure to external ionising radiation in the nuclear industry might be at an increased risk of leukaemia.
Because the numbers are small and the results could be due to chance, studies of larger numbers of children are needed.
A study investigating the occurrence of all cancers, not only leukaemia, and the incidence of other illnesses and conditions that could have a genetic cause among children of workers in the nuclear industry is underway.
If the effects seen in our study are real, the underlying mechanisms are far from clear.
Nevertheless, the hazardous exposure is unlikely to be monitored external penetrating ionising radiation.
The possibility that the effects could be due to internal contamination by radioactive substances, a chemical, or some other exposure at work should be explored.
Comparison of nifedipine and propranolol as second line agent for hypertension in black Kenyans
Nifedipine is reported to be particularly effective as an antihypertensive agent in low renin hypertension.
Because of the predominance of low renin hypertension among black Kenyan patients we compared the efficacy of propranolol plus diuretic, a standard treatment in Africa, with nifedipine plus diuretic in Kenyan patients whose blood pressure was not controlled by diuretic treatment.
Patients, methods, and results
Thirty seven black Kenyans aged 30–69 attending a hospital clinic for hypertension were admitted to this double blind crossover trial.
All treatment was withdrawn for a minimum of two weeks, after which inclusion in the trial depended on a diastolic blood pressure >105 mm Hg.
This was followed by four weeks of treatment with a diuretic (hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg once daily), when those whose diastolic blood pressure fell below 90 mm Hg were withdrawn from the trial.
Patients were then randomly allocated, in balanced blocks of four, to six weeks' treatment with either diuretic plus slow release nifedipine 20 mg twice daily or diuretic plus propranolol 80 mg twice daily.
After another four weeks of treatment with diuretic alone the study treatments were crossed over.
Blood pressure was measured with a random zero sphygmomanometer by one of three observers whose technique had been standardised beforehand.
At each visit blood pressure was recorded twice after five minutes' lying down, a radial pulse being measured between readings, and blood pressure and radial pulse were recorded after two minutes' standing.
Patients were seen every two weeks throughout the trial.
At the start of the trial and at the end of each stage patients were weighed and full biochemical blood screens, including plasma renin activity, were carried out.
Plasma renin activity was estimated (after standardised sampling) by radioimmunoassay of angiotensin I generated by incubating plasma for four hours.
Results were analysed with Student's t test for paired data and Hills and Armitage's method for analysing data from crossover trials.
Five patients were withdrawn after responding to diuretic treatment alone.
Another patient withdrew because of work commitments, and two were withdrawn while taking propanolol (one patient's diastolic blood pressure rose above 125 mm Hg and one had symptoms suggesting heart failure).
Of the 29 remaining patients, 16 initially took nifedipine plus diuretic.
This combination produced significantly lower systolic and diastolic blood pressures than propranolol plus diuretic (p<0.05)(table).
Both combinations of drugs significantly reduced blood pressure compared with diuretic alone (p<0.05).
There were no significant changes in the patients' mean weight and serum creatinine and sodium concentrations throughout the trial.
Serum uric acid and blood urea concentrations rose and serum potassium fell significantly during diuretic treatment, suggesting good compliance (confirmed by pill counts and the changes in pulse rates).
Plasma renin activity was low and changed with treatment (table).
Twenty two patients' lying mean arterial blood pressure and 19 patients' standing mean arterial blood pressure fell more with nifedipine than with propranolol.
Although those whose blood pressure fell more when nifedipine was added to diuretic had a lower mean plasma renin activity (0.47 (SD 0.60) nmol/l/h), these differences were not significant (t test).
One patient was withdrawn because of side effects (see above), but, otherwise, side effects were few.
No patients complained of severe headaches or flushing while taking nifedipine.
Comment
Both diuretics and calcium antagonists are effective and superior to β blockers in treating black hypertensive patients.
We have previously shown diuretics plus nifedipine to be an effective combination for black  hypertensive patients.
In this study nifedipine plus diuretic lowered blood pressure more effectively than propranolol plus diuretic, which has previously been shown to be effective in black hypertensive patients.
Although comparisons of fixed doses of drugs have limitations, the doses of propranolol and nifedipine used were in the middle of their therapeutic ranges.
Experience in Kenyan hypertension clinics confirms reports that black hypertensive patients have lower plasma renin activities than white patients.
Perhaps because of this, we found nifedipine plus diuretic to be an excellent combination for treating hypertension among black Kenyan patients.
Cancer mortality and atenolol treatment
In the Medical Research Council's randomised trial of elderly hypertensive patients, men receiving atenolol had a higher death rate from cancer than those receiving diuretic or placebo.
This was not observed in women receiving atenolol, whose mortality was similar to those receiving diuretic and lower than those receiving placebo.
The extra cancer deaths were apparently from lung cancer.
A randomised trial of elderly hypertensive patients in primary care reported a non-significant excess of fatal cancers of the bronchus in the group given atenolol compared with the control group (an excess risk of 1.89, 95% confidence interval 0.88 to 4.08).
We therefore examined the relation between atenolol treatment and cancer in a large study of hypertensive patients.
Methods and results
The Department of Health hypertension care computing project is a longitudinal study of patients who attended one of five hospital hypertension clinics (95%) or four general practices (5%) in the United Kingdom during 1971–86, with continuing mortality follow up.
Our analyses are based on deaths until 31 October 1990.
Patients were placed in mutually exclusive groups according to type of antihypertensive treatment: any record of atenolol treatment irrespective of other concomitant treatments; any record of another β blocker irrespective of other concomitant treatments except atenolol; any record of methyldopa treatment irrespective of concomitant treatments except any β blocker; or any record of diuretic treatment irrespective of other concomitant treatments except any βblocker or methyldopa.
Patient years of observation were measured from the first date of a prescription up to the patient's death or 31 October 1990.
Mortalities from cancer (cancer given as the underlying cause of death) were calculated for each treatment and were adjusted for age by the direct method.
We compared the risks between treatments with the Cox proportional hazards model.
adjusting for age and smoking.
We performed a nested case-control study of deaths from lung cancer, matching 79 cases (58 men and 21 women: 68 with lung cancer given as the underlying cause of death and 11 with any mention of lung cancer on the death certificate) with 154 controls.
We also calculated standardised mortality ratios for all hypertensive patients.
There was no evidence for an adverse relation between atenolol and all cancers or lung cancer (table).
Adjustment of the relative risks for smoking made little difference.
Women taking atenolol appeared to be at lower risk of lung cancer, but the number of deaths was small and confidence intervals wide.
There was no evidence that treatment had different effects on men and women.
Blood pressure (whether treated or untreated, systolic or diastolic) showed no relation with deaths from all cancers or lung cancer.
A conditional multiple logistic regression analysis of our case-control study gave a relative risk from smoking of 4.2 (95% confidence interval 1.9 to 9.0, p<0.0004) and from atenolol treatment of 0.9 (0.4 to 2.1, p=0.7).
The only excess standardised mortality ratio was for renal cancer (ICD codes 1890–9) with a value of 196 (107 to 328, p=0.03) for men and women combined.
Comment
We found no evidence to support previous suggestions of an excess of cancer in men treated with  atenolol, but in an observational study we cannot discount the possibility of confounding factors.
Our model adjusted for the most obvious of these (age and smoking), but there may be other unidentified factors.
The strength of experimental studies is that randomisation removes selection bias.
In the Medical Research Council's trial the relative risk of dying from cancer for men receiving atenolol was 1.9 compared with placebo (1.2 to 2.8) and 1.4 (0.9 to 2.2) compared with diuretic.
In our study the 95% confidence intervals of the relative risks for all cancers and for lung cancer excluded a twofold excess risk from atenolol.
We cannot exclude risks lower than this.
Does awareness of rates of obstetric interventions change practice?
Management awareness profiles may be used to present maternity units' statistics graphically.
They also provide a means of comparing units.
It is generally thought that it is helpful for managers and clinicians to be aware of the variations between maternity units and knowing where their own unit stands.
Whether management awareness profiles have any effect on decision making, however, is still unknown.
We evaluated their impact after five years of their use in Belgium.
Subjects, methods, and results
Since 1985 the Belgian French Speaking Association of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists has sent a questionnaire to maternity units annually.
Perinatal deaths, birth weight, preterm deliveries, and selected obstetric interventions are recorded.
Management awareness profiles are prepared and returned yearly to the heads of the obstetric departments.
The profiles include each item's median value, range, and 10th and 90th centiles of the distribution and the position of the unit for which the profile has been prepared.
The number of participating maternity units increased from 34 in 1985 to 49 in 1989; they covered more than 80% of live births in Brussels and Wallonia.
Our analysis is based on the 17 maternity units that sent data from 1985 until 1989 without interruption.
The 17 units registered a total of 12524 deliveries in 1989.
Data on caesarean sections were available in all the units, on epidural analgesia in 16, and on forceps and vacuum extractions in 13.
The rates of interventions are given as percentages — that is, per 100 deliveries.
Variances of the distributions of intervention rates were computed and were compared by Hartley's F m a x test.
The caesarean section rates ranged from 3.8% (59/1536) to 18.5% (43/232) in 1985 and from 6.5% (58/898) to 22.1% (38/172) in 1989.
The rates of epidural analgesia ranged from 1.3% (3/232) to 42.7% (487/1141) in 1985 and from 2.8% (16/580) to 65.1% (226/347) in 1989.
Forceps and vacuum extractions were performed in 8.1% (34/418) to 19.8% (226/1141) of the deliveries in 1985 and in 2.6% (15/580) to 24.7% (222/898) of the deliveries in 1989.
The variance of the distribution of the intervention rates did not change significantly during the study: the ratio of the largest variance to the smallest one (F m a x ) was 1.7 for caesarean sections, 2.6 for epidural analgesia, and 3.3 for forceps and vacuum extractions.
The figure shows that the rates of caesarean sections, epidural anaesthesia, and forceps and vacuum extractions went down in some maternity units but increased in most of them.
Comment
We found no change of practice in our study, but this does not seem to be due to a lack of use of management awareness profiles by the maternity units.
In 1990 we sent a questionnaire to the heads of the 49 maternity units that participated in the voluntary registration system in 1989.
This showed that management awareness profiles were circulated to the staff in 30 of the 34 units that answered the relevant question.
The increasing number of units participating in the system also indicates an interest in the management awareness profiles.
Feedback of information has been shown to change operative procedures in some non-randomised studies but not all.
The results of randomised controlled trials are less encouraging.
Our results also suggest that awareness is not enough to change behaviour.
Management awareness profiles are potentially useful, but mechanisms to make them effective in changing behaviour are still to be developed.
Their long term effects will have to be evaluated.
GENERAL PRACTICE
Prompting the clinical care of non-insulin dependent (type II) diabetic patients in an inner city area: one model of community care
Abstract
Objective —
To evaluate the effectiveness and acceptability of centrally organised prompting for coordinating community care of non-insulin dependent diabetic patients.
Design —
Randomised single centre trial.
Patients allocated to prompted care in the community or to continued attendance at hospital diabetic clinic (controls).
Median follow up two years.
Setting —
Two hospital outpatient clinics, 38 general practices, and 11 optometrists in the catchment area of a district general hospital in Islington.
Patients —
181 patients attending hospital outpatient clinics.
Null hypothesis —
There is no difference in process of medical care measures and medical outcome between prompted community care and hospital clinic care.
Results —
14 hospital patients failed to receive a single review in the clinic as compared with three patients in the prompted group (x≥6.1, df=1; p=0.013).
Follow up for retinal screening was better in prompted patients than in controls; two prompted patients defaulted as against 12 controls (x≥6.9, df=1; p=0.008).
Three measures per patient yearly were more frequent in prompted patients: tests for albuminuria (median 3.0 v 2.3; p=0.03), plasma glucose estimations (3.1 v 2.5; p=0.003), and glycated haemoglobin estimations (2.4 v 0.9; p<0.001).
Continuity of care was better in the prompted group (3.2 v 2.2 reviews by each doctor seen; p<0.001).
The study ended with no significant differences between the groups in last recorded random plasma glucose concentration, glycated haemoglobin value, numbers admitted to hospital for a diabetes related reason, and number of deaths.
Questionnaires revealed a high level of patient, general practitioner, and optometrist satisfaction.
Conclusions —
Six monthly prompting of non-insulin treated diabetic patients for care by inner city general practitioners and by optometrists is effective and acceptable.
Introduction
In the 1980s several British groups reported on studies which compared the effectiveness of diabetic care provided by general practitioners with care from hospital diabetic clinics.
Conclusions ranged from condemnation of general practitioner care as ‘erratic,’ of ‘generally poor standard’and ‘less satisfactory than care by the hospital diabetic clinic’to a view that organised general practitioner diabetic care ‘can achieve a degree of glycaemic control…equal to that reached by a hospital clinic.’
It seemed that effective care could be provided if it was structured and organised.
Many authors felt that the best way to structure diabetic care in general practice was for general practitioners to set up miniclinics in order to create the ‘protected time’ needed for assessment of a complex condition.
The general practitioner contract of April 1990 served to encourage the adoption of this model of care.
Despite an active policy of promoting the development of general practitioner diabetic miniclinics in Islington in the 1980s few local practices succeeded in establishing this service.
In 1987 a significant number of local doctors expressed an interest in assuming greater responsibility for the clinical care of non-insulin treated patients if review could be scheduled in normal surgery time and provided responsibility for retinal screening was not included.
Taking our cue from the Cardiff group's vision of a system which ‘would recall the patients to see their general practitioner at regular intervals, warn…and request…both clinical information and blood for estimation of glycosylated haemoglobin,’ we have developed a system for prompting community care of non-insulin dependent (type II) diabetes.
High street optometrists perform the necessary eye examinations for these patients.
Methods
The prompting system aims to enable general practitioners to structure diabetic care without setting up miniclinics.
It is based on the same clinical guidelines for outpatient care available to all doctors in the diabetic clinics of the district general hospital.
These advise annual clinical review, to include measurement of weight and glycaemic control, urinary albumin value, blood pressure, foot examination, examination of visual acuity, and retinoscopy through dilated pupils.
Between annual assessments a regular clinical review of the patient should include all these assessments except foot and eye examinations unless specifically indicated.
the prompting system
The hub of the prompting system is a database which sends requests to patients asking them to provide blood and urine samples for random plasma glucose, glycated haemoglobin, and albumin estimations (fig 1).
Samples can be taken by a practice nurse, at a nearby health centre, or at a hospital laboratory, whichever suits the patient.
All tests are performed by one district general hospital laboratory.
Results are incorporated within personalised medical records which serve as clinical review forms.
These are sent to patients with a request to take them along to their general practitioner within 10 days.
The prompts for blood and urine tests, followed by general practitioner clinical review, are sent six monthly, with alternate clinical review forms comprising annual review and regular review.
Patients not already under the care of a hospital eye clinic also receive an  annual eye test prompt and a map identifying local optometrists who perform refraction and dilated funduscopy.
The medical and eye review forms include past relevant clinical and biochemical information when known (fig 2).
The forms are self copying, and copies completed during clinical assessments are returned to the database to update longitudinal records on each patient.
Lack of feedback prompts reminders (see box 1).
prompted clinical assessments
General practitioner clinical assessments parallel those of the hospital clinic and are performed in the knowledge of each patient's recent and previous random plasma glucose and glycated haemoglobin values.
If albuminuria has been detected the result of a midstream urine culture is also included.
If the review form referral box is ticked an appointment to attend hospital outpatients is sent to the patient and the database sends a copy of the general practitioner or optometrist review findings to the appropriate hospital clinic doctor who will see the patient in outpatients.
In the case of referral to a dietitian or chiropodist the database dispatches brief details to the relevant department.
Copies of optometry feedback are sent to the patient's general practitioner, who is thereby kept informed of eye assessments.
In this scheme, with the approval of participating general practitioners, optometrists may refer patients directly to a hospital eye clinic by ticking the referral box on the optical review form.
Any prompted patient referred to a hospital clinic is assessed in the context of the scheme.
Further hospital clinic follow up is arranged only in cases of particular need; otherwise the patient is discharged back to prompted community care.
During the period of the pilot project the prompting system and database were paper driven.
They were later computerised by using Revelation software operating within MSDOS on an IBM computer (Revtech UK, Basingstoke, Hampshire).
evaluation
In 1987, with the approval of the local medical and optical committees, Islington general practitioners and optometrists were invited to participate in a pilot prompting project.
Thirty eight general practices agreed to take part, including 15 singlehanded and 13 two doctor practices.
The general practitioners were sent manuals which explained how prompting would operate, and they attended updating sessions on the management of non-insulin dependent diabetes.
A short textbook on diabetic eye disease was sent to each participating optometrist, who also attended educational meetings at which the importance of dilated funduscopy was emphasised.
A randomised controlled trial comparing prompted care with continuing hospital clinic care was undertaken.
As the trial was a comparison of two systems of care the prompted care group subjects could be referred through the system to hospital outpatients, while the hospital clinic group patients could consult their general practitioner for diabetes related reasons.
The study aimed to include mobile non-insulin dependent diabetic patients under the age of 80 who had attended the district general hospital diabetic clinics in the previous two years.
Patients with the following characteristics were excluded:(a ) women of childbearing age;(b ) patients with one or more of three established significant diabetic complications — namely, nephropathy with creatinine concentration >150 µmol/l (proteinuria was not in itself an exclusion), ischaemia severe enough to have resulted in gangrene or amputation, and retinopathy worse than background in one eye.
A review of the hospital notes of 570 diabetics registered with the relevant general practitioners identified 415 eligible patients, who were asked in writing for informed consent to enter the trial (fig 3).
Of these patients, 215 (52%) agreed to take part, of whom 209 were randomised (by using Cambridge tables of random numbers).
There were no significant differences in age or sex between patients who consented and those who did not.
A further 28 patients (13 in the prompted group, 15 controls) were excluded from the study.
Table I gives the reasons.
Randomisation therefore resulted in 89 eligible patients allocated to prompted care and 92 allocated to remain as controls (fig 3).
Prompting began in the prompted group in April 1988 and patients were phased into prompting  according to when their next hospital clinic appointment would have been due.
The study continued for a total of two years six months (median two years), at the end of which the patients' hospital and general practitioner notes were reviewed together with records of prompted clinical and eye reviews.
Information on mortality was obtained from general practitioner notes, hospital information systems, and family health services authority returns on deaths and departed patients.
A detailed questionnaire was sent to all patients (n=44) who had received 12 months of prompts — that is, five separate prompts — by May 1989 to elicit their views on the acceptability of these arrangements.
Questionnaires were also sent to participating general practitioners and optometrists.
Results
The results are based on an intention to treat analysis.
Comparisons of control and prompted patient groups at the start of the study are shown in table II.
The groups were well matched for demographic variables and also for most important diabetic attributes, although mean systolic blood pressure was recorded as 9 mm Hg greater in the control group (95% confidence interval 2.1 to 16.0 mm Hg; p=0.011) and 14 patients in the prompted group were documented as having signs of leg ischaemia compared with only four controls (χ 2 =5.7, df=1; p=0.017).
process of care
During the study period 333 prompts for blood and urine tests generated 296 sets of results, an 89% completion rate (table III).
Of the consequent 296 prompts requesting general practitioner  clinical review, 275 were completed (93% compliance with general practitioner prompts, 83% completion rate of both blood tests and general practitioner reviews).
Of 145 prompts for eye tests by optometrists, 125 (86%) were completed.
Fourteen (15%) of the control group failed to be seen again in a hospital diabetes clinic during the study period compared with only three (3.4%) of the prompted patients who failed to attend for clinical diabetic review (p=0.013; table IV).
In those patients who did not default from follow up all the clinical process of care measures were carried out more frequently in the prompted group; for most comparisons the differences were significant.
The prompted group also received greater continuity of care, the number of diabetic reviews performed by each participating doctor being significantly greater than in the hospital clinic group (3.2 v 2.2 respectively; p<0.001).
There was no difference in the number of patients referred for dietary advice or chiropody.
At the end of October 1990, 94% (170/181) of the general practitioner notes for the study patients were traced.
With the exclusion of prompted consultations for diabetic review they disclosed a high annual consultation rate for both groups (8.1 in the prompted group v 6.4 per year in the controls; p=NS).
The number of non-prompted, diabetes related consultations  with general practitioners also showed no significant difference between the two groups.
A total of 52 (58%) prompted patients received 139 hospital clinic reviews during the study.
Participating general practitioners referred 28 (31%) patients; and the database referred three (3.4%) on account of high blood glucose concentrations.
Five (6%) prompted patients changed their minds about accepting prompting and were subsequently transferred back to hospital outpatients.
The remaining 16 (18%) patients were referred by other hospital clinics, after inpatient episodes, or appeared to have referred themselves.
The number of structured clinical assessments per patient by location of care for each group is shown in table V. During the study period the frequency of structured review was comparable in the two groups.
In the control group all occurred in hospital diabetic clinics whereas for the prompted group 67% occurred in general practice.
When process of care measures were reanalysed after excluding the 21 patients who were referred back to the hospital clinic other than through the prompting system, all process of care measures in table IV remained more frequent in the prompted subgroup (n=65 prompted subjects).
medical outcome
By the end of the study there were no differences between the groups in the means of the last recorded random plasma glucose and glycated haemoglobin concentrations, though mean random plasma glucose values had risen from baseline by 1.3 mmol/l and 1.6 mmol/l in control and prompted groups respectively (table VI).
An additional measure of glycaemic control was provided by looking at the mean of all the  glycated haemoglobin results for each patient since the date of randomisation and then calculating the mean of means for each group.
This also showed no significant difference between control and prompted patients.
Changes in diabetes treatment categories — for example, diet to oral hypoglycaemics or insulin — the number of patients admitted to hospital for diabetes related reasons, and mortality were similar or identical in the two groups (table VI).
eyes
At the start of the study 70 patients in the control group and 74 in the prompted group were not currently attending a hospital eye clinic.
There was no significant difference in the proportion of each group noted to show evidence of cataract, previous cataract extraction, or diabetic retinopathy (table VII).
During the study period 12 controls and two prompted patients did not receive either hospital outpatient eye examination or optometry screening (p=0.008).
The prompted group received on average 1.1 eye examinations per year compared with 0.9 in the control group (NS).
There was no significant difference in the number of patients referred to hospital eye clinics.
The number of cataracts newly recorded by optometrists in the prompted group exceeded that recorded by doctors in the hospital clinic group (29 v 3; p<0.001) but there was no difference in the recorded rate of diabetic retinopathy in the two groups.
acceptability
High compliance levels suggested acceptability of the scheme to all groups involved.
More detailed responses were sought by means of questionnaires.
The response to the patient questionnaire was 93% (39/42), and a sample of their responses is shown in box 2.
Thirty two patients (82%) judged prompted community care, as a whole, to be as good as their former hospital clinic care.
All doctors (n=48) in the participating practices who had performed two or more prompted clinical reviews by May 1989 were also sent a questionnaire of 24 question stems, of which seven are reproduced in box 3; 31 general practitioners (65%) responded.
Clinical assessments were estimated to take on average 9.8 minutes for a regular review and 13.4 minutes for an annual review.
The general practitioners scored this method of care 4.3 on average, on a scale ‘very poor’(score 1) to ‘excellent’(score 5).
Their confidence in providing care within this framework averaged 4 on the same scale, all but three of the doctors indicating that this method of care interfaced well with their primary health care practice.
Despite the absence of a consensus on who had clinical responsibility for the patients in this scheme — general practitioner, hospital, or both — 28 of the 31 general practitioners wished to continue providing diabetic care within this framework.
Most of the responding general practitioners wanted more of their patients included within the prompting scheme.
The views of participating optometrists were also sought.
Eleven optometrists working in 15 different locations were visited and interviewed with a structured questionnaire.
All expressed satisfaction with the working of the prompting scheme and 10 wanted more patients to be included.
Besides performing refraction and examinations of the media of each eye all the optometrists reported that they had dilated the pupils of the prompted patients.
All had access to a tonometer.
All expressed satisfaction with the design of the optometry clinical review form.
Discussion
This study has shown that with a prompting system diabetic care comparable to that of a hospital diabetic clinic can be provided in small inner city practices, and with a lower lost to follow up rate.
Compliance of doctors and patients proved high and the system as a whole was widely acceptable.
The lower default rate in the community group is particularly important because loss to follow up carries an increased risk of diabetic complications, especially in non-insulin treated patients.
The approach adopted in Islington could have wide applicability.
Of the 570 patients whose hospital notes were reviewed before the study, 415 (73%) were judged by generally accepted criteria to be medically suitable for community care.
Though process of care measures may be an imperfect guide to the standard of patient care because of differences in the knowledge and skills of health carers in their different settings, we believe that our results are a very considerable improvement on those of previous British studies.
In the Cardiff trial 14% of community care patients received regular general  practitioner review and only 5% received yearly blood glucose estimations.
In Kirkcaldy only two thirds of patients received a diabetes review by their general practitioner in the first or second year of a two year study and only 50% had annual blood glucose assessments.
In a non-randomised study in Ipswich among a group of 209 diabetics discharged to general practitioner care with agreed standards of medical follow up only 25% of patients had had their urine tested or blood glucose value estimated by their general practitioner in the previous two years.
Prompting in Islington also ensured very high levels of specific diabetes assessments, comparing favourably with the most comprehensive levels of care reported from hospital clinics and from general practitioner miniclinic care.
need for easy and appropriate referral
A third of all structured diabetes reviews in the prompted group occurred in hospital outpatients but this does not detract from the effectiveness of the prompted care package as a whole.
Though 21 of 52 (40%) of these referrals were not made by participating general practitioners and a proportion may have constituted unnecessary duplication of care, most were referred appropriately as part of the shared care arrangements.
Effective community care must provide a mechanism which allows easy and appropriate referral to and from hospital clinics.
Prompted care in Islington successfully supported a shift of two thirds of the burden of care from hospital clinic to community setting over two and a half years.
Mean plasma glucose and glycated haemoglobin values, unlike complication rates, are not subject to observer error and provide useful proxy measures of outcome.
Our results are in keeping with findings from Wolverhampton, where in a non-randomised trial of discharge to general practitioner miniclinic care of patients with both insulin treated and non-insulin treated diabetes there was no loss of glycaemic control.
They contrast, however, with findings from the Cardiff trial, where the available measures of glycated haemoglobin indicated worse glycaemic control in the community care group at the end of the study, although there were no prerandomisation glycated haemoglobin measurements.
Previous studies have noted a higher mortality in the community group, but this was not the case in Islington.
Responsibility for retinal screening lay with optometrists unless the patient was already under the care of a hospital eye clinic.
After allowing for the much higher non-attendance rate in controls, the annual rate of eye examination per patient and the number of patients referred to a hospital ophthalmic clinic were comparable in the two groups.
The larger number of cataracts recorded in the prompted group probably reflects the diligence of optometrists in noting these defects, compared with doctors in the hospital diabetic clinic.
It is recognised that without standardisation and training of the optometrists and doctors involved such measures, together with those of recorded retinopathy, are ‘soft’ measures of outcome.
willingness of gps to participate
Despite financial inducements provided by the general practitioner contract and a doubling in the number of nurses working with participating practices in the past two years, few local general practitioners wish to establish miniclinics.
General practitioners in Camden and Islington make only half the national annual average of clinic payment claims to the family health services authority.
This study has shown that an acceptable standard of diabetic care can be provided in normal surgery time.
Structured prompting of community care allows ‘protected review’ in normal surgeries rather than requiring ‘protected time’in specially designated miniclinics.
However, the degree of uncertainty concerning overall clinical responsibility for prompted patients revealed by the general practitioner questionnaire needs to be carefully addressed.
Organisational and clinical guidelines embedded in the Islington prompting system may be varied and developed as standards of good practice evolve or  as new resources become available locally.
For example, a number of future enhancements are already envisaged involving the inclusion of ideal body weight on the general practitioner review forms and an option for general practitioners to request review by a diabetes education nurse.
Requests for intraocular pressure measurement may be added to the optical review forms.
In July 1993 payments to general practitioners for disease management clinics will stop completely.
In the case of non-insulin treated patients the health care objectives which practices will then have to meet in order to qualify for diabetic care payments could be met by prompting structured care as in Islington.
Expansion of this pilot scheme into a district service is planned.
Box 1
Box 1 Prompting rule set
(1) Patients receive prompts for blood and urine tests six monthly unless more frequent review is requested by the general practitioner
(2) If the results of blood and urine tests are not received by the database within three weeks of such a prompt a reminder is sent.
If there is no response after two such reminders a letter is sent to the general practitioner informing of non-response and asking for information.
Six months after the initial prompt the next cycle of prompting starts again
(3) The general practitioner review prompt is sent to the patient only when the results of the blood and urine tests have been received by the database.
If no copy of the general practitioner review has been received within two weeks of the prompt a telephone call to the general practitioner is made.
If it transpires that the patient has not yet attended the general practitioner for this diabetic review one reminder prompt is sent.
No response results in the system defaulting to the next prompt six months from the initial blood test prompt
(4) A random plasma glucose concentration between 20.0 and 24.9 mmol/l results in the patient receiving a general practitioner prompt with a covering letter advising attendance at the general practitioner surgery within three days rather than 10 days
(5) A random plasma glucose concentration >: =25 mmol/l results in the database sending an urgent hospital diabetic clinic appointment to the patient rather than a general practitioner review prompt.
Influences on control in diabetes mellitus: patient, doctor, practice, or delivery of care?
Abstract
Objective —
To assess patient, doctor, practice, and process of care variables for their effect on glycaemic control in diabetes mellitus, and to quantify their relative effects.
Design —
Search of general practice medical records, patient questionnaires and examination, doctor questionnaire, videotaping and analysis of consultations, and practice questionnaire.
Setting —
12 practices with 32 participating general practitioners in Nottinghamshire.
Subjects —
318 patients randomly selected from those with diabetes in each practice, 10 for each participating doctor.
Main outcome measure—
Glycaemic control as measured by random glycated haemoglobin A 1 c estimation (random haemoglobin A 1 measurement).
Results —
Glycaemic control was significantly related to the disease process as measured by years since diagnosis, treatment group, and number of diabetes related clinical events.
Females had significantly worse control than males.
Other patient factors, such as age, social class, lifestyle, attitudes, satisfaction, and knowledge, had no association with glycaemic control.
Of all the doctor factors examined, only doctors who professed a special interest in diabetes achieved significantly better glycaemic control.
Bigger and better equipped practices and those with a diabetic miniclinic had patients with significantly better glycaemic control, as did those with access to dietetic advice.
Patients attending hospital clinics had worse glycaemic control, but this seemed to be attributable to the case mix and practice characteristics.
Shared care did not contribute to the multiple linear regression model.
Conclusion —
Glycaemic control among diabetic patients in the community is related to such factors as treatment group, sex, and years since diagnosis; it is also related to the organisation and process of care.
The findings support concentrating diabetic care on partners with special interests in diabetes in well equipped practices with adequate dietetic support.
Introduction
The age adjusted prevalence of diagnosed diabetes mellitus is between 1.01% and 1.04% in white people in the United Kingdom, with higher rates among some ethnic minorities.
There is evidence that good  glycaemic control reduces the risk of diabetic complications that can be disabling or fatal.
These two facts mean that diabetes is both a common and important clinical condition.
They also mean that hospital care for all patients with diabetes is impracticable but that care in general practice must be sufficient to maximise glycaemic control.
In 1980 Wilkes and Lawton showed that, though care in general practice was popular with patients, the process of care and disease control were poor.
These findings were repeated throughout the early 1980s in Britain and abroad as structured hospital care was compared with unstructured primary care.
As the general strategy for care was refined, so the need for structured care in general practice was recognised and shown to offer improved glycaemic control, comparable with that in hospital clinics.
Many general practitioners, however, continue to offer low levels of supervision, and diabetic miniclinics are still offered in only a minority of practices.
The organisation of care is not the only possible influence on glycaemic control.
For patients psychosocial factors, life events, the locus of control, and patient knowledge have all been explored.
The doctors' knowledge, health beliefs, and personality have all been postulated as influences on control, while there is an implicit assumption in the teaching of consultation skills that doctor behaviours affect outcomes such as glycaemic control.
Studies which look at individual factors, however, often fail to show substantial effects and sometimes do not put the importance of that factor into true perspective.
This study was designed to look at an array of possible influences on diabetic control in a group of diabetic patients in the community in order to identify which factors influenced glycaemic control and to quantify the relative contribution of each.
Method
A number of possible influences on control and methods for measuring each were identified (table I).
Eighteen Nottinghamshire practices were randomly selected from the family practitioner committee (now family health services authority) list and invited to take part in the study.
Twelve practices agreed to participate, one as a pilot practice (in which only two of the four partners were involved).
In one participating practice one general practitioner declined to take part in the study and a further three were excluded — two because they had joined their practices within the previous six months and one because he left the practice during the study.
This gave 32 participating general practitioners.
Of these general practitioner principals, 25 (78%) were male; 14 (44%) were under 40, 14 (44%) were aged 40–59, and four (13%) were aged 60 or over.
The distribution of partnership size and teaching commitment is shown in table II.
These characteristics are similar to the characteristics of Nottinghamshire practices as a whole.
All participating practices completed a practice questionnaire and each participating doctor completed two general practitioner questionnaires which included five multiple choice questions, each with five stems, from recent MRCGP examinations to test their knowledge of diabetes.
Each doctor completed the Cattell 16 personality factor (16PF) questionnaire.
For each participating doctor a routine surgery was chosen at random and the consultations with 10 consecutive consenting patients video recorded.
Patients with diabetes were not excluded, but most patients were not diabetic.
These consultations were analysed by TIMER, a methodology which quantifies the time allocated to five physical, nine verbal, and four secondary task activities.
Ten unselected consultations are reportedly sufficiently accurate to characterise an individual doctor's consulting style by using TIMER.
A list of all patients with a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus was identified for each practice by using a pre-existing disease register, a repeat prescribing register, an examination of all repeat prescription requests over two months, or, in one practice, a manual search through all the medical record envelopes.
The prevalence of diabetes thus established ranged from 0.92% to 1.71%, with seven practices grouped in the range 1.11% to 1.31% around the mean of 1.28%.
All patients aged under 18, with dementia or severe psychiatric illness, in institutions, or who had registered with the practice within the previous year were excluded from the study.
From the remainder, patients representing 12 times the number of participating general practitioners in the practice were selected randomly.
Ten patients for each general practitioner were approached, and the others were reserved to replace any patients who declined to take part.
On two occasions 12 patients were in-sufficient as only nine consented, giving an overall number of 318 patients.
The number of patients was chosen to give a sample size of at least 300, which was calculated to have a 90% power to detect a 1% difference in glycated haemoglobin (haemoglobin A 1 c ) concentration at the 5% level between two groups of equal size, given a standard deviation of 2.5%.
A written invitation was sent to 10 patients for each doctor asking them to participate in the study.
Sixteen patients refused, of whom 14 were replaced by another patient from the 12 for each doctor.
Those who agreed were visited at home, where, after giving informed consent, they completed a series of questionnaires and had blood taken by the research nurse.
The general practitioner's medical record envelope was searched and variables concerning the process of care recorded.
The percentage of glycated haemoglobin in the random sample taken in the visit to the patient's home (random haemoglobin A 1 estimation) was used to measure the level of glycaemic control for each patient.
All samples were processed by a single laboratory.
Each practice was given the results of the study for all their participating patients after the study had been completed in that practice.
No practice audits of diabetic care were under way during the study.
The data were entered by using the scientific information retrieval program and analysed on SPSS/PC+.
The unpaired t test was used to compare the mean levels of diabetic control in two groups by means of a two sided test.
One way analysis of variance was used to compare the mean levels of diabetic control in three or more groups.
A multiple linear regression model was used to assess the independent effects on diabetic control of those variables studied.
A stepwise procedure was used, with the inclusion criteria set at p=0.05 and the exclusion criteria set at p=0.1.
Dummy variables were created for categorical variables.
Residuals were used to check the assumptions of the model.
Results
Results were obtained for 318 study patients.
A blood specimen was unobtainable from 10 patients, so that only 308 patients had a valid value for a random haemoglobin A 1 estimation.
This is the denominator used in the text and in table III unless otherwise specified.
The random haemoglobin A 1 value was a continuous variable, which was shown in a histogram to be approximately normally distributed.
The numbers of patients and mean random haemoglobin A 1 values with standard deviations are given in table III for those patient, general practitioner, and practice variables significantly associated with differences in glycaemic control.
patient factors
Sixty seven patients (22%) were treated with diet alone, and they had significantly lower mean random haemoglobin A 1 values compared with the 155 (50%) receiving oral hypoglycaemic therapy and the 86 (28%) taking insulin.
The difference in mean random haemoglobin A 1 values between the insulin and oral hypoglycaemic groups was small and not significant.
Compared with the 165 males, the 143 female patients had a significantly higher mean random haemoglobin A 1 value despite having had diabetes for fewer years (females: mean 9.5 years; males: mean 10.3 years; p=0.36).
Though the patient's age had no significant effect on control, years since diagnosis did.
Those patients diagnosed within the previous seven years (n=153; 50%) had significantly better control than those diagnosed eight or more years previously.
To measure the long term consequences of diabetes and their relation to glycaemic control the presence of diabetes related complications within the past 10 years was recorded from the patient's general practice records.
By totalling the number of such problems (listed in the box) a total score with a maximum of 13 was derived.
The number of these diabetes related problems was correlated with the random haemoglobin A 1 value (Spearman's rank correlation,r =0.17; p=0.004).
When those patients with none or one recorded diabetes related problem were compared with those with two or more problems they were found to have significantly better control.
The levels of smoking, alcohol consumption, and socioeconomic group, which were all asked for in the patient questionnaire, had no significant effect on control.
The patients expressed high levels of satisfaction with the care they were receiving, including the number of blood tests, the thoroughness of examination, the general practitioner's willingness to discuss diabetes, their involvement in decision making, ease of contact, and with general practice care overall (86–96% of patients answering ‘satisfied’ or ‘very satisfied’).
Of the 145 patients attending a hospital diabetic clinic, 101 (70%) said they were ‘very satisfied’ with their overall hospital care.
No significant relation between control and satisfaction was shown.
Ten patients (3.2%) claimed that they had never  been advised to check their urine, a further 39 (13%) never checked their urine, and 53 (17%) checked their urine less than weekly.
The frequency of urine testing was not significantly related to control.
The patients were asked how easy they found it to maintain good control.
The 149 (48%) who answered ‘very easy’ were more likely than the others to have better control.
The 28 (9.1%) patients who responded negatively to the question ‘do you feel you have had enough practical help and support recently?’ had worse control than those answering affirmatively.
Eighty four patients (27%) thought they ought to be looked after by both their general practitioner and the hospital, 138 (45%) by their general practitioner alone, 54 (17%) by the hospital alone, and 13 (4.2%) by a diabetes nurse (19 patients did not respond to this question).
These and other questions on patient expectations showed no significant relation to control.
Patient health status (as measured by the Nottingham health profile), health locus of control, and patient knowledge of diabetes were not significantly related to glycaemic control.
general practitioner factors
Patients were asked to identify the general practitioner whom they regarded as their ‘usual general practitioner’ for their diabetic care.
That doctors' sex, age, years as a principal, training, or teaching and training activity were not shown significantly to influence their patients' diabetic control.
Likewise, no significant correlations were detected between control and the doctor's personality, the doctor's diabetic knowledge, or doctor's consultation style.
However, the 56 (18%) patients of those doctors who professed a special interest in diabetes had a significantly lower mean random haemoglobin A 1 value (table III).
practice factors
The practice questionnaires asked about the presence of 16 items of equipment on the premises.
These ranged from a peak flow meter and a sphygmomanometer to oxygen and a defibrillator.
When those patients attending a practice with more than 10 items (n=173) were compared with those with 10 or fewer (n=135) they showed significantly better diabetic control.
The type of premises (practice owned, district health authority health centre, or rented) had no significant effect on control.
The prevalence of diabetic patients in each practice (which might be taken as an indication of commitment to case finding) was not significantly related to control, nor was the presence of a personal list system.
There was a tendency for the patients in the bigger practices to have a lower random haemoglobin A 1 value (analysis of variance,F =3.35, df=2305; p=0.04).
Significantly lower random haemoglobin A 1 values were found among patients in practices with access to a community or hospital dietitian, with a practice nurse skilled in diabetic care, or which ran miniclinics.
However, when the 181 patients in practices without any diabetic protocol were compared with the others no significant difference was shown.
process of care
The search of the general practice medical record was used to categorise patients according to whether they attended the general practice only (n=171; 56%) or whether they also attended the hospital (n=137; 44%).
The latter ‘shared care’ group included 15 patients who thought that the main decisions concerning their diabetes were made in general practice.
Overall, the patients managed in general practice had significantly better control than those having shared care (table III).
When the patients were examined by treatment group 17 (10%) patients in general practice were taking insulin, 105 (61%) were taking oral hypoglycaemics, and 49 (29%) were being treated by diet alone.
This compared to 69 (50%) taking insulin, 50 (36%) taking oral hypoglycaemics, and 18 (13%) on diet alone among the patients receiving shared care.
The mean random haemoglobin A 1 values within treatment groups were lower, but not significantly so, in the general practice patients (insulin dependent 10.2% v 11.2%, p=0.15; oral hypo-glycaemics 10.6% v 1.2%, p=0.17; diet alone 9.1% v 9.9%, p=0.18).
The patients having shared care involving attendance at a hospital clinic were less likely to have access to a community dietitian (χ 2 =44.3, df=1; p<0.00001), a hospital dietitian (χ 2 =6.9, df=1; p=0.008), or a practice nurse with dietetic skills (χ 2 =18.6, df=1; p=0.00003).
They were less likely to have a general practitioner with an interest in diabetes (χ 2 =21.7, df=1; p<0.00001) or to attend a practice with a miniclinic (χ 2 =42.6, df=1; p<0.00001).
Indeed, only one patient registered with a practice with a diabetic miniclinic had shared care with the hospital.
There was no significant relation between diabetic control and the number of general practice consultations in the previous two years, either in total or for diabetes related reasons.
Fourteen diabetes related examinations were looked for in the medical records, ranging from visual acuity and foot pulses to random blood sugar and urine analysis.
The degree to which the patients had been screened was not significantly related to control.
multivariate analysis
Table IV gives the results for multiple regression analysis using all the variables shown in this study to influence the random haemoglobin A 1 value.
The six variables which were retained in the model accounted for 15.4% of the overall variation.
Of these, two were not immutable patient characteristics — access to a hospital dietitian reduced the random haemoglobin A 1 value by a mean of 1.06%, and the general practitioner having a special interest in diabetes reduced it by 0.86%.
Discussion
It is impossible to achieve uniform and ideal control in every patient with diabetes.
Some patients inevitably have better control than others, and some explanations for this are not amenable to change.
For example, in this study the patients' sex and the length of time since diagnosis were both significantly associated with glycaemic control, as were the treatment group and number of diabetes related events in the previous 10 years.
However, other patient characteristics such as social class, age, smoking, alcohol intake, beliefs, satisfaction, and knowledge had no significant effect on control.
If a cohort of patients with diabetes shows poor  control this study has found little evidence that it should be attributed to factors specific to non-diabetic patients.
This means that patient characteristics determined by the locality of a practice offer insufficient explanation for variation in control in those with diabetes.
Of all the doctor related factors examined, including personality, knowledge, and consultation style, only a special interest in diabetes was shown to be significantly associated with better control.
As far as practice factors are concerned, patients registered with better equipped and larger practices had better control, as did those in practices with diabetic miniclinics.
Those patients with access to dietitians — whether community or hospital dietitians or a practice nurse with dietetic skills — had better control.
This evidence suggests that the organisation of care exerts a real influence on glycaemic control in diabetes.
Those patients attending general practice alone showed better control when compared with those having shared care with a hospital outpatient clinic.
This runs counter to previous findings but there were many confounding variables.
The treatment group mix was different in the hospital attenders, with an inevitable slant towards insulin dependency.
The hospital attenders were more likely to be registered with a practice with no diabetic miniclinic and with a general practitioner with no special interest in diabetes.
That the location of care is not a major determinant of glycaemic control was confirmed by the multiple linear regression (table IV), where shared care failed to contribute significantly to the model.
This study does not, however, offer any support for the idea that diabetic patients looked after exclusively in primary care have worse glycaemic control and therefore a poorer prognosis.
The multiple linear regression analysis showed that access to a hospital dietitian gave the second largest contribution to explaining variance in the random haemoglobin A 1 value.
This suggests that improving access to dietitians might be more efficacious than other changes.
The other variable which was not patient defined and which contributed to the multiple regression model was being under the care of a general practitioner with a special interest in diabetes.
This offers support for the idea (in those practices with at least one partner with a special interest in diabetes) of concentrating diabetic care on that partner, thus reinforcing that general practitioner's skills.
There are always risks when interpreting data from a descriptive study such as this one.
An association between two variables does not infer causality and if one feature is associated with better glycaemic control it may not be the case that its widespread introduction will improve control.
Bearing these caveats in mind, however, we may speculate from the evidence of this study on the changes that might improve the glycaemic control in patients with diabetes.
This might occur if general practices encouraged a partner with a special interest in diabetes to care for their diabetic patients; if practices are well equipped as part of a commitment to quality of care; if the practice has access to dietitian services — most appropriately, perhaps, through the training of practice nurses in dietetics; and, in such well organised practices, if only those patients with special problems are referred to hospital diabetic clinics.
EDUCATION & DEBATE
Countdown to Community Care
Community care and the fundholder
This is one of a series of articles looking at the forthcoming changes to community care
According to the government, clearly agreed local arrangements should enable individual general practitioners to make their full contribution to the new system of community care without getting involved in extra bureaucracy.
From 1 April the main part of that contribution will be to refer to social services those patients who seem to need social care.
Many general practitioners are worried that such referrals will be complex and time consuming and will generate too much extra work.
Moreover, general practitioners may also be asked to see patients specifically to help social workers' assessment procedures, and many fear that such consultations will overwork and underpay them.
General practitioner fundholders already use contracts to spell out what they expect from hospital services.
From 1 April they will be able to set up contracts for community health services such as district nursing and chiropody, and possibly this might be extended to social aspects of community care.
Over the past 14 months Dr Rhidian Morris and his partners in a fundholding practice in Devon have piloted contracts for all aspects of community care.
In this article Dr Morris explains how the most radical part of the pilot project — the contract for social care — was set up.
He argues that the lessons on communication that came from what was essentially a fundholding project could apply also to non-fundholding practices.
The history of relations between general practitioners and social workers is generally poor.
The two professions tend to be suspicious of each other, have little understanding of each other 's roles, and have very different cultures.
Social workers operate in teams, take measured approaches to problems, and rarely take decisions on their own.
General practitioners work mainly as individuals supported by primary care teams.
They have to make decisions quickly and virtually always alone.
They are trained to do this and to be aware that they carry personal legal responsibility for their actions.
When plans for the NHS reforms were announced I quickly became an enthusiastic advocate of general practitioner fundholding, the purchaser-provider split, and the contract system.
I had long believed that the primary health care team did not really work but that it could be made to do so by adhering to contracts.
In 1991 I started negotiations to run a pilot project of community nursing contracts in my practice.
I contracted from the local community unit a nursing team that would be led by general practitioners and would form a true practice based primary health care team.
I approached Devon social services to develop a contract for referring patients from our practice for social care assessments.
Some doctors have an abysmal lack of knowledge about the range of social services available
Lack of knowledge
When I started discussions with the social services department I had an open mind about the service to be delivered.
This was just as well, given my abysmal lack of knowledge about the department's range of services.
I did not know whether having a contract would make much difference to the service delivered or to relationships between social workers and general practitioners.
I simply wanted to see what would happen if I approached the problem with a contractor's mentality.
The result was the hardest set of negotiations I have ever encountered, lasting some six months.
The social services managers were two or three years behind those in the NHS in developing contracts, although they were catching up fast.
The biggest problem was that their whole philosophy and culture seemed alien.
At first there was a lack of trust between us: I thought they were not trying hard enough as we went over and over the same issues; they thought I was trying to take over.
I was the sole representative of the general practitioners.
The social workers always worked as a team and whenever we met a roomful of people arrived.
Their timescales for negotiations and those they proposed for dealing with referrals were much longer than mine.
I felt they wanted me to assess people's needs when that was their responsibility.
There were even language difficulties.
To them an urgent assessment meant ‘needs doing within  two days’ whereas to me it meant ‘needs doing immediately.’
Although both sides became frustrated, it says much for the social workers' determination that they turned up to meetings and attempted to understand me.
The breakthrough came when Plymouth Health Authority sent to the talks its contractor for community services, Chris Whitaker, and Devon Social Services Department sent its community care development officer, Tess Lomax.
Chris was a former social worker who understood the social services negotiators and was trusted by them.
Tess had a researcher's mind and an objective view.
Tess spent two days in the surgery.
She watched how we worked and communicated and how messages and information were received, stored, and sent out.
Then she asked me why we treated social services staff differently from everyone else.
We did not write letters to them.
We never recorded what information we sent them or received from them.
This simple observation surprised us and made us change our ways of communicating with social workers.
We decided to use the same system that we used for hospitals, making referrals to team leaders in the same way that we do to consultants.
Like consultants, social services' team leaders run teams of frequently changing staff.
Rapid turnover in junior staff does not disturb continuity if the working relationship is between the general practitioner and the consultant rather than the house officer.
This analogy helped us to see that our previous and unsuccessful requests to have a named social worker attached to the practice had been unrealistic.
At the time we had not understood why the team leader had refused this and had asked for referrals to be made directly to her.
Now that we had decided to refer to the team leader (who would be the care manager) we devised a simple referral form and agreed that all communications with and from social services would be made in writing and filed in our patients' notes.
The form is very similar to that recommended recently by the BMA.
Our referrals followed the same format as those to consultants and included requests for specific services when appropriate.
Unlike those to consultants, however, referrals could be made by any member of the primary health care team.
The contract followed fairly quickly, and on 1 January 1992 we began the pilot project.
How to do it
In the contract that we negotiated we could not alter the content of the service provided by Devon social services but we could influence the nature and speed of delivery and of communication.
The contract had the basic elements of any NHS contract, plus detailed commitments for each of the two parties (box 1).
The primary health care team contracted to follow set procedures for making referrals (referrers would inform patients, all referrals would include a clear statement of urgency and would be made in writing — even ones made by telephone would be followed up by written requests).
Referrers also agreed to pass on relevant new information (giving advance notice to social services of cold admissions to hospital if social care might be needed on discharge, and notifying changes in circumstances of existing social services clients).
Finally, leaflets and other information about social services would be displayed in the health centre waiting room.
The social services team contracted to take and act on referrals within specified times (the office would be manned between 9 am and 5 pm and referrals would be taken by a duty officer; urgent referrals would be dealt with within two hours, non-urgent cases would be contacted within five working days).
Core assessments would be performed for all referrals and general practitioners would be informed about assessments, services delivered, and closure of cases.
Needs for social care would be identified according to the social services department's policy and budgetary constraints.
Patients' needs after discharge from hospital would be monitored (separate arrangements would be made with the community health unit and hospital to assess referrals from those sources).
Lastly, the social services office would display general practice leaflets and other literature.
Both parties in the contract agreed certain joint commitments, such as observing professional confidentiality, defining an out of hours service, and monitoring the contract.
Monitoring included regular meetings — quarterly for the whole social services and primary health care teams and monthly for one general practitioner, the social services team leader (care manager), and the team manager of the community health unit.
We also agreed to set up systems for audit (box 2).
All these specifications were written into the contract document.
It also contained a brief description of the 30 different social care services offered, the types of patient eligible to use them, and copies of the referral form and the form used to carry out core assessments.
The resulting 18 page document might seem complicated but is actually a clear and simple statement of shared commitments.
Monitoring the contract
As soon as we got used to our new channels of communication with the social services team the  benefits of the contract became evident.
Our first audit showed that in 20% of referrals the referrer had given inadequate information; the second showed that in only 7% was information inadequate.
At the same time there was an increase of 15% in the complexity of referrals.
Similarly, responses to us in writing within six weeks of referral rose from 25% of cases in the first audit to 60% in the second.
There was also a change in source of referrals — those from district nurses rising by 34% and those from general practitioners falling by a similar amount.
We have no firm data yet on whether delivery of services improved.
To explore relationships between the social services and primary health care teams the psychology department of Plymouth University carried out a questionnaire survey of attitudes.
This showed that health visitors had the greatest influence on social workers.
It also highlighted a complex network of contracts between the two teams and suggested the need for clear lines of communication.
A member of the primary health care team has now been designated liaison officer and all messages are passed to her.
All worth it in the end
Although the contracting process was complex, it was worth while.
We can now deal with the main problems that could arise in the new community care system.
The Plymouth Community Trust is considering whether nurses and health visitors could order certain aspects of social care after training by the social services department.
The aim is not to increase the community nurses' workload but rather to decrease time spent chasing the social work team.
Many general practitioners fear that the community care reforms will increase their own workload, too.
We do not believe that general practitioners will be overburdened.
In our practice, covering a population of 10000, we make an average of 1.7 referrals a week.
And we have not been asked to see any patients specifically to help social workers' assessments.
We already provide medical notes for patients admitted to county council run residential homes and letters of information for those going to private care.
Will there really be much change?
Urgent work; to general practitioners ‘urgent’ means ‘immediate.’
Conclusions
I have come through this experience with much greater understanding of social workers.
I have learnt a lot from them and I recognise that we think and work in different ways.
I have also learnt much from the skills of others: without Chris Whitaker and Tess Lomax we might not have succeeded in improving the way we organise community care.
Though other practices may interpret and implement the community care reforms in different ways, I hope that some of the lessons we have learnt will be useful.
General practitioners do not have to be fundholders to take a contracting approach to improve communication with social workers.
Box 1
Outline of contract between Ivybridge Health Centre and Devon social services
(1) Aims of contract
(2) Duration of contract
(3) Population to be covered (the practice list)
(4) Brief summary of the six main acts of parliament that apply to social services and to the policy of charging clients for certain services
(5) Grading of referrals by priority
(6) Definitions of assessment and service provision
(7) Procedures for quality assurance
(8) Complaints procedures
(9) Clear description of commitments for each party in the contract
Box 2
Auditing the contract with social services
We looked at the following aspects:
Number of referrals
Who is referred (age, sex, whether previously known to social services)
Who makes referrals
Urgency, quality, and complexity of referrals
Speed and complexity of responses, and whether made in writing
Problems and disabilities found on assessment
Service input (difference between services requested and offered, time taken to deliver services)
Consumer follow up Contracts with primary health care team
Problems with contract
The fortysomething barrier: medicine and age discrimination
Agism in the medical profession is mainly covert but it is not uncommon.
It is widely believed that people become less productive as they get older.
However, research has shown that older people have less absenteeism, more job stability, and greater output than younger workers.
Job losses, which until recently were unheard of in the NHS, usually affect older people first, resulting in the loss of those with the most skill and experience.
With an aging population it is important that the government takes steps to discourage age discrimination in the NHS and Britain as a whole.
Age related assumptions are made throughout a doctor's career.
Subjective and usually implicit their manifestations are obvious.
From time expired senior registrar who despairs of finding that elusive consultant job to the frustrations of the mature, would be medical student who comes up against the agist admissions policies of many British medical schools.
Sometimes the barriers are explicit.
In a letter to regional advisers and postgraduate deans in 1988 the chairman of the Joint Committee on Higher Surgical Training stated that trainees aged 35 or over and without the requisite ‘papers’ should be told they are unlikely to succeed in finding a senior registrar post.
The doctors retainer scheme sponsored by the Department of Health, which seeks to help doctors stay in touch with medicine so that they can later return to NHS employment, applies only to doctors under 55.
Mature medical students (defined as over 23) account for only 2% of the medical school population.
Most universities are dubious about accepting students older than 30.
Indeed, in 1990 only 0.42% of preclinical students were over 30; 74% were aged 18–19.
When a medical career has to be ended early because of staffing reductions (virtually unheard of in the NHS before the reforms but now planned in the wake of the Tomlinson inquiry) age usually predominates over other factors such as experience and skill.
Early retirement and voluntary redundancy schemes often result in the loss of some of the best people.
A recent report showed how older workers bear the brunt of economic recession.
Older people are always among the first to be made redundant and to retire prematurely yet there is no evidence to show ‘that redundancy or early retirement are seriously associated with health or any general tendency for workers to become less productive with age.’
The government, the report adds, ‘should take a lead by setting a good example in the context of its own  employees and disseminate the information which enables firms to see the full costs of the permanent loss of their older workers.’
Older workers have as many strengths as younger ones
What is age discrimination?
Age discrimination is a result of prejudice and stereotyping and hinders the proper consideration of a person's talents, skills, abilities, potential, and experience.
Agism, like other forms of discrimination at work, is rooted in a society's culture.
The predominant view in Britain and other Western countries associates aging with decline, dependency, isolation, and often poverty.
Such negative stereotypes are often reinforced by pervasive media images which portray the young as capable and glamorous.
Arbitrary age discrimination can affect everyone.
It consistently disadvantages older workers, young people, and women returning to work.
It overwhelmingly favours people aged 25 to 35.
Decisions based on age are rarely justifiable, are often of poor quality, and lead, as the government now recognises, to ineffective use of human resources.
In an open letter to members of parliament in 1991 the Metropolitan Authorities Recruitment Agency (METRA) which has led the debate on agism said: ‘Many people of all ages face unfair discrimination at work or when looking for a job, simply because of their date of birth.
Negative beliefs are held about older people.
Often these are based upon generalisations.
Most are known to be false.
These untested beliefs get built into the culture of many organisations.’
Government response
The inaugural meeting of the Department of Employment's Advisory Group on Age Discrimination was held in February.
Under the chair of employment minister Patrick McLoughlin, the group aims to persuade employers to abandon agist policies and to promote good practice in employment.
Michael Forsyth, minister of state for employment, speaking at a recent recruitment industry's award ceremony, said, ‘blanket age discrimination and recruitment is absurd, wasteful, and shortsighted.’
He further warned that employers who ‘set arbitrary age limits are missing out on a variety of skills, experience, and commitment that older workers can bring to a job.’
Although the government has ruled out legislation, many organisations are calling for an age discrimination act similar to the existing Race Relations Act 1976 and Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and 1986.
In June 1990 an inaugural meeting of the Alliance Against Ageism in Employment launched a ‘ban agism in recruitment’ campaign.
The campaign wants legislation to stop the use of upper age limits in recruitment advertising.
At least seven private members' bills on the subject have been presented by both Conservative and Labour MPs.
Employers' organisations like the Confederation of British Industry and the Institute of Personnel Management have also proposed ways of tackling the problem.
Peter Naylor, past vice president of the Institute of Personnel Management and an advocate of legislation, believes that marginalisation of older workers is unlikely to be eliminated simply by exhorting the worth of the people aged 50 and over.
As Western Europe's largest employer, the NHS has been noticeably reticent in the debate.
Health and age
According to Eric Midwinter, former director of the Centre for Policy on Ageing, ‘Discrimination by age is as vicious as discrimination by race or sex and not borne out by medical evidence.’
There is no evidence to support the common assumption that older workers are slower and less productive.
Indeed workers over 50 have been found to be more productive than their younger colleagues because of their experience, maturity, and strong work ethic.
One study which examined the effects of age and various performance criteria showed that performance, rather than falling with age may actually improve.
While some slowing down undoubtedly occurs with age the effects are greatly exaggerated and can usually be offset by changing the pattern or intensity of the work.
An American Department of Health study in 1978 challenged many of the popular beliefs about older people.
The study found that the intelligence of most people remains constant until the age of 70 and concluded that ‘for most people life satisfaction does not decline markedly with age, and the ability to function and adapt does not seem related to age.’
A recent study of Open University graduates found that students aged 60 to 65 had better results than any other age group.
Other studies show that older workers tend to have fewer accidents, less absenteeism, and greater output and job stability than their younger counterparts.
Research overwhelmingly supports the proposition that age is a poor predictor of performance and ability.
As Naylor says, ‘there is ample UK evidence which reinforces US studies to show that capacity to learn new skills, acquire knowledge and new attitudes in middle age does not decline sharply after one's 40th birthday.’
Probably the most important thing which all studies show is the diversity of people.
Indeed people may become more diverse with age because of differing life experiences.
Lessons from abroad
united states
In the United States the Age Discrimination Act 1967 aims to ‘promote the employment of older persons based on their ability rather than their age, to prohibit arbitrary age discrimination in employment, and to help employees and workers find ways of meeting problems arising from the impact of age in employment.’
The act applies to people aged 40 and over.
The act makes it unlawful for an employer to ‘limit, segregate or classify an employee in any way that would deprive that employee of job opportunities or adversely affect employment status because of their age.’
In 1978 the act was amended to make the earliest  mandatory retirement age 70 and to eliminate it entirely for federal employees.
canada
In Canada the Human Rights Act 1978 does not go as far as removing mandatory retirement ages (although there is pressure growing to do so) but does make it unlawful to deprive people of employment opportunities on grounds of age, as a result of policies or practices relating to recruitment promotion, training, or other personnel matters.
european community
In the European Community only France has legislation which protects older workers.
In 1989, with support from the minister of culture, the government launched a national day: the journee de flamboyance .
La flamboyance is a new movement which promotes and celebrates longevity.
It aims at dispelling the myths about old age and at building a network of associations concerned with the issues of aging.
In 1990 the European parliament voted on two reports calling for action on age discrimination.
The de Vitto report on the social charter action programme called for the commission to carry out a survey into legislation and practices that discriminated on the grounds of age and to take measures to guarantee equal treatment for elderly people.
The Nianias report on European Commission proposals for older people calls on the commission to conduct investigations into discriminatory practices on the grounds of age and initiate action to bring about equal treatment for elderly people.
Impetus for change
The main impetus in Britain for measures to deal with age discrimination at the workplace — despite the current recession — derive from the so called demographic time bomb which will be increasingly felt by all organisations, public and private, during the 1990s and into the next century.
The fall in the birth rate in the 1970s means that the number of people entering the labour market today is falling.
For instance there are one million fewer 16 to 19 year olds in 1993 than there were in 1983 — a drop of 28%.
Other changes highlighted in 1989 by the National Economic Development Council include an aging workforce (in the 1990s the working population will become increasingly concentrated in the middle age groups and in the year 2000 there are likely to be 1.8 million more people aged 35 to 54) and an expanding adult labour force (women returning to the labour market are expected to provide most of the growth in labour force in the 1990s).
In addition, the report shows the changing skills needed by employers.
New skills and flexibilities are needed to cope with increasing new technology, the single European market, the internationalisation of markets, changes in the structure and nature of employment, and changes in patterns of consumer demand and the distribution of disposable income.
Time for a rethink
Proposals for meeting the challenges posed by changes in the workforce and patterns of work include calls for the total elimination of mandatory retirement ages and changes to existing employment laws which discriminate against the over 60s.
The Metropolitan Authorities Recruitment Agency (METRA), which is a consortium of 38 authorities (together employing over 350000 staff), has instigated several campaigns aimed at eliminating age discrimination in local government.
One aspect of METRA's campaign deals with public sector pension rules (similar to those operating in the NHS).
Pension abatement has been singled out as a blatant piece of age discrimination that is obsolete and should be abolished.
Brian Russell, the principal administrator for the United Kingdom Steering Committee for Local Government Superannuation believes that abatement rules are ‘illogical and uneconomic.
It may be fair enough for those people who retire at 60 or 65, but consider those who were forced to take early retirement or who were sick and have now recovered.’
Conclusions
This year has been scheduled by the European Commission as European Year of Older People and Solidarity between Generations, and age discrimination and the employment of older workers is emerging as a major public policy issue.
In medicine, as in other occupations, there is no significant correlation between age and work performance.
Indeed most studies of employment show the low validity and reliability of age as a predictor of performance.
The use of age criteria in redundancy and early retirement schemes has resulted in a massive withdrawal of older workers from the British workforce and a considerable loss of skill and talent.
Despite the current recession, demographic changes and the ‘greying’ of the workforce means urgent new thinking is needed on such issues as flexible working and retirement, taxation and superannuation rules (especially abatement provisions), and employment laws.
The efficient and effective use of people's skills requires that employment decisions are based on job related criteria — skills, qualifications, potential, and competence — rather than arbitrary, outmoded, and misconceived notions about age.
Lesson of the Week
Late presentation of traumatic rupture of the diaphragm in a child
Rupture of the diaphragm caused by blunt trauma is an uncommon injury in children; the condition may present late, so a high degree of awareness is essential for prompt diagnosis
Rupture of the diaphragm due to blunt trauma is uncommon.
Late presentation of such an injury is well recognised in adults but exceptionally rare in children.
Lack of awareness of late presentation of traumatic rupture of the diaphragm in children may result in a delay in diagnosis.
Case report
A 7 year old boy was admitted as an emergency case after falling from the side of a lorry.
He was alert and neurologically normal with a Glasgow coma score of 14 on admission.
He was haemodynamically stable but had a few episodes of haemoptysis, and there was macroscopic haematuria.
Positive findings were decreased air entry in the right lower chest and a distended abdomen with tenderness and guarding, mainly in the suprapubic region.
He was resuscitated and monitored along the lines of trauma management described by the American College of Surgeons.
A chest x ray picture showed right sided pulmonary bruising, and an abdominal film showed a fracture through each pubic ramus.
Ultrasound study of the abdomen showed free fluid in the peritoneal cavity and a right perirenal collection of fluid but normal kidneys, liver, spleen, and bladder.
He was managed conservatively, the fractured pelvis being treated by rest in bed.
He recovered rapidly.
Three days after admission ultrasonic appearances in the abdomen were normal.
He continued to improve and was discharged home 11 days after admission.
At discharge, when he was fully well, he was eating normally and had no clinical abnormality in chest or abdomen.
A radiograph of the chest was reported on as normal (figure).
Eighteen days after discharge from hospital he was readmitted as an emergency complaining of epigastric pain and vomiting for 24 hours.
On examination he looked pale and dehydrated.
He was in no obvious respiratory distress but the chest sounded dull on percussion and there was decreased air entry on the left.
A chest x ray picture showed features interpreted as consolidation of the left lower lobe with a left sided pleural effusion (figure).
A provisional diagnosis of staphylococcal pneumonia was made.
He was treated with intravenous fluids and antibiotics.
Eight hours after admission he suddenly deteriorated, with severe respiratory distress and increasing left chest signs.
Review of the chest x ray picture suggested post-traumatic diaphragmatic hernia, which was confirmed by ultrasound examination.
During transfer to the intensive care unit he suffered a cardiac arrest which necessitated 20 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation to establish a normal cardiac rhythm.
At laparotomy, performed after a period of attempted stabilisation, the whole of the stomach and omentum was found to have herniated into the left hemithorax.
The hugely distended stomach had to be decompressed before it could be returned back into the abdomen, and the defect in the left hemidiaphragm (6×5 cm) was repaired with 2–0 silk sutures.
He had an  unstable postoperative course with further neurological deterioration, culminating in brain death 48 hours postoperatively.
Chest x ray appearances on discharge from hospital after initial admission (top) and 18 days later on readmission (bottom)
Comment
The incidence of diaphragmatic rupture due to blunt trauma is increasing concomitantly with the increase in the number of motor vehicle accidents.
Mortality ranges from 20% to 40% in series in adults; the figures for children are similar.
Though some of the deaths may be attributed to associated severe injuries, a delay in diagnosis contributes to the high mortality.
In our patient the diagnosis was delayed by eight hours, with a fatal outcome.
Several factors are described as contributing to the diagnostic delay — presence of serious concurrent injuries and paucity of pathognomonic clinical signs; simultaneous lung injuries may mask or mimic the diagnosis radiologically.
Our patient sustained blunt thoracoabdominal trauma severe enough to cause intra-abdominal bleeding, pelvic fracture, and pulmonary bruising but there was no clinical or radiological evidence of diaphragmatic injury during the initial admission.
In many adult trauma centres exploratory laparotomy is an essential part of complete evaluation of the patient, and these centres have a lower incidence of missed diaphragmatic injuries.
Had our patient been subjected to an exploratory laparotomy during the initial admission the diaphragmatic tear would have been diagnosed at that time.
But in children the management of haemoperitoneum and injury to solid abdominal viscera is generally conservative.
The advantages are avoidance of unnecessary operations and preservation of vital organs like spleen, resulting in reduction of morbidity and mortality in the short and long term.
During the second admission the clinical and radiological features of air and fluid in the left hemithorax were misinterpreted as staphylococcal pneumonia.
Above all, a high index of suspicion, essential for prompt diagnosis of diaphragmatic injuries, was not present when the patient was readmitted.
This was at least partly due to the lower incidence of diaphragmatic injuries in children.
In an era of increasing motor vehicle accidents involving children a high degree of awareness of traumatic rupture of the diaphragm and the possibility of late presentation is essential for prompt diagnosis and the consequent reduction in morbidity and mortality.
LETTERS
Unlicensed nicotine skin patches
Editor ,— Nicotine skin patches were launched in Britain in June 1992.
Three licensed patches (Nicabate, Nicorette, Nicotinell) are now available over the counter from pharmacies.
There is convincing evidence from clinical trials that these patches are an effective aid to stopping smoking.
In the past two months there has been a rash of newspaper advertisements for unlicensed patches available by mail order.
We are aware of brands going under the names Nicostop, Nicorene, Nicotine Patch, Nicocheck, and Nicoban.
The advertisements for two brands, for example, make extravagant claims: ‘Guaranteed to stop you smoking’(Nicostop); ‘With Nicoban's help you stop smoking painlessly, simply, permanently…
You wear it on your arm, and it releases a measured dosage of nicotine extract throughout the day which really does take away the desire to smoke.
So simple, so easy.
And above all…so effective.’
Common to these patches is the claim that they deliver either nicotine or ‘nicotine extract’ and the promise of great savings over patch products ‘sold by our competitors.’
But none of these mail order products has undergone regulatory scrutiny.
We have obtained supplies of several of these patches and have examined nicotine absorption.
The patches seemed to be of two types: Nicorene, Nicotine Patch, Nicocheck, and Nicoban were of closely similar or identical appearance and on analysis contained only 0.4 mg of nicotine per patch.
The strongest, Nicostop, contained about 4 mg (compared with values ranging between 25 and 100 mg in the licensed patches).
After either Nicocheck or Nicotine Patch had been worn for 24 hours plasma nicotine (0.2 µg/l) and cotinine (0.2 µg/l) concentrations were unchanged, indicating no absorption.
In a second subject, who wore 11 Nicotine Patch patches simultaneously, plasma nicotine concentrations had risen marginally from 0.4 to 1.8 µg/l after four hours.
These patches were therefore essentially placebos.
Plasma nicotine concentrations with Nicostop were somewhat higher.
After eight hours values of 1.8 µg/l and 5.4 µg/l were observed in two subjects.
In both subjects these concentrations were considerably lower than concentrations obtained with previously studied pharmaceutical patches (8.6 µg/l and 20.0 µg/l).
These unlicensed patches make unwarranted claims of therapeutic efficacy and imply that they are comparable with licensed products in all but price, yet they either are placebos or deliver nicotine in amounts unlikely to relieve withdrawal significantly.
Their marketing, and the use of brand names similar to those of the licensed products, seems to rely on the understandable difficulty that consumers will have in distinguishing genuine products from false.
The Medicines Control Agency may not be entirely blameless in this as for years it has tolerated the marketing of other nicotine containing products of unproved value or quality without licence.
We urge that all commercially marketed aids to stopping smoking should undergo the same regulatory scrutiny.
The continued marketing of products of dubious provenance, dubious efficacy, and dubious quality could bring discredit to a new approach to stopping smoking that seems to be of great potential benefit.
How many doctors does Britain need?
Editor ,— Like hospital doctors, general practitioners have suffered from increasing bureaucracy and public expectation, and workload has increased accordingly.
General practitioners have also had to bear the brunt of many changes, usually without a proportionate increase in funding or resources, and now have to contend with the problems of poor recruitment.
It is important that the profession makes the public aware that the effect of increasing understaffing is potentially disastrous.
This is a particular threat given the present NHS management ethos, which is at best distant and disinterested and at worst disregards workforce morale.
We write as partners in a practice which is presently enduring a three month interregnum.
A partner has left us to take up a senior registrar post (not least because of the out of hours commitment).
Because of the present shortage of entrants to general practice, we received only two replies to each of our advertisements.
We have worked long hours.
It has frequently been necessary to employ the deputising service in the evening; we were not prepared to jeopardise our patients' safety.
When our third partner left we lost his basic practice allowance, and because of the cost of employing locums we will end up substantially out of pocket.
We did not imagine that our task was going to be easy, but we are angry for being penalised for maintaining our service.
Stephen Brearley's suggestion that the medical profession has tolerated poor working conditions because of high job satisfaction is, we believe, an understatement; professional dedication is nearer the mark.
Far from being the beneficiaries of a cartel, doctors have been denied the benefits of market forces by an employer who has not shrunk from exploiting their vocation and responsibility.
Perhaps it is not surprising that many younger doctors are voting with their feet.
Editor ,— Stephen Brearley's editorial agreeing with the Medical Manpower Standing Advisory Committee's recommendations to increase annual intake of medical students by almost 500 a year and to increase total numbers of NHS doctors by 1000 a year (1%) to 112000 by 2010 seem to be based on no reliable evidence.
In general practice between 1950 and 1990 the numbers of NHS general practitioner principals increased from 19000 to 33000 — from 43 to 62 per 100000 population (an increase of 44%)— and the mean list size decreased from 2500 to below 1900 (a 24% fall).
Between 1970 and 1990 there has been an average total increase of general practitioners by 500 a year (1.5%).
How long should this continue?
With 33000 general practitioners working 30 years or more (ages 35 to 65) this means an annual retirement vacuum of 1100; add to this perhaps 400 a year who retire or expire earlier or who move out of general practice, and this adds up to 1500.
Since 1981 there have been 2000 vocational trainees a year seeking to become principals; hence the 500 surplus.
Attention has to be paid to the many changes taking place in general practice: teamwork with delegation to nurses and other members of ‘the team,’ more shared care with local specialists, more administration, more new tasks including community care, and more general practitioners wishing to work part time.
These changes have not been quantified — will they require more or fewer general practitioners?
Doctors are the most expensive health workers.
I estimate that once a future general practitioner enters medical school the nation (NHS) can write off almost £3m for training costs, salaries, and pension until his or her death.
In addition, an NHS general practitioner now prescribes at a rate of £100000 a year, and it is likely that referrals and use of other hospital services may amount to £200000 a year — these add up to £12m over 40 years.
Should we not consider controlling numbers?
Finally, it has to be recognised that no country has a meaningful medical manpower policy.
Brearley notes a rate of one physician per 338 people for western European countries, but it ranges from 1:296 in Spain to 1:575 in the United Kingdom.
In the United States it is 1:440, in Japan 1:610.
For primary care the ratio of primary care physicians to population are 1:975 in Spain, 1:1067 in Germany, 1:1120 in France, 1:1365 in the United States, 1:1745 in the United Kingdom, 1:2300 in the Netherlands, and 1:2430 in Sweden.
The Medical Manpower Standing Advisory Committee needs to think much more widely and commission more extensive analyses before committing the nation to the huge costs of paying for extra doctors over the next 20 years.
Editor ,— Stephen Brearley asks the question ‘How many doctors does Britain need by 2010?’
This is impossible to answer, but he does suggest that it is likely to be more than the planners currently recommend.
The problem is that there  are few data from which to calculate a requirement.
Politicians and planners feel comfortable or uncomfortable only when specific figures are offered rather than vague generalisations.
It is, therefore, important to try to establish the starting point relevant to the early 1990s in order to convince those that are responsible for overall planning and funding that there is an increasing need to train skilled personnel in all the health professions but particularly in medicine.
The public, practitioners, and the patients want their treatment carried out by competent trained doctors to the highest standards.
That means largely by consultants.
The Association of Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland considers that the desirable ratio of consultant surgeons to a catchment population is 1:30000.
This is calculated from such accurate activity analysis as that from Taunton, in which the total general surgical activity in both NHS and private practice that was required in the year 1990–1 for a relatively captive population in west Somerset was as follows: 25.1 new outpatient referrals per 1000 population; 28.1 intermediate equivalent (hernia) operations per 1000 population.
By using the workload recommendations of the Royal College of Surgeons of England it becomes possible to calculate how the outpatient and operative workload requirements of the population can be met.
If 10%–15% of the total activity is carried out in private practice and a similar proportion is carried out by trainees without the direct supervision of a consultant then one consultant is required for approximately 30000 population.
This compares with a current average in England and Wales of 1:50000.
An increase in consultant surgeons would have several benefits.
It would help to reduce the caseload and so permit the conditions of the Patient's Charter to be met and would make it possible for consultants to be more involved in the routine care of patients, both emergency and elective, and so diminish the responsibilities of junior doctors for service commitment.
The goal of one consultant general surgeon for 30000 population is modest when compared with international comparisons or even with Scotland, where there is currently one consultant for 31000 population, and Northern Ireland, where there is one for 28000.
Assessments of this sort would form a basis for quantitative calculations of the needs of the future.
Editor ,— Stephen Brearley argues that the Medical Manpower Standing Advisory Committee may have grossly underestimated the need for increasing the intake of medical schools.
Certainly, when Medical Forum was asked to submit evidence its comment that an increasing number of doctors were seeking careers outside medicine was met by an attitude akin to ‘well this has always happened,’ as if to brush the issue under the carpet.
Any acknowledgement that there is an impending massive crisis in medical recruitment is missing from the committee's report.
Improving selection and retention of medical staff to redress the expected deficit in manpower would be an alternative or additional approach.
Perhaps this is considered too expensive, but it is hard to believe that 240 doctors can be trained at no capital cost, even if there is head space at medical schools.
The issue of dwindling medical manpower in the face of increasing demand needs a three pronged attack through selection procedures, training, and making the job rewarding and enjoyable enough for people to want to do it.
If all three aspects are not addressed the 240 additional cannon fodder will not remain in the system either.
Medical education
Editor ,— In her series on medical education Stella Lowry has failed to mention one major initiative in community based medical education.
The department of primary care at University College London Medical School has been running a community based general medical firm for first year clinical students since September 1991.
This six week firm has replaced one of the traditional hospital based medical firms.
The model that we have developed is to attach students in pairs to a general practice tutor in a teaching practice.
The students spend half the week in the practice, where they see patients at home or in the surgery.
They are expected to take a full medical history and perform a physical examination.
Once they have finished they are joined by their tutor, who goes through the history and supervises their examination skills.
The programme is structured, and tutors are asked to ensure that students see patients with problems pertaining to the ‘topic of the week.’
These topics are chosen to reflect prevalent clinically important medical conditions — for example, ischaemic heart disease, diabetes, asthma and chronic obstructive airways disease, common cancers, and stroke and other common neurological conditions.
At the end of each week there is a plenary session on the topic of the week, in which students present patients they have seen and reflect on what they have learnt.
The programme is problem oriented and concentrates on teaching the core clinical skills of history taking, physical examination, and communication with patients.
The department also runs seminars on developing clinical and communication skills to reinforce the students' experience in the practices.
Students find the firm both educational and enjoyable; in particular they appreciate the one to one teaching from the general practice tutor and the structured nature of the firm.
The programme developed from a pilot study with four students per firm.
This academic year the number of students per firm has increased to eight and we are collaborating with the department of oncology at the Whittington Hospital, which undertakes a fifth of the teaching.
Next year we intend to have two parallel firms of eight students each.
This will account for half the 215 students in the year, and we hope to continue expanding until all first year students participate in one community based general medical firm.
Undergraduate medical education
Editor ,— The article by Lesley Rees and John Wass is an excellent example of factual and well reasoned analysis; it must not be ignored.
The academic excellence of the University of London is based on its federation and on the diversity of the medical schools and other university institutions.
Deans of Medical Schools in Britain and throughout the world favour an annual intake of 100–150 students.
Above this number the staff-student relationship, vital in medicine, deteriorates rapidly, with concomitant loss of quality of teaching at the bedside and in the laboratory.
There is no evidence that excellence is a prerogative of size.
There is also little to support the contention that teaching and research in medical schools are improved by mergers into multifaculty institutions with large departments of biological sciences.
The loss of basic medical sciences can only be detrimental to clinical teaching and research and to the staff of university hospitals.
There are no factual data that amalgamation of institutions has any advantages beyond economies of some central services such as catering and purchasing, and perhaps administrative convenience.
London attracts about 20% more students than the provincial multifaculty universities, as well as a large proportion of clinical students from Oxford and Cambridge.
The costs of training a student in London are no greater than in the rest of England.
There has been a consistent increase in the number of well qualified applicants of about 30% to the Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine, and we are able to admit only one in 18 applicants.
Yet current government policy is based after all on choice, market forces, and competition.
Further restructuring of medical schools in London will lead to:
loss of the ability of medical schools to define priorities;
loss of ability to develop innovative teaching and research;
larger classes;
separation of basic medical science and clinical science; and
the loss of the new integrated preclinical and clinical courses.
Although realistic estimates of the capital costs to the university for radical restructuring are not available, these are known to be substantial (perhaps £200m immediately), and the implications of all the Tomlinson proposals to the wellbeing of Londoners, to the university, and to the practice of medicine in London must be viewed with great concern.
Death from cancer at home
Editor ,— R H V Jones and colleagues in their follow up study of cancer deaths at home comment that patients' pain was relieved more effectively than any of the other symptoms, But of the 207 patients in the study, 42 received only moderate relief of pain — and eight had no relief of pain in their final month of life.
Three patients refused all analgesia, but even so 25% of their patients did not receive adequate analgesia.
This clearly highlights that the primary care team was not performing well with any aspect of symptom control.
The list of accessibility of professional support does not mention any help, advice, or even referral to physicians specialising in relief of pain in cancer.
If pain and other symptoms were being so badly managed these patients should have been referred promptly to other health care professionals who might have been able to provide a better quality of analgesia.
Editor ,— R H V Jones and colleagues provide a valuable contemporary assessment of domiciliary terminal care in Devon.
Their study also highlights unmet needs similar to those mentioned in other reports.
The challenge for all of us working in palliative care is how to continue to improve.
We agree with Jones and colleagues that trainees in general practice need to be taught patient centred medicine, but two other components are essential — that is, teamwork and anticipation.
The doctor should not expect to be able to direct and support patients and carers in all their needs.
The doctor is often the gate to all the other members of the health care team, although he or she may involve them only when problems have arisen.
Carers are likely to be looking after a dying loved one for the first time in their life; their anxieties may be greater than the patient's.
The doctor and team must anticipate the natural course of the patient's illness and the capacity of the carer(s) to cope if home care is to succeed.
We know, for instance, that dyspnoea is distressing and often poorly controlled.
The patient and carer need clear guidelines on how to cope with acute exacerbations if they are not to panic in the middle of the night.
Lastly, general practitioners must feel confident to ask a colleague for advice if poor control of symptoms persists.
Respite care
Editor ,— David Griffith is quite right to emphasise that the new Community Care Act potentially will have negative as well as positive effects on the development of support for carers.
A conjunction of opportunity and threat, as well as the acknowledged need of local and health authorities for developmental help in improving services for carers, led to the launch of the Carers Impact project on 30 October 1992.
Carers Impact is a national development initiative that is currently beginning work with authorities in a number of localities around England.
Over the next three years it will be helping and encouraging authorities to gather information about the needs and preferences of local carers, to use this information to work out plans for improving carer support, and to ensure that caring for carers becomes an integral component of mainstream community care services.
The assistance on offer from Carers Impact comes in the form of small development teams which will work with health and local authorities over a sustained period of time.
The membership of the teams is bringing together a unique combination of experience and expertise in developing services for carers.
Team members, who are all individually skilled as managers or practitioners in working to improve services for carers, are being drawn from health authorities, social services departments, voluntary organisations, and the independent sector.
Each team also includes a person who is currently, or has recently been, a carer to make sure that the carer's perspective on needs and priorities remains constantly in focus.
During the course of the project Carers Impact will also be distilling the lessons learned from the locality work and attempting to identify good practice.
Later on we shall be sharing the fruits of this through workshops, conferences, and publications.
Better support for carers is an essential ingredient of good community care and we want to ensure that practical examples of how this can be achieved are well publicised so that others can emulate them.
As the importance of caring for carers has become more widely recognised, so too has the realisation that making better support for carers a reality is the responsibility not of a single agency but of many.
The Carers Impact project is the product of an alliance of national bodies representing the interests of health groups, local authorities, social services, and the voluntary sector in community care.
We shall be working hard to encourage the formation of similar alliances at local level which will listen to carers, recognise their needs and preferences, value their contribution, and — most importantly — take some action.
Long term care of elderly people in the NHS
Editor ,— From 1 April, under the NHS Community Care Act, local social services departments will be responsible for assessing care needs.
Where domiciliary care is thought to be impracticable, however, it still remains unclear who is going to pay for ‘institutional’ care.
In the past this has been provided by local authority residential homes (or private equivalents) and long stay NHS beds, depending on the independence of the person concerned.
This division was well laid out many years ago in a Ministry of Health memorandum issued with HM(65)77, the needs of the two categories of elderly people being quite different.
Those requiring residential accommodation were means tested and often they or their relatives paid some or all of the cost, while those needing nursing care received it under the NHS — naturally, free at the point of delivery — if private care was not requested.
According to the current secretary of state, this principle still applies: ‘Health authorities have a responsibility under the NHS Act 1977 to provide nursing care for those who cannot or do not wish to pay for it.
Department of Health guidance is clear that people should not be discharged into private nursing homes when they have no wish to pay.’
Yet in the past few years long term nursing care beds in the NHS have been progressively reduced and district health authorities have made little effort to improve their remaining accommodation.
In addition, the Department of Health seems loth to continue its imaginative programme of creating NHS nursing homes.
Evidence is growing that at local level when long term nursing care is necessary patients or their relatives are being pressurised to accept care in private nursing homes.
Thus this large part of the NHS is being progressively privatised.
By the blurring of the division between those needing residential care and those needing nursing home care this privatisation is being carried out by stealth and is often not recognised by those working with elderly people.
It is essential that the secretary of state for health states clearly whether NHS nursing care for long stay patients is still going to remain available or whether it will be privatised.
If it remains in the NHS she should give an assurance that the quality of service will be improved, presumably both by refurbishment of remaining facilities and by a relaunch of the NHS nursing home project.
Children of parents infected with HIV in Lothian
Editor ,— Since the widespread introduction of HIV infection into the drug using population in Lothian between 1982 and 1985 a large number of children have been born to infected parents.
As the rate of vertical transmission in Europe is 14.4% only a small number of these children are themselves infected with HIV.
Over the next few years increasing numbers of parents will die of diseases related to HIV and many healthy children will suffer the death of one or both parents.
Research in Italy has addressed this issue.
In Britain the Department of Health has recently published guidelines about the provision of services for children infected with and affected by HIV.
No attempt has been made, however, to quantify the extent of this emerging problem in Britain.
In a general practice in north Edinburgh, between 1987 and 1989, 265 injecting drug users were asked if they had any children and, if so, when they had been born and where they were currently living.
The HIV serostatus of parents was determined.
One hundred and ten people infected with HIV reported 119 children, of whom 60 were dependent — that is, less than 16 years old and living with a parent.
Of the HIV infected parents of dependent children, 17 had one dependent child, nine had two, and seven had three or more.
Twenty four parents were living with partners, six were single parents, and the remainder lived with their own parents.
Of the dependent children, six were aged over 10, 30 were aged 5–10, and 20 were aged under 5.
Up to 30 September 1991 there were 588 people with HIV infection through injecting drug use in Lothian.
Extrapolation to Lothian gives an estimate of 250 children born to 63 parents infected with HIV through injecting drug use.
Thus in Lothian about 250 children — the vast majority not infected with HIV — are likely to suffer the death of one or both parents due to disease related to HIV in the near future; this figure is probably an underestimate as it represents only the tested population.
Although many of these children will be beyond their early years when their parents develop advanced disease, they will require much support and counselling.
Research should focus on what happens to children when a parent infected with HIV dies and on the role of fostering and adoption services.
In our experience it is often grandparents or other family members who bring up children when their HIV infected parents have died or are unable to cope: account needs to be taken of the pressure exerted within extended families in such cases.
The care of healthy, dependent children due to suffer bereavement as a result of the HIV epidemic in Lothian should be addressed while the problem is still in its infancy.
Trends in prenatal diagnosis of Down's syndrome
Editor ,— David E Mutton and colleagues report their analysis of the national Down's syndrome register for 1989–91.
One of their main findings is the increasing importance of fetal ultrasonography in the prenatal diagnosis of fetal trisomy 21.
Though I do not doubt the considerable advances made in certain ultrasound centres in Britain and the United States in the use of fetal ultrasonography as an adjunct to prenatal diagnosis of fetal trisomy 21, the evidence in the Down's syndrome register is only as good as the information provided to the cytogenetics centres from people requesting karyotyping.
In the past year I have identified two cases of trisomy 21 in our screening district for which the regional cytogenetics centre was advised that the reason for requesting karyotyping was a suspected anomaly seen on ultrasonography.
Examination of the records of prenatal biochemical screening for these two cases showed that biochemical screening had been carried out and a report of an increased risk of Down's syndrome issued before the ultrasonography was done.
To ascribe diagnosis of such cases solely to ultrasonography is thus incorrect as prior knowledge of the results of biochemical screening could lead to a bias in identifying cases by ultrasonography.
If these examples are duplicated across Britain doubt may be cast on the finding of an increased effectiveness of fetal ultrasonography in the prenatal diagnosis of fetal trisomy 21.
The Down's syndrome register should consider classifying reasons for referral more precisely.
It will become increasingly less likely that any one element (biochemical screening, maternal age, or ultrasonography) will be the sole reason for referral for karyotyping.
Retinoblastoma in children of former residents of Seascale
Editor ,— In 1990 three cases of retinoblastoma were reported in children whose mothers had spent part of their childhood in Seascale and whose maternal grandfathers had worked at Sellafield nuclear plant.
Subsequently a further two cases of retinoblastoma linked to Seascale came to light.
The common feature in these five cases is that the mother had been resident in Seascale at some time since the early 1950s, when the Sellafield nuclear plant came into operation.
We have estimated the size of the denominator population as an average of 31.4 births a year which, projected to a 41 year period (1950–90), gives 1287 births.
Of the children born in Seascale 57% entered the village school; the others were assumed to have left the village.
If the average age at school entry is 4.5 years this gives an outward migration rate of 12.5% a year (95% confidence interval 10.8% to 14.4%).
If it is assumed that the age structure of the inward flow and the outward flow is similar and that those who leave continue to reproduce at the same rate as those of a similar age who stay then an estimate of the number of births to women who leave can be made (table).
Two methods of calculation are possible.
Method A assumes that women who leave in any one year will produce a×b children a year thereafter, where a=average number of children born in Seascale per year and b=the migration rate.
The number born from 1950 to 1990 is obtained by summing over all years — that is, a×b (sum of 0.5 to 40.5).
This will be an overestimate, however, as some of the births will be grandchildren, not children, of Seascale residents.
Method B corrects for this overestimate by using the average age at which women give birth, which in England and Wales between 1950 and 1990 was 27.1 years.
The women who leave Seascale in 1950 will produce approximately a×b×27 children, as will those who leave in 1951, and so on for 14 years.
But then the number will reduce.
An estimate is given by:(a×b×27×14) + (a×b (sum of 0.5 to 26.5))
The total number of births (table) is in the region of 4000–5000.
Retinoblastoma occurs in 1 in 20 000 live births, and the expectation in 5000 children is 0.25 case.
Five cases is a 20-fold increase (6.4 to 46.4; p<0.0001).
There is a considerable increase in retinoblastoma in children whose mothers have lived in Seascale during the period of operation of the Sellafield nuclear plant.
A longitudinal health study of this population is required to see if the incidence of other childhood cancers is increased.
Persistent glue ear in children
Editor ,— The Effective Health Care bulletin No 4 on the management of persistent glue ear in children has caused controversy.
As there is considerable clinical uncertainty and variation in practice in this condition such debate is to be welcomed.
Some clarification of points raised might, however, be useful.
Carl Watson seems to have misread the bulletin in a few places.
We do not report that 22% of all tonsillectomies for glue ear in Yorkshire were done as day case procedures but that 22% of tonsillectomies carried out as single procedures were.
This represents only two cases in 1990–1, and all costings were based on the assumption that tonsillectomies took place as inpatient procedures.
Altogether 471 tonsillectomies were performed for glue ear, all but nine of which were performed with other operations such as adenoidectomy.
What is more worthy of comment is the high number of tonsillectomies for this cause, given the evidence that tonsillectomy does not enhance the effectiveness of either adenoidectomy or insertion of grommets in improving hearing.
The bulletin's conclusion is based on a comprehensive review of all the studies, and the stated beneficial effects of some surgery for some children took into account the positive results from a study by Gates et al .
We drew particular attention to three studies because they reported a level of hearing loss which can be more objectively compared between studies and is a major clinically relevant end point.
Our observations about possible problems with using the contralateral ear as a control were made as a contribution to debate and were not used as a basis for excluding any studies from consideration or inclusion.
H B Whittet and colleagues make the valid point that hearing loss is not the only important outcome measure.
We argued (paragraph J.2) that broader outcome measures that are more sensitive to potential disability should be included in future research and audit.
Nevertheless, we take issue with some of the indications for treatment that they mention.
None of the 19 randomised controlled trials used otalgia or recurrent acute otitis media as an outcome measure and so there is little scientific evidence that surgery benefits children with these conditions, especially when the high proportion who experience severe or persistent discharge after insertion of grommets is considered.
Like John Marshall and Anthony A Narula, we would like to see improved access to high quality audiological and otolaryngological assessment.
By ignoring the complex natural course, however, they mistakenly assume that, because waiting times are often considerable, children who present with effusion have had glue ear for some time and will continue to do so without treatment.
Watchful waiting is more likely to establish persistence and reduce the unacceptably high dry tap rates reported in several of the studies reviewed.
Tumour markers and primary site of cancer
Editor ,— A R Gamble and colleagues aimed to identify the primary site of metastatic cancer using tumour marker immunoreactivity in the hope that this will reduce the number of investigations in patients with often a very limited life span.
However, their article states that ‘investigative mastectomy could be considered for women with normal mammograms who present with axillary node disease when antibody reactivity supports a primary tumour in the breast.’
According to their results, in 10 out of 16 patients with breast as the predicted primary site the prediction was incorrect.
Normal results on breast examination and the mammogram would make a breast primary even less likely.
Breasts are not just appendages which can be removed to provide the histology department with a tissue diagnosis.
Pre-emptive analgesia
Editor ,— Dudley J Bush mentions the conflicting evidence for the existence of pre-emptive analgesia and suggests that differences in surgical procedure and anaesthetic may explain this.
The noxious stimulation used in animal studies (chemical and thermal) is also suggested to be inadequate and given as reason why these studies often lend support to pre-emptive analgesia.
Recent studies have shown that rapid molecular events occur in the spinal cord after noxious peripheral stimulation and may explain why pre-emptive analgesia is often difficult to show.
Hunt et al showed that brief noxious but generally not other stimulation will lead to the rapid expression of the c -fos gene in Rexed layers I, II, and V of the spinal cord.
These changes may last many hours, and thermal stimulation especially gives rise to a particularly complex and longlasting expression of the gene.
Fos protein dimerises with Jun protein to bind the AP1 binding site on DNA.
The gene for pre-pro-dynorphin (PPD) has the AP1 binding site and fos has been shown to colocalise with dynorphin.
Models of acute pain and inflammation have been associated with increased production of dynorphin and dynorphin applied directly to the spinal cord causes hyperalgesia.
Furthermore, changes in immunoreactivity of fos can be correlated with the severity of the disease state in an arthritic model.
On the basis of these findings a model can be suggested to explain how noxious stimulation can lead to induction of c -fos and give rise to the neurophysiological and behavioural changes seen in pain states.
Attempting to block the expression of c -fos is extraordinarily difficult.
Morphine given pre-emptively in an acute pain model will block the induction of c -fos in a dose dependent manner, however, even with relatively high doses there is still a basal level of c -fos induction with noxious stimulation.
Though MK-801, the N -methyl- d -aspartic acid (NMDA) antagonist, blocks central sensitisation and ‘windup,’ it does not stop the expression of c -fos in a noxious stimulation model.
There is also evidence that previous ‘low level’ noxious stimulation may have a priming effect, allowing further minor noxious stimulation to cause dramatic c -fos induction.
This may have implications for the effectiveness of pre-emptive analgesia in surgery for previously painful conditions.
We agree with Bush that the persistence of afferent stimulation after the pre-emptive analgesia has ‘worn off’ may allow a barrage of nervous impulses which will induce c -fos and so minimise the beneficial effect of the technique.
Research into c -fos and other related genes (known as immediate early genes) as markers of noxious stimulation in the nervous system can increase understanding of the basis of both acute and chronic pain state.
Inheritance of chronic inflammatory bowel disease
Editor ,— Marianne Orholm and colleagues have reported an investigation into the mode of inheritance of chronic inflammatory bowel disease.
They performed a mixed model analysis by fitting several mathematical models to the segregation of ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease in a series of Danish families.
The authors proposed a dominant gene model for ulcerative colitis and suggested a recessive gene model for Crohn's disease to explain the evident familial clustering in these conditions.
Ten years ago, the mixed model was extended with the incorporation of transmission probabilities, which allows the formal testing of mendelian segregation proportions.
This unified model was introduced to prevent false detection of major gene inheritance.
For example, McGuffin and Huckle showed in a mixed model analysis that attendance at medical school was adequately fitted by a recessive major gene model; however, this intriguing hypothesis was rejected when transmission probabilities were rigorously tested.
Contemporary computer programs for complex segregation analysis allow such tests of mendelian segregation, and I urge caution in interpreting these results pending a full analysis under the unified model.
The Danish group has previously commented on the familial occurrence of inflammatory bowel disease and reported empiric recurrence risks for first and second degree relatives of probands with either ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease.
Risch has shown how the pattern of recurrence risks in various classes of relatives can elucidate the mode of inheritance of a trait.
The reported recurrence risk ratios (λ R ), which are defined by the risk to a relative of class R (K R ) divided by the population prevalence (K p ), fit a multifactorial model better than a monogenic model for both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease (see table; note that recurrence risks corrected for sex and age are not available to permit rigorous analysis of these data).
The authors support this finding with their observation that the recurrence risk ratio for first degree relatives in families with two affected members is greater than that found among the relative of single probands (18.1 v 8).
This increase in risk is a cardinal feature of a multifactorial trait.
In view of these concerns over the mode of inheritance of chronic inflammatory bowel disease, attempts to map susceptibility loci should be analysed by a robust linkage test (for example, affected pedigree member of ‘sib pair’ test) so as to minimise false positive claims of linkage.
BCG vaccination and health care workers
Editor ,— K M Citron discusses BCG vaccination against tuberculosis and asserts that vaccination of hospital staff may become increasingly important.
Under French regulations BCG vaccination is compulsory for hospital employees.
I report on  tuberculosis in health care workers in central France.
I studied cases of tuberculosis in hospital employees between 1984 and 1992.
Sixty two cases of occupationally acquired tuberculosis occurred during this period.
In all cases the employees had had BCG vaccination, but in 41 cases the tuberculosis occurred more than 15 years after the vaccination.
The World Health Organisation and many authors consider that BCG vaccination gives about 80% protection, but only for 15 years.
Thus in these 41 cases the protection offered by BCG vaccination may have disappeared.
Health care workers should have a tuberculin skin test at least every two years.
A further BCG injection should be given if the result of the test is negative.
In 44 cases in this study tuberculosis was detected by a routine chest x ray examination.
Chest x ray screening, though more costly, is more effective than skin testing.
As the number of patients admitted to hospital with HIV infection and tuberculosis increases, the risk of nosocomial transmission to staff may rise, and new thought must be given to prevention.
Toxic shock syndrome after minor surgery
Editor ,— We believe that there are two other important lessons to be learnt from A R J Bosley and colleagues' lesson of the week on toxic shock syndrome after minor dermatological surgery.
Septic shock is defined by its characteristic haemodynamic profile, which is independent of the infective organism.
Suspicion of this diagnosis should, in our view, result in the patient being transferred to the intensive care unit immediately.
The initial management is supportive, requiring invasive haemodynamic monitoring with arterial, central venous, and pulmonary artery flotation catheters in most cases.
Vigorous resuscitation with intravenous fluid and support with inotropes and vasoconstrictors should be started without delay to optimise oxygen delivery and transport.
Specific treatment, currently antibiotics and surgical debridement, guided by investigations to localise and identify the infective organism is equally important.
Despite the above measures septic shock, regardless of aetiology, continues to have a mortality of 60–90%.
In our opinion, only by early recognition and aggressive intervention can a patient's chances of survival be increased.
Secondly, transport of such critically ill patients to regional referral centres should be considered and discussed early in the clinical course.
Complications during transport are, in our experience, common and life threatening and thus demand adequate equipment and appropriate numbers of experienced staff.
Editor ,— In their comments on the treatment of toxic shock syndrome A R J Bosley and colleagues do not mention the use of blood products containing human immunoglobulin.
In toxic shock syndrome in burnt children specific treatment entails the use of intravenous human immunoglobulin, either as a concentrate or in the form of fresh frozen plasma or whole blood.
Appropriate intravenous antibiotic treatment should also be given, but this alone will not neutralise the toxin that has already been produced and absorbed into the circulation.
Circulatory support with plasma expanders is usually essential and may prevent the onset of shock.
Specific treatment with immunoglobulin early in the course of the illness is likely to be equally appropriate in toxic shock syndrome occurring in association with surgical procedures or with other conditions and should perhaps be recommended.
Early diagnosis of the syndrome, though difficult, is important.
Use of the term staphylococcal toxaemia might emphasise the need to treat this condition specifically and before the development of shock, which has a far higher associated mortality.
Bosley and colleagues' suggestion that there is a need for the condition to become notifiable should be supported.
Selective decontamination of the gut
Editor ,— Simon W Atkinson and David J Bihari's views on selective decontamination of the gut and related issues are unlikely to improve accepted standards in intensive care units.
Most publications on the use of selective decontamination of the gut have reported a reduction in rates of infection, but few have resulted in improved survival.
This discrepancy could be explained by the fact that these studies were of poor design, with insufficient power to detect changes in mortality.
Another important consideration might be that infection is not important in determining mortality in critically ill patients and that the type of infection seen in these patients (that is, nosocomial infections) is the consequence of their illness rather than the cause of it.
In many large series of critically ill patients sepsis has been found to be a major determinant of mortality.
The term ‘sepsis’ is misleading.
Though all doctors recognise the associated clinical signs of fever and hyperdynamic circulation, few people appreciate that although infection is the commonest cause of sepsis, infection is not necessary to maintain this clinical state; most patients with multiple organ failure die with advanced signs of sepsis but no bacteriological evidence of infection.
The inflammatory state is maintained by interactions between the vascular endothelium and cells of the immune system, one of the common final pathways being activation of arachidonic acid metabolism.
To avoid the connotations of infection it would be better, therefore, to abandon the term sepsis and use the recently introduced ‘systemic inflammation.’
Both Marshall and Sweeney and our group have shown that systemic inflammation may be more important than infection in determining mortality.
We have also shown that selective decontamination of the gut has antiseptic (anti-inflammatory) properties, which may be additional to its anti-infective (antibacterial) effect.
Other measures to prevent bacterial overgrowth such as avoidance of H 2 antagonists are likewise unlikely to have any effect on mortality, though Atkinson and Bihari support these measures.
It is true that medical staff neglect their hand hygiene, intensive care nursing staff, who have most contact with the patients, maintain high standards.
Other recommendations such as regular change of vascular access have no proved value, and we remain too ignorant on nutritional issues to give clear guidelines on this subject — though at least we agree that nutrition is a good thing.
Selective decontamination of the gut clearly does what it set out to do (reduce infection rates).
That some of its actions remain unknown is a stimulus to further research, and with sufficient collaboration between intensive care units definitive work could easily be performed.
Risks to surgeons and patients from HIV and hepatitis
Editor ,— In addition to the risks to health care staff and patients from HIV and hepatitis B outlined by the Joint Working Party of the Hospital Infection Society and the Surgical Infection Study Group, during ‘invasive procedures’ there is also a risk of transmission from health care staff to patients.
The joint working party's paper correctly highlights the problem that one possible reason for non-response to hepatitis B vaccines is a pre-existing hepatitis B carrier status and suggests that non-responders should be tested for hepatitis B e antigen to identify infectious carriers and advise them against carrying out invasive procedures.
During a 12 month period our laboratory investigated 10871 people who had had a course of hepatitis B vaccine.
Those who failed to respond to vaccine (concentration of antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigen <10 IU/l; 14% of those vaccinated) were first tested for antibodies to hepatitis B core antigen, a marker of past or current infection with  hepatitis B. As can be seen from the table, most of those investigated (99%) had negative results for antibodies to core antigen and were true non-responders.
In this series only 14 required further investigation.
On testing for hepatitis B surface antigen after informed consent was obtained we found that most subjects had negative results (9/14, 64%); three (21%; 0.03% of all those vaccinated) had positive results; there was no follow up testing on one patient, and the other was later found to have a low level of antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigen produced in response to an additional dose of vaccine.
The three members of health care staff found to have antibodies to surface antigen were all women, reflecting the large proportion of female health care workers being vaccinated and followed up (7821 out of 10871; 72%).
Of the three carriers of hepatitis B surface antigen (all positive for antibodies to hepatitis B e antigen) one was a general practitioner's receptionist and two were nurses, one of whom was known through antenatal screening to be a hepatitis B carrier.
The samples tested in this series may not include a high proportion of health care staff involved in invasive procedures.
Previous studies have shown that only 2% (386/17000) of health care staff being vaccinated were naturally immune to hepatitis B, a figure lower than that found in our population — 5.5% (1186/21389)— indicating that perhaps most of those being vaccinated are either ‘low risk staff’ or new entrants to the profession.
Testing laboratories and occupational health departments should find the data concerning the proportion of non-responders who have antibodies to core antigen useful in estimating the number of hepatitis B carriers likely to be revealed with use of the protocol suggested in the joint working party's paper.
Gloves for venepuncture
Editor ,— In 1990 the Expert Advisory Group on Aids published its guidelines, which advocated universal precautions as the best strategy for prevention of transmission of bloodborne viruses.
As the prevalence of bloodborne viruses varies and the risk of acquiring infection is proportional to this prevalence, it was unfortunately then argued that universal precautions could be restricted to areas with a high prevalence.
The compilers of the BMA code of practice for the safe use and disposal of sharps must have thought that many practitioners would be unable to comply with universal precautions because the code suggested that gloving decreased manual dexterity.
The BMA also stated that the Department of Health recommended universal precautions: wearing of gloves for all invasive procedures.
The Hospital Infection Society Working Party's guidelines also suggested a two tier approach and gave a list of 16 inoculation risk categories of patients.
Under the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations the employer is required to ensure safe working practices, but recent studies have led to serious reservations about the reliability of this two tier system for venepuncture.
Doctors are often understandably reluctant on first encounter with a patient to obtain the detailed personal history necessary to assess his or her risk category.
When a risk is perceived gloves are generally worn, but a proper assessment is infrequently performed.
Nurses and phlebotomists are more willing to comply with universal precautions than the medical profession, whose example may in the long term compromise the safety of other health care workers who are not in a position to assess the risk.
It is now time to recognise the impracticability of the two tier system for phlebotomy and persuade all health care workers to wear gloves for venepuncture.
This would decrease the exposure of skin to blood, and when a needlestick injury does occur there will be a reduction in the amount of blood inoculated.
Many patients find it more acceptable if gloves are worn for all venepuncture.
They need not be subjected to obtrusive or distressing questions that may have no relevance to their illness, and no one will be singled out for discriminatory treatment.
Information obtained from microbiologists and control of infection from nine hospitals in the South West region reveals that most have abandoned the concept of high risk patients.
Managing urinary tract infections
Editor ,— I H Khan reiterates the results of our survey into the usefulness of urine transparency as an index of absence of infection in the Dundee renal clinics.
Subsequent to this investigation we assessed 2907 urine samples from women attending the antenatal clinics in Dundee between November 1990 and September 1992.
The overall infection rate, as judged by finding >10 bacteria/ml of urine on a dipslide (Medical Wire and Equipment Co, Corsham, Wiltshire) was 5.0%.
Although the predictive value of a negative result (clarity) was 96% and the false negative rate 3.7%, the sensitivity of using transparency as an index of the absence of infection was only 32.4% in this population.
In other words, 67% of the urine samples found to be positive on culture were judged at the time of voiding to be clear.
In the renal clinic study the sensitivity was considerably higher (73% overall).
It should be noted that with low infection rates based on positive cultures (145 of 2907 urine samples) in the antenatal clinics the false negative rate is bound to be low.
Diagnosis of urinary tract infection remains difficult and there is no convenient and universally-applicable ‘gold standard’ test.
Asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy may lead to acute pyelonephritis, and treatment reduces the risk of this and subsequent prematurity.
The positive predictive value of a single dipslide culture in a given clinical setting (such as an antenatal clinic) is difficult to ascertain.
In a study of bacteriuria in pregnancy, less than half of the positive cultures were confirmed.
The reasons for the different sensitivities between the populations (between renal and antenatal clinics) are not immediately obvious.
For part of the antenatal survey aluminium bowls were replaced by white plastic bowls, which hampered interpretation of the clarity.
We would continue to recommend transparency as a useful index in renal clinics, but think that in the light of our findings it is less useful as a screening test in antenatal clinics.
Microalbuminuria, height, and sex
Editor ,— M M Gould and colleagues report an inverse association between albuminuria and height in a survey of 423 European men aged 40–75 in north London, and they speculate about possible influences in early life.
In a regression analysis with age as a covariate they report a coefficient of -0.02 cm (95% confidence interval -0.01 to -0.03 cm) for the slope of the relation between log e albumin excretion rate and height, which is equivalent to a fall of 2% in geometric mean albumin excretion with every 1 cm increase in height.
We have examined data from a survey conducted by one of us in which timed overnight urinary albumin excretion was measured in 976 European and 789 south Asian men aged 40–69 in west London.
This excluded participants with diabetes, those with an albumin excretion rate >200 µg/min, and those taking angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors.
The methods of the main survey have been described.
In regression analyses that controlled for 10 year age group as a categoric variable the slope of the relation between log e albumin excretion rate and height was 0.005 cm (-0.002 to 0.013 cm) in the European men and 0.009 cm (0 to 0.019 cm) in the south Asian men.
The age standardised prevalence of microalbuminuria (defined as albumin excretion rate 20–200 µg/min) by thirds of height in the European men was 4.3% in the lowest third, 4.6% in the middle third, and 2.5% in the highest third (NS).
In the south Asian men the age standardised prevalence of microalbuminuria was 4.6% in the lowest third of height, 4.9% in the middle third, and 4.6% in the highest third (NS).
Our results therefore exclude an inverse association between albuminuria and height of the size  reported by Gould and colleagues.
We note that the most striking finding reported in their paper — the 5 cm difference in average height between men with microalbuminuria in both samples and those with no microalbuminuria in both samples — is based on a small number of men with microalbuminuria, and the means are not standardised for age.
In the British population 70 year old men are on average about 4 cm shorter than 40 year old men, partly because of the general increase in adult height since the 1930s.
It would be helpful, therefore, for Gould and colleagues to report the number of men with microalbuminuria in both samples and the size of the difference in height between men in this group and men without albuminuria when the means for both groups are standardised to the same age distribution.
Authors' reply — Altogether 14 men in our study had microalbuminuria on both occasions and 298 were normoalbuminuric both times.
The difficulties indicated by Paul McKeigue and David Leon do not arise in our paper.
All published analyses were adjusted for age, as stated in the results section.
The difference in height between the two groups with means standardised to the same age distribution has already been calculated by analysis of covariance which controls for age (table II).
Further analysis by a paired t test with age matched controls (five controls for each subject) showed a significant difference in height between the men with microalbuminuria (mean height 166.3 cm) and those with normoalbuminuria (mean height 172.1 cm)(p<0.00001).
In the west London population in McKeigue and Leon's study only one urine sample was used to define whether the subjects had microalbuminuria, whereas our subjects were characterised by overnight and daytime urine collections.
The different results from the two studies may be due to the diurnal variation in albumin excretion rate or to different methods being used for estimating urinary albumin.
Postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy
Editor ,— J N Fordham and C Speed challenge H S Jacobs and F E Loeffler's statement that bone densitometry would not be helpful for screening for the risk of hip and vertebral fractures.
They argue, as others have done, that screening is appropriate because bone density is related to subsequent risk of fracture.
No trials have assessed the effectiveness of bone mass screening in preventing osteoporotic fracture.
Decisions about its value are therefore based on indirect evidence.
Last year I examined the way in which bone mass screening had been assessed in published work.
A Medline search yielded 18 papers discussing bone mass screening (table).
Six concluded that screening should take place, yet none of these seriously considered the requirement for screening to benefit those screened.
Four papers discussed some criteria and concluded that although screening was not recommended, ‘widespread testing’ was probably of value.
This is a convenient way of promoting the use of an investigation while side stepping the financial and ethical issues inherent in offering testing to healthy subjects (that is, screening).
Arguments against screening included that other effects of hormone replacement therapy are as or more important when decisions on treatment are made; that no agreement exists on when and whom to treat; that measurements vary at different times and with different equipment; and that there is little separation between the groups who will and will not suffer fracture in terms of bone mass.
There seems no prospect that screening for osteoporosis will meet the basic requirements for a screening programme — namely, that those offered screening must be better off as a result, that overall the screening programme must do more good than harm, and that screening must represent a better use of health care resources than other competing demands.
Published work on screening for osteoporosis is based largely on experience in the United States, where widespread growth of screening has been driven by commercial factors and not by public health policy.
In Britain bone mass screening is unlikely to be introduced on public health grounds, but interest will continue as screening is popular with the public, politicians, equipment manufacturers, drug companies, and organisations allocating research grants.
Several pilot projects are under way to show that women can be persuaded to attend for screening and that lower than average bone mass will be found in some.
This tells us only about the feasibility of screening, not about effectiveness.
Available techniques for measuring bone mass are nevertheless extremely sophisticated and will be of continuing value in the diagnosis and management of bone disease and for research.
Police surgeons
Editor ,— Headlines reports a study noting that the work of police surgeons in inner London is dominated by calls associated with intoxication and arguing that there is a need for a standardised approach to the assessment of a suspect's fitness to be interviewed.
Some four months before the publication of the reported work, we produced a report which drew on a questionnaire survey of all police surgeons and sample surveys of investigating and custody officers working in the Metropolitan Police District; the reported work focused on the custody records of just three stations in London.
We subsequently undertook an additional study of the records of 450 call outs of London police surgeons and are now conducting  research for the first comprehensive national study of police surgeons.
Our researches confirm that intoxication is implicated in many call outs.
However, it was often not the prime reason for the call out, typically occurring in combination with other factors, usually some form of physical injury.
In cases focusing on fitness to be detained it was the injury rather than the intoxication that was the prime reason for the call out.
In cases involving the assessment of fitness to be interviewed, mental state assumed a greater importance.
Overall, injury and assault accounted directly for 36% of consultations and alcohol for 19%.
This finding concurs with the personal study of Payne-James.
With regard to the assessment of fitness for interview, a key issue is the need for any standardised approach to incorporate a record of the reasons for particular decisions.
We believe that the present system within the Metropolitan Police District carries a potential for discrepancy between custody records, surgeons' notes, and records of a surgeon's attendance.
Only a minority of police surgeons' decisions subsequently receive in depth scrutiny and our work found no reason to doubt the quality of the service, but this shortcoming should be addressed.
Low blood pressure and wellbeing
Editor ,— The finding of Annika Rosengren and colleagues, that low blood pressure is associated with decreased psychological wellbeing, is consistent with several studies recently published in the BMJ including our own.
These authors are right to point out that in cross sectional analyses it is difficult to make assumptions of causality.
The concept of a ‘hypotensive syndrome’ implies that low blood pressure causes the associated physical and psychological symptoms, such as impaired psychological wellbeing or mild depression.
This is clearly the assumption in those countries where the condition is widely ‘treated’ with a variety of drugs.
An alternative hypothesis, which has considerable intuitive plausibility, needs to be refuted before this assumption can be justified.
According to this hypothesis, depression or decreased psychological wellbeing causes low blood pressure by a variety of possible mechanisms, including diminished physical activity, altered diet, and decreased autonomic arousal.
We tested this hypothesis by examining the case notes of 1046 consecutively admitted psychiatric patients, comparing the blood pressure on admission of depressed and non-depressed patients.
If minor degrees of depression or diminished wellbeing lead to significantly lower blood pressure, then it should follow that depression that is sufficiently severe to lead to hospital admission will be associated with substantially reduced blood pressure.
The potentially confounding variables of age, alcohol consumption, and medication were controlled for in a logistic regression model, with the binary variable depression versus all other diagnoses as the dependent variable, and systolic and diastolic blood pressure as independent variables.
Analyses were conducted separately for men and women.
No significant differences were found between the two groups of patients for either systolic or diastolic blood pressure.
The finding that even severe depression does not lead to a lowering of blood pressure suggests that the mild depression and decreased wellbeing associated with low blood pressure in the studies referred to above is not due to a causal effect of the former on the latter, which strengthens the case for the existence of a hypotensive syndrome.
Gangliosides in neurological diseases
Editor ,— Albert Figueras and colleagues suggest that gangliosides can be withdrawn from the market because their efficacy is not clearly delineated.
The accompanying editorial, without scientific justification, calls for suspension of all human studies of possible efficacy of gangliosides because the substances are considered to be potentially immunogenic.
We do not agree with either statement.
The editorial was apparently written on the basis of inadequate information and some of the data, as outlined in this letter, may not have been available to Peter O Behan and B A G Haniffah.
Why continue studying the efficacy of gangliosides in humans?
They could be continued on the basis of efficacy studies in experimental animals and existing data in humans.
In experimental animals, gangliosides have been shown to be protective in a number of conditions including anoxic ischaemia, models of Parkinson's disease, central nervous system trauma, autoimmune neurological disease, and peripheral nerve injury.
In humans, gangliosides have been shown to be potentially effective in various central and peripheral nervous system disorders.
In addition, data presented at the second world congress of stroke in Washington, DC, last September showed efficacy of ganglioside treatment in acute stroke in two separate large multicentre studies.
With regard to immunogenicity, the only paper to describe rabbits immunised with brain gangliosides which later developed a ‘ganglioside syndrome’ was published by Nagai et al in 1976.
The purity of the ganglioside preparation used in this study has, however, never been established, and this work has not been reproduced in other laboratories.
An abstract recently presented by R K Yu et al at the 22nd annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience in Anaheim, California, indicated no clear association of treatment with monosialoganglioside (G m 1 ) and the development of antibodies to it in 418 samples from human subjects receiving parenteral gangliosides.
In addition, serum antibodies to gangliosides, particularly monosialoganglioside, have been reported in patients with a variety of neurological conditions and those without neurological disease.
These antibodies are found in patients who have never received parenteral gangliosides.
The association of these antibodies with any human diseases is currently unclear.
A strong case can be made for the antibodies being consequential to neurological disease, and there is no correlation between the presence of these  antibodies and in vitro indices of inherent toxicity of sera in patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome.
We see no scientific justification for the statement about the immunogenicity of gangliosides, nor do we find any direct evidence to support the contention that naturally occurring antibodies to monosialoganglioside are pathogenic.
Thus, we feel that the recommendation to suspend human trials is erroneous, unjustified, and devoid of scientific merit.
Editor ,— Albert Figueras and colleagues describe 17 cases of acute motor polyneuropathy presumably associated with the administration of gangliosides that have previously been reported to the Spanish drug surveillance system.
We believe that their report conveys an erroneous view.
To assess the benefit:risk ratio for gangliosides the Spanish National Committee of Pharmacovigilance created a task force.
Two authors of the paper — Figueras and Morales-Olivas — were members of a group of neurologists and clinical pharmacologists on the task force.
The panel of experts signing this letter were recruited by the pharmaceutical companies involved in Spain.
The Spanish National Committee of Pharmacovigilance analysed 16 of the 17 cases reported as being cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Typical Guillain-Barré syndrome occurred in five patients and atypical Guillain-Barré syndrome in two others.
Of these seven patients, six had potential aetiological factors other than use of gangliosides; protopathic bias was detected in five, and in the remaining one it was doubtful whether the drug could be blamed.
The final conclusions of the national committee were, firstly, that it is not possible with the available data to establish a definite causal relation between the use of gangliosides and acute polyneuropathies and, secondly, that patients diagnosed as suffering from acute neuropathies should have a detailed drug history taken and should be followed up (Grupo de Trabajo Gangli-Msidos, 18th session of Spanish National Committee of Pharmacovigilance, Spain, 1992).
We reviewed the first 14 consecutive yellow cards reported to the Spanish drug surveillance system; only four of the patients could be regarded as having Guillain-Barré syndrome.
In only three cases was administration of gangliosides compatible temporally with the onset of symptoms.
Two Spanish epidemiological surveys on the Guillain-Barré syndrome were presented at the scientific debate of the Spanish National Committee of Pharmacovigilance (Madrid, health ministry, 30 January 1992).
In short, these studies show that the incidence of Guillain-Barré syndrome in Alcoy (0.93 cases/100000) and Cantabria (0.95 cases/100000) is comparable with that in other countries in which gangliosides are not used.
Furthermore, 74 patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome were identified in these studies; none of them had ever been treated with gangliosides.
Taking the clinical and epidemiological information into account, the Spanish health authorities decided, firstly, to prescribe gangliosides under special rules and, secondly, to recommend new clinical trials.
These trials are now under way in 12 hospitals to confirm the efficacy of gangliosides in diabetic neuropathy.
We did not find scientific justification in our report to the Spanish National Committee of Pharmacovigilance for Peter O Behan and B A G Haniffah's statement about the immunogenicity of gangliosides.
We believe that many of the arguments and circumstances discussed here were unknown by the authors of the editorial.
Natural remedies
Editor ,— Snake oil salesmen might recognise the treatment that was given to Simon Crawford's patient, but not homoeopaths, lay or medical.
The medicine prescribed, Apitop-F, is unlike any homoeopathic treatment; is not listed in homoeopathy's Materia Medica; and does not accord with principles.
The person who prescribed the medicine may have had homoeopathic experience but was not using homoeopathy in this case.
Homoeopathy can be safe and effective and was established long before most of our present allopathic treatments.
Unfortunately, anyone can describe himself or herself as a homoeopath.
There are, however, proper training agencies and reputable bodies.
Crawford comes from Glasgow, where there is a homoeopathic hospital and the Scottish College of Homoeopathy, which offer proper training and treatment.
Editor ,— Despite repeated inquiries I have been unable to discover the nature and contents of the remedy called Apitop-F.
It is certainly not stocked by any of the main homoeopathic suppliers in this country and I can assume therefore that it is most likely not homoeopathic but a herbal product — unless it has been imported from abroad, possibly Europe.
The Faculty of Homoeopathy would certainly concur with Simon Crawford's view that it is absolutely unethical for any medicine to be sold as natural and especially as homoeopathic if it were to include pharmacologically active ingredients, whether hormonal or otherwise.
Furthermore, the faculty would consider such behaviour unethical; it would most probably result in a referral to the faculty's disciplinary committee.
Patients' interests or resource allocation?
Editor ,— Tony Hope and colleagues make the important points that clinical decisions may incorporate decisions about rationing of health care and that is is important to clarify ethical judgments implicit in such decisions.
I propose that a useful point to be considered by the doctor is whether a treatment would be clinically indicated for a private patient with unlimited personal resources.
If it would be a decision not to offer it to a patient dependent on the NHS must be a decision about rationing of resources rather than about clinical need.
The doctor is then ethically obliged to make that clear to the patient to whom treatment is being denied.
I fear that we shall be faced with this obligation with increasing frequency.
Editor ,— We agree with Tony Hope and colleagues that a distinction must be drawn between decisions about which patients will benefit from an intervention and whether offering the intervention to them is an appropriate use of scarce resources.
We think, however, that some of the points made by the authors tend to confuse rather than clarify the issue.
The two sets of decisions can be understood more easily if thought of in terms of, firstly, assessing need and, secondly, setting priorities.
In contrast with the view expressed by the authors under the heading ‘Needs theories,’ we understand the need for health care to be an ability to benefit from an intervention.
In operational terms, someone has a need for health care if he or she has the appropriate indications for the intervention in question.
The authors fail to emphasise  the difficulties that arise from the lack of information available about indications for treatment.
The case series quoted in their article in support of a low mortality after intervention in elderly people may not be representative as published series are often of highly selected patients and from centres of excellence and are likely to overestimate the results obtained in more typical practice.
Other studies, especially randomised controlled trials, may be of little additional help as many exclude important groups such as women or elderly people.
There are few well designed evaluative studies that examine how different symptoms respond to an intervention and under what circumstances.
This has important implications for patient preference as such studies should provide a basis for each person to assign his or her own values to different levels of risk and benefit.
Those who wish to receive an intervention, having considered the probability of a particular outcome, will translate their need into a demand for care.
As the resources required to meet all demands are likely to exceed those available to society the ethical questions arise in decisions on what can be afforded, in terms of both the total amount of resources to be spent on health care compared with other demands such as education or housing and the distribution of those resources.
It is at this stage that the various approaches — use of quality adjusted life years, lotteries, sanctity of life — may be useful, but in discussing them the authors raise a series of straw men.
None can provide a definitive answer to the question of whom  resources should be spent on.
Rather, they can act only as a guide to decision making by making the assumptions underlying the decisions explicit.
We believe that much of the confusion surrounding the current debate on allocation of resources results from a failure to distinguish between assessing need (a technical question) and setting priorities (a judgmental question).
Clarification of this distinction would enable the correct questions to be asked about those interventions that are provided although a need does not exist (reducing inappropriate care) and those interventions that are not provided although they are demanded and can be shown to be needed (rationing).
NHS reforms
Editor ,— Chris Ham states that ‘The introduction of contracts has helped to enhance the accountability of providers to purchasers,’ but from our own research we are aware of some purchasing organisations that have failed to exercise any control over the financial and strategic operations of providers (presented to the Health Economics Studies Group, York, 1993).
As one contracts manager put it, ‘Don't talk to me about that health needs nonsense, we're just trying to keep the lid on.’
We found the most significant factor affecting the health of purchasing authorities was the outcome of subregional weighted capitation, in which inertia was overcome only where districts had gained or lost significantly under the formula.
Many providers seem to have been able to ‘capture’ the market place, safe in the knowledge that they are in a better position than purchasers to favourably influence the local and national political environments to their advantage.
In particular the threat to switch contracts to alternative providers is an empty one for many health authorities.
We are aware that, in the present round of contracting, some health authorities are coming under pressure from regions to support providers for whom they are the main purchaser.
In addition to doubts about the contracting process, we also take issue with Ham on his singling out of underfunding as the major problem for the future of the NHS.
We do not disagree that the financial health of the NHS requires attention, but it is also true that the NHS is caught in a gridlock of unevaluated and inefficient practice in which most major policy decisions are still left to individual clinicians; this situation requires urgent attention.
A good illustration of this is provided by a recent study of surgery for otitis media with effusion, in which 34% of children operated on were found not to have the condition at the time of surgery.
The trial was designed on a pragmatic basis, and the results reflected normal practice among the clinicians involved.
Inefficiencies such as these are avoidable, and the future of the NHS depends on developing a structure within which effective interventions can be targeted at those most likely to gain real benefit.
As the situation in the United States shows, it is not merely how much money is spent on health care that is important, but also what it is spent on.
Tipping the balance
Editor ,— We wish to correct several inaccuracies in Tony Smith's review of What Doctors Don't Tell You .
Tony Smith claims that the purpose of our newsletter is to support alternative medicine.
That is untrue.
Our objective is to expose those treatments in orthodox medicine that have never been subjected to rigorous testing to prove their safety and effectiveness.
We do so to make available to ordinary people this crucial information so that they can make informed decisions about their health care.
Smith disparages our claim to be printing material hitherto available only in medical literature, maintaining that much of what we print regularly appears in the national newspapers and magazines.
If so, where was the general coverage of the recent study showing poor pregnancy outcome among women receiving routine Doppler ultrasound scans?— or of the large scale trial in the United States showing that half of the coronary angiography being undertaken is unnecessary or postponable?
We do not adopt a dogmatic position ‘for’ or ‘against’any medical treatment.
We limit ourselves to a single question: has this treatment been proved to be safe and effective?
For instance, we warned about the measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine three years before two of the three versions of the drug were taken off the market.
Tony Smith claims that we apply a double standard to orthodox and alternative medicine, using published studies in the medical literature to denounce the former while relying largely on anecdotal evidence to promote the latter.
He attacks our article on diabetes mellitus which quotes Dr Stephen Davies explaining the value of supplements and dietary intervention when, in fact, there is a wealth of published scientific evidence showing the value of such an approach.
Waiting times for outpatient appointments
Editor ,— Catherine Pope's editorial on waiting times for outpatient appointments does not reflect the whole picture.
Though we agree that nationally the NHS ‘lacks a systematic method of collecting information about outpatient waiting,’ the situation in our area is different.
Ealing Health Authority obtains regular updates on waiting times for a first outpatient appointment by consultant and, for each consultant, by subspecialty (for example, general surgery clinics and varicose vein clinics) from all of its major providers.
Waiting time by specialty is meaningless as it conceals a wide variation among consultants' clinics.
The information, however, may not always be reliable.
For example, Monday clinics are prone to develop a backlog owing to bank holidays and statutory holidays.
Clinics should be managed within each provider unit to take this into account.
With regard to verifying the accuracy of the published waiting times, mechanisms are in place through which general practitioners and community health councils can feed back the current situation to the health authority.
The health authority, as purchaser, requires through its service contracts regular and accurate publication of waiting times for outpatient appointments so that general practitioners can take them into consideration when making a referral.
Thus ideas have come out of academe and are being implemented in the clinic.
Editor ,— Catherine Pope is wrong when she states that the patient's charter promises patients a maximum outpatient waiting time of 30 minutes.
What the charter does promise patients is that they ‘will be given a fixed appointment time and be seen within 30 minutes or be kept informed of any delay.’
Suitable explanations for any delay would be that there are too many patients or too few doctors and that the service is underfunded.
Unless these deficiencies are corrected it will not matter how many ideas come out of academe.