

Editorials
Interventional genetics and cancer treatment
Gene therapy predicted to join the therapeutic menu within the decade
The discovery of oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes has opened new avenues for exploring the control of cellular growth in health and disease.
The protein products encoded by many of these genes have been characterised — some in considerable detail — and the evidence is now compelling that their abnormal expression is related to the development of human cancer.
Can any of this be harnessed for therapeutic gain?
Systemic treatment of cancer is bedevilled by the similarity of tumour cells to normal cells, at least under most physiological conditions.
Currently available chemotherapy is often highly toxic and, sadly for patients with many common tumours, simply ineffective.
Although new agents, often discovered empirically, are entering clinical trials, there is little sign of classic pharmacological approaches providing a breakthrough.
The prospect of genetic intervention is much more appealing as it gets to the core of the problem.
Thanks to rapid advances in recombinant DNA technology, we now have a range of sophisticated vectors that can deliver genetic information to cells in vivo.
Most protocols currently use replication defective retroviruses, which can very efficiently achieve stable integration into human somatic cells.
Gene transduction with these agents is essentially restricted to dividing cells, but although this could limit applications for other genetic disorders, it should not restrict gene therapy for cancer, where the target population of malignant cells is expanding.
Other viral vectors have features that may be useful for delivering genes in particular circumstances.
For instance, large segments of DNA can be successfully cloned in place of the early region 1 genes of replication deficient adenovirus.
Such altered viruses can transduce non-replicating cells, including differentiated epithelial cells of the respiratory tract and elsewhere, and this has made them the chosen vectors for genetic therapy of cystic fibrosis.
Other delivery systems include liposomes and the promising technique of receptor mediated delivery of nucleic acids.
Two interventional genetic approaches might be exploited to block expression of genes associated with cancer.
Antisense technology uses sequences of nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) complementary to a specific target messenger RNA to block the production of proteins selectively.
The second approach uses ribozymes that are RNA sequences with the capacity to cleave target RNA selectively.
These may be incorporated as cassettes in antisense vectors and may be even more effective in abrogating expression of target genes.
Such approaches have proved effective in reverting the transformed phenotype of malignant cells in vitro, but several problems remain before clinical application would be feasible.
Most of the 38 protocols approved for genetic therapy are being carried out in the United States on patients with cancer.
Britain has lagged behind, and the committee for the approval of protocols proposed by the Clothier report has only just been announced by the Department of Health.
Several British groups have protocols ready for treating cancer with genetic therapy.
Four approaches are being investigated.
The first, virally directed enzyme prodrug therapy, involves the delivery of suicide or ‘Trojan horse’ vectors to tumours and certain normal cells.
This entails coupling a promoter region of a gene expressed in cancer cells with a non-mammalian enzyme that can activate a prodrug to a cytotoxic agent.
The selectivity may not need to be absolute — for example, if the promoter is specifically activated in breast epithelial tissue it may be possible to produce a ‘genetic mastectomy,’ effectively destroying all normal as well as malignant breast cells.
The transcriptional regulatory sequences of carcinoembryonic antigen (implicated in colorectal cancer), tyrosinase (melanoma), c-erb B2 (breast, pancreatic, and gastric cancer), and α fetoprotein (hepatoma) have been coupled to the genes for several drug activating enzymes.
One of the most versatile enzymes is cytosine deaminase, found in fungi and bacteria, which converts the antifungal drug flucytosine to the much more toxic fluorouracil.
Better understanding of the secrets of transcription control are likely to lead to new selective vectors.
The second approach is to use lymphocytes that home in on tumours as vehicles for delivering a biological payload to the tumour.
Tumour infiltrating lymphocytes can be harvested from tumour biopsy specimens, grown in vitro, and infected with suitable retroviruses containing human cytokine genes.
Lymphocytes that have been successfully transduced (that is, they express the genes carried by the virus) are selected and their population expanded for reintroduction into the patient.
Tumour necrosis factor, interferon alfa, and interleukin 2 have already been expressed and secreted in high concentrations within certain tumours.
These agents are toxic when given systemically, and so producing them at high concentration within the tumour is an attractive goal.
As yet, however, there is little evidence that cytokine secreting tumour infiltrating lymphocytes perform any more effectively than the parent cells.
Modifying the immunogenicity of tumour cells by inserting genes encoding either cytokines or the products of the major histocompatibility complex can circumvent the problem of the weak immunogenicity of many animal tumour systems.
Encouraging results have been obtained by expression of the IL-2 gene in a mouse colonic cancer model and of the IL-4 gene in a mouse renal cancer model.
Many clinical studies of genetic immunomodulation are currently under way, particularly in those diseases in which powerful immune responses have been detected, such as melanoma and renal cell carcinoma.
Perhaps the most exciting of future possibilities for genetic intervention in cancer is the direct manipulation of oncogenes or tumour suppressor genes.
Although we recognise that cancer is a multigene disorder (with five or six genetic changes needed to induce malignancy), some genes may be critical at particular stages and reversal or blockade of a single event may be therapeutically useful.
Mutant oncogenes of the ras family are found in about a third of all cancers and as many as 80% of pancreatic tumours.
This family presents an obvious target for antisense attack, and a protocol to use a retroviral delivery system for antisense treatment in adenocarcinoma of the lung has just been approved in the United States.
The restoration of tumour suppressor gene function has proved an effective strategy for reversing the malignant phenotype in vitro and recently in several animal systems using retinoblastoma gene constructs.
Unfortunately we do not yet have good methods to control the quantity of protein produced, and overproduction could adversely affect normal tissue.
Indeed, transgenic mice with an extra copy of the RB1 gene are consistently smaller than normal.
Once the entire human genome has been mapped and sequenced it will become amenable to manipulation.
Replacing new genes for old — homologous recombination — is now feasible in animal cells, but the technology requires a great deal of refinement before such a feat could be achieved in human somatic cells.
Transgenic animals with deleted or mutant tumour suppressor genes provide an elegant model for correction of inherited predispositions to cancer by gene transfer either into particular tissues or into the whole organism.
All new technologies carry risks.
Gene therapy is emotive, with potential hazard not only to the patient but also to staff and the environment.
Considerable effort has gone into evaluating the risks and developing ingenious methods to reduce them.
Thus disabled viruses that cannot reproduce themselves, suicide marker genes that can destroy cells containing the relevant vector when required, and close examination of clinical protocols by national ethical and scientific committees all help to limit potential problems.
A decade ago it would have been inconceivable that we would now know enough about the molecules of cancer to consider genetic intervention.
We believe that within 10 years cancer centres will be offering gene therapy as an effective systemic treatment along with surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy.
Fluoridation in Britain today
Water companies are getting in the way
The recent decision by Welsh Water not to continue fluoridating water in Gwynedd means that the water fluoridation schemes established as part of the Ministry of Health's demonstration study in 1955–6 on Anglesey and in Watford and Kilmarnock have now all stopped operating.
That the schemes provided benefits seems undeniable.
For example, after the burgh council stopped the Kilmarnock scheme Professor John Mansbridge of the University of Edinburgh continued to monitor the dental health of children in Kilmarnock and in the control community of Ayr.
He showed that five years later the dental health of children in Kilmarnock had deteriorated.
At baseline in 1956 the average 4 year old had 7.1 decayed, missing, or filled teeth.
By 1961, after five years of fluoridation, the equivalent figure was 3.0; in 1962 fluoridation stopped, and by 1968 the number of decayed, missing, or filled teeth had reverted to 6.1.
Throughout the period 1956 to 1968 the equivalent figure in 4 year old children in the control town of Ayr remained between 6.9 and 7.2.
The Anglesey scheme operated for over 30 years, albeit rather intermittently for the past few years.
Thomas and Kassab recently reported on the substantial benefits of fluoridation for the dental health of women aged up to 32 years who had lived continuously on Anglesey and who were attending St David's Maternity Hospital between July 1986 and July 1987 for their confinement.
The dentist recording the dental condition of both the women from Anglesey and the control group from the non-fluoridated Gwynedd mainland was blind to  women's residential status; those living in the fluoridated area had 30% fewer caries.
The fluoridation plant in Watford, also showing signs of age, stopped operating  in 1989.
On the positive side, fluoridation continues to provide substantial benefits for the dental health of six million people, many of them living in the west midlands and the north east of England.
The arguments for extending fluoridation are not as overwhelming as they were in 1956.
The prevalence of dental caries has fallen in both fluoridated and non-fluoridated districts, and the costs of fluoridation plant designed to meet modern operating standards are considerable.
It is sensible therefore that the health departments should give priority for new schemes to areas such as the north west of England and the west of Scotland where the prevalence of dental caries remains high and where large water treatment works allow for economies of scale.
The Water (Fluoridation) Act 1985 placed the responsibility for decisions on water fluoridation with district health authorities, who are required to consult locally before making a formal request to the water undertaker.
It was assumed, incorrectly as we now know, that water undertakers would concern themselves mainly with the technical feasibility of the proposal.
Experience in the North Western Region, where 18 district health authorities completed consultation in 1988, and more recently in Strathclyde, Yorkshire, Wessex, and Northern Ireland, clearly shows that health authorities can obtain substantial public and professional support for fluoridation, even though opinion among local authorities remains divided.
It is also clear that the cooperation of the water companies cannot be assumed.
For example, the chairman of Welsh Water stated recently that, in spite of assurances from the Drinking Water Inspectorate concerning the safety of fluoridation plant designed according to the Department of Environment's code of practice, his company would not continue fluoridation on Anglesey or extend fluoridation into the rest of Wales unless required to do so by the secretary of state.
While ministers quite correctly point out that the act requires local consultation, it was surely not the intention of parliament that water undertakers should have such an absolute veto.
The recent fundamental review of dental remuneration by Sir Kenneth Bloomfield called for ‘a more robust approach’ to fluoridation ‘which would not allow for indefinite procrastination in adopting measures judged by the competent health authorities to be both beneficial and cost effective.’
The secretary of state should now require water undertakers to implement fluoridation schemes when they are requested to do so by health authorities, subject to assurances that the proposed schemes are technically feasible and economically sensible.
Urban slums and primary health care
The private doctor's role
Living in abject poverty and consulting a private doctor seem a contradiction, though not to slum dwellers in many developing countries.
In some cities a relative plethora of doctors and rapid urbanisation have led to a boom in private medical practice, which now provides a substantial amount of curative care for the inhabitants, including the poor (p 673).
At the same time as slum dwellers have been queuing to see their local private doctor, ideas from the political right have influenced the policy guidelines of international organisations with clout in developing countries.
For example, the World Bank and the World Health Organisation now emphasise private options for health care delivery.
This has led planners to focus on the substantial private sector already in existence in some countries.
They want to know how this sector can be promoted, how the quality of care can be improved, and how private doctors can participate in national public health policies.
Answers to these questions have important implications for slum dwellers, whose only local source of medical care may be private doctors.
The little that has been written about private health care in developing countries suggests great variations among doctors and countries.
Excellent care is provided by some, but the general picture is depressing.
In particular, it seems that the market forces that opened the doctors' doors in slums are determining the type and quality of the care that they provide.
Services are predominantly curative.
Preventive health care, such as childhood immunisation and health promotion through advice on lifestyle, is uncommon.
Consultations, mostly for minor ailments, are characteristically brief.
The number of people seen is high — up to 100 patients a day — thus ensuring that unit costs are kept low.
Standard medical practice may be ignored, with excessive numbers of drugs or overly expensive formulations being prescribed.
For example, in a study of 100 private doctors 80 treatment regimens for tuberculosis were identified.
Only four of these followed the standard guidelines of WHO, and the prescribed regimens cost three times as much as the standard protocols.
Some prescribing habits may adversely affect patients' health: systemic steroids for fever, psychotropic drugs for pain, and use of inappropriate antibiotics fall into this category.
When it comes to referral anecdotal reports suggest that informal gratuities are being paid by specialists to doctors for referring patients, potentially leading to overinvestigation and overtreatment.
Have governments a responsibility for actively regulating the private sector?
At the very least, they have an obligation to protect their populations from practices that may adversely  affect their health.
Beyond this the state may wish to encourage better quality service and extend the range of activities that private doctors provide to include preventive programmes such as immunisation.
These goals seem reasonable on paper but require a strong political commitment to ensure the accessibility of basic primary health services to the population and the existence of a clear vision of the minimum level of service that the state expects.
Invoking state regulatory mechanisms to improve the quality of the service provided is likely to be complex.
The process will be contingent on existing regulation in the countries, the opportunities that may arise, and the strength of opposition to change.
Regulating doctors' qualifications, their premises, and the care they provide is clearly a starting point.
Control may also be achieved through resource management, such as social insurance schemes or payment of retainers or fees for service.
Professional development and postgraduate training in primary health care could be a useful adjunct in improving quality.
A reliance on training, however, assumes that the poor service results from inadequate professional knowledge rather than the perversity of market forces.
Private doctors' response to stronger state regulation, especially in countries where the private sector is well established, is likely to vary.
State activity that interferes with their autonomy is likely to be unpopular.
Collaborative change, with negotiation between professional groups and the state, may be the best way forward, but without strong government control it risks becoming little more than a tinkering with the existing system.
Ensuring that private practitioners take on preventive activities and promote healthy behaviour by their patients requires a substantial move away from a strictly market led approach.
Incentives and fees for service will be needed to reduce private doctors' autonomy and increase their accountability to the state.
Yet this requires state money for health care.
Clearly, substantial changes are needed rather than tinkering.
The goal of donor led initiatives should be to improve health care, not to increase private provision.
Ironically, the international political changes that shifted the focus to private practice were also inimical to regulation and state funding of health care.
The time seems ripe to change these guiding beliefs.
Deception in research, and racial discrimination in medicine
Racial discrimination in medicine must be ended
Not often are authors of BMJ papers arrested by the fraud squad, but this is what happened to the authors of the paper on p 691.
They sent matched pairs of simulated curriculum vitaes — one bearing an English name and one an Asian name — in response to 23 advertisements for senior house officer posts.
The only important difference between the curriculum vitaes was in the name, and yet the English names were significantly more likely to be shortlisted than the Asian names.
Although the authors were charged by the fraud squad, they were not prosecuted.
We must always question the use of deception in research, but in this case the public and professional importance of the question being asked seems to justify the small element of deception.
Ideally, the authors might before beginning the study have gained informed consent from the personnel departments of all the hospitals likely to be approached.
This method has been used to gain consent from general practitioners for research in which they are consulted by surrogate patients.
There would, however, have been at least two problems with using this method in the present study.
Firstly, everybody likely to be a member of a selection panel would have had to give consent — a formidable logistic problem.
Secondly, even a small proportion of people declining to give consent might have undermined the study — if those declining included most of those who knew that they allowed race to influence their judgments when shortlisting candidates for jobs.
The second crucial question is whether these results could have been obtained without deception.
An expanding body of work does provide evidence of racial discrimination in medicine, and St George's Hospital Medical School was found to be using a computer program to shortlist applicants that downgraded those with non-English names.
Nevertheless, most of this work is retrospective and there were other variables apart from racial differences.
The present study was prospective and allowed only race to vary — and so adds important information.
Much research does include some deception.
A placebo controlled trial does not present this problem because subjects give informed consent, but regularly in case-control studies subjects are not told the true reason for the study for fear that the study will be biased.
Stooges are used increasingly in research on how general practitioners and pharmacists perform, and some famous studies have depended on substantial deception.
Our thinking on mental hospitals has been strongly influenced by studies in which researchers pretended to be mentally ill, and in a television programme broadcast last week in Britain a reporter pretended to be homeless and  schizophrenic to illustrate the bleak reality of being mentally ill and homeless (p 726).
The experiment in which people inflicted electric shocks on subjects who were actually actors is known to all psychology students, and even journalology has an important study that depended on deception: editors had papers that they had already published resubmitted to them with the titles and addresses changed and then rejected most of them — providing evidence, the researchers argued, that editors and referees were biased against authors from provincial universities.
The study we publish today provides further evidence of racial discrimination in British medicine.
Few doctors trained overseas will be surprised by the result.
Many of them believe that the immigration of overseas doctors was encouraged to support the NHS in its early days, only for the overseas doctors subsequently to be marginalised.
Australia has also seen debate over whether doctors trained overseas suffer racial discrimination.
The demonstration of discrimination at St George's Hospital Medical School led to a flurry of reform, but a paper published in the BMJ in 1990 showed that doctors from ethnic minorities who had trained in Britain did not progress as fast in their career as native European doctors.
The authors speculated that this discrimination occurred in shortlisting for senior house officer and senior registrar posts (rather than in interviews), and today's study supports that speculation.
The shortlisting problem can be countered by not letting those doing the shortlisting have access to the names, ages, and gender of the candidates, and this process should be adopted.
But the problem of rooting racial discrimination out of the health service and medicine is a deeper one that needs a broad strategic approach.
The Commission for Racial Equality has proposed such a strategy for primary care, and the NHS Management Executive has issued guidelines on equal opportunities in recruitment and selection procedures.
These policies should be fully supported by doctors and their organisations — because racial discrimination damage both those discriminated against and those doing the discriminating.
This damage has been powerfully illustrated in a famous study that depended on deception: John Howard Griffin, a white man, darkened his skin and trudged through the American South.
In Black Like Me he writes: ‘I offer [my account]in all its crudity and rawness.
It traces the changes which occur to heart and body when a so called first class citizen is cast on the junkheap of second class citizenship.’
All the homeless people — where do they all come from?
Probably not as many from psychiatric institutions as we think
The coining of the term ‘cardboard city’ reflects the public consciousness of the visible increase in the number of homeless people on our cities' streets.
Because of problems of ascertainment, putting an accurate figure to this total is impossible.
Using its restrictive definition of homelessness, the Department of the Environment estimates that the number of homeless families in England has more than doubled over the past decade to 146000 last year.
(The housing charity, Shelfter, says that this represents at least 420000 people.)
Many of these people are likely to have serious psychiatric problems.
An early study of the Camberwell Reception Centre (now closed) found that one third of the residents were suffering from a severe psychiatric disorder, excluding alcoholism.
Twenty years later, in a survey of men arriving at a Salvation Army hostel, a quarter were diagnosed as having schizophrenia.
During the intervening period surveys of homeless people in residential settings have estimated the prevalence of severe mental illness at between 25% and 45%.
While the proportion of mentally ill among homeless people has probably not changed greatly over the past two decades, the absolute number has probably doubled in parallel with the number of homeless people.
The number of occupied psychiatric beds in England has fallen from a peak of 148 000 in 1954 to about 55 000 in 1990.
Some commentators have ascribed the rise in the number of homeless mentally ill people to the run down of psychiatric hospitals and have called for a halt to the policy of closure.
But have the erstwhile long stay patients swelled the ranks of homeless people?
There are two sources of evidence bearing on this question: one is the psychiatric history of homeless mentally ill people, while the other is follow up studies of long term psychiatric patients discharged into the community.
Only a few of the surveys of homeless mentally ill people have inquired about any history of psychiatric treatment.
A study of people using a shelter in Boston found that although 30 of the 68 respondents were suffering from a psychosis, only five had been admitted to hospital for longer than a year in total.
A survey of 124 homeless men using a Salvation Army hostel found that over half were suffering from mental disorders but only seven had been admitted to hospital for longer than a year.
In an experimental study of a case management service for homeless mentally ill people only two out of 94 people referred in a year reported having been admitted to hospital for a year or longer.
During the first year of the London homeless mentally ill initiative 544 homeless people were identified as suffering from severe mental illness.
Of these, only three had had a continuous hospital admission lasting more than five years.
The follow up studies of discharged patients have produced complementary evidence.
The Team for the Assessment of Psychiatric Services has been evaluating the run down of Friern and Claybury Hospitals in north London.
A follow up of the 278 long stay patients discharged between 1985 and  1988 failed to trace only six people, who were presumed to have become vagrants (three had been vagrants before their admission).
Of the 216 patients discharged in 1989–90, none became vagrants during the first year of follow up(J Leff et al , unpublished study).
In a similar study of the closure of Cane Hill Hospital in south London, of 103 patients followed up one year after discharge, none had become homeless.
These two sources of evidence suggest that the discharge of long stay patients from the declining mental hospitals is not the main factor contributing to the increase in the numbers of mentally ill people living on the streets.
What other factors might be operating?
One of the economic changes that is leading to increasing homelessness is the disappearance of low cost rented accommodation.
People suffering from severe psychiatric illnesses are particularly vulnerable to this change because of their high level of unemployment, low earning power, and lack of social support.
Another possible contributory factor is the increasing difficulty in admitting acutely ill patients.
The 1983 Mental Health Act, while safeguarding patients.
The 1983 Mental Health Act, while safeguarding patients' civil rights, has made many mental health professionals reluctant to use its compulsory powers except in extreme cases.
Furthermore, psychiatry has been affected by the general reduction in admission beds.
Resulting deficiencies in the treatment of acutely ill patients can place intolerable burdens on their families and increase interpersonal friction, which may culminate in patients leaving home abruptly and being unable or unwilling to find alternative forms of shelter.
The fact that severely mentally ill people roam our streets without adequate accommodation and medical care is an inescapable indictment of our society.
Instead of assuming that the discharge of patients from psychiatric institutions is to blame we should be studying carefully the pathways that lead mentally ill people into homelessness and destitution.
If we are successful in identifying these the opportunities may exist to prevent a situation that is desperately difficult to cure.
The Journal of Medical Screening
A new journal aims to focus a scattered subject
When so many diseases cannot be cured, medical screening has intuitive appeal.
It offers excellent opportunities for preventing disease, but currently the subject lacks an intellectual and practical focus.
A recent British report showed that potentially effective screening tests have been poorly implemented, while other tests have been introduced into practice without adequate evidence of benefit.
The same story is seen the world over, and there are considerable variations among countries in the ways in which screening tests are introduced and how they are applied.
Understandably, health workers and the public are confused.
As a contribution to raising the intellectual rigour of the subject and improving professional and public understanding the BMJ Publishing Group is to launch the Journal of Medical Screening next January.
At the outset potential screening tests need to be rigorously evaluated.
It is not enough to show that a screening test detects disease early, or even that it will probably save some lives.
Before a screening test is introduced into practice the efficacy of the test in detecting disease and the effectiveness of early intervention in preventing death or disability must first be quantified.
These benefits must be set against the costs, measured in both financial and medical terms, so that a judgment can be made on whether the benefits justify the cost.
Once a screening programme has been introduced, continued research is needed to monitor and improve screening performance.
The new journal will encourage the publication of the essential information on screening performance and costs so that rational decisions can be made on screening practice.
It will include papers on all aspects of proposed new screening tests and on improvements to existing tests together with regular critical reviews.
Such papers are widely dispersed at present, in specialist clinical, radiological, pathological, and epidemiological journals.
The Journal of Medical Screening will help to reduce this diffusion and concentrate the subject without sacrificing its multidisciplinary nature.
The philosophy of the journal is that screening should be about the prevention of disability and disease, not simply the early detection of disease as an end in itself.
In addition to advancing the science of screening the journal will guide its implementation.
Screening services are often fragmented, and the public may not have equal access to particular screening programmes.
The journal will encourage discussion on these issues.
The psychological, managerial, economic, and social aspects of screening will therefore be considered.
The journal will ask such questions as where screening should be carried out, who should do it, and how often screening examinations should be repeated.
The difficult ethical issues that are often raised by screening programmes will also be grasped.
The Journal of Medical Screening aims to be international and multidisciplinary, and the editorial board reflects these aims.
A call for papers for the new journal appears opposite p 721, and we welcome contributions now.
The journal will be launched at a major conference to be held in London next January.
PAPERS
Health inequalities: new concerns about the children of single mothers
Abstract
Objectives —
To show that the exclusion from conventional class based analyses of child mortality of children whose parents are classified as ‘unoccupied’ produces a misleading picture of health inequalities.
Design —
Reanalysis of data published in the childhood supplement of the registrar general's decennial supplement on occupational mortality in England and Wales, which compares numerator data for registrations of deaths in children over the age of 1 but below their 16th birthday in 1979, 1980, 1982, and 1983 with data about children aged 1–15 who were enumerated at the 1981 census.
Results —
Parents who are classified as ‘unoccupied’ largely consists of economically inactive single mothers.
Their children are estimated to represent 89% of the 614000 aged 1–15 classified as ‘unoccupied’ in the childhood supplement.
They have the worst mortality record of all social groups — an age specific death rate of 68.8/100000 a year, 42% worse than in social class V (48.4/100000) and worse than that of social class I (22.8) by a factor of 3.
At older ages (10–15 years) these children have a relative risk of death of 4.14 relative to classes I and II; the risk is 2.58 in children 0–4 and 2.56 in those 5–9.
Relative risks of child mortality in social classes I and II in comparison to classes IV and V suggests a progressive shallowing from 2.08 at ages 1–4 to 1.37 at ages 10–15.
When unoccupied parents were combined with classes IV and V and compared with classes I and II, however, inequalities seemed to be pervasive throughout childhood; the relative risks were 2.21 for those aged 1–4 and 1.98 for those aged 10–15.
Conclusions —
Children classified as unoccupied are almost certainly living in poverty as well as experiencing relatively high risks of mortality.
Class based analyses which exclude them therefore produce a misleading picture of inequalities in child health.
The implications for health policy are profound.
Strategies to promote the nation's health should acknowledge the importance of material and social deprivation more explicitly.
Introduction
One of the main criticisms of The Health of the Nation is that it fails to pay serious attention to health inequalities.
The white paper acknowledges ‘variations in health status between different socioeconomic groups’ and recognises the ‘complex interplay…of factors’which impact on health.
But it emphasises the significance of differences in relation to individual risk behaviour rather than the poverty and disadvantage of the most vulnerable sections of the community.
One of the reasons why the government seems able to sidestep a real assault on health inequalities is its belief that many observed differences in health status cannot ‘be fully accounted for by…factors such as socioeconomic groupings.’
Further research, therefore, is required ‘to elucidate the reasons for these differences.’
We aimed to respond to this challenge by showing how significant social trends — which are not captured by conventional social classifications, but which are exacerbating health inequalities — help to account for very substantial differences between population groups in rates of childhood mortality.
Reanalysis of childhood mortality data first published in 1988 raises new concerns about the health and circumstances of one of the fastest growing and most disadvantaged groups in society: lone mothers with dependent children who are largely reliant on social security benefits.
The latest estimates suggest that more than one million dependent children are in such families.
The specific objective of this paper is to show that these children have the worst mortality record of any social group.
The failure to pay more attention to what we believe is an increasingly serious health problem is a product of the way in which occupational mortality data are recorded and analysed.
The over-reliance on occupational class, which is widely acknowledged to be of diminishing utility in stratifying many social groups, has falsely persuaded some commentators that inequalities in mortality are shallower among adolescents than at any other stage in the life cycle.
In contrast, we argue that when data on mortality in all children are taken into account, inequalities associated with socioeconomic status are pervasive throughout childhood.
Method
occupational mortality
The decennial supplements of occupational mortality published by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys are an important source of data about health inequalities.
It is surprising, therefore, that greater use has not been made of the childhood supplement, which was published in 1988.
One of the supplement's most important findings is that class related differences in childhood death rates can be found in every age group for both sexes.
Table I shows the number of children, the observed number of deaths, and age specific death rates for the different groups that are separately identified in the childhood supplement.
Age specific death rates do not differ much between the non-manual social classes.
However, the manual rates are greater than the non-manual ones and they show a much clearer class gradient.
Such data, therefore, represent clear evidence of health inequalities among children aged 1–15.
But they may underestimate the true extent of inequalities, since a large group of children — who at many ages have a particularly poor mortality record — are excluded from the main analyses.
This excluded group, which the supplement categorises as ‘inadequately described’ or ‘unoccupied,’and which consisted of approximately 849000 children in 1981, is reported to have a variable pattern of death rates.
The supplement states that ‘sometimes the rates are higher than for social classes IV and V and sometimes lower, irrespective of whether or not a social class gradient exists across the rest of the classes.
Little attention has consequently been paid to this category in this report.’
It is unhelpful — and possibly disingenuous — to lump together the categories ‘inadequately described’ and ‘unoccupied’because — as Table I illustrates — their mortality records are very different.
The group classified as inadequately described has an exceptionally good record, but the unoccupied group has by far the worst mortality record of any social group.
The term unoccupied is used as a residual term by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys to describe people for whom an occupation cannot be stated.
Relatively little is known about such people, although in oral evidence to the House of Commons Health Committee the head of medical statistics at the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys remarked that ‘one of the things that people are now suggesting about that other group who do not have an occupation is that they are forming…an under class.’
Whatever its precise definition, the unoccupied group accounted for 6% of all children (61445)— more than in either social class I or V — yet 14% of observed deaths (1690) occurred in this group.
Its mortality record is not only worse than that of social class I by a factor of 3 but it is 42% worse than that of social class V (table I).
Table II contrasts the main causes of death for children whose parents are classified as unoccupied with those whose parents had an occupation.
Accidents and external causes of injury among the children of the subgroup of unoccupied families account for nearly 60% of deaths, twice the proportion in the rest of the population.
identifying ‘unoccupied’ children
The main reason given by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys for not making more of the data about the unoccupied group is related to the way in which child mortality is calculated.
Numerator data are based on registration returns about child deaths, whereas denominator data are obtained from the 1981 census.
In the vast majority of cases the occupational classification used in the census and at death registration is the same, but the term unoccupied might be interpreted differently.
In practice, we do not believe this to be sufficiently important to invalidate comparisons.
We argue that lone mothers constitute the vast majority of those classified as unoccupied at both census and death registration.
At death registration, registrars are instructed to make every effort to find out about the previous work experience of people, including those who might be unemployed or sick.
But until changes in the registration of women's occupation were introduced in 1986 there was a major difference between men and women: ‘At the registration of the death of a child…the instructions to the registrars specify that the occupation…of a woman should not be recorded unless she has been in employment for most of her adult life.’
Bradshaw and Miller's work has shown that a substantial proportion of single mothers have never been in full time employment.
A reasonable assumption to make on the basis of the instructions given to registrars before 1986, therefore, is that most of the deaths of children classified as unoccupied will have been registered by economically inactive lone mothers.
In a small number of cases, however, a woman without an occupation may be registering the simultaneous death of her spouse and child as the result of an accident.
Although such women may be registered as unoccupied, they were not in fact lone mothers.
The number of deaths for which this is likely to be true is so small that it ought not to affect the analysis presented here.
There can be little doubt that economically inactive lone mothers would have been classified as unoccupied in the census, but so might other people.
It is important to establish, therefore, whether or not it is reasonable to suppose that the children of lone mothers represent a significant proportion of the unoccupied group recorded in the census.
If it can be shown that most children recorded as unoccupied in the census also had economically inactive lone mothers then it would be reasonable to assume that the concerns about numerator-denominator bias expressed by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys may be exaggerated.
The childhood supplement does not provide detailed information about the economic or household characteristics of the 61445 children classified as unoccupied on the basis of information from a 10% sample of the 1981 census.
An examination of other reports based on the 1981 census, however, clearly shows that an overwhelming number of such children almost certainly belong to economically inactive, single parent families.
Unfortunately, it is not a simple matter to estimate the number of children in such families.
Nevertheless, the calculations set out in the box suggest that the number of children under the age of 16 living with lone mothers in 1981 and largely or totally dependent on state benefits was about 544000 in England and Wales.
Comparing this figure with the estimate of 614450 derived from the childhood supplement implies that nearly 90% of the unoccupied children are in the most disadvantaged group of one parent families.
The clearest supporting evidence that lone mothers would be classified as unoccupied at census and death registration comes from a very detailed survey of lone parent families in Britain by Bradshaw and Millar.
This study found that 73% of lone mothers depended on income support at the time of the survey, and of these only 28% had had regular full time employment before becoming a lone parent.
This implies that at least 53% of lone mothers would be classified as unoccupied; they would have been regarded as economically inactive at the census, and at death registration the instructions to registrars would preclude the recording of any occupational information.
For all practical purposes, it is reasonable to assume that the children classified as unoccupied at the census were living in poverty in one parent families.
We have also established that the instructions given to registrars would have meant that deaths of children classified as unoccupied are almost certainly associated with economically inactive lone mothers.
Much of the apparent concern about numerator-denominator bias, therefore, evaporates.
Results
In the light of these deductions the child mortality records of different age and social groups can be considered in more detail.
Using social classes I and II combined as the reference point, Table III sets out the relative risks of child mortality for different social groups in three age bands: 1–4, 5–9, and 10–15 years.
It shows that the relative risks of mortality for children in social classes IV and V were higher than for those in classes I and II for all age groups, although the difference was not statistically significant at ages 10–15.
Also, the relative risks of mortality for all age groups were highest among children classed as unoccupied.
The confidence intervals show that the relative risks among the unoccupied groups were always larger than for social classes I and II.
In addition, they were at least as high as social classes IV and V at ages 1–9 and significantly greater at age 10–15.
Children aged 1–9 who were classified as unoccupied were 2.6 times as likely to die as those in social classes I and II, and the relative risk was in excess of 4.0 at ages 10–15.
The broad picture that emerges from a consideration of mortality in social classes I and II and IV and V in table III seems to be consistent with the notion that inequalities become progressively shallower at older age groups.
However, given the importance of the mortality record of the children of what we believe to be economically inactive, one parent families, any analysis of health inequalities will be seriously flawed if it fails to include this group.
When the unoccupied group — now largely identified as a particularly disadvantaged subgroup of one parent families — is added to social classes IV and V and the relative risk of the combined group is compared with that of classes I and II, a completely different picture emerges.
Table III shows that in all three age groups, the risk of dying in the most disadvantaged group (classes IV and V plus the unoccupied) is consistently twice that of the highest group (classes I and II).
One of the consequences of taking proper account of the mortality of children classed as unoccupied is to remove the misleading impression that inequalities decline during childhood.
In fact, as is clearly illustrated by this data, inequalities are relatively consistent throughout childhood.
In particular, they are much more substantial at ages 10–15 than is commonly supposed.
Discussion
Our evidence suggests that a new approach to social stratification is required to assess health inequalities in childhood.
It is clear that the worst child mortality is found among children classified as unoccupied, a term that is usually a euphemism for their economically inactive single parents.
The credibility of this contention is strengthened by a recent study of perinatal and infant mortality that linked vital registration data for deaths under 1 year so as to overcome numerator-denominator bias.
One of the key findings was that for babies born outside marriage and registered by the mother alone — a total of 8% of all births in 1990 — the infant mortality rate was 13.1 (per 1000 live births), 80% higher than that of babies born within marriage.
Furthermore, aggregated data from this source presented to the House of Commons Select Committee on Health show that in approximately two thirds of births registered solely by the mother she is classified as unoccupied.
We believe that this evidence buttresses our conclusion that any failure to take account of children classified as unoccupied runs the very real risk of understating the extent of child health inequalities.
This is especially the case when the unoccupied group is identified as largely consisting of single parent  families dependent on state benefits, one of the fastest growing and most disadvantaged groups in society.
By any stretch of the imagination, economically inactive lone parents as a group are at least as disadvantaged as those in social classes IV and V, who are commonly contrasted with their more privileged counterparts in classes I and II.
There is a strong case, therefore, for comparing the combined mortality records of social classes I and II with IV and V plus the unoccupied to give the best aggregate picture of inequalities in child mortality.
If our analysis is valid, one consequence is that a greater proportion of observed health differences in childhood would be associated with socioeconomic variations in circumstances than can be accounted for by conventional social class groupings.
Furthermore, an implicit corollary is that strategies to promote health should pay greater attention to financial hardship and other correlates of poverty than present policy seems inclined to do.
We must, however, acknowledge that the inferences on which the analysis in this paper are based are, of necessity, speculative.
We believe that the assumptions we have made are reasonable and that the picture we paint is a valid one.
Nevertheless, we have to concede that the evidence as it stands cannot be conclusive.
Given that the implications are so profound, however, there is an urgent need to consider ways in which data from the 1991 census and vital registration can be linked in more illuminating ways so as to examine the phenomenon of the unoccupied in more depth.
How many children under 16 lived in families with an economically inactive lone mother?
To estimate how many economically inactive lone mothers there were in 1981, with children aged 1–15, in England and Wales, we have proceeded as follows:
(1) The number of one parent families in Great Britain in 1981 was estimated to be 850000.
(2) Ninety one per cent of one parent families were resident in England and Wales.
(3) Eighty nine per cent of one parent families consisted of lone mothers.
(4) The number of lone mothers in England and Wales in 1981 was estimated at 688000.
(5) Haskey found, for 1987–9, that 53% of lone mothers with at least one child under the age of 16 were economically inactive.
We assume that this rate applied in 1981; thus there were 365000 such lone mothers.
(6) There were 1.58 children under the age of 16 for each economically inactive lone mother in 1981.
(7) Thus there were 577000 children under the age of 16 in families with an economically inactive lone mother in 1981.
(8) The percentage of children under the age of 16 normally resident in private households who had a reported age at last birthday of 0 on Census day in 1981 was 5.75.
(9) Thus there were 544000 children aged 1–15 in families with an economically inactive lone mother in 1981.
(10) The estimate in (9) can be compared with the 614000 children aged 1–15 classified as unoccupied in the childhood supplement occupational mortality.
(11) Thus, probably about 89% of the children classified as unoccupied are from families with an economically inactive lone mother.
Epidemiology of Alzheimer's presenile dementia in Scotland, 1974–88
Abstract
Objective —
To describe the epidemiology of presenile Alzheimer's disease in Scotland from 1974 to 1988.
Design —
Retrospective review of hospital records of patients aged less than 73 years admitted to psychiatric hospital with various diagnoses of dementia.
Diagnoses were classified by National Institute for Communicative Disorders and Stroke and Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association Criteria and the Hachinski score.
Completeness of the study sample was evaluated by scrutiny of neurology outpatient and general hospital records.
Setting —
All general psychiatric hospitals in Scotland.
Subjects —
All patients with onset of dementia aged 40–64.
Main outcome measures —
Probable and broad Alzheimer's disease, sex of patient, age at onset.
Results —
5874 psychiatric hospital records, 129 neurology outpatient records, and 89 records from non-psychiatric hospitals were examined.
317 patients met criteria for probable Alzheimer's disease, 569 met criteria for broad Alzheimer's disease, and 267 met those for multi-infarct dementia.
Minimal incidences per 100 000 population aged 40–64 years were 22.6 (95% confidence interval, 20.2 to 25.2) and 40.5 (38.9 to 42.3) per 100 000 for probable and broad Alzheimer's disease.
In the 1981 census year the annual incidence of probable Alzheimer's disease was 1.6 (1.0 to 2.6).
Women were at greater risk with incidence rates for probable Alzheimer's disease of 28.2 (24.5 to 32.4) per 100 000 compared with 16.5 (13.8 to 19.8) per 100 000 for men.
The incidence per 100 000 for multi-infarct dementia was greater in men (25.1, 23.3 to 27.1) than women (13.4, 12.1 to 14.8).
Conclusion —
Female sex seems to be positively associated with development of Alzheimer's disease before age 65 years.
Introduction
Old people have the highest incidence of dementia, a condition with over 100 distinct causes.
Although Alzheimer's disease is the most important cause of dementia, there are few epidemiological data on the illness.
Most studies have investigated senile dementia in relatively small populations.
Although fewer people develop presenile Alzheimer's disease, such patients are more likely to be known to the health service than older sufferers.
Studies that use health service data to estimate the incidence and evaluate the natural course of presenile Alzheimer's disease may be considerably more accurate and informative than those of senile disease.
Substantial progress has been reported in understanding the molecular pathology of presenile Alzheimer's disease but this cannot be extrapolated to senile forms before the epidemiology of presenile disease is known.
Incidence of disease needs to be known for aetiological studies but is also important to those planning diagnostic services within the health service.
For  insidious disorders like Alzheimer's disease, time of onset of symptoms differs from time of presentation to medical care.
Time of presentation can be more objectively obtained from hospital records and is more relevant when assessing service requirements.
This study reports the age specific incidences of two provisional clinical classifications of presenile Alzheimer's disease and one classification of multi-infarct dementia.
Subjects and methods
We obtained data by retrospective examination of hospital records.
In Scotland all patients receive a hospital diagnostic code from the International Classification of Diseases (ICD ninth revision) on admission, discharge, or death, and this information is available from the information and statistics division of the Scottish Home and Health Department.
The distinction between senile and presenile dementia is set at age 65 years, but some patients with presenile onset may not be admitted until after 65.
Our preliminary studies estimated that an upper age limit of 73 years at admission would identify over 97% of those patients with onset before 65 years.
We obtained data from the information and statistics division on all patients aged less than 73 years with a diagnostic code of Alzheimer's disease, senile dementia, presenile dementia, arteriosclerotic dementia, senile dementia with acute confusional state, or dementia unspecified attending all general psychiatric hospitals during 1974 to 1988.
Two experienced observers (GM and CM) examined the hospital records.
A third observer (LJW) blindly examined a randomly chosen sample of 100 records of patients with presenile dementia, and interobserver reliability in the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease was tested by Cohens κ statistic.
Patients were included who had presented aged 40 to 64 years with documented features of dementia.
The lower age limit was set by the National Institute for Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA) and the upper age set by convention for presenile disease.
These criteria and a Hachinski score were applied to each record as described previously.
Patients were classified into three groups:(a )‘probable’ Alzheimer's disease if they met the clinical criteria and had a Hachinski score less than 5;(b )‘broad’Alzheimer's disease defined after reclassification of all presenile patients by discriminant analysis (this group included all probable Alzheimer's disease); and (c ) multi-infarct dementia — a definite history of at least one cerebrovascular accident and a Hachinski score greater than 6.
Denominators for incidence were taken from the 1981 census and used to estimate the ‘at risk’ population aged 40 to 64 years.
We calculated 95% confidence intervals with exact error factors for Poisson mean for numbers less than 30 and with the asymptotic error factor approximation  for larger numbers.
Mantel-Haenszel weights were used for summary risk ratio estimates.
The assumption that all patients with presenile Alzheimer's disease are known to psychiatric services was tested by reference to further data sources.
In Scotland death certificates record primary, secondary, and tertiary causes of death, and institution of death.
This information was requested from the registrar general wherever presenile dementia or Alzheimer's disease was a cause of death before the age of 73.
Hospital records were sought for such patients who had died in care outside psychiatric hospitals.
Two neurology departments where registries of outpatients are maintained (Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, and Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, together serving about 20–25% of the Scottish population) allowed scrutiny of records of patients aged less than 73 years with a diagnosis of dementia.
Advice was sought from all chief administrative medical officers about the care of patients with presenile dementia.
Views were also obtained from local family doctor committees and from medical advisers to the Mental Welfare Commission.
These sources confirmed that most patients were cared for within psychiatric services.
In Grampian all psychiatric patient contacts since 1963 are notified to the Grampian psychiatric case register, search of the register found no outpatient with presenile Alzheimer's disease who had never been admitted to psychiatric hospital.
Ethical approval to scrutinise hospital records was obtained from ethics committees of all health boards in Scotland and from the privacy committee of the Scottish Home and Health Department.
Results
The Information and Statistics Division identified 6581 patients.
We located 5874 hospital records, 1217 of which were for demented patients aged 40 to 64 years at presentation; 707 records were either lost or contained insufficient information to apply the diagnostic criteria.
Scrutiny of 1217 case records identified 569 broad cases of Alzheimer's disease (of which 317 were probable cases) and 267 cases of multi-infarct dementia.
We assumed that at each hospital the same proportion of missing or inadequate records (317/5167=6.1%) were cases of Alzheimer's disease and estimated that about 43 cases of probable Alzheimer's disease (6.1% of 707) were omitted because of lost or inadequate records.
Tables I and II give the age sex specific incidences and female to male risk ratios for probable and broad Alzheimer's disease.
Increasing age and female sex were associated with an increased incidence of Alzheimer's disease.
The summary sex risk ratios for probable and broad Alzheimer's disease were similar.
Crude division of overall incidence by 15 (number of years of studied) gave annual rates of 1.5 per 100 000 and 2.7 per 100 000 for probable and broad Alzheimer's disease respectively.
These compare with the actual rates of 1.6 (95% confidence interval 1.0 to 2.6) and 3.5  (2.6 to 4.7) per 100 000 for probable and broad Alzheimer's disease for the 1981 census year.
Women had significantly less risk of multi-infarct dementia than men (table III).
validity
We sought 169 records from district general or teaching hospitals and 34 from cottage or private hospitals.
The hospital records of 199 patients with presenile dementia who died in institutions other than psychiatric hospitals were requested but only 89 were located because over half of these records were destroyed after death.
All 89 met study criteria for presenile dementia; nine of these records were of patients with probable Alzheimer's disease, but only three had not been admitted to a psychiatric hospital.
This suggests that among the 199 records at least seven were of Alzheimer patients.
Review of neurology department registries found 129 outpatient records; 24 met the criteria for probable Alzheimer's disease and 20 of these noted admission(s) to psychiatric hospital.
The remaining four records were of patients who had presented to neurology departments after 1983.
These figures suggest that about 20 Alzheimer patients remained solely as neurology outpatients throughout Scotland during 1974–88.
Kappa values of 0.72 and 0.61 were obtained for comparisons between the two observers (GM and CM) and the blinded observer (LJW).
This represents substantive agreement between the two main observers and the third in the diagnosis of probable Alzheimer's disease.
Discussion
Our rates of broad and probable Alzheimer's presenile dementia are minimum estimates of the true incidence.
Previously we estimated that our data request omitted 6.5% of cases and we now add a further 6.1% who may have been lost because of inadequate records.
These omission errors are small compared with the effects of changes in diagnostic criteria: rates in our broad class are more than double those in the probable class.
Although our method of classification is novel and requires further validation, the main findings were unaffected by choice of diagnostic criteria.
Female sex was significantly associated with the risk of Alzheimer's disease no matter how dementia was classified.
Small numbers of patients aged less then 55 make interpretation of a sex effect in this group inappropriate.
Different ascertainment methods have consistently found female sex to be a risk factor in surveys of senile Alzheimer's disease, but a significant association between female sex and presenile Alzheimer's disease has not been reported.
Significantly more men than women had multi-infarct dementia diagnosed.
Patients identified as having multi-infarct dementia represent a distinct clinical subgroup within the study sample, but it is debatable whether they accurately represent all patients with this disease in the population.
The point of health service contact for patients with cerebrovascular disease and dementia is variable and dependent on several factors that we did not evaluate — for example, location and progression of cerebral disease, relative dominance of symptoms, etc.
Variation in use of health care between the sexes does not explain the strong association between Alzheimer's disease and female sex.
care of patients
We tested the assumption that most patients with presenile Alzheimer's disease are eventually admitted to psychiatric hospital.
If alternative pathways of health care provision were used extensively we would have had serious underascertainment.
Alzheimer patients may never present to medical attention but die in the community either undiagnosed or cared for by relatives who have never sought medical investigation.
The insidious course, the behavioural disturbances, and the distress of Alzheimer's disease make this uncommon.
General practitioners can determine the pattern of later health care delivery in Alzheimer's disease and may not refer to specialist outpatient care.
Local family doctor committees throughout Scotland advised that most, if not all, such patients were referred to specialists.
Our study was retrospective and because the quality of general practitioners' records varies and most records are destroyed after a patient dies, it was not possible to include such patients in our study.
The total number of Alzheimer patients who followed this pathway remains unknown, but community care is much rarer in Scotland than in England and Wales.
Patients with Alzheimer's disease could be referred for specialist investigation but never admitted.
Only 3% (4/129) of patients with dementia who attended two neurology outpatient departments were not admitted to psychiatric hospital.
These observations were consistent with advice received from experienced physicians in Scotland and indicate that this is a small source of error (about 20 Alzheimer patients for all Scotland).
It is also possible for patients to be admitted directly to general hospitals and never to psychiatric hospital.
Of the 89 records we scrutinised, only three were of patients with probable Alzheimer's disease who had never been admitted to psychiatric hospital.
The reported incidences of Alzheimer's disease (derived from records of patients admitted to hospital) are consistent with results reported by other investigators who used different case ascertainment methods.
An annual incidence rate of 2.4/100 000 at risk population was reported for presenile probable Alzheimer's disease in another national study.
In summary, evidence from several independent data sources indicate that our ascertainment method was not systematically biased in respect of the study's main findings.
Our results suggest that female sex is a risk factor in presenile Alzheimer's disease.
The pressing question is what is it about being female that increases the risk of this condition?
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: meta-analysis of efficacy and acceptability
Abstract
Objective —
To examine the evidence for using selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors instead of tricyclic antidepressants in the first line treatment of depression.
Design —
Meta-analysis of 63 randomised controlled trials comparing the efficacy and acceptability of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic and related antidepressants.
Main outcome measures —
Improvement in mean scores on Hamilton depression rating scale for 55 randomised controlled trials.
Pooled drop out rates from the 58 trials which reported drop out by treatment group.
Results —
Among the 20 studies reporting standard deviation for the Hamilton score no difference was found in efficacy between serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic and related antidepressants (standardised mean difference 0.004, 95% confidence interval -0.096 to 0.105).
The difference remained insignificant when the remaining 33 studies that used the 17 item and 21 item Hamilton score were included by ascribing weighted standard deviations.
The odds ratio for drop out rate in patients receiving serotonin reuptake inhibitors compared with those receiving tricyclic antidepressants was 0.95 (0.86 to 1.07).
Similar proportions in both groups cited lack of efficacy as the reason for dropping out but slightly more patients in the tricyclic group cited side effects (2445 (18.8%)v (15.4%) in serotonin reuptake group).
Conclusions —
Routine use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors as the first line treatment of depressive illness may greatly increase cost with only questionable benefit.
Introduction
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are a relatively new class of antidepressants that have been heavily promoted for use as first line treatment in depression.
They are the most commonly prescribed antidepressant in the United States, but their routine use in Britain is controversial.
The high specificity of serotonin reuptake inhibitors, without antagonism of neurotransmitter receptors or direct cardiac effects, has led to the expectation that they have the same antidepressant activity as tricyclic and related antidepressants but do not produce many of the common side effects.
Thus it is claimed that they have two important advantages over tricyclic and related antidepressants — they are better tolerated and are less toxic in overdose.
However, disagreement exists about the role of serotonin reuptake inhibitors in treating major depression.
One reason for these differences of opinion is that the claims made for serotonin reuptake inhibitors are often based on the results of individual trials.
Many of the studies are not large enough to detect or exclude with certainty clinically relevant differences in the effects of serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic and related drugs.
We reviewed the evidence for the efficacy and acceptability of serotonin reuptake inhibitors compared with the tricyclic and related antidepressants by meta-analysis.
We included data from all comparable randomised controlled trials, which enables smaller effects to be detected or excluded with confidence.
The large number of studies also gives the findings potentially greater generalisability.
Methods
We conducted a meta-analysis of the results of efficacy studies and of the drop out rates.
We identified 64 randomised controlled trials comparing serotonin reuptake inhibitors with tricyclic or related antidepressants by searching Medline and Index Medicus , manual cross referencing, and discussion with experts (table I).
One study did not use a double-blind design and was therefore excluded from the analysis.
Some multicentre studies have been published in aggregate and separately, and we took great care to avoid including the same results more than once.
efficacy
The trials used various psychometric instruments to measure the efficacy of treatments.
The most consistently used instrument, Hamilton depression rating scale, was included in 61 of the trials.
The Hamilton depression rating scale is a reliable instrument that is particularly weighted towards and sensitive to change in somatic symptoms rather than psychological and cognitive factors.
Most studies used either the 17 question or the 21 question instrument, although other versions were occasionally used.
However, it is generally accepted that none of the items which supplement  the basic 17 questions provide additional information of value.
The mean difference in Hamilton scores between patients treated with serotonin reuptake inhibitors and those treated with tricyclic or related antidepressants (treatment difference) was calculated for each trial.
A pooled estimate of the treatment difference was calculated by averaging all the treatment differences, weighting each by the inverse of the individual squared standard errors.
This gave larger studies, with tighter confidence intervals, more influence in the pooled estimate of difference in efficacy than smaller ones.
Only 20 trials presented the standard deviation of Hamilton scores needed to calculate the weights.
A test for heterogeneity (non-random differences) of standardised treatment difference between the studies, with a χ 2 statistic, showed no significant heterogeneity (Q =23.58, df=19; p=0.213), so a fixed effects method was used to estimate the pooled difference in efficacy.
To avoid the potential bias from using only 20 trials, we ascribed a standard deviation to the remaining 33 studies which used the 17 or 21 item Hamilton scale.
Since the standard deviations of the scores from the 16 trials using the 17 or 21 item scale were similar, for each scale a weighted average of these standard deviations was used to calculate a standard error for each of the 33 studies.
Pooled estimates of treatment differences were calculated for all 49 studies and compared with the estimate derived from the 16 studies that presented standard deviations for either the 17 or 21 item Hamilton scale.
acceptability
Acceptability to patients is an important element in a treatment's effectiveness.
Drop out, which is a useful measure of acceptability, was reported in 58 trials.
We compared drop out rates in the two arms of the trials and analysed the main subjective reasons given by patients for discontinuing therapy (inefficacy and side effects) when available.
The ratio of drop out rate of patients in the serotonin reuptake inhibitor group to that in the tricyclic and related antidepressant group (odds ratio) was calculated for each study.
A pooled estimate of the overall odds ratio of drop out was calculated by weighting each odds ratio by the inverse of the variance; thus studies with more subjects were given more weight.
The odds ratio was heterogeneous among studies (Q =78.79, df=57; p=0.03) and so the pooled odds ratio was calculated by a random effects method.
Results
efficacy
Of the 20 trials which presented the mean Hamilton score and its standard deviations, six used the 21 item Hamilton scale, 10 the 17 point scale and four other versions.
Pooled results are presented separately for the 17 and 21 item version of the scale and then all 20 trials were combined by using the standardised difference between mean Hamilton scores for the serotonin reuptake inhibitor and tricyclic and related antidepressant groups: Standardised difference=difference between means/standard deviation.
The average baseline Hamilton score was about 26 on the 21 item scale and 24 on the 17 item scale.
No significant difference was found in mean Hamilton score in the 21 item scale for serotonin reuptake inhibitors compared with tricyclic and related antidepressants, after up to eight weeks of treatment (mean difference 0.13; 95% confidence interval -1.01 to 1.28)(fig 1).
Tricyclic and related antidepressants were significantly more effective than the serotonin reuptake inhibitors in trials using the 17 item scale (mean difference 1.29, 0.28 to 2.30)(fig 1) but the difference was not clinically important.
Overall, in the 20 trials which presented the standard deviation of the Hamilton score the tricyclic and related antidepressants showed a small but non-significant benefit in efficacy when compared with the serotonin reuptake inhibitors (standardised difference 0.004, 95% confidence interval -0.096 to 0.105).
We ascribed weighted average standard deviations to the remaining 33 studies that used the 17 or 21 item Hamilton score as an end point so that the results for all 49 studies could be pooled.
A standard deviation of 8.27 was ascribed to studies using the 21 item scale and 6.81 to those using the 17 item scale.
Again, there were no differences in trials using either the 21 item scale (mean difference 0.147; -0.597 to 0.891) or the 17 item scale (0.727, 0.083 to 1.370).
This strengthens the inference that there is no significant difference in efficacy between serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic and related drugs.
acceptability to patients
Fifty eight studies reported drop out rates during the treatment phase.
The pooled drop out rate was 32.3% in patients receiving serotonin reuptake inhibitors and 33.2% among those receiving tricyclic and related antidepressants (table II).
The odds ratio for drop out for serotonin reuptake inhibitors compared with tricyclic and related antidepressants was estimated to be 0.95, which was not significantly different from 1 (95% confidence interval 0.816 to 1.107)(table III, fig 2).
Several trials reported the reason given by patients for dropping out from treatment.
The two most commonly cited reasons were lack of efficacy and side effects.
There was no difference in the drop out rate attributed to lack of efficacy among the two groups but drop out because of side effects was slightly more common among patients taking tricyclic antidepressants (tables II and III).
Discussion
The results of this analysis are particularly important because the populations in the trials were generally similar to that found in primary or ambulatory care, where most first line treatment is undertaken.
Our most important finding was that there was no statistically or clinically significant difference in the acceptability  of serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic and related antidepressants in patients with major depression.
The serotonin reuptake inhibitors seem to have similar efficacy to the tricyclic and related antidepressants, but the analysis of efficacy is less reliable than that of acceptability because intention to treat analyses were not widely used, different Hamilton scales were used, and reporting of standard deviation was inadequate.
The length of follow up in all the studies (median six weeks) was short relative to the generally accepted desirable duration of treatment in this population.
In addition the study populations were heterogeneous despite all meeting the criteria for major depression.
Some patients had a short lived mood disorder, which would be likely to resolve rapidly, perhaps without treatment.
Others had a more persistent disorder, some of whom had already been treated unsuccessfully.
Spontaneous resolution is likely to reduce the ability of any trial to show differences in the effect of treatment.
On the other hand, the fact that some patients had already failed to respond to tricyclics before entering the trial might have introduced a bias against this class of drugs.
Better designed studies with more complete reporting of data would enable more reliable estimates of efficacy of treatment.
This is essential for the translation of research findings into clinical practice and should be mandatory in reports in clinical journals.
The lack of evidence of greater efficacy and acceptability of serotonin reuptake inhibitors means that their adoption as the drugs of choice in major depression may be premature, although they may have a role in subgroups of patients in whom other treatments are contraindicated or have failed.
The other argument for prescribing serotonin reuptake inhibitors has been their reported lower toxicity in overdose compared with some antidepressants.
However, more knowledge of the long term effects of these drugs is needed before they can be recommended as a safe alternative to tricyclic antidepressants, which are less expensive, equally effective, and well tolerated.
It may be more effective to adopt alternative strategies for improving mental health and reducing suicides, as outlined in the recommendations of the Defeat Depression campaign of the Royal Colleges of Psychiatrists and General Practitioners.
In conclusion, our meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials indicates that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have no significant advantage in efficacy or acceptability over tricyclic and related antidepressants.
This is at odds with some of the claims made in the promotion of serotonin reuptake inhibitors and does not support their increasing use as routine first line treatment for major depression.
Dental disease and risk of coronary heart disease and mortality
Abstract
Objective —
To investigate a reported association between dental disease and risk of coronary heart disease.
Setting —
National sample of American adults who participated in a health examination survey in the early 1970s.
Design —
Prospective cohort study in which participants underwent a standard dental examination at baseline and were followed up to 1987.
Proportional hazards analysis was used to estimate relative risks adjusted for several covariates.
Main outcome measures —
Incidence of mortality or admission to hospital because of coronary heart disease; total mortality.
Results —
Among all 9760 subjects included in the analysis those with periodontitis had a 25% increased risk of coronary heart disease relative to those with minimal periodontal disease.
Poor oral hygiene, determined by the extent of dental debris and calculus, was also associated with an increased incidence of coronary heart disease.
In men younger than 50 years at baseline periodontal disease was a stronger risk factor for coronary heart disease; men with periodontitis had a relative risk of 1.72.
Both periodontal disease and poor oral hygiene showed stronger associations with total mortality than with coronary heart disease.
Conclusion —
Dental disease is associated with an increased risk of coronary heart disease, particularly in young men.
Whether this is a causal association is unclear.
Dental health may be a more general indicator of personal hygiene and possibly health care practices.
Introduction
In 1989 Mattila et al reported the results of a case-control study in which they found a strong association between dental disease and acute myocardial infarction.
Using an index based on severity of caries, periodontitis, periapical lesions, and pericoronitis they found that patients admitted to hospital for acute myocardial infarction had higher scores on the dental index than matched controls from the population.
Given the distribution of scores among their controls, we estimate that people above the upper quartile had at least a twofold higher risk of being admitted to hospital for acute myocardial infarction than did people with a score of zero.
This is comparable to the increase of well established risk factors for coronary heart disease, such as cigarette smoking, hypercholesterolaemia, and hypertension.
Adults in the United States have an average of 10 to 17 decayed, missing, or filled teeth and most have experienced periodontal disease (gingivitis or periodontitis), with moderate to severe periodontal disease being present in one third of the elderly population.
Thus the impact of an increased risk of coronary heart disease associated with poor dental health could be substantial.
Because of the potential importance of the association, as well as to overcome methodological limitations of the original study, we analysed data from a prospective study that allowed us to assess the association between dental disease and coronary heart disease.
Subjects and methods
We analysed data from the national health and nutrition examination study I and its epidemiological follow up study.
From 1971 to 1974, 20749 subjects were examined in the initial study.
The follow up study was restricted to participants from the first study who were 25 to 74 years of age at baseline.
All subjects were followed up in 1982.
In 1985 only those aged 55 and older at baseline were studied, and in 1986–7 all subjects were followed up again.
Information for the follow up study was collected by means of personal interviews, death certificates, and records from hospitals and nursing homes.
Over 90% of the study population was successfully traced, with a median follow up of 14 years.
During the baseline examinations the subjects underwent a standardised dental examination.
For our analysis we used four measures of dental disease.
(1) Number of decayed permanent teeth.
(2) Periodontal classification: no periodontal disease; gingivitis (with or without pockets); periodontitis (grade 4+pockets); and no teeth.
(3) Periodontal index.
Each tooth was given a score of 0, 1, 2, 6, or 8 depending on the degree of periodontal disease; the index was the arithmetic average of all the teeth that were scored.
(4) Oral hygiene index.
Selected surfaces of six teeth were examined and scored for extent of debris and calculus.
The amount of debris was scored as 0 to 3 for each tooth surface depending on the extent to which soft debris or stain covered a tooth surface.
The amount of calculus was also scored on a scale of 0 to 3 for each tooth surface depending on the degree of supragingival or subgingival calculus covering the tooth surface.
The debris scores were totalled and divided by the number of surfaces scored to obtain the debris index.
The calculus index was determined similarly.
The oral hygiene index was calculated as the sum of the debris and calculus indices.
We used Cox proportional hazards models to compare the incidence of coronary heart disease and total mortality according to the state of dental health at baseline while at the same time controlling for several potential confounding variables.
We checked the assumption of proportionality by using graphs of the log-log survivor function.
We excluded from the analysis subjects who had a history of heart attack, heart failure, stroke, cancer, or an unknown periodontal classification at baseline.
The end points of coronary heart disease we evaluated were mortality (underlying cause of death on the death certificate coded as 410–414 according to ICD ninth revision) and admission to hospital (first admission with discharge diagnoses coded 410–414).
The incidence of coronary heart disease was the primary outcome measure in our analyses.
If a person had been admitted to hospital for coronary heart disease we used the date of first admission as the incidence date.
If a person died of coronary heart disease but was never admitted to hospital we used the  date of death as the incidence date.
In addition to the incidence of coronary heart disease we also evaluated associations with total mortality.
In the proportional hazards models we included the potentially confounding variables of age, sex, race, education, marital state, systolic blood pressure, total cholesterol concentration, body mass index, diabetes, physical activity, alcohol consumption, poverty index, and cigarette smoking.
The poverty index is the ratio of the total income of the household and a multiple of the total income necessary to maintain a family with given characteristics on a nutritionally adequate food plan.
During the baseline examinations only a subsample was asked about history of smoking.
Therefore, we used the categories current smoker, former smoker, never a smoker, and unknown in our analyses.
We performed additional analyses restricted to subjects whose history of smoking was known at baseline.
Our main analyses were of men and women who were aged 25 to 74 at the baseline examinations.
As nearly all of the subjects in the study by Mattila et al were men aged 50 to 60 or younger, we also present results for men who were under 50 at the baseline examinations.
The subjects in Mattila's study had all been admitted to hospital for acute myocardial infarction.
Therefore we performed additional analyses focusing on acute myocardial infarction (ICD (ninth revision) code 410).
The results for acute myocardial infarction were generally similar to those for total coronary heart disease and will are not reported separately, although in men younger than 50 the log-log survival curves by periodontal disease tended to converge as duration of follow up increased.
Results
The baseline characteristics of the subjects varied according to severity of periodontal disease (table I).
Subjects with more severe disease were more likely to be men, older, non-white, less educated, unmarried, and smokers.
Although the proportion of people who reported having diabetes or high blood pressure increased as severity of periodontal disease increased, some of the increase may be a reflection of the older ages of those with more severe disease.
As would be expected, those without teeth at baseline were older than those who had teeth, regardless of periodontal class.
The proportion of subjects with coronary heart disease or who died during follow up was also related to periodontal class (table II).
Total mortality and each of the outcomes of coronary heart disease increased as severity of periodontal disease increased.
The highest proportions for each of the outcomes were seen among those who had no teeth at baseline, although differences in age contributed to these results.
In proportional hazards models in which we adjusted for age and several other potential con-founders the severity of periodontal disease had a small effect on the risk of coronary heart disease (table III).
Gingivitis did not increase the risk of coronary heart disease, whereas periodontitis or having no teeth increased it by about 25%.
When the periodontal index was used as a continuous measure of periodontal disease the relative risk was 1.04 per unit increase in the index.
This means that those with the highest periodontal index score of 8 had a relative risk of 1.43 compared with those with a score of 0, and those at the 90th centile of the distribution of the periodontal index (score=5) had a relative risk of 1.25 compared with those below the lowest decile (score=0).
High scores on the oral hygiene index carried a greater risk of coronary heart disease than on the periodontal index (table III).
People with a maximum hygiene index score of 6 had a relative risk of 2.03 compared with those with an index of 0, and those at the 90th centile (score=3) were 1.42 times more likely to experience a coronary heart disease event than were those below the lowest decile (score=0).
The amount of dental debris (relative risk=1.24) and calculus (relative risk=1.19) contributed equally to the increased risk associated with the hygiene index.
The number of decayed permanent teeth did not alter the risk of coronary heart disease (relative risk=0.99, 95% confidence interval 0.96 to 1.03).
When we restricted the analyses to subjects whose history of smoking was known the results were similar to the results among all subjects.
When no periodontal disease was used as the referent category the adjusted relative risks for coronary heart disease were 0.79 (0.58 to 1.08) for gingivitis, 1.29 (0.87 to 1.70) for periodontitis, and 1.33 (1.02 to 1.73) for no teeth.
The adjusted relative risks were 1.06 (1.01 to 1.12) for the periodontal index and 1.13 (0.95 to 1.26) for the oral hygiene index.
The severity of periodontal disease increased the risk of total mortality more than the risk of coronary heart disease (table III).
Compared with subjects with little or no periodontal disease, those with gingivitis were at about 23% higher risk, and those with periodontitis or who had no teeth were at about 50% higher risk of  dying during follow up.
The association of periodontal index and total mortality reflects the findings of the periodontal classification; the relative risk was 1.53 for those at the 90th centile compared with those below the lowest decile of the distribution of the index.
The oral hygiene index carried about the same level of increased risk for total mortality as for the incidence of coronary heart disease.
When we restricted the analysis to men under 50 at baseline we found a stronger association between periodontal disease and coronary heart disease (table IV).
Men with periodontitis or who had no teeth were about 70% more likely to have coronary heart disease than were men with no periodontal disease.
Among men with periodontitis the relative risk of death from coronary heart disease (2.86) was greater than the relative risk of being admitted to hospital for coronary heart disease (1.58).
A similar difference in relative risks of death from coronary heart disease (3.71) and admission to hospital (1.46) was seen among those who had no teeth.
Among men under 50 at baseline the periodontal index increased the risk of death from coronary heart disease or admission to hospital (1.09 per unit increase in the index)(table IV), with a maximum relative risk of 2.00.
A unit increase in the oral hygiene index was associated with a 1.12-fold increased risk of coronary heart disease in younger men.
The number of decayed permanent teeth did not show any association with risk of coronary heart disease among younger men (relative risk=1.01, 0.94 to 1.10).
Results from analyses restricted to men younger than 50 at baseline whose history of smoking was known were in line with the preceding results.
With no periodontal disease as the referent category, the adjusted relative risks for coronary heart disease were 0.93 (0.49 to 1.75) for gingivitis, 1.54 (0.80 to 2.96) for periodontitis, and 2.99 (1.28 to 6.98) for no teeth.
The adjusted relative risks were 1.07 (0.94 to 1.22) for the periodontal index and 1.05 (0.85 to 1.29) for the oral hygiene index.
The strongest associations we found were between measures of periodontal disease or oral hygiene and total mortality among men under 50 at baseline (table IV).
Men with periodontitis had more than a twofold increased risk of dying compared with men who had no periodontal disease at baseline.
Young men who had no teeth at baseline had a 2.6-fold increased risk of dying.
For the periodontal index the results reflected the findings with the periodontal classification.
The oral hygiene index also showed a stronger association with total mortality than with the outcome of coronary heart disease in young men.
Young men who had a maximum oral hygiene index of 6 had a risk of dying 3.4 times higher than those who had a hygiene index of 0.
Discussion
Overall we found that periodontal disease was associated with a small increased risk of coronary heart disease.
In men under 50, however, periodontal disease was a stronger risk factor; men with periodontitis had a nearly twofold higher risk of coronary heart disease than men who had little or no periodontal disease.
In the total population the degree of dental debris and calculus, as reflected in the oral hygiene index, was a stronger risk factor for coronary heart disease than was the severity of periodontal disease.
In both the total population and among younger men periodontal disease and oral hygiene were more strongly associated with total mortality than with the incidence of coronary heart disease.
Although providing support for the findings of Mattila et al , our results show a weaker association between dental disease and coronary heart disease.
For example, in Mattila's study the highest score on the dental index carried a 10-fold increased risk of acute myocardial infarction relative to the lowest score.
Among the younger men in our study the maximum relative risk for coronary heart disease was about 2.0 for both the periodontal index and the oral hygiene index.
The dental index in the study by Mattila et al was composed of both severity of periodontal disease and dental caries, suggesting that dental decay may contribute to the risk of coronary heart disease.
We found no association between extent of active dental decay and risk of coronary heart disease.
Tooth loss in people under 60, however, is usually caused by dental caries.
Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that the increased risk of coronary heart disease among young men with no teeth may have been related to previous dental decay.
The essential question is whether the association between dental disease and coronary heart disease is causal.
In the entire study population the associations, particularly with periodontal disease, were weak and may have been due to small biases or residual confounding.
The associations we found in younger men, however, were stronger and could not be as readily dismissed.
The reason for the stronger association in the younger men is not clear.
Similar differences in relative risks between young and old have been observed in studies of other risk factors for coronary heart disease.
A limitation of our study is that we had baseline data on smoking for only a few of the subjects and could not completely control for the potentially confounding effects of cigarette smoking.
In analyses restricted to subjects whose history of smoking was known, however, the results were compatible with the overall results.
This indicates that residual confounding due to smoking is not likely to explain our findings.
Several factors minimised potential biases in the study.
The dental examinations were performed before follow up for disease occurrence and thus there should have been little if any bias in the assessment of oral health.
The hypothesis of an association between coronary heart disease and poor oral health was not part of the design or conduct of the original or follow up studies, which would further decrease possible information bias.
Selection bias should also have been low because of the high rate of follow up.
For several reason the retrieval of hospital records was not as complete as that of death certificates in the follow up study, and information on admission to hospital may not be as reliable as that for mortality.
This may have affected the differences we found in relative risks between mortality and admission to hospital for coronary heart disease among the younger men.
Young men with periodontitis had a nearly threefold increased risk of death from coronary heart disease but only about a 50% increased risk of admission to hospital for coronary heart disease.
Possibly men with more severe periodontal disease have less access to, or less frequently use or recall use of, health  care services.
If this is the case, then our relative risks between periodontal disease and admission to hospital for coronary heart disease may underestimate the true risk.
The biological mechanism by which periodontal disease or poor oral hygiene could lead to coronary heart disease is not clearly established.
The bacteria which cause periodontitis have been proposed as possible causative agents.
Recent epidemiological studies have found that people with evidence of infection by Chlamydia pneumoniae have an increased risk of coronary heart disease.
The possibility that other bacteria, including those commonly associated with periodontal disease, may cause coronary heart disease is currently only theoretical.
In conclusion, we found an association of coronary heart disease with periodontal disease and other measures of dental disease.
Overall, the associations were weak, although not so weak in young men as to be dismissed as unimportant.
Perhaps our most noteworthy finding, however, is that periodontal disease and poor oral hygiene are stronger indicators of risk of total mortality than of coronary heart disease.
Oral health may be a more general indicator of personal hygiene and health care practices, including access to and use of health care services.
Racial discrimination against doctors from ethnic minorities
A retrospective study of 1500 doctors graduating from five British medical schools between 1981 and 1987 suggested that those from ethnic minorities experienced disproportionate difficulty in obtaining hospital posts.
A report published by the Commission for Racial Equality in 1987 also suggested that British trained doctors from ethnic minorities had trouble in getting the best jobs.
Definitive evidence of discrimination, however, may be obtained only from a prospective study.
Subjects, methods, and results
A pilot study was carried out to test the hypothesis that British trained doctors with foreign sounding names were less likely to be shortlisted.
We developed a curriculum vitae (CV) for six equivalent applicants — three with Asian names and three with English names.
All applicants were male, the same age, and educated and trained in Britain, with a similar length of experience in district general or teaching hospitals.
All were at the same stage of their career, applying for their first senior house officer post in a non-teaching hospital because applications to teaching hospitals usually require completion of a form.
Each CV was tailored to a particular post by including a short paragraph explaining why the candidate was applying for the job.
The medical school and secondary education were randomly changed so that shortlisting was not influenced by attendance at a particular school or university.
The pairs of names used for each application were randomly selected from the panel of three Asian and English applicants.
The comparability of the CVs was confirmed by two consultants who were unaware of the purpose of the research and were asked to rate the CVs after the names had been removed.
Matched pairs of applications were sent for each post — one with an English name and one with an Asian name.
The main outcome measure was the difference in the applicants' frequency of being shortlisted.
When applicants were shortlisted we immediately cancelled any interviews.
We sent 46 applications for 23 advertised posts in otolaryngology, paediatric medicine, general surgery, psychiatry, and geriatric medicine.
Eighteen applicants were shortlisted, of whom 12 had English and six Asian names (11 English and 17 Asian applicants were not shortlisted).
In one post the English applicant was shortlisted and was subsequently withdrawn — after which the Asian applicant was shortlisted.
This was included as a positive outcome for the English applicant.
The table shows the number of pairs  where neither candidate was selected, where only the English candidate was selected, and where both were selected.
The Asian candidate was never shortlisted unless the English candidate was also shortlisted.
The outcome was different in six pairs (χ 2 =4.17, p=0.03, df=1).
Comment
We originally planned a survey covering approximately 100 posts and all hospital specialties; unfortunately we were arrested by the fraud squad and charged with making fraudulent applications.
Although not prosecuted, we were advised against continuing the work.
Nevertheless, our results are important and suggest that discrimination does take place against ethnic minorities, apparently at shortlisting.
English applicants were twice as likely to be selected, and this difference would probably have been greater had we carried out the full study and been able to include posts in teaching hospitals.
Doctors from ethnic minorities predominate in at least two of our chosen specialties (psychiatry and geriatric medicine)— reflecting these specialties' comparative unpopularity — and the proportion of such doctors is much greater in district general hospitals than in teaching hospitals.
It is remarkable therefore that despite these two biases we still found a twofold difference.
Mechanisms could easily be incorporated to reduce the chance of name and ethnicity determining the likelihood of being shortlisted, as well as to monitor discrimination.
As a start, we suggest that all application forms for medical posts should be standardised so that information identifying ethnic origin can be removed by the personnel department — for example, on a detachable front sheet.
Ethnic monitoring should also be standard personnel practice so that all districts and regions can monitor whether equal opportunity policies are actually being implemented.
Communication between general practitioners and child psychiatrists
Previous studies have examined the content of referral letters from general practitioners to consultants as well as the requirements of consultants.
Child psychiatrists have a special interest in information about the child's family, as often the whole family will attend for assessment.
This study aimed to review the content of referral letters from general practitioners to a child psychiatry department and to discover whether general practitioners and psychiatrists hold different views on the information that should be included in a referral letter.
Methods and results
From a consecutive series of 50 referral letters sent by general practitioners in Sunderland to the local department of child psychiatry, 15 items of information were identified that could account for all the information contained in the letters.
The frequency with which each item appeared in the letters was recorded.
Postal questionnaires were then used to seek the views of local general practitioners and the child psychiatrists working in the Northern region.
They were required to assess the importance of the 15 categories of information on a four point scale (categories of essential, desirable, doubtful, and irrelevant).
They were also asked their views on the quality of referral letters in general.
Questionnaires were returned by 93 (63%) general practitioners and 26 (90%) psychiatrists.
The table shows the frequency with which the 15 items of information occurred in the letters and the comparison of the importance given to the different items by the psychiatrists and the general practitioners.
The reason most often mentioned by general practitioners for poor quality letters was lack of time.
A few replies contained the comment that families were sometimes reluctant to reveal information to their doctor.
The main complaint from psychiatrists was that referral letters were too brief, with key information (particularly the attitude of the family to the referral and to involvement of other agencies) often absent.
Comment
Although the categorisation of information from referral letters is somewhat arbitrary, the study has the advantage that the items which the two groups of doctors were asked to assess were taken from a sample of actual letters.
The study, moreover, replicates the finding by Kentish et al that the only item of information which is found consistently in referral letters is a description of the presenting symptoms.
There was some consensus about the relative importance of certain items of information that a referral letter should include, but psychiatrists rated two key items of information of more importance: the attitude of the family to referral and whether other agencies are involved.
The attitude of the family has implications for the style of initial assessment carried out by the psychiatrist; if the psychiatrist realises from the outset that other agencies are involved then consent of the family for reports may be obtained at an early stage.
Many general practitioners seem unaware of the importance for the psychiatrist of possessing this information before the family attends for the first appointment.
It also seems that psychiatrists are  sometimes unaware of the difficulties that general practitioners may face in obtaining the information required.
Marinker et al have recommended the development of protocols for referral between general practitioners and consultants.
Some departments of child psychiatry now use standardised referral forms with specific questions on the attitude of the family to referral and involvement of other agencies.
This study has shown that child psychiatrists have some special requirements for referral letters, but they are unlikely to obtain the desired information unless they educate general practitioners.
Drug misusers in Lothian: changes in injecting habits 1988–90
Of 941 HIV seropositive cases reported in Edinburgh up to September 1992, 515 (55%) were associated with injecting drug misuse.
HIV and drug targeted services in the region have concentrated on a ‘harm reduction’ approach, one aspect of which is to encourage injectors at least to use a safe injecting technique but preferably to switch to oral use.
The aim of this study was to verify a strong clinical impression that injecting drug misuse in Lothian has recently diminished.
Subjects, methods, and results
The community drug problem service, the setting for this study, has been described.
The data presented were drawn from detailed clinical interview of new patients at the point of initial assessment.
Fifty consecutive referrals in 1988 were compared with 50 consecutive referrals in 1990 with respect to demographic characteristics and patterns of drug misuse.
These included injecting frequency (past and recent), prescription status at assessment, drugs reportedly used, and syringe sharing.
Injecting frequency was defined as never (no injecting), occasional (averaging fewer than two injecting episodes a week), and frequent (averaging two or more episodes a week).
‘Recent’ injecting refers to the six months before assessment.
‘Past’ injecting refers to the injecting career before that period.
The two samples did not differ in sex, age, employment status, proportion with a regular partner, source of referral, age at first drug misuse (excluding cannabis, solvents, and alcohol), or age at first injecting (among injectors).
The table shows significant differences between the two years in past injecting frequency (χ 2 =19.9, df=2; p<0.0001), recent injecting frequency (χ 2 =26.6, df=2; p<0.0001), and recent injecting frequency among frequent past injectors (χ 2 =19.9, df=2; p<0.0001).
This last finding excludes the possibility that the preponderance of frequent past injectors in 1988 could account for differences between 1988 and 1990 in recent injecting frequency.
Among recent injectors 37% (13/35) had recently shared syringes in 1988 compared with 20% (3/15) in 1990.
This difference was not significant.
Among opioid misusers 51% (24/47) in 1988 and 70% (30/43) in 1990 were receiving prescribed opioids before assessment.
Among benzodiazepine misusers 70% (23/33) in 1988 and 59% (23/39) in 1990 were being prescribed benzodiazepines before assessment.
These differences were not significant.
(Some patients reported being prescribed both drug types.)
Of the drugs in use within one month before assessment, injectable opioids such as Temgesic (buprenorphine) were significantly more commonly reported in 1988 than in 1990.
Dihydrocodeine (rather than methadone) was the non-injectable opioid most commonly reported in both years but was significantly more popular in 1990 than in 1988.
The 1988 and 1990 samples were combined to test for association between prescribing status before assessment and frequency of recent injecting.
Receiving a benzodiazepine prescription was not associated with recent injecting frequency.
However, being prescribed opioids before assessment was strongly associated with lower recent injecting frequency (χ 2 =25.7, df=2; p<0.0001).
Comment
In this study sample sizes were small.
Nevertheless, it is clear that something has happened in Lothian to diminish injecting prevalence among clinic attenders.
Reported opioid misuse seems to reflect this trend.
Being prescribed oral opioids before assessment was associated with less recent injecting but as levels of such prescribing were similar in the two samples this would not, as a ‘treatment effect,’ fully explain the differences found in recent injecting frequency.
Availability of oral opioids on the ‘grey market’ to drug users not receiving a prescription may be a factor.
Other possible factors may include the influence of public and drug user targeted education and changes in attitude owing to drug users' personal experience of friends and relatives becoming ill and dying of HIV related conditions.
Study of an ‘out of treatment’ group might disclose to what extent, if at all, the trends reported reflect behaviour change in the wider population of drug misusers in Lothian.
GENERAL PRACTICE
Heartsink hotel revisited
Three and a half years ago I described my experience of a meeting I attended for briefing on the brave new world of budget holding, the wild card of the recently published NHS Review.
Since then over 3000 family doctors have become fundholders, John Major has replaced Margaret Thatcher and Virginia Bottomley, Kenneth Clarke, and I now practise in the city of sails (Auckland) instead of the city of socks (Leicester).
There is no causal relation between these various events.
In September, after three years in New Zealand, I had the opportunity to spend one month back in Britain and was able to review the changes I had heard previewed in March 1989.
What follows is a personal observation based on visits in three regions of England to four fundholding and two non-fundholding practices and one poised to join the third wave.
I also talked to general practitioners, practice staff, officers of family health services authorities and district and regional health authorities, hospital consultants, academics, nurses, and patients.
Impact of fundholding
Has fundholding been a success?
As a more formal evaluation has suggested, it is too early to judge, but certainly there have been gains and losses.
I sensed real enthusiasm and empowerment among some of the fundholders and discovered tangible improvements in patient care.
I also learnt of untoward knock on effects and serious concerns about fragmentation and dis-enfranchisement.
The fundholding practices I visited ranged in size from 12 000 patients (six partners) to 17 000 patients (seven partners).
One was in an inner city, one an industrial town, one a country town, and one a county capital.
All practices agreed that preparing for and implementing fundholding was an enormous administrative task.
On average each practice had employed two additional full time staff to cope with this workload — usually a fund manager and a secretary or data entry person.
In addition, one partner had taken responsibility for overseeing the whole process.
Not surprisingly, the enthusiasm was greatest in the first wave practices.
Attitudes in second and especially third wave practices were more lukewarm, and I often encountered a sense of resigned determination —‘if we don't go in now, we'll get left behind.’
Fundholding has produced tangible improvements in patient care
There was a palpable sense of excitement, dynamism, and innovation among the fundholders, especially those in the first wave.
This was also apparent in the family health services authority officers I met — I was impressed by their commitment, vision, and leadership qualities.
The authorities were taking a proactive role, acting as the mainspring of change not only in fundholding but in other areas such as consumer surveys and information systems.
They were also organising business planning courses for their doctors and dentists.
I heard of some spectacular changes in services available to patients in fundholding practices.
One practice has used last year's savings to clear its waiting list totally for eye, orthopaedic, and ear, nose, and throat surgery by purchasing the operations from the private sector.
In another ear the sole consultant ophthalmologist has resigned from the district general hospital and bought a caravan which he is using to provide private consultations at fundholding practices.
Patients are seen within one week, do not have to travel to the hospital, and, if requiring surgery, are operated on promptly and privately.
However, the patients of non-fundholding practices now have no ophthalmology service available at their local hospital and have to travel up to 50 miles (80 km) to their regional hospital.
More modest examples of improved services included provision of physiotherapy and specialist consultations in the practice premises.
One practice was considering using its surplus to employ an additional orthopaedic surgeon at the district general hospital to clear the practice's long orthopaedic waiting list.
Where fundholders had encouraged local hospitals to improve the services for their own patients, other patients attending the hospital also benefited.
For example, one practice with a predominantly Asian population had persuaded the hospital to subscribe to Language Line, a telephone interpreting service which is now available to all patients attending the hospital.
The purchasing clout of the fundholders seems to be encouraging the hospitals to become more patient centred — who would have thought two or three years ago that evening or weekend clinics and operating sessions would be contemplated?
A clear shift of power away from the hospital consultants was apparent.
Although this is thought to be long overdue by some of my colleagues, will there be a backlash at some point?
The district general hospital in Leicester has undergone a facelift since I was last there, replacing the previous institutional look with touches of humanity, colour, and interest — preparation for trust status perhaps?
Fair and representative service?
On the downside there was evidence of polarisation between fundholders and non-fundholders.
Some practitioners whose practices were too small to qualify for the scheme felt bitter, excluded, and frustrated that their patients were being disadvantaged by a system over which they had no control.
Such divisions of opinion were causing difficulties in the functioning of local medical committees.
In at least two of the areas I visited the regional health authority and some of the first wave fundholders were wrangling over the savings accrued during the first year.
Over £100 000 was at stake in two cases, and the authority's attempts to claw back some of this were being resisted fiercely.
Even the enthusiasts for fundholding realised that the lid was sinking on health expenditure.
As the system beds down and budgets tighten the opportunities for innovation and experimentation will steadily diminish.
In a few years time the fundholders may have very little room to manoeuvre but will still have to cope with the burden of administering their fund.
All the fundholders I spoke to admitted that the scheme had increased the number of meetings they had to attend, both within and without the practice.
In some areas fundholders had formed liaison groups and were meeting regularly to share experiences and develop their collective expertise.
In one town, however, second wave fundholders had been told to fend for themselves by those in the first wave.
I became aware of two further concerns, one from regional and district health planners and one from patients; both related to the increased power of the fundholders.
The Health of the Nation spells out a clear strategy for public health policy, and many regional and district health authorities have mapped out their local plans.
Conflict may arise if a large fundholding practice decides to pursue its own health priorities or ignore those of the local district health authority.
Similarly, there is no obligation on fundholding practices to consult with their patients over how they will manage their fund and how any savings will be used.
Yet the consequences of these decisions, as in the ophthalmology example mentioned above, can have profound effects on patients both inside and outside the practice.
I became slightly unnerved by the frequent reassurances I was given by fundholders that they wouldn't do anything to ‘upset the applecart’ or disadvantage their colleagues' patients.
Nobody really knows what the patients think about all this.
A recent survey showed that over 40% of patients did not even know about the NHS reforms, let alone fundholding.
Indeed in one practice I visited the patients held a Tupperware party to raise money to ‘help’ their practice — believing that fundholding meant that the practitioners had to raise their own funds.
Fundholding has acted as a catalyst for change in Britain's general practice community — the ultimate outcome of the experiment remains to be seen.
General practitioner fundholding: experience in Grampian
Proposals for fundholding were greeted with scepticism by many general practitioners, and in Scotland the BMA persuaded the government to allow a scheme to test the arrangements as a demonstration project operating ‘shadow’ practice funds.
This allowed the six selected practices to set up administrative and computer systems without the worry of dealing with real money.
The shadow fundholding scheme has since been extended to small practices and to a trial of fundholding for all services except accident and emergency.
The six practices in the original pilot have all become fundholders and are beginning to effect improvements in the service to their patients.
However, with more practices becoming fundholders negotiating contracts with providers is becoming increasingly complicated and more time and money needs to be put into this aspect.
When the radical proposals on general practitioner fundholding were put forward three years ago they were not enthusiastically received by most of the medical profession.
The proposals were believed to be ‘an attempt to cash limit a demand led service which will damage the doctor/patient relationship and be detrimental to patient care.’
In Scotland, however, the approach was different.
A paper which I and colleagues in Grampian prepared for Scottish General Medical Services Committee posed the questions does this present an opportunity for general practice to have greater influence in the provision of health care for our patients? does it put general practice in the driving seat in helping to determine the range and quality of health service provision? or might it constitute an intolerable administrative burden on the constrained resources of an increasingly cash limited primary care service?
In a characteristically pragmatic way, the BMA in Scotland persuaded the government to allow the proposals to be tested.
A shadow fundholding exercise was agreed that would be independently evaluated to assess the effects on the care of patients and look at the administration structures, consulting patterns, and use of doctors' time.
Shadow fundholding
Six groups of general practitioners in the north east of Scotland were identified for the exercise in the first three months of 1990 — five in Grampian and one in Tayside.
The evaluation was and continues to be conducted by the Department of General Practice of the University of Edinburgh under Professor John Howie.
The exercise was regarded by the then minister for health in Scotland, Michael Forsyth, as a piece of ‘action’ research, the results of which would be made known at intervals during the evaluation.
In fact, the first report appeared in July 1992 and was mainly a description of the evaluation process.
Its summary pointed out that around 10 years would be needed to appreciate the full implications of such a fundamental change in the organisation of health services — so much  for action research.
However, publication of a second report is imminent.
Brimmond Medical Group's experiment with ‘total’ fundholding may point the way ahead
The shadow fundholding exercise was focused in Grampian because of the readiness and willing cooperation of the health board and the enthusiasm of practices of suitable size in Grampian to test out fundholding.
Relationships between practices and the primary care division in Grampian have traditionally been close and officials have, on the whole, been supportive of efforts to ensure high standards of general practice.
The exercise allowed the practices, health board, and hospitals to work together with the Department of Health to develop fundholding without the anxieties of dealing in real money.
In particular, it enabled the practices to gain experience and confidence in setting up computer systems and staffing arrangements before committing themselves to fundholding.
Some of the difficulties encountered in England have arisen from miscalculations in setting funds, because of general practitioners' uncertainty about costs.
In Grampian difficulties with the GPass computer system delayed the development of fundholding, and these problems are still being overcome.
However, the initial experience was sufficiently encouraging for all the practices to proceed to real fundholding in October 1991.
Further developments
Fundholding was initially limited to practices with list sizes of at least 11 000 patients, which meant that few practices in Scotland were eligible.
The minimum list size was subsequently lowered to 9000 patients and has now been further reduced to 6000.
Twelve smaller practices were recruited to the shadow fundholding exercise in 1991 to test the feasibility of fundholding with smaller list sizes.
In addition, my practice is participating in a scheme that involves fundholding for the whole range of hospital and community services with the exception of accident and emergency and sexually transmitted disease.
This is designed to test the feasibility of extending fundholding to cover all services and not just the limited range of services at present included — which represents only about 20% of services purchased from providers.
On paper we have a nominal fund of £2.3m covering our 8000 patients.
My practice has not encountered serious practical problems different from those of other fundholders and it seems to remove some of the difficulties of the existing scheme in that it resolves the problem of what referrals are within the range of services that can be purchased.
The administrative burden is increased but the processes are the same as those already in place for fundholding.
Hospitals have to provide costings for those procedures, admissions, and care not included in the fundholding scheme.
I have found this quite revealing — £28 000 a year for geriatric NHS long stay and over £30 000 a year for psychogeriatric long stay.
With certain safeguards for patients who, for example, may require liver transplants in Philadelphia full range fundholding seems a realistic possibility.
Enabling general practitioners
For me however, the biggest eye opener was when I joined the fundholder group in Grampian and their meetings with the provider units.
These meetings focused on services provided and on quality issues with a view to modifying contracts to improve the service to patients.
Issues discussed included waiting times, return of letters and reports to practices, and the need for outpatients to be seen by a consultant.
Experience on statutory advisory committees to the health board has shown me how slow and often ineffectual they are.
Hospital services were developed without general practitioners being asked whether they were required and often at the expense of the more routine but essential treatment our patients required.
Most general practitioners accepted that the service delivered was what you got and I have often had to persuade the patient to accept that.
It was therefore very refreshing to find a group of general practitioners meeting with managers and spelling out precisely what they wanted and, through the contracting process, beginning to see the possibility of achieving it.
I will give you one example of general practitioners' influence.
One of the hospitals in Grampian had spare capacity in radiology and made a presentation to the fundholding group.
Referrals would be seen within a week and reports sent out the same day, by fax if necessary.
The other and main hospital providing radiology had a waiting time of up to nine weeks with no prospect of the additional staff needed to reduce this.
Yet within a month it had received additional funding and increased sessions and would be able to meet demands previously unattainable.
So what is the current position in Grampian?
The five practices that took part in the shadow exercise became real fundholders in October 1991 and two other practices are participating in the small practice shadow exercise.
Other practices have applied to become fundholders so that in April 1993 there will be 25 fundholding practices involving 145 of the 320 general practitioners in Grampian covering 248 000 or 47% of the population.
Still more practices intend to become fundholders in 1994.
Negotiating contracts
The growth in fundholding poses problems for negotiations and the first moves in setting up the Grampian Association of Fundholding Practices are under way.
There are also to be three subgroups of monitoring committees which will ensure adherence to contracts.
The executive committee of the association will negotiate the broad contractual issues with providers with detail being resolved directly between fundholding practices and providers.
Providers include the private sector, which is keen to compete with the NHS and match costs.
Opportunities to enter into contracts with providers outside Grampian exist and practices are looking to develop services in house.
The health board, which negotiates contracts for non-fundholders, is to be represented in the negotiations between providers and fundholders.
This will keep the board informed of fundholders' efforts to  secure high standards and improved quality of care.
It is also proposed to include a non-fundholding general practitioner on the committee as it has been a policy to try to ensure that two tier service does not develop.
It remains to be seen whether this is practicable.
Provider units have expressed fears that fundholders might seek advantage through contracts.
As the contracting process evolves individual practices might try to make their contracts more specific, but identifying patients from such practices to meet different contractual demands might prove expensive for the provider units.
This should result in fundholders setting the pace and others benefiting.
A fundamental problem is funding the development of the contracting process.
Operating a consortium approach will require some form of management structure among general practitioners.
Yet most existing fundholders find they do not have the available money as their management fees are fully committed within their practices.
One of the major trusts in Grampian is seeking £1.5m to develop contract setting and monitoring and has given a contract to a firm of management consultants to handle contracting issues with fundholders.
From the general practice side this matter is being urgently discussed with both the health board and management executive.
In conclusion, I hope you can see the enormous challenge fundholding is posing, and how it is an opportunity to make the health service responsive to our needs as general practitioners acting on behalf of our patients.
The huge investment in computers, staff, and administration has the potential to improve the health service by making it more responsive to patients' needs and raising awareness of costs.
The fundholding debate: should practices reconsider the decision not to fundhold?
We are entering a period of deterioration in health care services.
The waste and inefficiency predicted by opponents of the introduction of market mechanisms into the NHS are already becoming evident.
Rapidly increasing administrative costs are contributing to reductions in service despite increased expenditure.
Unrealistic assumptions are being made about the extent to which — and the speed with which — the need for hospitals can be reduced by technological advance and improvements in primary care.
For primary care the most painful consequences of the reform stem from the cash limiting of services in the face of rising demands and costs.
Cash limits will in future apply to fundholders and non-fundholders alike.
The very generous terms on offer to early fundholders are unlikely to continue: the crisis in the economy and the ensuing pressure on public spending will accelerate the move to greater stringency in this area.
Many fundholding practices are already making loud protest at the reduced funds on offer as regions move to more equitable methods of allocation based on capitation.
In imagining what it would be like to be fundholders in future we should assume that overall adequacy of funding for health care will be less than we have previously known.
The key question is whether greater freedom to decide on the distribution of funding between drugs, staff pay, referrals, and community care will be a boom or a burden.
We should consider whether taking on this role, in a context of inadequate overall expenditure, might not increase our administrative workload and the level of stress from our clinical work and adversely affect our relationships with our patients, our staff, and each other.
Many practices have so far opted not to take the inducements to fundhold, and some have invested a considerable amount of time and energy into alternative methods of organising general practitioners' input into purchasing decisions.
Has the time come to change course?
I think not: these are the reasons why.
Reasons for not fundholding
(1)Greatly increased administrative workload — Even with the existing generous management and computerisation allowances, fundholding involves general practitioners in considerable extra administrative work, over and above that already entailed by the new contract.
With an extension of the services covered by the fund, and a reduction in management allowances as more practices take funds, this additional workload will increase and the rewards will dwindle.
Few of us truly enjoy administrative work, and the time that we spend on it is lost from direct contact with our patients — or our families.
(2)Conflict with the general practitioner's role as the patient's advocate — Fundholding gives general practitioners an explicit and visible responsibility for rationing the health services made available to their own patients.
This conflict of interest may undermine our patients' trust that our decisions on whether or not to treat, investigate, or refer are based solely on their needs rather than on what the fund can afford.
Such distrust may extend to the suspicion that our decisions may be influenced by personal financial self interest.
This perception, however unfounded it may be, has the potential to complicate many consultations every working day of our lives.
The more inadequate that overall funding of services becomes, the more this problem will become a reality.
For patients, continued trust in the basis for their doctor's decisions is worth more than the possibility of quicker access to elective surgery.
The fact that we already participate in certain ways in what are effectively rationing decisions does not constitute an argument for greatly increasing the scope and visibility of that role.
(3)Implicit acceptance of responsibility for providing a wide range of services to our patients — In taking a fund we accept responsibility for purchasing hospital services, drugs, and now community care on behalf of our patients.
As the services provided become less adequate we will find that the perceived responsibility for these inadequacies will also be laid at our door.
Government will be very keen to do this, just as governors will be blamed for poor schools, local authorities for poor local public services, and so on.
A key theme of policy in recent years has been to maximise the extent to which other agencies than government itself can be held responsible for inadequacies in public sector services.
We would be most  unwise to take on this role in the current economic climate.
(4)Boosting private health care — It is no coincidence that the services covered originally by the fund were those which the private health sector could compete with the NHS to provide — often on favourable if unfair terms.
Holding a fund would give us a clear and continuing incentive to maximise the extent to which our patients took out and used private health insurance.
The concept of fundholding was undoubtedly designed with this in mind.
Do we want to be a party to further undermining the NHS in this way?
(5)Weakened district planning of health services — District health authorities have to plan health services for populations, maximise efficiency in the use of resources, and address inequalities in provision.
The more that their budget is diverted to fundholding practices, the more their capacity to do so will be undermined, to the detriment of important areas of service for all patients.
It may be argued that fundholding allows us to discharge these responsibilities ourselves in respect of our own practice population, and that we are capable of doing the job better than a large purchasing authority.
I would suggest that this is not so.
Few of us have the time, training, or expertise to do this job properly, even if it were possible to do it for a population as small as 10 000 people — which it is not.
Some general practitioners are developing a high degree of expertise in purchasing: their skills would be better used in providing properly supported and remunerated guidance to purchasers at district level.
(6)Greater threat, in the medium to long term, to the independence and identity of practices — This may seem an odd assertion.
Many practices are worried that only by taking a fund can they retain some independence from what they fear may be increasingly arbitrary or incomplete control by the family health services authority or its eventual successor.
But there is a serious question mark over whether fundholding at the level of single practices will remain viable.
With greater financial stringency there will be increasing pressure for economies of scale by the amalgamation of fundholding practices.
This would lead to a greater loss of independence and the identity of the practice than is likely to occur by staying outside the fundholding system.
General practices would evolve into American-style health maintenance organisations — a prospect perhaps more appealing to planners than to patients or general practitioners.
Conclusion
The reasons I have cited make a largely self interested case for not fundholding.
There is a further reason that operates more at the level of values.
Fundholding poses ethical problems, either because it secures a better service for the patients of a fundholding practice over those whose doctors happen not to hold a fund, or because it does not.
If not, it is an appalling waste of time and money that would be better spent on other things.
In some districts the management costs of fundholding already exceed the cost of running the family health services authority.
We are seeing the beginnings of a two tier system.
Hospitals openly confess to giving higher priority to fundholders' patients as they try to avoid financial crisis.
District health authority contracts fail to cover hospitals' existing work rate.
As the perennial overspend on core and emergency services (used by the patients of fundholders and non-fundholders alike) leads hospitals to restrict their activities, fundholders' patients are getting preferential access to elective surgery.
Should we accept the inevitability and permanence of this state of affairs?
Must we take a fund so as to avoid having our patients condemned to the lower tier of a two tier service?
Politicians and health service managers have repeatedly assured us that a two tier service is not on the agenda.
We should take them at their word and hold them to it, rather than resign ourselves to the judgment that they have been lying.
Not to do so would be a betrayal of our hope that the founding principles of the National Health Service can survive the government's reforms.
Non-fundholding practices must continue to secure equivalent access to funding for staff, premises, and equipment and equitable treatment for their patients.
If enough practices stay out of fundholding then a more rational and cost effective embodiment of the purchaser-provider split will emerge from the present chaos.
EDUCATION & DEBATE
NHS internal market 1991–2: towards a balance sheet
The first year of the internal market in the NHS has been claimed to have resulted in increased efficiency.
These claims, however, are hard to substantiate because the systems for operating the market are not fully in place.
Examination of data on tax relief for private health insurance premiums for over 60s, general practice fundholding, and implementation and transaction costs suggest that much of the increased efficiency is not due to the reforms but to increased funding.
Furthermore, some of the changes seem to be decreasing market forces and reducing efficiency.
Evaluation of the first year's operation of the internal market is not straightforward.
The first difficulty is the scale of the reforms, which are generally agreed to be the most wide ranging and fundamental since the inception of the NHS in 1948.
Secondly, the white paper and the working documents that supplemented it give only the barest outline of the market framework and leave several key issues unresolved.
The resultant local variation in working arrangements has greatly complicated national assessment.
Thirdly, the first year of implementation presents problems as a basis for evaluation.
The market was established before the information on which it depends (population health needs, service costs) was available.
As a result most contracting in the first year was in the form of unsophisticated block contracts.
Furthermore, the reforms were introduced during the run up to a general election in which it was widely (but incorrectly) expected that health would be the key issue.
Accordingly, the NHS Management Executive advised regions and districts against major shifts in service patterns.
This resulted in 75% of contracts being placed with the traditional provider.
Because the pattern of trading in the first year of the market was so confined by technical and political constraints it would be unsafe to generalise from it.
In this article I examine claims that the reforms have improved efficiency by considering three aspects of health services: tax relief on private health insurance premiums for the over 60s, general practice fundholding, and transaction and implementation costs.
These data suggest that the reforms may not be responsible for the improved performance observed.
Increased efficiency or increased funding?
The difficulties in assessing the internal market already identified did not deter the NHS Management Executive from attempting an evaluation of the first six months of operation.
In what was clearly intended as a pre–emptive strike against Labour's expected attack, it claimed the reforms were improving quality and responsiveness and providing ‘even better value for money.’
The claims of increased activity were disputed but were apparently confirmed by the absence of those traditional indicators of NHS inactivity — hospital beds temporarily closed as a year end cost saving exercise.
Further apparent corroboration has come from more recent independent statistics.
These show that in 1991–2 inpatient numbers rose 3.5%, day cases 31%, total outpatient attendances 3.2%, and new outpatient attendances 2.3% compared with 1990–1.
Government claims on waiting lists were also substantiated, although allowance has to be made for reductions achieved clerically rather than clinically.
But the momentum of reducing waits of over two years does not seem to have been sustained beyond the election and might be partially offset by a rise in waits of between one and two years.
This concern was expressed as early as spring 1991.
Others were anxious that patients with long waits had received priority over those with clinically more urgent conditions.
On balance, though, the evidence suggests record levels of NHS activity during the first year of the internal market.
Before this increased activity is attributed to the internal market, alternative explanations such as increased funding need to be eliminated.
Analysis of NHS spending and activity during 1979–92 points strongly towards this possibility (Colin Thunhurst, personal communication).
Whereas there had been virtually zero real growth in NHS funding during the 1980s, in 1990–1 and 1991–2 NHS spending rose in real terms by 2.8% and 4.1% respectively.
In other words almost all the real growth during the decade coincided precisely with the run up to the implementation of the internal market (and the general election).
It must, therefore, be included in any explanation of increased activity.
Nor can the elimination of two year waits be attributed to the internal market.
It is the culmination of a centrally coordinated and continuing ‘waiting list initiative’ begun in July 1986 and costing £156m.
It thus validates not the internal market but ‘the power of a key ministerial priority and targeted additional funding.’
Similarly, the rise in day case surgery originates from medical advances and investment decisions that predate the reforms.
It cannot be claimed as evidence of their effectiveness.
Tax relief on private health insurance premiums
Evidence for the effect of tax relief on private health insurance premiums for the over 60s is fairly secure since the scheme has been operating for two years.
Pessimistic early predictions seem to be confirmed by more recent data.
Loss of Exchequer revenue has been considerable and has not been offset by any gain in total expenditure on health care.
The cost to the Treasury of tax relief was estimated at about £60m for the year 1991–2, while the number of people claiming relief was put at 330000.
Insurers also incurred substantial losses.
British United Provident Association invested £3m in an attempt to tap the expected new market but failed to recover its investment.
Western Provident Association spent over £1m but recruited just 120 new subscribers.
The scheme has done little to create new  demand.
It has simply encouraged existing subscribers to switch from non-qualifying to qualifying policies.
Fundholding has given practices control of their budget but has not reduced variations in spending
The costs of the scheme do not end there, however.
Tax subsidisation of private health care will have moved the market away from rather than towards greater efficiency.
By lowering the market price from what existing subscribers had already shown they were willing to pay the scheme has decreased the efficiency of this sector of the health care market.
As well as reducing efficiency, it will also have reduced equity.
People with private health insurance are known to have above average income and tax relief therefore redistributes purchasing power from lower to higher income groups.
Since the wealthy are also likely to be more healthy the scheme also reduces equity of access; the more healthy are ensured privileged access to health care at the expense of those whose need is greater.
It is ironic that reforms intended to increase efficiency by introducing market disciplines should have undermined them in the one sector in which they already existed.
General practice fundholding scheme
The second area of concern is the general practitioner fundholding scheme.
Although it is too soon to draw definitive conclusions, some aspects of the scheme raise doubts about the consistency of the government's interpretation of variations in performance.
Working for Patients was not a closely argued and intensively documented analysis of the NHS.
It is therefore all the more significant that, among the few statistics it does contain, data on variations in performance between providers feature so prominently — 50% variation in acute hospital treatment costs, for example, or 100% variation in general practitioner prescribing costs.
In the absence of any reliable direct measure variations were taken as evidence of inefficiency.
Eliminating (or at least reducing) variations was a main goal of the reforms.
The budget setting process for fundholding implies a different attitude towards variation.
As no formula for capitation funding had been developed fundholders were given budgets on a historical basis.
These budgets allowed them to maintain pre-existing activity and referral patterns and have resulted in massive variations in per capita allocations between fundholders.
A study of 15 practices in London and the home counties showed variation of over 400% in drug budgets, over 300% in hospital inpatient treatment budgets, and 150% overall.
Similar variation was identified nationally.
It seems unlikely that variations of this magnitude will prove to be correlated with need or deprivation.
If it were consistent the government would have to view these variations too as evidence of inefficiency.
It has been claimed that fundholding ‘has revealed rather than created these variations.’
I would suggest that it has done rather more than just reveal them.
It has reinforced them by building them into practice budgets.
Higher spending practices were rewarded for their inefficiency and the more efficient penalised by lower budget allocations.
The implication that ‘easy money’ was made available to some fundholders was reinforced by reports in January 1992 that some were expecting six figure savings from their hospital treatment budgets by the end of the financial year.
These expectations are rumoured to be confirmed by an Audit Commission report on fundholding due for publication last September but delayed.
It is hardly surprising that health authorities and hospital managers were calling for the immediate introduction of capitation funding for fundholders as a means of stemming losses from their budgets.
The fundholding scheme has entailed costs for other actors in the internal market.
Providers have had to cope with the uncertainty created by the unpredictability of fundholders' purchasing decisions or maintain services on a lower throughput when fundholders referred elsewhere.
They have had to develop more detailed service costings than required by their main customers, the district health authorities, who were limited to the less information costly block contracts during the first year of the internal market.
The fact that these costs cannot readily be quantified or fall outside the fundholding sector does not mean that they should be overlooked.
Whenever the final balance is drawn up, costs such as these will have to be offset against whatever gains arise from the scheme.
Transaction and implementation costs
Although critical of the costs of bureaucratic organisation, proponents of markets have paid less attention to the costs of transactions in the market place.
When the product or service being exchanged is complex (as is the case with health care), it is either impossible or extremely costly to specify in advance in a written contract every contingency that might affect the transaction.
An elderly unstable diabetic patient admitted for surgery, for instance, is obviously going to require more hospital treatment than a younger fitter patient.
Because it is difficult to incorporate contingencies of this kind contracts will inevitably be incomplete specifications of the rights and obligations of the contracting parties.
Incompleteness creates scope for opportunism.
For example, a provider could seek to increase profits by trimming the quality of care or a purchaser to reduce costs by manipulating information or concealing intentions (for instance , about the number of patients it will be referring under a block contract or their health status).
One solution to the problem of incomplete contracts is to try to incorporate as many contingencies as possible.
This, however, requires much more information.
An alternative is intensified monitoring of performance in an attempt to ensure compliance with contracts.
Neither solution is straightforward, given the inherent difficulties of specifying and monitoring compliance with care plans that are essentially ‘customised’ to each patient.
Both add significantly to the transaction costs of operating the internal market.
If operating the market entails transaction costs, it is even clearer that establishing it entails implementation costs, although the difficulty of identifying and quantifying them means that estimates vary widely.
One estimate puts the eventual start up cost of the internal market at £2bn and recurring costs at £0.5bn annually.
Officially, however, only the following implementation costs have been conceded: £79m in 1989–90, £306m in 1990–1, and an estimated £383m, in  1991–2.
To this, though, we would need to add the start up costs of the fundholding scheme (£4.4m in 1990–1 and £8m in first six months of 1991–2) and the £11m estimated cost of creating the asset registers needed for calculating capital charges.
We should also add some part of the cost of the increased numbers of general and senior managers, which rose from 510 in 1986 to 13200 in 1991, Between 1987 and 1991 the salary bill for general managers rose from £25.7m to £251.5m.
These increases must be seen in context.
Part of the increased numbers may be nominal (because of changes in title) rather than real.
Salaries of general managers still represent only 2.2% of total wages and salaries in the NHS.
Even if we add in the £1.2bn spent on other administrative and clerical staff as a crude proxy measure of the managerial and administrative ‘overhead’ it amounts still to just under 6% of total NHS expenditure.
Others have estimated administrative expenditure in the NHS at around 5%.
The NHS has always been considered a ‘good buy’ internationally in terms of administrative costs, and although precise comparisons are not possible, clearly remains so, certainly when compared with the 24.1% calculated for the United States.
Nevertheless, the rate of increase in expenditure on senior management since 1987 is remarkable and the costs are now equivalent to those of running four medium sized health authorities.
We are unlikely ever to be able to quantify transaction and implementation costs with any certainty.
None the less, it is clear both that they are substantial and that they have to be offset against any putative gains in efficiency brought about by the internal market.
This conclusion is confirmed by recent experience in the United States, where rising costs of administration and regulation are an important factor in the continuing escalation of health care spending.
The cost of health service administration in the United States rose by 37% between 1983 and 1987.
Much of the high administrative overhead in the United States is attributable to the multiplicity of payers and the necessity of assigning treatment costs to individual patients and purchasers.
In Britain for the foreseeable future the ultimate purchaser of 80% or more of health care will continue to be the Treasury.
This being so, the question has to be asked: Will the expected benefits of the internal market be sufficient to offset the costs of establishing and operating it?
There is evidence that the government may have substantially underestimated these costs.
The financial memorandum published in the NHS and Community Care Bill in 1990 set out its official estimate of the financial and personnel effects of the legislation.
For items where costs have been disclosed, these estimates have been greatly exceeded.
The £14m annual budget allowed for establishing fundholding seemed to be heading for overspend just midway through 1991–2.
Creating asset registers cost double the £5.5m estimated.
The  acknowledged annual implementation costs referred to earlier were running at almost double the £220m estimated for setting up the internal market.
The memorandum expressed the government's confidence that the extra costs would be more than covered by the savings they made possible.
This confidence seems unjustified, at least as far as capital asset charging is concerned.
The whole of the first year was written off as a ‘shambles.’
Conclusion
The NHS is changing but the nature of the change is still unclear.
Considerable uncertainty remains about the balance to be struck between the market and hierarchy, between economic forces and political considerations in the determination of health policy.
Politics has predominated hitherto, but its future role is unknown (and probably undecided).
Even if this had been determined there would still be formidable technical obstacles to be overcome in realising the managed market in health care, given that the project is unprecedented and unpiloted.
Under these circumstances, attempting even an interim assessment of just a few facets of change may appear premature (not to mention hubristic).
I would argue that the uncertainties that make evaluation difficult also make it imperative.
Given the scale and complexity of the reforms final analysis may never be possible.
However, on the basis of the limited data available, and in the areas that have been considered it seems probable that substantial and largely unrecognised costs have been incurred.
What is less certain is whether they have been, or will be, offset by corresponding gains.
Letter to Mrs Bottomley
No doubt my loved ones are already laughing heartily at the thought that I could have anything useful to say to a secretary of state, and two years ago I too would have discounted the idea that a politically damp, small ‘c’ conservative would ever be in a position to offer advice on competition and free markets to a Tory government.
However, one thing that we have learnt in recent times is that truths which are self evident to those of us who actually work in public services hold novelty value for our masters.
So could I presume to make just two or three points about the current ills of the NHS?
The free market
One great advantage of the free market was to have been the prospering of hard working, successful hospitals at the expense of those providing an inferior service.
Let's think about the unsuccessful hospitals and, possibly more to the point, the unsuccessful ventures undertaken from time to time by otherwise efficient units.
Did you see Sir John Harvey-Jones on the television sorting out the problems of the Bradford Royal Infirmary?
One of the most telling sequences in that film passed without comment.
A hospital in the Bradford district had renovated some ward space for geriatric patients who subsequently ended up elsewhere, the purchasers presumably having been made an offer they couldn't refuse.
The newly decorated wards were left empty, for the time being at least.
In that particular instance the money may or may not have been misspent, and for all I know those wards are now full.
But in the brave new world management and doctors are bound to make judgments about potential workload that turn out to be wrong.
Although this will not usually result in equipment and other resources lying totally idle, it will undoubtedly cause neighbouring hospitals, intent on getting their share of the market, to invest in the same expensive technology, which is then underused.
The point that no one in government seems to have grasped is that the businessman who spots what he thinks is a gap in the market and retools his factory, only to find that he has made an error of judgment, loses his own money and learns his lesson.
The cash that buys the unwanted computed tomographic scanner, or furnishes the nice new empty waiting room, on the other hand, is money lost for ever from an already inadequate central pool.
And every pound lost means a patient untreated, in pain, or perhaps even dying.
The NHS is not a consumer outlet just like any other.
Distortion of priorities
Although the last thing we want is a return to rigid central control, the NHS does need some coordination to ensure that scarce resources are used to best advantage and not wasted by the unsupervised duplication of facilities.
My next point also stems from this underlying tendency of the reforms to produce fragmentation and deregulation.
Even your supporters are becoming alarmed by the destabilising effect of general practitioner fundholding, as you top slice cash from the central reserve and ensure that it can be spent only on the limited number of services that general practitioners are allowed to purchase directly.
Waiting list initiatives have had exactly the same effect — because money was diverted to solve a politically sensitive problem, health care rationing priorities have been distorted so that in some cases cash rather than clinical need dictates who gets treated.
You were warned about this when fundholding was first mooted, and again when your obsession with waiting lists surfaced, but no one seems to listen.
Please listen
As for the argument that money would follow patients and so make it possible for hospitals to treat more of them, that was always a non-starter given that the total amount of cash available to purchasers was not going to be increased.
When hospitals increase throughput all that happens is that the purchaser runs out of money before the end of the year.
We then start to read the familiar stories of ward closures and idle operating theatres which have become so much a part of the New Year celebrations and which the reforms were supposed to eliminate.
To tell hospital managers that they should have paced themselves to spread the money over the full year is a denial of all the theoretical advantages of a free market.
In 1988 the money ran out because of‘inefficiency’ and ‘bad management,’prompting the NHS review.
This year the same problem has arisen as a result of ‘overtrading.’
Patients refused admission cannot be expected to take much comfort from this explanation of their plight.
Naturally I welcome the fact that the reforms are revealing the extent of NHS underfunding, but this will only be of benefit if you acknowledge what is happening and do something about it.
Competition won't work
Finally, although you have stopped talking so much about commercialism, we are still told that competition between hospitals is the way to ensure efficiency in  health care provision.
This is why I know that you need someone like me to explain about competition.
It works in the high street because suppliers are trying to sell more washing machines and videos than there are customers wishing to buy them; the firms are therefore forced to compete on both price and quality, to the benefit of the consumer.
In the NHS the reverse is true: demand exceeds supply and, what is more, the suppliers are working within strict cash limits.
Competition and purchaser pressure may have forced hospitals to give more attention to some of the easily measurable quality issues such as waiting times and patient information leaflets — and a good thing too — but this will not increase efficiency.
Indeed, the net result may well be to consume resources without producing any improvement in more important but less readily quantifiable criteria of outcome.
Hospitals should be cooperating, not competing.
When Kenneth Clarke first told us of his ideas these and other flaws were so obvious that many of us assumed that either we had analysed the situation incorrectly or that he too had spotted the pitfalls and had the solutions up his sleeve.
We now realise that this was not the case.
The NHS did need a kick up the backside, and a lot of us were (and still are) far more prepared than you realise to promote any scheme that looks halfway decent.
Sadly, there was no discussion or consultation, and the present confrontational atmosphere was allowed to develop.
It is depressing to see the predicted problems materialising one after another, and even more damaging to morale when it becomes apparent that the message we are trying to get across — that a so called free market is no way to ensure the satisfactory provision of health care to an aging population — has not been appreciated by those in a position to make a difference.
I work in a trust hospital which, as far as I can tell, has made a successful transition from directly managed status.
Nevertheless, like everyone else we wonder how we can ever afford to replace the time expired capital equipment and infrastructure which was our legacy from the past 20 years of neglect.
But if we are doing well someone else is doing badly — that is what free markets are like.
We cannot afford to have failures in a health system which needs to use every hospital and every health care worker if it is to cope with the demands of the twenty first century.
Please listen to the arguments of those of us who are doing our best to make the new system work.
The reforms are not all bad, and many of us can see opportunities opening up which we are eager to grab.
Don't assume that we are all Luddite malcontents afraid of change.
Like you, we are committed to the NHS, and there is an enormous reserve of goodwill that you could be harnessing; just show some evidence that you appreciate the nature of the problems we are facing, and we can all work together to establish the quality service that our patients rightly demand.
Basic Molecular and Cell Biology
Cell to cell and cell to matrix adhesion
This article will be in the second edition of ‘Basic Molecular and Cell Biology,’ which is to be published in April this year
The structure and organisation of body tissues is dependent on maintenance of contact between cells and their neighbours and between cells and the extracellular matrix.
In simple epithelia, such as the lining of the intestine or the kidney tubule, the individual cells have surfaces with three different sets of adhesive properties.
The apical or luminal surface is non-adhesive, the lateral surface is specialised for adhesion to adjacent cells, and the basal surface is specialised for adhesion to the underlying matrix, the basement membrane.
In a stratified epithelium, such as epidermis, the cells in the basal layer adhere to the basement membrane below, to each other laterally, and to suprabasal cells apically.
The suprabasal cells have lost adhesion to the matrix and instead adhere to similar cells on all sides.
Apically this mutual adhesion is also lost and cells are sloughed off.
Other cell types — leucocytes and blood platelets — spend much of their time circulating freely and thus showing no adhesive interactions.
Lymphocytes, however, show quite specific recirculation patterns in which particular subsets leave the blood circulation by first adhering to high endothelial venule cells at specific sites — for example, peripheral lymph nodes or mucosal associated lymphoid tissue.
They then migrate into the lymphoid tissue and eventually return to the blood circulation.
Endothelial adhesion by leucocytes is also the first step in a range of adhesive interactions required in their tissue invasive response to inflammation.
Blood platelets respond to injury by a whole set of adhesive interactions with endothelial cells, with the matrix of the clot and endothelial basement membrane, and with each other.
Thus cells of any particular type possess a set of adhesive properties that may be both spatially and temporally regulated.
A considerable amount is now known about the molecular mechanisms that mediate these properties.
Families of cell adhesion molecules
Many different cell adhesion molecules have been described.
Most of them belong to one of a small number of families of related molecules in which the individual members share the same basic molecular structure but are subtly different from each other(figure).
cadherins
In most tissues a major contribution to cell to cell adhesion is made by calcium dependent cell adhesion molecules known as cadherins.
In general these are simple transmembrane glycoproteins.
The extracellular domain has an adhesion site towards the N-terminal region and several calcium binding sites.
Adhesive binding is homophilic: a cadherin molecule on one cell binds to another cadherin molecule of the same type on the next cell.
Linkage of the cytoplasmic domain to the cytoskeleton through proteins known as catenins is necessary for cadherin function.
The best characterised is epithelial cadherin, E-cadherin or uvomorulin.
This appears very early in development, when it is involved in compaction of the eight cell embryo and cell polarisation.
In adult epithelia — for example, intestinal epithelium — it is present on the lateral cell surfaces but is concentrated in intercellular junctions known as the zonulae adherentes, which ring the cells in the apicolateral region.
The zonula adherens is characterised by a cortical ring of  cytoskeleton, the major component of which is actin.
The adhesive glycoproteins of the other major intercellular junctions of epithelia, the desmosomes, are members of the cadherin family.
Their extracellular domains are very like those of cadherin but their cytoplasmic domains differ, being specialised for forming desmosomal plaques and, thereby, attachment to the keratin intermediate filament cytoskeleton rather than to actin.
A cell adhesion molecule known as neural cadherin (N-cadherin) is expressed predominantly in the nervous system, where it is implicated in neuronal migration during development.
immunoglobulin superfamily
The other major group of cell to cell adhesion molecules is part of the immunoglobulin superfamily.
The extracellular portions are characterised by the presence of at least one, and usually multiple, immunoglobulin-like domains.
Included in this group are several nervous system adhesion molecules such as the neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM), L1, and TAG, which are involved in neuronal guidance and fasciculation.
Several members of the immunoglobulin family are concerned with antigen recognition and adhesion in T lymphocytes.
These include the T cell receptor (CD3) and its coreceptors CD4 and CD8, which together recognise complexes of antigen peptide and major histocompatibility complex on other cells; the major histocompatibility complex molecules themselves; and lymphocyte function-related antigen 2 (LFA-2 or CD2), a receptor for another immuno-globulin-like molecule, LFA3, expressed on other cells.
Another group of immunoglobulin-like cell adhesion molecules includes the so called intercellular adhesion molecules, ICAM-1 and ICAM-2, which are more widely expressed, for example, on epithelial and endothelial cells, and V-CAM, which is expressed on endothelial cells.
These three are involved in the inflammatory response.
The immunoglobulin superfamily is large and diverse probably because the basic structure of the immunoglobulin domain is versatile and readily adaptable to different binding functions.
Among these molecules, however, only the T cell receptor and the immunoglobulins themselves have somatically variable domains necessary for antigen recognition.
Members of the superfamily are present in insects, where they are involved in forming of nerve connections; thus the association of immunoglobulin-like domains in cellular recognition preceded the immune system in evolution.
integrins
Both cell to cell and cell to matrix receptors are contained within the remaining large family of adhesion molecules, the integrins.
These are heterodimers consisting of one αchain and one β chain, both of which are necessary for adhesive binding.
Thirteen different α chains and eight different βchains are now known.
Integrins may be classified into subfamilies according to which β subunit is involved in the complex.
Thus β1 integrin may associate with one of eight different α subunits to give a series of matrix receptors.
The β2 integrins on the other hand are a family of cell to cell adhesion molecules of lymphoid cells with three alternative α subunits.
The classification is made more complicated because some α subunits can associate with different β subunits (for example, α6β1 and α6β4).
Some integrins are apparently quite specific in their ligand-binding properties — for example, α5β1 for the arginine, glycine, and asparetic acid (-arg-gly-asp-) tripeptide sequence of fibronectin — whereas others are promiscuous — for example , αvβ3, once regarded as the vitronectin receptor, also binds fibronectin, fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, thrombospondin, and osteo-pontin.
An interesting example is α4β1, which binds both the IIICS domain of fibronectin and the immuno-globulin-like molecule V-CAM on endothelial cells.
To complicate matters further individual cell types usually express multiple integrins.
A good example to consider here is the blood platelet that expresses predominantly αIIbα3 (GPIIb/IIIa), which binds fibrinogen, fibro-nectin, von Willebrand factor, and vitronectin but also lesser amounts of αVβ3, α5β1, α2β1 (collagen), and α6β1 (laminin).
selectins
Most cellular adhesive interactions seem to entail homophilic or heterophilic protein to protein binding.
However, the final, as yet small, family of cell adhesion molecules bind to carbohydrates.
These are the selectins, which have lectin-like domains at their extra-cellular N-terminal extremities.
One of these, L-selectin (previously LAM-1/Mel-14), is a ‘homing receptor,’ mediating specific adhesion of lymphocytes to endothelium in peripheral lymph nodes.
This molecule is also involved in the adhesion of neutrophils to endothelium during the inflammatory response.
The other two members of this family, E-selectin (previously ELAM-1 endothelial leucocyte adhesion molecule) and P-selectin (previously GMP-140, PADGEM or CD62), are also involved in the inflammatory response.
E-selectin is up regulated on endothelial cells over a period of hours after stimulation by inflammatory mediators.
P-selectin is contained within Wiebel-Palade bodies of endothelial cells and platelet granules, from which it is rapidly mobilised on activation or clotting, mediating adhesion to neutrophils and monocytes.
Cell adhesion and disease
adhesion molecule deficiency
A number of rare diseases result from defects in adhesion molecules.
The inherited immunodeficiency disease leucocyte adhesion deficiency is characterised by pronounced granulocytosis, lack of pus formation, mobilisation of neutrophils and monocytes to inflammatory sites, severe gingivitis, and recurrent or progressive soft tissue infections.
It is caused by defects in the common β2 subunit of the lymphocyte integrins, resulting for example, in deficient expression of the αβ heterodimers at the cell surface with the result that adhesion of lymphocytes is impaired.
Defects in β2 may be either mutations, which affect the structure of the protein, or greatly reduced expression or absence of mRNA.
In its most severe form the disease causes death in early childhood from overwhelming infection.
It has been shown recently that adhesiveness of lymphocytes from patients with leucocyte adhesion deficiency can be restored by transfection with an expression vector continuing the complementary DNA for the normal β2 subunit.
Thus gene therapy may be feasible for these patients.
Mutation of the β3 subunit of the platelet integrin GPIIb/IIIa results in the bleeding disorder Glanzmann's thrombasthenia.
The Bernard-Soulier syndrome entails a deficiency of the non-integrin platelet adhesion receptor GPIb/IX and von Willebrand's disease abnormalities of von Willebrand factor.
pemphigus
In pemphigus, the group of autoimmune diseases that cause epidermal blistering, patients' serum contains autoantibodies to desmosomes, the cadherin-like glycoproteins of the epidermal intercellular junctions.
The autoantibodies cause the junctions to break down and the keratinocytes to separate (acantholysis) giving rise to the formation of blisters.
Breakdown of desmosomes by another mechanism (possibly protease activity) gives rise to the inherited Darier's disease and Hailey-Hailey disease, which are similar but probably unrelated.
Failure of adhesion between the epidermis and its underlying basement membrane occurs in bullous pemphigoid, in which autoantibodies to cytoplasmic protein components of the matrix adhesive junctions known as hemidesmosomes are found in serum.
The hemidesmosomes adhesion receptor is another integrin, α6β4.
The matrix ligand for this may be a newly discovered trimeric basement membrane component known as BM-600, nicein, kalinin, or epiligrin.
(Like many new proteins this has been discovered by different groups, which have given it different names.)
Another group of blistering diseases, epidermolysis bullosa, results from failure of epidermis to adhere to basement membrane.
The most severe form of junctional epidermolysis bullosa is fatal in early childhood.
It involves defects in hemidesmosomes possibly resulting from defective interaction between the integrin and its ligand.
metastatic behaviour
Defective cell adhesion has long been thought to play a part in the invasive and metastatic behaviour of neoplastic cells.
Invasive cells spread into the tissues surrounding the primary tumour; penetrate into blood vessels, lymphatics, or body cavities; and become dispersed to distant areas.
Some may become trapped at new sites, extravasate, and form secondary tumours.
This is a complex series of events that may involve various altered cellular properties, such as secretion of proteolytic enzymes, alterations in cell motility, and altered growth properties, as well as possible changes in adhesiveness.
However, some interesting observations have been made in relation to adhesion and tumour spread.
For example, formation of secondary tumours by injected melanoma cells in mice was inhibited by simultaneous injection of a short synthetic peptide containing the -arg-gly-asp-tripeptide that blocks integrin α5β1 binding to fibronectin, strongly suggesting a role for matrix adhesion in the formation of metastases.
A series of small, cysteine rich peptides that contain -arg-gly-asp- (which are called disintegrins) has been identified in viper venom.
These peptides are much more potent inhibitors of β1 and β3 integrins than synthetic peptides and inhibit tumour metastasis in mice, as well as platelet aggregation.
In a series of human tumour cell lines invasion into collagen gels was inversely related to expression of E-cadherin and inhibition of invasion was achieved in a breast carcinoma cell line by transfection with a vector expressing E-cadherin.
This suggests a possible tumour suppressor function for this cell adhesion molecule.
In a detailed study of the genetic deletions found in colorectal cancer one of the commonly deleted genes (DCC) was found to code for a protein homologous to the immunoglobulin superfamily of cell adhesion molecules, again suggesting a possible tumour suppressor function.
viruses and parasitic diseases
Cell adhesion molecules are also involved in some infectious and parasitic diseases, in which the invading organisms use the normal tissue molecules for binding.
Thus the rhinoviruses — RNA viruses responsible for about a half of common colds — bind to intercellular adhesion molecules on respiratory epithelium.
Of more sinister significance the binding of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) during infection of T lymphocytes is mediated by binding of the viral gp120 protein to CD4, the immunoglobulin-like T cell co-receptor.
Intercellular adhesive molecules are also implicated in the adhesion of red blood cells infected with Plasmodium falciparum to capillary endothelium in the pathogenesis of severe malaria.
Cytokine mediated up regulation of endothelial intercellular adhesion molecules may be associated with severity of the disease.
other important functions
An important function of cell adhesion molecules in addition to adhesive binding is transmission of signals across cell membranes.
Study of this has so far been limited, but several aspects have emerged.
Members of all three of the large families of cell adhesion molecules — the cadherins, integrins, and immunoglobulin-like superfamily — have been shown to participate in signalling.
Signals can be transmitted from the outside to the inside of cells in response to ligand binding, affecting second messengers and gene transcription, or from the inside to the outside of cells, modulating the binding affinity of cell adhesion molecules.
Add to this the quantitative regulation of expression of cell adhesion molecules in response, for example, to inflammatory mediators and associated with changes in cellular differentiation, and we find a complex and highly responsive set of cellular adhesion mechanisms whose role in normal tissue formation and disease is only beginning to be understood.
Epilepsy mistaken for panic attacks in an adolescent girl
Complex partial seizures are a form of focal epilepsy associated with impairment of consciousness.
The clinical presentation of such seizures is diverse, which can lead to misdiagnosis.
We describe the case of a 17 year old woman who was referred to our service for treatment of panic attacks.
Case report
The girl was referred to our department with a two year history of panic attacks.
She complained of recurrent episodes of acute anxiety accompanied by palpitations, hyperventilation, fuzziness in the head, butterflies in the stomach, tightness in the chest, nausea, urgency to micturate, and a choking sensation.
During these attacks she would scream and run about in an agitated state.
The attacks were short and occasionally occurred at night (she woke up before the attacks started).
She was described as being ‘distant’ during the attacks but said that she was aware of her actions.
She would quickly come round when held still.
She also mentioned outbursts of anger and physical violence, including assaulting a bystander and putting her hand through a window.
The precipitants to these outbursts were trivial and she was alarmed at both the extent of her anger and her lack of control over it.
She was taking a contraceptive pill and denied misusing drugs.
The mental state examination and a physical examination showed no abnormality.
Between the ages of 2 and 5 she had had episodes of disturbed behaviour during sleep.
A paediatrician had diagnosed these as night terrors.
She was first referred to our department aged 14 years, when she had behavioural problems at school, short bouts of deep depression, and outbursts of temper.
She was counselled by an educational psychologist and her condition rapidly improved.
She was referred again a year later with similar problems.
Her threshold for anger and frustration was low and she had once slashed her wrist.
She failed to attend follow up and was discharged.
There was a family history of generalised anxiety (father) and epilepsy (paternal grandmother and paternal aunt).
We were concerned that some of the features of her panic attacks were atypical, particularly the short duration, prominent motor activity, and nocturnal occurrence.
These coupled with the family history of epilepsy prompted us to investigate with electroencephalography.
Immediately before the recording she had an attack during which she appeared anguished and flushed, cried out in panic, and leapt off the bed.
After this she was drowsy but cooperative.
The electroencephalogram showed a postictal delta focus in the right frontotemporal region.
Ambulatory electroencephalographic monitoring over 48 hours showed two similar attacks lasting about 40 seconds, each of which corresponded to episodes of panic.
In addition a 25 second burst of delta activity was seen that did not cause panic or disturbed behaviour.
Complex partial seizures were diagnosed.
All blood tests and computerised tomography of her head gave normal results.
She was started on carbamazepine.
Her panic attacks stopped and the frequency and intensity of her rage attacks decreased.
Discussion
The prevalence of epilepsy in the general population is estimated at 4–10/1000.
Complex partial seizures are a common type of epilepsy, constituting about 60% of all cases when seizures that become secondarily generalised are included.
Complex partial seizures usually arise from the temporal lobe, but up to 30% may arise from other sites, in particular the frontal lobe.
The clinical presentation of complex partial seizures is diverse and includes psychiatric, motor, and somatic signs and symptoms.
Temporal lobe seizures produce complex auditory, visual, gustatory, and olfactory hallucinations; déjà and jamais vu; depersonalisation and derealisation; affective changes (fear, depression, euphoria); memory flashbacks; and visceral sensations (nausea, epigastric discomfort).
Frontal lobe seizures show prominent motor manifestations.
Occipital lobe seizures cause simple visual phenomena (sparks and flashes).
Those from the parietal lobe are associated with motor and sensory symptoms and disorders of the body image.
The psychiatric symptoms of complex partial seizures are said to be indistinguishable from those of true psychiatric disorders.
They are not limited to ictal episodes and can also occur peri-ictally and interictally.
Lindsay et al reported that 36% of children with complex partial seizures had interictal rage attacks.
Factors that predispose to epilepsy — for example, birth asphyxia, head injury — can help distinguish psychiatric illness from complex partial seizures.
About 30% of patients with complex partial seizures have a family history of epilepsy.
Behaviour in patients with complex partial seizures is usually more repetitive and stereotyped than in psychiatric illness.
Messner describes abrupt recurrences, rapid shifts of symptoms, and hallucinations in relatively untroubled personalities as supportive of complex partial seizures.
Disturbed behaviour in sleep and rage attacks should also raise the possibility of epilepsy.
The presence of postictal confusion is also helpful.
Fear is the commonest change in mood associated with complex partial seizures and is thought to be exclusively related to the right temporal lobe.
It is therefore unsurprising that such seizures are sometimes confused with panic attacks.
In both conditions the fear is qualitatively different from normal anxiety, has sudden onset, and occurs without warning and for no apparent reason.
However, in panic attacks the fear lasts for many minutes compared with only seconds or minutes in complex partial seizures (unless status develops).
If complex partial seizures are suspected the patient should have electroencephalography.
However, although epileptiform tracings can support a diagnosis, they are not detected in all epileptic patients.
A single waking interictal electroencephalogram will show epileptiform activity in about 50% of patients with epilepsy.
Detection rates increase to 80% with sleep electroencephalography and to 90% with repeated recordings and videotelemetry.
In difficult cases ambulatory electroencephalography and special electrodes may be helpful.
Countdown to community care
Hunting the gowk?— psychiatric community care in Scotland
This is one of a series of articles looking at the forthcoming changes to community care
The implementation of the community care changes throughout the United Kingdom from 1 April will mark the culmination of a series of major health and social care reforms.
The vowed aims of achieving value for money and improved consumer choice through the introduction of competitive internal markets have yet to be tested.
The political complexion of Scotland means that any proposed change to the NHS has tended to be greeted with a mixture of suspicion and resistance.
As a result very few self governing trusts and fundholding general practices exist north of the border.
And although Scotland has not had a wide reaching policy of moving psychiatric patients out of hospitals, community care for mentally ill people has advanced spontaneously.
Last October Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, minister of state for health and social work at the Scottish Office, announced what was described as ‘the last of the major building blocks for full implementation of the government's community care policy’— the finance for provision of community care by local authorities in the coming year.
A total of £41m will be transferred from central government to Scottish local authorities in 1993–4 with a further £20m towards implementing assessment and care management.
The Mental Illness Specific Grant, which had a tiny budget before 1991, will be increased to £21m.
From the psychiatrist's perspective it is important to remember that these sums are ‘in support of not only the elderly, mentally ill, mentally handicapped and physically disabled people but also drug and alcohol abusers, homeless persons…mothers and babies in registered specialised accommodation, terminally ill people in nursing homes, people on probation and ex-offenders in registered accommodation.’
The sums of money are large, but so too is the level of need in Scotland.
Scotland has a population of approximately 5 million, most of whom live in or close to cities or towns.
An important minority of the population lives in far flung, sparsely populated areas such as the highlands and islands.
The provision of psychiatric care to these areas must, necessarily, be different from that for densely populated cities.
In rural areas community psychiatric nurses are more autonomous than their urban counterparts and all psychiatric staff have to travel to see patients.
This diversity of service presents particular challenges for planning.
Most people with mental illness are treated in the community by general practitioners.
But in Scotland, as elsewhere, most of the mental health budget has been consumed by services based at mental hospitals.
In recent years psychiatrists in Scotland have peered over the border, somewhat bemused by the speed at which psychiatric long stay beds have been emptied in England.
Visiting speakers from England have chided their Scottish colleagues for their slow pace of change, citing bed numbers in Scotland and the building of an entirely new psychiatric hospital in Aberdeen as examples of outmoded practice.
In fact such simplistic comparisons are misleading.
Caution is needed when attempting to interpret cross national data on psychiatric hospitals because of many confounding factors, demographic and geographical, as well as the pattern and availability of alternative services.
Over the past two decades the resident population in Scottish mental hospitals fell by 20% but the proportion of residents aged 65 or over rose from 45% in 1970 to 66% by 1988.
The number of old and very old people in Scottish psychiatric hospitals accounts for much of the difference in bed numbers on the two sides of the border and reflects the poor provision of local authority run places for elderly confused people in Scotland.
For example, in 1985 only 238 places in local authority and registered nursing homes for mentally ill people were recorded in national statistics in Scotland, a shortfall of 1000 places from the number recommended by the government's guidelines.
History of Scottish community care
Despite such criticisms, Scottish mental health services have often been in the vanguard of community care developments, with services evolving locally for pragmatic reasons.
But many of these services have not been evaluated effectively.
At Dingleton Hospital in the borders a community model based on teams for home visiting and treatment has been used for the scattered population of 100 000 since the 1960s when Dr Maxwell Jones extended from the hospital his ideas about therapeutic communities.
Dingleton's practice of seeing all patients in their own homes (or occasionally the general practitioner's surgery) has never been systematically evaluated.
Yet this continuing service predates the better known crisis team at Napsbury Hospital, St Albans, by at least eight years.
Scotland has also led the way in moving psychiatrists into primary care.
Exactly 40 years ago the first general practice health centre in Scotland was opened at Sighthill in Edinburgh.
Three years later the first psychiatric clinics were held at Sighthill.
By 1987 more than half of Scottish consultant psychiatrists were spending some time each week in primary care settings compared with fewer than a fifth in England  and Wales.
This move of resources into the community was entirely unplanned and arose from local initiatives.
Because it did not reflect Scottish Office policy its development went unrecorded, such work being undifferentiated from normal outpatient sessions for statistical purposes.
This type of work represents a hidden shift of resources into the community because its considerable costs are generally attributed to the budget for psychiatric hospitals.
Victorian asylums were often built on the edge of towns and have subsequently been overtaken by urban development.
Gartloch Asylum in 1899
The development of psychiatric services in Scotland has been influenced greatly by the sites chosen for the Victorian asylums.
Many were built on the edge of towns or cities and have subsequently been overtaken by urban development.
For example, the Royal Edinburgh Hospital is just 3 km from the city centre in a pleasant residential area (Morningside), and Gartnavel Royal Hospital is on the edge of Glasgow's equivalent suburb (Kelvinside).
In England and Wales the policy encompassed in Hospital Services for the Mentally Ill sought to overcome the problem caused by the many mental hospitals built at a considerable distance from their catchment populations by opening psychiatric units on district general hospital sites.
This policy was not adopted in Scotland, where there are few such psychiatric units.
Indeed, a report by a working group of the National Medical Consultative Committee in 1989 saw ‘merit in the development in Scotland of the concept of inpatient care based on a ‘mental health campus’’ which would include units for assessment and short term care, medium to long term care, and special facilities for adults with behavioural problems due to brain damage combined with multiple physical disabilities.
In 1980 the report Scottish Health Authorities Priorities for the Eighties (SHAPE)was published.
Care of mentally ill, mentally handicapped, elderly, and elderly mentally disabled people was grouped by the report under category A, which was given priority for health boards' spending.
A main objective was to work towards a community based service for people with mental illness through joint planning by the NHS, local authorities, and voluntary agencies.
Five years later Mental Health in Focus described the mental health services in Scotland as ‘a deprived area of care’ and noted ‘a serious shortfall, in Scotland, of community alternatives to inpatient mental health care.’
The report warned that failure to develop comprehensive locally based mental health services ‘can be remedied only if the necessary initial resources are forthcoming.’
In 1987 an unpublished report, known as SHARPEN (Scottish Health Authorities Review of Priorities for the Eighties and Nineties ), pointed out the deficiency of local authority provision for mentally ill people and noted local authorities' particular responsibilities under the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984.
This report suggested the development of community teams with community psychiatric nurses based in primary care, and health boards were finally persuaded of the desirability of psychiatric units in district general hospitals.
Current problems
Some current problems reflect decisions made many years ago.
In the 1970s, when comprehensive resettlement services were first developed and psychiatric wards were emptied by the steady resettlement of low dependency patients into group homes, the opportunity to close beds was not always taken.
Instead a growing number of elderly demented people were admitted because of the local authorities' failure to provide alternative care.
Thus, low dependency psychiatric patients were replaced by patients who required much higher levels of staffing without a commensurate increase in funding.
Over the past five years the pace of discharges from psychiatric hospitals has accelerated as elderly patients have been transferred to the community.
In fact they have been moved into nursing homes funded by the Department of Social Security.
This raises the question of what constitutes the community.
Do the private ‘nursing homes’ such as that with up to 240 beds on one site proposed for the West of Scotland really count as community care?
If such a home places its residents under the care of a consultant psychiatrist, surely it should be called a hospital.
If the consultant withdraws and the residents come under the care of a general practitioner, who might from time to time call in a psychiatrist, the home is called a nursing home in the community.
This seems similar to the semantic juggling reported by Jones and Poletti when visiting Italy after the introduction of Law 180 in 1978, which forbade the admission of any new patients to mental hospitals.
They saw some ‘family homes’ which looked like ordinary mental hospital wards and although patients in some wards were referred to as ‘guests,’this did not prevent them from being confined by locked doors.
Some former long stay patients have been discharged to supported accommodation run by housing associations and others to hostels.
It makes good sense for housing associations to buy several houses in adjoining streets for ease of monitoring and staff support.
But these cluster developments have proved unpopular with local residents and with local general practitioners, who often feel relatively unsupported in taking responsibility for up to 20 recently discharged chronically mentally ill people.
It is quite clear that community care developments in Scotland have failed to keep pace with discharge of patients and the closure of long stay beds, although the range of facilities has improved together with the liaison between the statutory and voluntary sectors.
The number of community psychiatric nurses has increased, but nowhere in Scotland do their numbers approach those in many English districts.
Day hospital places have also continued to increase, but in many districts clinical psychology services are underresourced.
Finally, the impact of the SHAPE and SHARPEN reports on health boards' spending has been disappointing.
The new reforms
By 1 April 1992 all local authorities and health boards in Scotland were required to produce community care plans.
This has led to a closer working relationship with the adoption of coterminus boundaries between health and social work departments in many areas.
Some professional groups, especially general practitioners, felt that they had been left out of this  planning process.
To redress the balance the Scottish Office held a workshop in Crieff in June 1992 on the role of the general practitioner in the primary care team.
The chief executive of the NHS in Scotland, the chairman of the Scottish General Medical Services Committee (BMA), and 100 general practitioners held a vigorous debate on the need to clarify the role of the general practitioner in the assessment process, the need for training and education, and involvement in the planning process.
In many ways Scotland is in a strong position to benefit from the community care reforms.
Because of the slower pace in the rundown of hospital beds than in England, there is a smaller pool of homeless former patients in the community and a larger reservoir of resources in mental hospitals, and now there is a greater possibility of discharging elderly patients to nursing homes.
The close working relationship that has developed between psychiatrists and general practitioners should support general practitioners in their role as primary carers for former inpatients.
The leave of absence arrangements allowed under section 18 of the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 enables the psychiatrist and mental health officer to ensure a higher level of supervision of vulnerable patients in the community than is permitted under the Mental Health Act 1983.
The community supervision orders proposed for England and Wales would permit a similar level of supervision if enacted.
Comprehensive resettlement policies were developed in the 1970s — too late for these patients at Larbeit Asylum
Implications for training
General practitioners already deal with up to 95% of identified psychiatric morbidity in the community without reference to specialist psychiatric services.
Increasingly they will be asked to take care of people with more serious mental illnesses.
Although vocational training for general practice has been mandatory for almost two decades, only 40% of general practitioners registering with the General Medical Council had a psychiatric attachment.
General practitioners will require a higher level of knowledge and expertise in psychiatry than has previously been the case.
Psychiatrists may increasingly be working alongside general practitioners, but there are few training posts in community psychiatry.
Consultant psychiatrists in Scotland do, at least, take an equal number of psychiatry trainees when they work in primary care settings.
In England and Wales only half of all psychiatrists working in primary care are accompanied by trainees.
Conclusion
Scottish psychiatric services have developed at a different pace and in a somewhat different form from those south of the border.
In many ways Scotland is in a strong position to face the challenge posed by the community care reforms.
In recent years, however, for financial reasons social work departments have restricted their work almost exclusively to statutory tasks, people with mental health problems having a very low priority.
The new lead role for social workers as assessors and purchasers of community care will effectively remove any prospect of direct social work casework with the mentally ill.
The changes, however, come hard on the heels of the introduction of clinical directorates and new unit structures, the NHS internal market, and a reorganisation of social work departments.
These reforms, untested by pilot evaluations, represent a leap of faith.
It remains to be seen whether they turn out like ‘hunting the gowk.’
A gowk in Scotland is a cuckoo, a Scots equivalent of ‘un poisson d'avril’ in France or an April Fool.
Hunting the gowk is a fool's errand.
LETTERS
Improving London's health service
Editor ,— Virginia Bottomley's cure for the ills of London's health services promises adverse side effects for many of London's doctors and other health professionals, whether they work in the community or the hospital sector.
It may well lead to a major exodus of general practitioners from the capital; this would have an effect opposite to the one Mrs Bottomley claims to seek.
It is extremely difficult to provide a high standard of primary care in London, partly because of the social deprivation and poor local authority services.
For this general practitioners are rewarded with an income below the national average and a level of frustration much above it.
There is considerable (? deliberate) confusion about the figures, but it seems that general practice and community services will receive about 4% extra revenue next year to help them prepare for the extra workload.
Some general practitioners will also benefit from schemes to improve substandard premises; £170 million over six years has been promised for this (but only £10 million for 1993–4).
Little of these paltry sums is likely to be new money, most being sliced off existing allocations.
For most general practitioners a huge increase in workload and a decrease in job satisfaction will result from the closure of almost a quarter of London's hospital beds.
At present good practices in inner London are having difficulty recruiting new partners.
Existing partners may soon find the new strains too great to cope with and may choose to leave to avoid ‘burn out.’
The impact of the Tomlinson report on hospital staff will be no less dramatic.
Many senior and rising hospital staff will be faced with having to find another job.
Where will these highly trained, expensively developed clinical and academic staff, who depend on their teams, go to?
Some may find their way to suburban, provincial, or country destinations.
Many will be driven into the private sector, to Saudi Arabia, or to North America or countries in the South.
A few will go to Europe.
It will be the most able who are recruited to better appointments.
We fear that none of this will ‘make London better’ for the patient.
Of course the structure and function of our medical services must change to meet — even better, to anticipate — changes in the patterns of disease and the emergence of new methods to deal with them.
Such planning requires continuing, adequately resourced, and interactive collaboration between the professional, technical, and management arms of the NHS.
Calling in Sir Bernard Tomlinson to throw together a salvage package as market forces take their toll cannot replace the well resourced, experimentally oriented planning apparatus so vital to the long term health and development of a real national health service.
Editor ,— Jane Smith's editorial on improving health care in London raises some important issues in relation to the London Implementation Group to which I wish to respond.
Smith questions whether the group will be able to explain what is happening to staff and patients and says that it ‘smells too much of hole in the corner deals.’
As a former regional chairman I recognise the value and importance of open communication.
Change is always hard but clearly is even harder if the reasons for it are not explained.
I expect the improvements in services that Londoners should see in the coming years to speak for themselves, but there is no room for complacency.
Silence and rumour are the enemies of understanding.
That is why communications are a priority.
The London Implementation Group has a full time press officer working alongside colleagues in the Thames regions.
We are also working hard to develop internal communication with staff.
To that end we will be providing staff with up to date factual information, often through managers, who can keep staff briefed and explain the implications of the changes, not only for their hospital but for them individually.
Two newsletters have already gone out to all staff, and these will continue in the months to come.
The London Implementation Group has no hidden agenda.
It is an organisation by the NHS for the NHS.
It is being led by Bob Nicholls, formerly the regional general manager of Oxford region.
Its ethos is to work through existing organisations to bring about change.
It is working hard to link with as many bodies as possible.
Dr Peter Simpson, formerly regional medical officer in Mersey region, and Ainna Fawcett Henesy, director of nursing in South East Thames region, have joined the group to ensure that it has open channels of communication with the professions.
Its processes must be open if it is to win understanding and acceptance.
The human resources subgroup is being led by Charles Keaney, human resources director in North West Thames region.
It is developing policies and protocols to assist managers in handling the staffing implications of the changes.
The implementation group wants to work closely with the health unions and staff and professional organisations.
Arrangements will include a clearing house to help match staff with vacancies and special provisions for retraining.
There is also likely to be ring fencing of some key posts.
I do not underestimate the challenge that lies ahead for the London Implementation Group.
I am confident that we can meet the challenge and will do so best by taking the professions, public, and staff with us.
Priorities in first aid
Editor ,— I wish to protest about some of the teaching in the latest edition of the First Aid Manual by the St John Ambulance, the St Andrew's Ambulance Association, and the British Red Cross.
Dealing with resuscitation, it instructs (p 32): ‘If the casualty's breathing and pulse [its italics]have stopped, you must first phone for help,then [my italics]combine artificial ventilation with chest compression.’
Similarly (p 61), first aiders are taught to begin the rescue of someone who has collapsed from fume and gas inhalation by going away to telephone.
The last words in the manual before the index read (p 232): ‘By legal definition, correct first aid practice is that which has been approved by the Voluntary Aid Societies for publication in this book, where this has been used in the training of the First Aider.’
That could be bad news for any theoretical widow suing a first aider who had left her husband to die while scouting around for a telephone.
She and her legal advisers might aim further at those who produced the manual.
In the first aid world this manual is regarded as a sort of bible, and the fundamentalists (of whom there are many) may follow its text literally.
We sent this letter to the authors of the manual, who replied as follows.
Priorities in first aid
Editor ,— The three voluntary aid societies have received several inquiries similar to A S Playfair's questioning the dogma of the sixth edition of the First Aid Manual .
For too long we have sat on the fence regarding when a lone rescuer should leave a collapsed victim to seek medical help.
Obviously, when there is more than one rescuer there is no problem — one goes for help and the other stays with the patient.
Recently, the importance of early access has been studied as a component of the chain of survival (early access, early basic life support, early defibrillation, early advanced care).
The arguments about when to leave a casualty were addressed at the American Heart Association's national conference on cardiopulmonary resuscitation in 1992 and were rehearsed in detail in its proceedings.
The European Resuscitation Council agrees with the American Heart Association, and the First Aid Manual has adopted its guidelines to present an internationally approved approach.
Before 1992 a lone rescuer was advised to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation for some time before calling for help.
Stults pointed out that trained rescuers who are on their own often delay calling an emergency service and may use neighbours and other bystanders rather than dialling immediately for an ambulance (the main source of a defibrillator).
The window of opportunity for survival from sudden cardiac arrest is narrow, the best chance occurring when the emergency medical services are activated first so that a defibrillator can be brought in good time.
It has been argued that this approach may delay treatment of a victim of obstructed airway or primary respiratory arrest.
In practice, most  collapses outside hospital are due to cardiac arrest.
In over 80% there is ventricular fibrillation, which carries a high chance of survival given early defibrillation.
In practice, it is difficult for even trained rescuers to distinguish between a primary cardiac arrest and a collapse secondary to airway and breathing causes.
In a standardised approach to the immediate resuscitation of a casualty a quick assessment of the airway, breathing, and circulation (which includes opening the airway) should allow the first aider to decide whether the problem is unconsciousness alone, disturbed or absent breathing, or cardiac arrest.
If both breathing and pulse are absent and the rescuer is alone the casualty is more likely to survive if the rescuer phones for help before starting cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
It is true that in the first aid world the manual is regarded as a sort of bible.
Yet medicine is not a precise science and some treatments recommended, though they benefit most casualties, may occasionally be harmful.
The first aid societies stand by their advice and believe that there is sufficient medical evidence to justify their statements in the unlikely event of a ‘theoretical widow suing a first aider.’
Effect of NHS reforms on GPs' referral patterns
Editor ,— Since the advent of the NHS reforms and the internal market, expedient treatment and patients' convenience often seem more important than quality of care.
Purchasers who seek prompt treatment for their patients far from home are unlikely to receive the results of peer review audit in the treating unit.
Abel-Smith has shown how this may lead to a discredited system.
The number of patients being treated far from their local provider unit is unknown, but referral to distant units is promoted by the NHS helpline established by the government.
Although Angela Coulter and Jean Bradlow report no change in referral patterns in 16 general practices studied, we report a case that highlights the problems associated with patients travelling considerable distances for treatment of common conditions.
A 64 year old man with bilateral inguinal hernias was seen in a surgical clinic and placed on the waiting list for elective hernia repair.
He had had a congenital right inguinal hernia repaired as a child.
Because of the length of the local waiting list (waiting time 6–9 months) the patient contacted the NHS helpline, which confirmed that a hospital in south Wales had spare operating capacity.
The patient arrived by train on a Wednesday, was operated on the next morning, and was discharged 24 hours later.
Travel back to West Yorkshire entailed a five hour car journey.
On arriving home the patient complained of discomfort in the left calf and pain in the left testicle.
Over the next five days the testicle became more painful and swollen, and on the seventh postoperative night the patient woke with pleuritic chest pain.
He was admitted to the general medical service at Pinderfields General Hospital with a provisional diagnosis of pulmonary embolism.
In addition the left testicle was hard, indurated, and tender.
Exploration of the testicle was deferred because of the potentially life threatening medical condition.
Doppler ultrasonography suggested infarction of the testicle, and phlebography confirmed venous thrombosis in the left calf.
This case raises concerns about the accuracy of audit data when patients are treated in this way.
As the debate about contracting, fundholding, rationing, waiting list initiatives, and the patient's charter rages it is important to document the incidence of complications, which — unlike the primary condition — are often treated in local provider units.
Though money may follow the patient, postoperative morbidity tends to stay at home.
Editor ,— I am a patient in a London teaching hospital where medical staff have been told not to accept any extracontractual referrals until they have received confirmation that the patient's local health authority will fund that patient.
I gather that they have also been told not to worry patients by explaining the real reasons for any consequent delay in treatment.
I consider such an instruction to be wholly misguided.
It means that patients, in their ignorance, blame already overstressed medical staff for delays or treatment withheld while those who should be held accountable are cushioned from the consequence of their actions.
We patients must be told the unpalatable facts so that we can exert pressure on those who really are responsible for prolonging our pain.
Editor ,— In their paper on the effect of the NHS reforms on general practitioners' referral patterns Angela Coulter and Jean Bradlow state that ‘the overriding impression is that referral patterns remained strikingly similar among both fundholders and non-fundholders.’
This cannot be left unchallenged.
Clearly, the purpose of including a non-fundholding group was to control for variables, including secular trends.
The increase in referral rates in the fundholding group (from 107.3 to 111.4 referrals per 1000 patients a year) was much smaller than that seen in the non-fundholding (control) group (from 95.0 to 112.0).
Closer scrutiny of the data sheds further light on this comparative reduction in the referral rates of fundholders.
Table IV shows that though for females the referral rate in the non-fundholding group increased from 111.1 to 130.5, the increase in the fundholding group was only from 127.8 to 128.9.
For women aged 75 and over fund-holders increased referrals by 2.2% whereas non-fundholders increased them by 20.3%.
The age specific referral rate for women aged 65–74 decreased by 3.3% in the fundholding group, compared with an increase of 34.5% in the non-fundholding group.
The authors draw attention to the increase in fundholders' referral rates to general surgery (an 8.6% increase), but this should surely be interpreted in the light of the 17.0% increase in such referrals by non-fundholders (table III).
Although brief mention is made of a reduction in general medical referral rates, no attempt is made to compare this 9.8% reduction with the 22.6% increase in the non-fundholders' referral rate to general medicine.
Coulter and Bradlow conclude that ‘the overall increase in referral rates may seem disappointing to those who hoped that fundholding would provide a mechanism for reducing the demand for specialist care,’ but our interpretation differs.
We suggest that there is considerable evidence in the data that they present for a downward pressure on referral rates, most noticeably in women (perhaps particularly in elderly women) and to the specialty of general medicine.
Our only alternative explanation is that the higher referral rates in the fundholding group compared with non-fundholding group in the year before the introduction of fundholding represent an atypical year for these practices.
Authors have rights too
Editor ,— Michael Dewey's plea for authors' rights brought back painful memories, for we have recently suffered the writer's equivalent of torture at the hands of the editors of a journal published by the BMA.
Before drawing our conclusions we summarise the events.
We submitted a manuscript in August 1991 and revised it in October in the light of minor criticisms by the referee(s), whose report was highly supportive.
The only request from the editor was that we should reduce the length of the paper.
We were therefore taken aback to receive, within two weeks, a highly critical letter from the editor requesting a major restructuring of the paper and enclosing a heavily edited copy of the manuscript.
We complied fully with the instructions and resubmitted the paper in January 1992.
In February the editor made four new criticisms on technical matters, which we dealt with in a third revision.
In May we received another referee's report and a letter from the new editor of the journal.
This referee's report asked whether the paper was appropriate for the journal.
A fourth revision, taking into account the new referee's technical comments, was submitted in June.
The next month we received yet another set of referee's comments and a rejection of the paper on the grounds of its unsuitability for the journal yet complimentary in other respects.
Our appeals were rejected.
We were hurt by the insulting tone of some of the written communications and puzzled as to why repeated telephone calls were never returned by the editors.
We were dismayed to learn that the new editor was making decisions without access to the full file on our paper.
This series of events wasted thousands of pounds of public funds in terms of opportunity costs; caused embarrassment to us; has long delayed the publication of our work; has reduced the originality of the work as others have published papers on related topics in the intervening period; and has swept away our confidence in the editorial and peer review process.
Our sense of injustice has been shared by three senior journals editors we have discussed the matter with.
Our recommendations are as follows:
(1) The decision about a paper's suitability for the journal should be an early one, and no revisions should be requested until this decision has been made.
(2) When revisions are requested there should be a commitment to publish if the criticisms can be met.
(3) New editors and new referees should take into account, and take responsibility for, the views and decisions of their predecessors.
(4) Communication should be respectful and by telephone when appropriate.
On a wider note, authors need to organise themselves to redress the current imbalance of power.
In recovering from our torture we take solace from the knowledge that we share with H G Wells, Oscar Wilde, William Butler Yeats, W Somerset Maugham, James Joyce, and many other writers the experience of having had a rotten rejection.
Editor ,— Michael E Dewey raises an important point regarding the standards used by journal editors in handling manuscripts submitted for possible publication.
There is certainly a paucity of information on the ethical issues that arise between author and editor, but groups such as the Council of Biology Editors have produced important texts on this topic.
Most of the issues that Dewey raises would never have occurred had the journal editor simply followed common courtesy.
There is no excuse for holding a manuscript for a year in the review process.
If reviewers are too busy to do their job properly (and I recognise their willingness to take on such a thankless task, though it is one that helps the process of science advance) then they should be removed from that task.
Dewey does not mention political issues that arise.
I am aware of journals that have held papers under review for almost two years, apparently to prevent publication.
I am aware of journals that do not acknowledge receipt of papers submitted to them.
I am aware of journals that alter text substantially yet never seek the authors' approval.
And I admit to being guilty of one of Dewey's charges: as an editor, I have not shared reviewers' comments with other reviewers, and I have certainly published papers after they have received negative reviews yet may not have explained why to those reviewers who labour so hard on my behalf.
I will not do so again.
Ultimately, if a journal editor is to be a gatekeeper of scientific knowledge, procedures must be in place to assure both readers and authors that their work is to be taken seriously.
Editors, like scientists, are human and do err.
The spirit of fairness, however, mandates that we should treat all papers equally and with candour.
Editor ,— Michael E Dewey raises several important issues in his review of problems encountered by authors when dealing with journals.
Many of us have had similar experiences.
Most of his examples relate to inefficiency or lack of feedback rather than abuse of power (except, perhaps, the issue of the editor as author).
To his list we would add that authors should have the right of reply when a journal has published correspondence critical of their publication.
Authors can also encounter some more serious difficulties.
Several years ago we wrote a paper in which we detailed a serious case of abuse of editorial power.
A brief outline of the events is that the editor of a major medical journal (a ) republished a previously published paper solely in order to attack it in an editorial;(b ) did this without the authors' permission, while stating the opposite;(c ) initially refused to allow the original authors the right to reply in his editorial criticism;(d ) published a further editorial attack when (a year later) he published an edited version of the authors' response;(d ) refused to publish any other correspondence about the editorial attacks; and (f ) gave another editor a dishonest account of events to dissuade him from publishing our account of the affair.
We had full documentation to support these charges.
We submitted our paper (or a shortened version) to six journals, including three directly or indirectly concerned in the particular incident, but were unable to get it published.
Indeed, one journal never replied.
Though there may be several good reasons why our paper was not accepted (one being that the editor in question was no longer alive), the fact is that there is no outlet for complaints against editorial abuse of power.
Editors rightly feel strongly about scientific fraud.
The International Committee of Medical Journal editors should consider the sorts of issue discussed by Dewey and how a mechanism might be set up to allow authors' grievances to be aired.
Editor ,— I agree with Michael E Dewey that journals should respect authors' rights.
A case report on magnetic resonance imaging of the brain of a patient with Munchausen's syndrome has led to speculation that the syndrome may be a ‘pure organic disorder.’
Some years ago Lezak and I wrote an article on brain dysfunction in patients with Munchausen's syndrome.
We accumulated 25 neuropsychological assessments and estimated that about one third were characterised by serious brain dysfunction.
The paper described five cases, in one of which computed tomographic findings were abnormal.
Although well acquainted with rejection notices, we were unprepared for the criticisms of this paper.
Seven editors rejected it despite several reviewers indicating that it was well written.
Eventually it was accepted by a somewhat obscure journal.
In first submissions we included the neuropsychological data.
One reviewer questioned whether the examinations were properly interpreted, and another did not like one test we used.
No one, however, sought neuropsychological consultation or reviewed Lezak's book describing our methods.
Our next drafts eliminated the test data and focused on the conclusions.
Reviewers said that the paper lacked data.
Another insinuated that on one had ever seen that many patients with Munchausen's syndrome let alone tested them.
One reviewer suggested that the patients had fooled us.
In fact, all were eager to prove that they were neuropsychologically intact.
Most performed in the high average to superior range on measures of verbal learning but had severe deficits in tasks associated with the non-dominant hemisphere.
Like Fenelon et al we were uncertain about the aetiology and timing of the damage.
Nonetheless, whatever behavioural sequelae existed had been subtly woven into the personality of the patient.
One reviewer told us that case reports prove nothing.
Do some screening anyway.
Liver failure induced by paracetamol
Editor ,— John Spooner calls on experience when he states that ‘people bent on suicide who are denied one method will choose an alternative.’
Though this may apply to certain people, research findings indicate that suicide is at least partly a function of the availability of a lethal method of suicide.
A real reduction can be achieved by restricting the availability of such methods.
Coal gas poisoning was a common method of successful suicide until the carbon monoxide content of domestic gas was reduced.
Although the number of suicides by other methods rose, this was not sufficient to compensate for the fall in deaths due to coal gas poisoning — indeed, a reduction in suicide of over 30% was observed.
Studies on the effect of gun control in the United States have shown that states with stricter laws have lower suicide rates than states where a higher proportion of people own guns.
Paracetamol, although not a common cause of death by suicide, is used increasingly for deliberate self poisoning.
A 12 year study of adolescents showed that self poisoning with paracetamol increased from 23.4% of overdoses to 48.3%.
The contribution to completed suicides is likely to rise.
Serious consideration needs to be given to increasing the safety of paracetamol.
Education regarding the potential dangerousness of the drug in overdose may prevent accidental deaths, but it is not clear that this alone will prevent death among those who impulsively overdose with this drug.
Editor ,— John Spooner, of the Paracetamol Information Centre, accuses Gary P Bray of causing confusion in relation to suicide by ingestion of paracetamol.
Spooner ignores clinical experience by dismissing all such deaths as being deaths of ‘people bent on suicide.’
Many who deliberately ingest excessive amounts of paracetamol are unaware of its lethality in overdose, and their behaviour is interpreted as a cry for help.
It is not possible to determine the number of such people  among the 119 recorded as dying in 1990 or how many would not have taken an overdose had they been aware that paracetamol, if taken in large quantities, often results in a painful and lingering death due to liver failure.
By diverting attention towards the 1143 deaths due to overdose of drugs other than paracetamol Spooner disregards the fact that paracetamol is consistently one of the most common drugs used in suicide and far exceeds any other over the counter medication as a method of death by poisoning.
It is also by far the most common substance used in deliberate self poisoning attempts.
In a review of 3263 admissions after deliberate self poisoning in South West Thames region in 1989 I found that 957 were a result of paracetamol overdose (unpublished study).
The next most common class of drugs used was benzodiazepines, which accounted for 584 admissions.
Benzodiazepines, of course, are prescription only drugs, and an overdose is far less likely to cause death.
Combining paracetamol with methionine, as Bray suggests, may not be the answer, but surely the manufacturers of paracetamol should take a more responsible attitude by at least placing a more specific warning of the effects of overdose on the packaging.
Editor ,— Gary P Bray makes several suggestions to reduce the number of deaths from paracetamol overdose.
We wish to add a French one.
As in Britain, paracetamol is one of the most commonly used analgesics in France.
As a consequence the incidence of paracetamol poisoning is high, but liver failure is uncommon and fatal cases are rare (<10 a year).
The explanation is simple.
People who overdose in a suicidal attempt may take one or several drugs but generally ingest at most one pack of each.
Accordingly, the content of each pack of paracetamol was legally limited to 8 g at the beginning of the 1980s.
This measure was obviously effective.
Organ donation after paracetamol overdose
Editor ,— Gary P Bray reports that each year 160 people in England and Wales die of liver failure after an overdose of paracetamol.
We suggest that they should be regarded as potential heart and cornea donors.
A 33 year old man was admitted to another hospital after taking 30 tablets of paracetamol with alcohol some 17 hours previously.
He received acetylcysteine, but his condition deteriorated, showing signs of liver failure, and he was transferred to this hospital for supportive treatment.
Over the next 24 hours he developed grade 3 encephalopathy, and high flux dialysis was started.
He showed no signs of improvement over the next 48 hours.
He was transferred to the intensive care unit for intubation for airway control after a period of desaturation.
Twenty four hours later he showed signs of brain stem compression, having fixed dilated pupils, no spontaneous respiratory effort, and hypertension.
The patient's relatives were keen for him to be an organ donor.
For a diagnosis of brain stem death irremediable structural brain damage should be present.
It was not possible to confirm brain stem death in this patient because of potentially reversible metabolic disturbances.
An alternative method of diagnosing brain stem death needed to be found.
After discussions with the transplant coordinator, coroner, and radiologist it was decided to perform arch arteriography.
This procedure, which is relatively easy to perform, is used as a confirmatory test of brain stem death in other countries.
The arteriogram showed no evidence of intracranial perfusion, the internal carotids terminating below the skull base.
Brain stem death was therefore confirmed.
The patient's heart was removed for transplantation, and the recipient is making excellent progress.
A shortage of organ donors continues to be the main limiting factor in most types of transplantation.
One third of patients accepted for heart transplantation die before a suitable donor is found.
It has been suggested that supply would be adequate if all potential donors became actual donors.
Mortality in patients with fulminant hepatic failure is over 40%.
Deaths from paracetamol overdose are unnecessary, and efforts should be made to decrease this mortality.
If people dying of paracetamol overdose were regarded as potential organ donors this would increase the number of hearts and corneas available for transplantation.
It might also help the relatives to see something positive come from these unnecessary deaths.
Outcome of breech delivery at term
Editor ,— J G Thorpe-Beeston and colleagues reported a rate of intrapartum and neonatal death for normally formed singleton infants presenting by the breech at term of 0.8% for vaginal delivery and 0.03% for caesarean section.
We agree with correspondents that analysis should be by intention to treat, and we report on term breech presentations in Aberdeen Maternity Hospital 1981–90.
We have presented our data in the same way as MacKenzie and Jefferies from Oxford.
Of the 1111 women for whom vaginal delivery was planned, 467 (42%) had an emergency caesarean section.
(This rate is similar to that in Oxford but lower than that in London.)
Only three perinatal deaths occurred in normally formed babies, and these were all in the group for which vaginal delivery was planned (table).
As the numbers were so small the table also gives our results amalgamated with those obtained in Oxford: in these two large teaching hospitals the perinatal death rate in cases in which vaginal delivery is planned (2.9/1000) is no different from that in elective caesarean section is carried out (2.3/1000) or in all cases (2.7/1000).
Because of the large numbers of emergency caesarean sections it may be true, as Paul Bingham and Richard Lilford claim, that a policy of routine elective caesarean section would not increase immediate maternal mortality, but surely this cannot be seriously advocated for a negligible benefit for the fetus.
We estimate that since we in Grampian deliver about 1% of British babies there would have to be about 6500 extra caesarean sections in Britain each year if current practice is similar to ours and was replaced by routine elective caesarean section.
From the point of view of women, satisfaction with the birth, postoperative morbidity, and the implications of caesarean section for the mode of delivery in future pregnancies are also important.
Another factor that needs to be considered when policy is formulated is that lethal malformation will not always be diagnosed before delivery.
In our series three cases of hydrocephaly were diagnosed before delivery, but another five lethal malformations were not (trisomy 18, Vater syndrome, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, Saldini-Noonan syndrome, and sirenomelia).
Only one of the infants with these malformations was delivered by elective caesarean section (the one with Vater syndrome); three of the four others were not recognised as presenting by the breech until labour was established, which limited the scope for prenatal diagnosis.
We believe that most women may still be advised that vaginal delivery can be safely accomplished when a term fetus presents by the breech and that there is no case for routine elective caesarean section.
Obstetric outcome should be analysed by parity
Editor ,— Anne Fleissig emphasises the need to collect data on the prevalence of procedures in childbirth.
We recommend, however, that all  obstetric data should be analysed according to whether the patient is primiparous or multiparous.
The importance of such analysis by parity has been highlighted in previous studies.
Data from our hospital for last year also show that obstetric outcome differs dramatically between primiparous and multiparous women (table); this is not fully appreciated when the results of all parities are combined.
Indeed, differences over time and differences among hospitals, regions, and populations may be due to the proportion of primiparous women in the study group rather than to other variables.
Furthermore, separate analysis of first deliveries, especially for caesarean section, may be a useful and early predictor of future trends in obstetric care.
We argue, therefore, that differentiation of first deliveries from subsequent deliveries is mandatory before further investigations into differences in obstetric outcome are initiated.
Diagnostic dilatation and curettage
Editor ,— Angela Coulter and colleagues' implication that there are major savings to be made in the investigation of menstrual abnormality will doubtless delight district health authorities.
Gynaecologists, however, will be dismayed at the authors' apparent lack of understanding of the management of a common medical complaint.
Certainly, considerable changes in the investigation of menstrual disorder have occurred not only in the United States but also in parts of the United Kingdom.
The authors have shown that the traditional diagnostic curettage is becoming obsolete but have failed to identify the reason.
Endometrial biopsy is cheap, safe, quick, easy, and useful for diagnosing endometrial carcinoma.
As malignancy is one of the rarest causes of menstrual disturbance the procedure is not helpful in the management of most women referred to gynaecologists.
Hysteroscopy and biopsy are more time consuming and expensive than the traditional dilatation and curettage.
The accurate diagnosis achieved combined with the evolution of intrauterine surgery, however, is radically changing patients' management.
Far from decreasing costs this change in management actually requires increased funding in the short term.
Benefits to patients are obvious, but the theoretical long term savings in cost have yet to be confirmed.
The idea that American gynaecologists have abandoned dilatation and curettage for a cheaper alternative is interesting but unfounded.
Have the major insurers in the United States noticed a decrease in the cost of investigating menstrual abnormality?
Unlikely.
Where have all the patients gone?
To the hysteroscopy clinic.
Editor ,— Having run an outpatient surgical service for some years, I welcome B V Lewis's editorial suggesting that diagnostic curettage should be replaced by outpatient endometrial biopsy.
The problems of providing this service are varied, and the view that procedures under local anaesthesia are less satisfactory than those under general anaesthesia is compounded by the current funding emphasis on day case surgery to the detriment of outpatient work.
With the advent of contracts, business plans, consultant episodes, and performance audits, attendance for outpatient surgery (colposcopy, cone biopsy, hysteroscopy, curettage, etc) is classified as outpatient attendance.
Obviously, as such procedures take longer than the usual consultation, activity seems to be reduced.
Savings due to reduced admissions are dismissed by administrators because the saved places are readily used up from endless waiting lists.
Perhaps the most disturbing factor I have so far encountered is that any savings from outpatient surgery are to the purchaser's benefit, not the provider's, and therefore outpatient surgery will effectively incur a financial penalty.
With the current financial structuring of the service, even in trusts, until it is generally recognised that more than just a pen and speculum are required in gynaecological outpatient clinics the value of outpatient surgery will not be realised.
Editor ,— In response to Angela Coulter and colleagues' study of the use of diagnostic dilatation and curettage Jane Weston and colleagues advocate that the procedure should be performed at the time of routine sterilisation procedures ‘to exclude early pregnancy.’
I disagree strongly.
Firstly, termination of pregnancy should be performed only after proper counselling and the completion of a ‘blue form’ by two medical practitioners in accordance with the Abortion Act.
Secondly, the success rate of dilatation and curettage to terminate a pregnancy of under four weeks is poor.
Add to this the small but unnecessary morbidity associated with dilatation and curettage, and most people would agree that this procedure is not indicated at the time of a routine sterilisation.
Editor ,— We agree that the use of diagnostic dilatation and curettage in young women should be nationalised.
Of 225 new patients attending our adolescent gynaecology clinic in 1992, 167 presented with menstrual disturbances.
Only one was admitted for diagnostic dilatation and curettage, which was performed as a day case procedure.
The patient complained of continuous vaginal bleeding despite medical management with hormonal agents.
Though a therapeutic response was reported, histological examination of the endometrial curettings did not show any disease.
Of the remaining 166 patients, 136 were successfully treated pharmacologically.
It has long been our practice to avoid performing diagnostic dilatation and curettage in young women if possible.
In 1984 an audit in the hospital of 200 consecutive women aged under 40 who underwent diagnostic dilatation and curettage showed no cases of endometrial carcinoma and only 16 cases of endometrial hyperplasia.
We therefore agree that the use of diagnostic dilatation and curettage in young women should be limited to those in whom important disease is suspected and that the procedure is necessary it should be accompanied by hysteroscopy.
Hypoglycaemia with human and porcine insulins
Editor ,— Albert Maran and colleagues had already reported their randomised crossover study of hypoglycaemia with human and porcine insulin in abstract form.
In the abstract they stated that there were 88 episodes of hypoglycaemia with human and 132 with porcine insulin.
In the article the figures are 136 and 149 respectively.
The difference was marginally significant in the abstract (p=0.09) and not significant in the article (p=0.63).
This discrepancy is disturbing, and it is not obvious how it could have arisen, especially because the abstract and the full paper report on the same follow up period.
Also, it is unclear whether the correct statistical tests were used.
We observed a comparable difference in the occurrence of hypoglycaemic episodes (234 episodes with human insulin and 259 with porcine insulin), which was significant (p<0.001 by Wilcoxon signed rank test).
Maran and colleagues attempted to confirm or exclude a difference in responses to induced hypoglycaemia as previous studies had lacked the necessary statistical power.
As the intrapatient variability is large it is not surprising that, with 17 patients, their study again fails in this regard.
Their results are compatible with a 37% smaller or greater adrenaline response with human insulin compared with porcine insulin.
Their data cannot exclude a 20% lower glucose threshold for adrenaline or a 24% lower threshold for noradrenaline with human insulin.
Reviewing the literature, we and others concluded that most studies found some difference either in symptoms or in hormonal responses.
These differences were always in the same direction — more pronounced hormonal responses and more reporting of symptoms with porcine insulin.
We wonder whether in Maran and colleagues' study there was a significant difference in the peak adrenaline concentrations (fig 1 of their paper).
The authors conclude that a link between treatment with human insulin and reduced perception of hypoglycaemia should be ruled out.
The less frequent reporting of hypoglycaemia during treatment with human insulin observed in their study and in ours, however, supports the hypothesis of reduced awareness of hypoglycaemia with human insulin.
The rate of fall of the glucose  concentration may be important.
Surprisingly, Maran and colleagues do not discuss this possibility.
Editor ,— After being transferred to human insulin a number of patients have complained that they do not recognise hypoglycaemia as clearly as they used to with animal insulin.
Scientific debate about this has developed into a veritable battle of faith.
Having been responsible for recruiting patients to one of the landmark studies in this field, which Alberto Maran and colleagues reference, I can testify to what can happen in the heat of combat.
In the report of this study 14 of 28 episodes of severe hypoglycaemia which occurred in my patients were attributed to the wrong insulin and patients were subsequently excluded selectively.
This became obvious because different figures had been published earlier.
The design of Maran and colleagues' study would seem to exclude such trouble.
Important inconsistencies emerge, however, from a reading of their earlier abstract.
The threshold for psychomotor deterioration was higher with human insulin in the abstract (3.1 v 2.8 mmol/l); in the paper the thresholds are different but nearly identical (2.8 v 2.7 mmol/l).
But why bother?
The pharmaceutical industry is willing to keep animal insulins available for patients who need them, although it will not fund a definitive large study assessing severe hypoglycaemia.
Animal insulins continue to be needed both from patients' and from doctors' points of view.
Because of the doubtful reanalysis of the data Maran and colleagues' findings should be interpreted with caution.
Remarkably, their table I shows that the median symptom scores for episodes of hypoglycaemia during the two months' treatment are higher with porcine than human insulin for seven of the nine items and identical only for the remaining two; the scores at the onset of attacks show the greatest difference.
The authors' conclusion that no causal relation exists between human insulin and reduced hypoglycaemia awareness may well seem disdainful to some patients — for example, those who refused to participate in the study because of the problems experienced with human insulin.
I suggest that doctors should end the battle of faith and stand together to assure continued supply of animal insulin for those who need or want it.
Authors' reply ,— We acknowledge the numerical discrepancies between the data published in abstract form for the American Diabetes Association and those in the final version of the paper in the BMJ .
These differences are small and in no way alter the conclusions.
They are due to differences in the data available for the preliminary analysis (the abstract was written in December 1991, when data collection and analysis were incomplete) and to the limited space available in the abstract (200 words).
We could not, for example, explain how we had analysed the frequency of clinical episodes of hypoglycaemia during treatment with the two insulins.
In the abstract we used only the numbers from the last six weeks of each treatment period to avoid a changeover effect.
This is explained in detail in the paper, and the analysis in the paper (and, indeed, the analysis presented at the time of the summer meeting for which the abstract was drafted) is more sophisticated and based on a complete dataset.
With regard to Matthias Egger and colleagues' other points, the adrenaline concentrations were not significantly different between the two studies (p for the peak value was 0.23), nor (which these authors do not mention) was the earlier response with human insulin significant.
As regards the size of the study, the power calculations are clearly described in the text.
The meta-analyses referred to show that it is often different components of the counterregulatory responses that vary between studies.
All the evidence available suggests that the rate of fall of the glucose concentration does not affect the response to hypoglycaemia in a clamp.
Ernest von Kriegstein's suggestion that our reanalysis is dubious is unworthy.
It is by no means uncommon for preliminary results in abstracts to differ from those achieved finally — indeed, we were surprised that these discrepancies were thought worthy of remark.
The analysis is fully explained in the paper.
The values in table I are medians, and the quoted statistics clearly show the lack of significant difference.
We had no preconception of the results and analysed our data without prejudice.
We deny that we have been disdainful of patients: we were investigating a concern expressed by them in the most objective way we could.
We ourselves suggested that, notwithstanding our data, any patient who believes that he or she has a problem with human insulin should resume animal insulin, which we certainly would not wish to see withdrawn.
The subject is certainly emotive, but we believe that our study has helped to move the ‘battle of faith’ into the arena of science.
Prevalence of toxoplasma IgG
Editor ,— The prevalence study of Gilbert and colleagues, aimed at identifying the possible connection between toxoplasma seropositivity and ethnic group and place of birth of an antenatal population from west London, was of considerable value as it is the first study of its kind to be published.
However, the conclusions drawn from the data are of some concern.
There was no indication whether individuals within the subgroups had travelled to either their country of origin, if appropriate, or — if born in one geographical location — had travelled to other areas where the incidence of environmental toxoplasma exposed them to increased risk of this infection.
In this context, it is of note that the prevalence of toxoplasma infection can vary in different geographical areas within a single country.
The authors gave considerable emphasis to the role of ingestion of raw or undercooked meat as a source of toxoplasma infection.
Meat must be uniformly heated to 66°C (150°F) to kill intracystic toxoplasma.
Such food is undoubtedly involved in acquiring toxoplasma infection.
This has been shown by lower prevalence of antibodies to toxoplasma in immigrants to Paris than in women of French origin, a factor suggested to be the consequence of a cultural preference for poorly cooked meat.
It is important, however, not to exclude from the equation the ingestion of food contaminated by infective oocysts from cat faeces.
This route of toxoplasma infection to humans has been extensively investigated and recorded — for example, in a series of related studies from Costa Rica.
Two of the longitudinal studies cited showed a temporal decline in toxoplasma seroprevalence; this was suggested to be due to improved standards of food storage.
However, these studies started in 1969, which coincides with the first report of the role of the domestic cat in the life cycle of toxoplasma.
Could it be that the awareness of this factor has contributed, at least in part, to the observed decrease in human toxoplasma infection, at least in some geographical areas?
Prescribing folic acid
Editor ,— Anna Livingstone's statement that 400 µg folic acid tablets (classed as a dietary supplement) cannot be prescribed on FP10 is incorrect.
The factor that decides whether a product can be prescribed is whether the product appears on the blacklist rather than whether it has a product licence.
A great many FP10s are written  for our 400 µg folic acid even though it is classed as a dietary supplement.
FHSAs and prescribing
Editor ,— Rhona Panton's article on family health services authorities and prescribing refers, in its opening paragraph, to several factors that are outside the control of these authorities and that require understanding in the context of prescribing costs.
Given the received wisdom that effective prescribing is economical prescribing, I suggest that there are two important omissions from Parton's list — namely, medical education and the national distribution of unbiased, reliable guidance on prescribing, such as the British National Formulary .
Improvement of the prescribing content of undergraduate medical education was one of the more important recommendations of the Informal Working Group on Effective Prescribing.
The group also endorsed the distribution of the British National Formulary .
Unfortunately, evaluation of both these factors is difficult and labour intensive and requires a longer timescale than that usually acceptable to policymakers and budget setters.
They should not, however, be ignored in the consideration of prescribing habits and costs, or in any research into these matters.
Finally, I am somewhat dismayed at the proposition that patients might be tempted (or should I say bribed?) into taking a decision for or against generic substitution.
GPs in partnership with management
Editor ,— N Starey and colleagues' paper on general practitioners' involvement in management arrangements for commissioning services in the future raises important issues about the evolution of the purchasing function.
But, though the paper recognises one of the major external influences affecting the role of general practitioners as being the implementation of community care, this dimension is ignored in the subsequent proposals for new structures and arrangements.
Other documents recognise the importance of engaging general practices in the community care arrangements, particularly in respect of the extension of fundholding to include community health services.
Numerous papers have been published over many years identifying the need for an integrated approach to health and social care at the practice level.
A recent pilot project of social work attachment in general practice has been undertaken recently in Upton on Severn.
Thus there is substantial evidence of general practitioners' participation in the medical and social care of their patients, especially elderly patients.
I propose that a local joint commissioning body for medical and social care should be established, which would eliminate much of the sterile debate about the boundary between the two.
The authors may argue against this as it would require legislation and changes in the existing responsibilities of local government authorities and health authorities.
But their proposals would also require legislation to merge district health authorities and family health services authorities, which is not yet on the government's agenda.
Given the changing roles of local authorities and the Boundary Commission's inquiries into unitary local authorities, this seems to be the appropriate opportunity to consider establishing local commissioning authorities covering all health and welfare functions.
This would be the next logical progression in the organisation of caring services in Britain.
I hope that this suggestion may stimulate a wider vision of future purchasing arrangements for commissioning services.
Drug advertisements
Editor ,— Is it not time for the BMJ to set the same standards for the drug advertisements it carries as it does for scientific papers?
I have been increasingly irritated by the recent series of double page advertisements for Proscar (finasteride).
The strident claims of the manufacturer — MSD — are supported by two references: of these one is quoted no less than four times, but on reading the small print this reference turns out to be ‘data on file Merck, Sharp and Dohme Ltd’— hardly the most impartial of sources.
It is left to Minerva to give a more balanced view; reporting on a large trial of the same drug she notes ‘men hoping for a drug treatment for benign prostatic hypertrophy will have to wait a while longer…small improvements in a urinary flow rate and a small reduction in the size of the gland have to be balanced against negative effect on both libido and potency.’
Given Minerva's comments I hope this is the last we will see of this particular advertisement, but in future may I suggest advertisements are refereed and that manufacturers should be permitted to quote only published material and not their own files as references?
Pharmaceutical advertising has to comply with the Medicine's Act and the code of the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry.
We do not peer review advertisements as we peer review scientific papers, and I do not know of any medical journals that do.
We may reject advertisements on grounds of taste, and we are always willing to consider for publication letters critical of advertising.
Drugs, secrecy, and society
Editor ,— Charles Medawar discusses an important and complex subject.
Our comments focus on some issues relating to drug safety.
The safety of medicines has not always been treated in a balanced way by the lay press or by some consumer advocates.
Often the interaction between interest groups has consisted largely of assertion not fully supported by objective data or rational argument.
It is important for all interested parties to acknowledge that there is no ‘no risk option.’
Rational discussion depends on quantification of competing risks and benefits.
The risks of a drug cannot be treated in isolation from its benefits, from the risks of the disease being treated, or from the potentially deleterious effects of drug withdrawal.
Meaningful discussion depends on sound methodology and the availability of appropriate data on these component risks.
Risk attributable to drugs is currently poorly estimated.
The ‘spontaneous’ reporting systems give an imprecise estimate both of events (numerator) and prescribing (denominator).
Further, these systems do not incorporate a quantitative measure of the background incidence of the event of interest in the patient group being treated, the likely outcome of disease without treatment, or the treatment benefit to be expected.
Similar reservations apply to other current sources of safety information.
Risk attributable to drugs is poorly estimated because much data was collected in an ad hoc fashion from highly selected subgroups of patient populations that differ greatly in demographic and other characteristics from patient populations today.
Potential risks of drug withdrawal should not be ignored.
Making a drug unavailable may achieve the objective of reducing risk associated with that individual drug but may increase risk due to alternative drugs or because of reduced efficacy of alternate treatments.
It is important to appropriately balance these risks on the basis of adequate information.
Current data on which regulatory decisions are based, because they are incomplete, give an imprecise estimate of risk.
These deficiencies in data are potentially remediable with improved data collection and aggregation (including record linkage).
These limitations of methodology and data may limit the short term possibilities for meaningful exchange of information which Medawar desires.
Editor ,— Having read Charles Medawar's editorial and heard subsequent public statements from Mr Giles Radice MP (such as on Channel 4,The Parliament Programme , 15 January), I am convinced that the need for his Medicines Information Bill has evaporated.
It is abundantly clear that Mr Radice has two main objectives — to ensure that the Department of Health is required to give its reasons why a product licence for a medicine is granted, revoked, or suspended, and to ensure that patients are provided with better and more comprehensive information about the risks and benefits of the medicines that are prescribed for them.
He has, he says, no wish to compromise the commercial and intellectual property rights of the research based pharmaceutical companies.
On all these points, Mr Radice and the pharmaceutical industry are in agreement.
The Department of Health has cultivated the myth for some years that section 118 of the Medicines Act is the only reason why it is prevented from explaining the decisions of the licensing authority in general or the recommendations of the Committee on Safety of Medicines, based on doctors' reports of adverse reactions, in particular.
The reports, made by doctors on yellow cards, is data that the committee owns and as such can be disclosed by them as they see fit.
Papers based on such data have appeared in the medical literature on many occasions since the inception of the yellow card scheme in 1964.
On a select number of occasions the licensing authority has decided not to disclose to the medical profession and patients the data behind reasons for its decisions — for example, those relating to Opren (benoxoprofen) and Halcion (triazolam).
In 1991, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, then minister for health, even went so far as to use section 118 as the reason for not being able to give parliament information about the production and distribution of counterfeit medicines.
This was the kind of incorrect use of section 118 to which we refer.
The consumer groups that are sponsoring Mr Radice's bill have seized the opportunity to erroneously lay blame for such secrecy at the door of drug companies.
The pharmaceutical industry supports the EC directive (92/27/EEC) that will require all European licensing agencies to provide what will be known as a ‘summary basis of approval’ on granting a licence for a new medicine.
This will meet, in full, Mr Radice's demand for information on why a medicine has been licensed.
Mr Radice's second main objective — to provide more and better information to patients — is not in any way compromised by section 118.
To this end, this association has for some years now made the data sheet compendium — written originally for doctors and pharmacists — available to public libraries and, on request, to individual members of the public.
Next year we will be publishing a compendium of ‘user friendly’ patient information leaflets covering more than 1000 products.
For those who might argue that this information comes from ‘the industry’ it should be pointed out that such data have to be approved by government before it is issued.
The British Medical Association publishes for patients an excellent guide to all prescribed medicines.
The British National Formulary , published by the BMA and the Royal Pharmaceutical Society, and the society's Martindale pharmacopoeia are also readily available to the public.
There is now no need for Mr Radice's bill; he should withdraw it and save precious parliamentary time.
Tax relief on child care
Editor ,— As one of the two speakers criticised in Council by Mr John Chawner for saying that schemes for tax relief on child care were non-starters and a waste of health service money perhaps I may be allowed to draw attention to a debate earlier that day.
Much of the morning was taken up discussing bed closures in hospitals, overall underfunding of the NHS, and the BMA's strategy to emphasise the underfunding.
Yet in the afternoon the council put its weight behind a scheme that would selectively subsidise and increase the earning capacity of a small group who are by no means the worst paid members of society, and this largely at the expense of the previously agreed underfunded NHS and the taxpayer.
The rather weak reason given was the waste of the resources used in training these people.
By the same token we should build more fighter aircraft so that expensively trained officers may be ‘enabled to get back to work.’
Pilots cost vastly more to train than doctors, after all, and some may say there is an increasing demand for them.
The list of other ‘expensively trained’ groups is practically endless.
Should all be subsidised back to work?
If the BMA is to be taken seriously then it should espouse more worthy causes that have some prospect of success rather than politically correct harebrained schemes such as this, which is as likely to bear fruit as ‘pigs are to fly,’ to quote the two speakers.
Anecdote in the BMJ 
Editor ,— The Editor's Choice of 20 February draws attention to the place of anecdote in the BMJ .
The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines anecdote as ‘a short account of an entertaining or interesting incident.’
The use of the term in Editor's Choice includes case reports, such as the two lessons of the week, one of which describes no fewer than 36 patients.
Hunter drew a clear distinction between anecdotes, case reports, and syndrome letters but in her chapter on anecdotes, surprisingly, offered no definition.
The journal's definition would be interesting to read.
A careful reading of the issue of 20 February, from back to front, starts with Minerva, who gives three pure anecdotes among 12 items.
Atypically, neither the personal view nor the soundings pieces are anecdotal.
The letters section offers a feast of anecdotes about Mozart.
Among the papers is a short report about self monitoring of triglyceride concentrations in non-insulin dependent diabetes in 12 patients.
Is this an anecdote?
And there is a paper about life threatening events in infants and young children, whose discussion acknowledges the uncertainty that selection bias generates in the interpretation of the results.
Surely this fine paper is built on 157 anecdotes, about half of which were discarded as incomplete: ‘No diagnosis was established in 80 patients.’
The stories of the remaining 77 make instructive reading.
The paper on diary keeping in asthma actually takes anecdote, in its broadest sense of narrative of uncertain significance, as its subject, testing the reliability of patients' written accounts of their asthmatic symptoms.
The editorials do not disappoint.
David Bowsher, writing on paradoxical pain, opens with an anecdote about a consultant convicted of attempted murder.
Trish Groves captures readers' attention with two anecdotes at the start of her editorial on closing mental hospitals.
And the authors of the editorial on drug smuggler's delirium cite 16 references, at least eight of which, to judge from their titles, are truly anecdotal, and use them to construct useful clinical guidelines.
Finally, readers should return to the obituary section, another resting place for anecdote, to learn of the death of Kit Ounsted, a dedicated researcher, who ‘saw developmental medicine as a science of biography.’
Medicine a scientific discipline in which indulgence in anecdote is a dangerous and peripheral recreation?
The BMJ a journal in which anecdote is an occasional occurrence, carefully contained lest it leak out and contaminate scientific standards?
This devoted reader is forced to ask: Are you serious?
Re-emergence of tuberculosis
An editorial error occurred in this letter by W Fox and D A Mitchison (20 February, p 515).
The fourth paragraph begins: ‘The activities of the tuberculosis unit received worldwide recognition…’
This should read ‘The activities of the tuberculosis units…’ as there were in fact three units, the Tuberculosis Research Unit (1948–65), the Tuberculosis and Chest Diseases Unit (1965–84), and the Unit for Laboratory Studies of Tuberculosis (1954–86).