

NEWS
SSD contracts out major services
SUSAN CLARK
The biggest contracting out of social services is being proposed by Westminster City Council this week.
The findings of a comprehensive review begun last year into ‘externalising’ £12 million-worth of services are said to represent the most radical purchaser/provided shake-up yet.
Recommendations by consultants Price Waterhouse are expected to be approved by the social services committee today.
they appear to go far beyond community care guidance contained in the Laming/Foster circulars of last year, which simply asked SSDs to develop a purchaser/provider split according to local circumstances, and most SSDs have introduced only limited contracting.
In Westminster's proposals, £11.9 million of services would be competitively tendered, including services for elderly people, those with learning difficulties, and some elements of child care.
Seven out of ten day nurseries would be sold, and three elderly people's homes closed.
Westminster NALGO is predicting massive redundancies in the borough unless private companies take on the existing staff.
But under contracting regulations, companies would have to match current pay and conditions and may be deterred from taking on Westminster employees.
Ann Windiate, director of social services, conceded: ‘I cannot make guarantees on job security.’
But she said the council may build within the tendering process preference to companies who will take on staff.
Contracting out of other services within Westminster SSD will be extended at a later stage, said Windiate.
The new ‘business units’ would also be subject to competitive tendering as part of good and efficient management procedure.
‘This is the way forward.
Most authorities over the next five years will need to consider the provider/purchaser split.
A mixed economy of care is integral to government thinking,’ she said.
Opposition councillors have condemned the plan.
‘The Conservative majority at Westminster council has swallowed whole the dogma on the role of the market in the provider/purchaser split,’ said Karen Bucks, Labour's social services spokeswoman.
‘It is a purely ideological desire to see the private sector providing regardless of whether it is appropriate or not.’
Jenny Bianco, social services chairwoman, rejected the accusation: ‘If you get a good service while paying less than it is a much better deal and more realistic  than cutting services to save money.’
The report recommends £7.6 million worth of the programme should be started immediately to be completed by December of this year.
The remaining £4.3 million of contracts will be let during 1994.
This means time for the consultation process will be short.
Labour claims the council is trying to push through the changes quickly to limit negotiations on the principles.
But Bianco was adamant the expediting of the process was for the benefit of staff and users alike.
‘We have a running programme of consultation going back over the last two  years ,’ she said.
‘We are moving quickly to limit consultation fatigue.
Staff are being kept informed; we do not want to prolong any period of uncertainty.’
Windiate: ‘No jobs guarantees’
Delay for DoH restraint guide
The long overdue government guidelines on restraint in children's homes may have to be re-drafted.
The DoH legal departments is said to be worried that children in care could take civil action against staff and, by implication, the government if staff pursue the tough line thought to be recommended.
The DoH may have to redraft the guidelines, and even if the legal difficulties are overcome the guidelines may not appear for another two to three weeks — a frustrating delay for professionals at a time when social worker are increasingly being blamed by the public for failing to control young people in care.
Child's action against register
Children could have the right to remove themselves from the at risk register of an 11-year old girl wins her test case in the High Court.
The girl is taking legal action against a West Country county council after she was put on the at risk register at birth.
Her mother had suffered a rare disorder which causes parents to make their children ill to get medical attention.
The girl's mother has not suffered from the disorder in her daughter's lifetime and the girl was removed from the register after a few years.
But after the girl underwent an operation on her tonsils the girl was put on the at risk list after pressure from health workers.
Confusion at substance abuse clinics
Some drug and alcohol hostels around the country are losing clients and face financial difficulties because of confusion surrounding the new community care arrangements,writes Bob Cervi .
Almost a month after the 1 April changes, many local authorities have not yet set up assessment systems for drug and alcohol misusers and are failing to refer these clients for treatment.
Some residential units told Community Care of under-occupancy of beds which are normally heavily over-subscribed.
Major charities have predicted hostel closures as a result of the new arrangements.
These were announced last autumn when the government reversed its commitment to a separate ringfenced fund to support misusers in the community, instead giving SSDs the purse strings without extra funding.
The Roma project in London, a 20-bed national crisis centre for drug misusers, has a waiting list of eight clients who are unable to get assessments and funding from local authorities.
The centre has had a 90 per cent occupancy rate in the past two years but this has suddenly dropped to 65 per cent, according to area manager Eddie Killoran.
‘Those services which normally refer clients to us are not doing so because the local authority concerned does not have a contract with Roma or are struggling to sort out their assessment procedures,’ he said.
In Skipton, North Yorkshire, The Gargrave Park rehabilitation centre has not had a full referral since 1 April, leaving five of its seven beds empty.
‘We don't know if we'll be in business by September,’ said Dave Crabtree.
Counselling groups are not referring clients because of uncertainty about funding.
Alison Chesney, director of the Cranstoun Projects in London, said there was confusion among local authorities and it was difficult to get hold of social workers involved in assessments.
One project had a waiting list of 20 but now had five empty beds, she said.
Drugs charities and authorities met at a conference this week to try and speed up assessments, with a proposal for other agencies to be vetted for carrying them out.
The DoH is also launching new practical advice for SSDs.
Mental health charity faces further scrutiny
BY LYNN EATON
The Charity Commission has launched a second formal investigation into Richmond Fellowship Charitable Foundation, less than a year since its last report into the mental health charity.
The commissioners recommended in a report last July that Elly Jansen, its founder, resign as a trustee after concerns that she had failed to distinguish between her own and the charity's finances.
The commission has confirmed to Community Care that it is carrying out another formal investigation under section 6 of the Charities Act.
The Charitable Foundation was one of the three arms of the Richmond Fellowship, which also included the Richmond Fellowship UK, a major provider of residential homes, and Richmond Fellowship International.
The foundation was dissociated from the UK operation more than two years ago after Jansen resigned as chief executive of the Richmond Fellowship UK.
The UK operation came under scrutiny in the first investigation, but not in the latest formal investigation.
Commissioners are satisfied with the progress it is making to put its house in order.
The latest investigation follows continuing reports of confusion between the charity's and Jansen's finances.
The commission says it has received ‘a number of representations’ about the way the charity was being operated.
In a continuing battle to distance itself from the latest investigations, the Richmond Fellowship UK is trying to oust Jansen from an office she and staff from the charitable foundation occupy rent free behind its Kensington headquarters.
They are expected to be issued with a writ tomorrow giving them two weeks to leave the premises.
If they refuse to go, Jansen faces legal action.
Charity commissioners admit they have been in lengthy discussions with Jansen's solicitors about her position with the charitable foundation.
So far, Jansen has declined to stand down as a trustee.
The foundation has appointed more trustees and is advertising for a new chief executive.
The future of Steve Hawkins, its administrator, is now in doubt as a result.
Much of the work outlined for the new chief executive overlaps with his own duties.
Jansen has indicated she wants to had over some of her executive responsibilities because her daughter is seriously ill.
Elly Jansen could not be contacted when Community Care went to press.
SSD to appeal damages order
Wakefield SSD is to appeal against a £1,000 compensation order after a 14-year old child in its care was found guilty of mugging a pensioner.
Magistrates used the in loco parentis provision of the Criminal Justice Act to impel the authority to compensate the 78-year-old woman who had her bag snatched by the youth.
The boy, who had only been in care for a short while before the incident, is now in secure accommodation.
North Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Leeds are currently appealing against similar orders made.
Bill McKitterick, assistant social services chief in Wakefield, said: ‘The £1,000 damages will leave less money available to social services to help other children in the district.’
Child care battle
A 15-year-old boy's battle to force his mother to talk to him could end in stalemate due to the wording of the Children Act.
The case of Matthew Lucas who is trying to reopen relations with his estranged mother has been referred to the High Court.
But it is unlikely the court will be able to enforce any contact order.
Lucas, from Southampton, applied to the county court for a contact order under section 10 of the Children Act.
However the wording of the Act refers to the person the child lives with rather than any third party regarded as rejecting the opportunity to see the child.
Allan Levy QC, co-author of the pindown report, said: ‘The definition doesn't fit the situation.
It appears Matthew is hoping the court will persuade the mother to change her mind.
But the Court is not there to recreate relationships.’
The only options open to the courts to enforce compliance with a contact order  is a fine or imprisonment.
But the courts are likely to consider this route inappropriate to family proceedings, said Levy.
And as this situation is not explicit in the wording of the act, such action would be ‘unthinkable’, he said.
Lucas's mother refused to see him after he decided to move in with his father and his new wife at the beginning of 1992.
The mother is reported as believing the separation is in Matthew's best interests.
Civil Rights Bill
The Civil Rights (Disabled Persons) Bill was due to come before the Commons this week, but campaigners predicted it would be blocked by the government once more.
The Bill, introduced by Labour MP Alf Morris, aims to outlaw discrimination against disabled people but government ministers say it is too wide-ranging and potentially costly for employers.
MP's from the All-Party Disablement Group met Prime Minister John Major last month.
Charges differ
Elderly people in Scotland face widely varying charges for community care services, according to Age Concern Scotland.
A report shows residential care charges can differ by up to £150 a week.
Home help charges can range from nothing to £5.50 an hour.
Director Mike Cairns said having to pay for community care may mean some older people are deterred from asking for help.
Figures double
An estimated 12.5 million adults and children are living on or just above income support level, according to DSS estimates.
The number on actual income support has doubled to 10.3 million since 1979.
The figures show that 5.7 million will claim the safety net benefit in 1993–4 for themselves and 4.6 million dependents — more than one in six of the population.
The estimates were obtained by Labour's shadow Social Security Secretary, Donald Dewar.
ASW guidance
CCETSW has published revised guidance for training approved social workers and mental health officers.
The new requirements will fit into CCETSW's continuum of training and will be recognised in its post-qualifying framework for continuing professional development.
Fine ordered
Newcastle-upon-Tyne City Council has been found guilty of maladministration leading to injustice by the ombudsman and must pay £1,250 compensation for failing to assess and design adaptations to the home of a disabled man.
Home helps providing ‘care on the cheap’
by TIM LINEHAN
Home helps are carrying out tasks which they say should be carried out by qualified nurses and are being forced to neglect domestic duties such as cleaning and shopping, according to a survey by public sector unions.
The report, compiled by NUPE, NALGO and COHSE, which are forming the new union UNISON, is based on a survey of 1,200 local authority home helps in England, Scotland, and Wales.
Many of those interviewed said their job had changed beyond recognition over the past five years and were providing more personal care at the expense of domestic help.
According to the survey, one-third of home helps said they had received no training at all.
One-third also administered medicines to clients and 17 per cent said they carried out tasks which should have been done by nurses.
The unions fear SSDs are being forced to provide nursing care on the cheap.
Home care accounts for 10 per cent of SSD net expenditure and 25 per cent of all staff.
The report notes that SSDs are having to focus their care on clients with priority needs because of financial restrictions.
As a result, the unions say, many elderly people have had to turn to the private sector and pay for domestic care out of their own pockets.
Home helps said they were finding it difficult to cope with the extra responsibility.
One said: ‘There is far too much rushing around.
Rushing around causes mistakes which end up in accidents both to clients and home carers.’
Many of those interviewed said they felt their skills and experiences were undervalued.
ADSS secretary John Ransford said there had been a move away from domestic are to personal care.
But the DoH had made huge efforts to provide training for home helps through the training support grant and NVQs.
Peter Gilroy, deputy director at Kent SSD, said: ‘Research shows if you leave elderly people's needs simply with personal care and don't take into account their anxiety about their home, they are likely to go into a spiral of decline.’
Bringing it All Home , NUPE,.
In Unison: Kathy Englefield (left) and Maggie Morley, Lambeth home helps
Guidance urged on abuse at private schools
Education social workers have called on the government to prevent independent schools from suppressing child abuse allegations.
At its annual conference last week, the National Association of Social Workers in Education said that child protection procedures should be invoked immediately when any allegations of abuse were made against teachers.
Delegates to the conference, held in Pershore, Worcestershire, urged the government issue guidance to prevent independent schools from trying to deal with abuse allegations internally.
‘School governors have been given increasing responsibility in recent years, but they haven't been adequately prepared and as a result children haven't been properly protected against abuse by teachers,’ NASWE general secretary Sue Allen told delegates.
Brian Field, principal education welfare officer in Stockport, said pupils in grant-maintained schools were particularly vulnerable.
‘Schools outside local education authority control do not always accept local authority procedures,’ he said.
The conference also backed calls for education policy to comply with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
An emergency resolution was passed which urged the government to target criminal justice resources into preventative programmes rather than just extending custody for young offenders.
Scottish clash
A controversial consultation paper on the inspection of social work services is due to be published by the Scottish Office next week.
The paper will propose that arm's length inspection units should report to chief executives, instead of social work directors, in line with DoH consultation last October.
It will also outline the role and operation of the Social Work Services Inspectorate, which has come in for severe criticism since it was set up by the Scottish Office a year ago.
Although an initial consultation paper was issued in October 1991, the aims and functions of the SWSI have yet to be finalised.
Survey to assess adult mental illness
A government-backed survey was launched last week to assess the extent of psychiatric illness in the adult population.
The survey, to be conducted by the Office of Population Census and Surveys on behalf of the DoH, should confirm current estimates that 1 per cent of the population is suffering from a psychosis at any one time.
The study will consider the prevalence of difference types of mental illness, the associated social disabilities, the use of health, social and voluntary care services, and the risk factors often associated with mental illness such as the death of a close relative.
It will also try to reveal the extent of smoking, drinking and drug abuse among this group.
Four groups will be sampled: adults in private households; adults with psychosis living in private households; adults in institutions, catering for mentally ill people; and adults in other institutions, mainly hostels for homeless people sleeping rough.
The results will be available in 1994–5.
The introduction of the Mental Health Specific Grant has led to a 30 per cent increase in spending on mental health services, according to the SSI.
Its latest report on the grant shows 800 projects providing services to 64,000 people, many of them befriending, advocacy, advice, and respite schemes.
Project to meet the needs of black and minority ethnic groups were well represented, says the report.
The grant was established two years ago to kick-start developments and not to replace funding of existing services.
The SSI is concerned that a small number of authorities could not show they had abided by this ruling and would require some further investigation by the SSI and the Audit Commission.
NEWS RESIDENTIAL CARE CONFERENCE
Call for more specialisation
Social work training should place more emphasis on specialisation in certain fields, according to Barbara Kahan, chairwoman of the NCB.
Kahan called for 80 per cent specialisation in areas such as children's services and only 20 per cent on general social work training.
A panel discussion uncovered differing attitudes to developing training.
Kahan's view was backed by Des Kelly, deputy general secretary of the SCA; Vivienne Coombes from Havering College; and Norman Warner, author of the Warner Report.
Warner defended his recommendations for a specialised qualification in residential care.
‘Training is too elitist,’ he told the conference.
‘We are looking to the government for a fundamental change in attitudes towards training.’
But many degrees were still wary of a specific residential care qualification which they claimed would tie workers to the job.
One delegate commented: ‘It could be used as a trick to keep us in residential care.’
Eighty per cent of staff and 20 per cent of heads of residential care homes are without professional qualifications.
But the problems incurred by  absence for training and generally recognised low staff morale make it difficult to resolve the situation.
Shift away from consumerism
Britain is becoming more concerned about the diminishing sense of community and the increasing levels of aimlessness and social isolation.
Data from Elizabeth Nelson, director of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, suggests Britain is moving away from open consumerism.
However, she said: ‘The caring 90s is a current media theme, and has more to do with caring about what is happening to the British society and what can be done about it, than about spending more to underpin the disadvantaged and the dependent.’
Nelson revealed greater concern among those in the third age, between 50 and 70, who no longer worked or had dependent children yet were still independent.
Her statistics showed that 50 per cent of this group were carers and that 80 per cent of those said they had no choice in becoming carers.
Government sidelines Wagner forum idea
BY SUSAN CLARK
The Wagner Development Group ended its deliberations last week with the launch of its third report Positive Answers , and immediately heard junior health minister Tim Yeo tell delegates the government would not be following up on its key proposals.
Five years on from the original 1988 Wagner Report, the group made ten recommendations for the future beginning with the establishment of a new body to take over the group's function.
But Yeo told the NISW/ Community Care conference, ‘Residential Care: The Way Forward’, the government would not set up a permanent forum on residential care.
‘It would be impracticable for the DoH at this stage to create a standing forum for residential care as whole.
It could become unmanageable because of its size, and unproductive because its members would expect a DoH lead at every turn,’ Yeo said.
But he revealed that details of a users and carers group to monitor implementation of community care would be forthcoming next month.
The group was announced in January as part of the DoH post-April monitoring plans.
Lady Wagner, who spoke at the conference said: ‘I am extremely disappointed that the minister did not announce the setting up of a new group to take on from where we are now.’
Yeo conceded that the government may look again at creating a forum, but he considered it untimely to do so immediately.
‘We will let the new legislation settle down for a year or so first,’ he said.
Wagner later told Community Care : ‘The time is ripe now to establish a forum.
There is an enormous network to feed in ideas making it perfectly possible and it would not cost a lot.’
Sheila Mann, a consultant in psychiatry of old age from Homerton Hospital, voiced professional frustration at the government's intransigence.
‘We need a central body to provide a seamless service and bring in new ideas.’
Positive Answers emphasises the need for the residential sector to highlight good practice and to continue to push for change and improvements.
Its aim is to provide information, codes of practice and guidelines on ways to raise standards.
See Comment, page 11.
THIRD REPORT'S RECOMMENDATIONS
1.
A body to take over from the Wagner Development Group.
2.
Security of tenure — work is needed to enhance resident's rights.
3.
Unified registration and inspection system for residential and nursing homes.
4.
Training issues to be addressed.
5.
Complaints procedure to be accessible.
6.
Special attention to be given to ethnic groups.
7.
Mechanisms for discussing restraint and control with relatives.
8.
Information on services easily available.
9.
Promotion of relationships between establishments and relatives.
10.
Improve contacts with informal carers to access services they need.
Wagner: ‘Disappointment’
Seamless service proves elusive
Two speakers told a conference a dangerous gap exists between nursing and social care and that the provision of a seamless service between health and social care is still eluding most authorities.
Sheila Mann, consultant in psychiatry of old age at Homerton Hospital, warned of clients falling between two stools as they failed to receive adequate nursing or social care.
Derek Dean, director of policy and research at the Royal College of Nursing, advised of the ‘false distinction’ between the two services.
‘While this distinction exists, the ability of health and social services to provide seamless care in residential homes will be severely curtailed.’
The risk to elderly people forced to move between nursing and residential homes due to failing health was high, said both speakers.
‘Mobility causes mortality,’ warned Mann.
But the final report from the Wagner Development group recommended nursing and social care provision could be made within one set of regulations, with homes registering under one inspectorate.
Opportunities for a seamless service in the community were equally low.
Dean said: ‘At a time when government health policy objectives indicate that we need more not fewer community nurses, some health authorities have indicated that the number of district nurses may be halved.’
Daphne Statham, director of NISW, summed up the debate as: whether services should be free or not; joint registration; equity in geographic provision; and the need for a reconsideration of the differences between social and health care.
Changes wanted to youth system
The SSI is backing a series of recommendations sent out to directors in England and Wales last week by the Youth Treatment Service.
They are the result of a conference held last year for young women in secure accommodation.
More than 60 per cent of female detainees in England and Wales attended.
Predencia Gabbidon, training manager from Glenthorne Youth Treatment Centre who organised the conference with funding from the SSI, said: ‘With the new-build programme due it is important these issues are raised and taken on board at the design stage.’
According to Gabbidon, many detainees are victims of sexual abuse, yet find themselves sharing corridors with sex offenders.
Their vulnerability was further underlined by the lack of locks on the bathroom doors.
Gabbidon is pushing for directors to act immediately.
‘The changes are minor, like locks on the bathroom doors and providing an exclusively female ‘safe’ room for those on mixed corridors,’explained Gabbidon.
‘They don't cost a lot.’
A parallel conference, held for staff accompanying the girls, revealed a lack of communication between different units on good working practices.
Gabbidon is calling for directors to support an annual or  biennial conference for these women and staff.
New agency to face SSI probe
BY MARK IVORY
The UK Home Care Association has asked the SSI to look into  the activities of an agency which is offering to vet and licence domiciliary care providers.
Wessex Home Care, based in Poole, Dorset, is believed to seek fees of about £3,000 from prospective agencies.
Services include helping prospective domiciliary care agencies set themselves up anywhere in Britain, and granting such agencies ‘licences’ to operate.
Lucianne Sawyer, chairwoman of the UKHCA said she was ‘very concerned’ about the agency's activities.
She had rung the agency posing as prospective licensee.
‘The told me that they alone had cracked the system; they said only they could fix up proper contracts with local authorities on behalf of their clients.
They're trying to make money out of people's ignorance but there is nothing they do which licensees couldn't do for themselves perfectly well.’
Michael Steen, owner of Wessex Home Care and a Dorset councillor, said more than 20 would-be providers had contacted him about licences.
Steen told Community Care his agency vetted licence applicants rigorously, provided recruitment and training services, and established contact with potential purchasers in the licensee's catchment area, acting as a ‘kind of kitemark’, he said.
But one prospective licensee contracted by Community Care claimed he had been offered just two days in which to train and meet possible purchasers of his service.
Gordon Bateman, who had been planning to set up an agency in Reading, Berkshire, said he had two meetings with Steen.
No attempt had been made to vet his suitability as a home care provider, he said.
Bateman claims he was told by Wessex Home Care he had to be licensed by his local authority, even though no such licence is required.
‘If that was the case I found great difficulty in seeing how he could get permission from my local authority to license me,’ he said.
Bateman said he had been billed £3,000 for his licence, but he pulled out before money changed hands.
Sawyer has written to the SSI to complain.
She said the SSI has said it will look into the matter.
Mother turns down offer
The mother of the W children in Orkney, whose allegations led to the 1991 dawn raids, has turned down an offer of £100,000 from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board.
The Orkney Seven Action Group, which is campaigning for the release of the seven W children still in care, said Mrs W would not accept any offer on the basis that some of the children were abused by their elder siblings.
‘That is not the case, but  in so far as any of those children were abused by their father, she will accept the offer,’ said spokesman Andrew Fenton.
The CICB offer lists dates after 1986 when the father was jailed for sexual abuse.
It is seen by social workers as confirming the decisions of the courts and children's panel that inter-sibling abuse took place.
Social work director Paul Lee has said the offer is a matter between the family and the board.
But once it is formally rejected, the SWD could press for the money to be held in trust until the children are 18.
Lee has rejected speculation that social workers might release fresh medical evidence, saying it would not be in the interests of the children.
SSD plans to trace Beck colleagues
Leicestershire SSD has revised its plans to warn other authorities about workers connected with the Frank Beck case.
The SSD had hoped to persuade the SSI to send a circular letter to all directors listing the 20 to 30 people who worked in children's homes between 1976 and 1989 when Beck abused children (news, 18 March).
But following discussions with the DoH, the SSD is now planning to write direct to those authorities which are known to have recruited some of the former workers.
Director Brian Waller said the letters would warn the authorities that the named individuals who worked in child care during the Beck years may be a cause for concern.
But no allegations would be made against any individuals, and it would be down to each authority to decide whether to make inquiries with Leicestershire police or social services.
PRACTICE FOCUS
COMMUNITY CARE
Needs versus wants
As the legal experts pore over the intricacies of recording unmet need, care managers are getting down to work.
Lynn Eaton looks at how staff in one SSD are grappling with the problem
While civil servants and directors wade through the legal quagmire of whether to record unmet needs, many staff who have to implement the policy are already up to their necks in it.
For them, it is more a question of getting on with the job.
The only debate is how best to do it.
Like many people, Derrick Edwards, Dorset's community care co-ordinator, has criticised the way the DoH has apparently backtracked on linking community care services to people's needs, throwing his department, along with many others, into turmoil.
‘Quite how a council can plan effectively without recording unmet need, I'm not sure,’ said Edwards.
He argued that Dorset should continue to record unmet need as it had been doing in a pilot project, although the decision is so politically sensitive that it has to be given clearance by the politicians at their June committee meeting.
While many managers are increasingly concerned at recording unmet need, both how to do it and whether they should at all, he was confident Dorset has come up with a method which makes it a positive experience for staff and service users and, hopefully, avoids potential legal pitfalls.
Rather than try to combine all individual reports of unmet need into a county-wide planning process, the council has split its records into two types: the individual care assessment, where care managers decide for themselves how to record needs, and a more formal, anonymous sample of 10 per cent of service users, which can be used for planning.
Staff have been given a table on which to record assessed needs.
This includes general headings such as living environment, health, managing daily living, and specific ones like personal care, domestic tasks, social life, work or occupation, personal relationships, and financial problems.
They have been given guidance on the importance of distinguishing between needs, preferences, and wants.
A bottle of whisky a day would definitely come on the wish list, said Edwards.
Only justified needs and preferences are corded on the care plan including those which cannot be met.
If a preferred way of delivering a service cannot be met but the care manager feels it is an unreasonable demand, the department advises it should not be recorded as an unmet need by as an unmet preference.
It has also been made clear that where an unmet need is recorded which the department has a legal duty to provide, it could be used as the basis for a legal challenge, although it should still be recorded.
‘Reasonableness’ features heavily in the guidance as a yardstick for which services to provide.
Because the council is spending public money, it argues ‘reasonable’ must relate to the standards society would expect it to uphold, taking account of the cost, the various options and degree of disability.
Only occasionally was there an enormous difference between what the care manager thought a person needed and what the person wanted in the pilot study.
The discrepancies which arose were recorded separately on the assessment file.
The main problem in the pilot study was the difference from one part of the county to another in recording unmet need.
Although it could have been a genuine geographical variation, the fear was that staff were failing to record them because they thought this might lead to unresolvable problems which would jeopardise planning.
But in fact it enabled staff to come up with more appropriate answers to those problems, said Edwards.
Needs could often be met.
He cited as an example an intelligent man who had been disabled.
A mathematician, he and his care manager drew up a list of 12 unmet needs.
Within six months, 11 had been fulfilled, including a regular weekend break for his wife, a rota to provide his care during the day which enabled his wife to continue working, and some intellectual stimulation.
Intellectual stimulation was not easy, but the care manager came up with a group of volunteers, all of them computer buffs, who were able to communicate with the man on his level.
‘There was no way he would have fitted into one of our day centres,’ said Edwards.
Nor was there any point recording his needs within the county-wide planning process because they were so individual.
Such an approach also allows for more imaginative assessment of needs.
‘Had the care manager stuck to the initial referral alone, which was for respite care, she would have sorted them out for that, and that would have been it.’
Assessment and recording unmet need gives a very clear set of goals for the care manager:
‘The individual worker needs to be able to plan in order to work away at meeting them,’ he said.
Although Edwards has not dismissed the threat of legal action from v, d), D customers and admits he is worried, he argued it is a risk which must be run.
He believes it is vital to be honest with service users.
What might happen if a council refused to record a person's need for residential care because they couldn't provide it?
They might still face a court case.
‘I don't think that's been thought through.’
Recording need: A necessary task under the new legislation, but can everyone be pleased?
PEOPLE
A safe pair of hands for the ADSW
There's a saying in Scotland ‘It takes a long spuin to sup wi' a Fifer’.
Loosely translated, it means you've got to get up pretty early in the morning to get the better of Fife folk.
Jimmy Dick , the new president of the ADSW, is of that breed.
Born in a small mining village near Glenrothes, he has climbed the ladder by learning his craft.
This has culminated in his appointment as Highland's director of social work seven years ago.
Friendly and approachable, he makes a point of knowing people individually whenever he can.
But behind this couthy, amiable exterior lies a strong commitment to the service and a firm determination to get things done.
‘There is no question that when Jimmy decides enough he will hold a very firm line.
It is not management by consensus by any means,’ says one former colleague.
‘He will go along with things he considers to be in the best interests of the service and staff, but when hard decisions need to be made Jimmy will not be found wanting.’
Dick began his career in 1966 as a trainee probation officer in Edinburgh after a five-year spell with the police force.
Disillusioned with the preventive side of police work, he turned to probation after helping run a club for unemployed young people.
Three years later he was appointed child care officer in Moray and Hairn under director Fred Edwards, dubbed at the time as the ‘greenhouse’ of social work development in Scotland.
It proved to be a formative time.
From then it was steady progression of promotion through Perth and Kinross, Selkirk, Borders, and Grampian until he was appointed Highland's senior depute in 1985.
He became director the following year.
He still retains a keen interest in criminal justice, and has chaired the ADSW's criminal justice services committee for the past three years.
Colleagues regard Dick as a safe pair of hands who can be relied upon to step in when required.
Solid and supportive, he is direct and straightforward rather than an organisational game player.
‘He's very up-front — there's no side or cant to him.
When he doesn't know about something he says so from the beginning and doesn't try to waffle round it,’ says another colleague.
Dick describes his management style as open and supportive, with a readiness to communicate with is managers as much as possible.
‘I have always stressed the importance of communicating in social work departments.
It is an important personal agency, and communication is of the essence,’ he says.
‘But when the  time comes, only so much can be done by discussion.
Decisions have to be taken, and as director you have got to bite the bullet.’
No doubt the coming year will be a tough  one , with the long-awaited White Paper on child care law, local government reform looming, and the Scottish Office making ominous noises about ending the statutory appointment of directors.
But if anyone should try to get the better of Jimmy Dick, they'd better take a lengthy piece of cutlery with them.
David Mitchell 
Jimmy Dick: An upfront manager with a tough year in front of him
ANDY ROBERTSON has been appointed director (children and families) for Bolton SSD.
Robertson began as a social work assistant in Bristol before working in Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire.
He later joined Trafford SSD where he is children's service manager.
He takes over from PHILIP SWANN who has been made assistant director (adult services).
Sefton SSD has a new management team following the retirement of three long-serving senior staff.
New to the team are GED TAYLOR , assistant director older people and hospitals, and JENNY CROOK , assistant director adults.
Taylor joined the department last year from Cheshire SSD.
He will be responsible for services for older people.
Crook comes to Sefton from Bolton where she was principal offer for purchasing, planning, and development.
She trained as a state registered and registered mental nurse before moving into community development with a voluntary organisation.
She worked at Glasgow University for seven years in research and as a lecturer in social work.
RODNEY GRAHAME is the new chairman of the Disability Living Allowance Advisory Board and will advise the Social Security Secretary on the disability handbook which explains how medical conditions affect mobility and care needs.
Grahame is professor of clinical rheumatology and head of department at Guy's Hospital.’
SIMON WILLIS is the new director of Motability, succeeding KEN KEEN who is to retire in June.
He comes from the DSS where he was formulating policy on pensions and was a former private secretary to Minister for Disabled People, Nicholas Scott.
The National Care Homes Association has two new members of its executive:BARRY HARTLEY , who has a care home in Batley, Yorkshire and ALAN GARNER , who has care homes in Lincolnshire.
POLITICS
ELECTION ANNIVERSARY
The Thatcher Legacy
How have social policies fared since John Major's re-election?
Diana Sutton finds the policies were already there, but the atmosphere of financial crisis has affected implementation.
This month three major pieces of legislation have been implemented: the Community Care Act, the Child Support Act and the council tax.
Because of their implementation dates, they will probably be associated with the Major administration, but they are in fact a legacy of the Thatcher years.
All three represent fundamental shake-ups and policy shifts, and as their implementation coincides with a ruthless financial squeeze on local government, the council tax and community care may look like empty statements of ideology rather than meaningful new policies.
So one year after the general election, how will Major's cabinet be remembered in social policy terms, and how does Thatcher's legacy now appear?
Obviously, the Maastricht mess has dogged this first year, so it is difficult to assess what impact, if any, the supposedly new caring Major and his cabinet have had on social policy.
But the recession and the Treasury's growing public expenditure bill have prompted a review of certain departments' spending: social security, health, the home office and education — all those which have an impact on the operations of SSDs.
The DSS spends £80 billion on social security benefits and the pressure to control this and make cuts is huge.
Ironically, it is obviously during recession that the greatest demands are made on the social security budget as needs explodes.
Many welfare lobbyists and pressure groups are still struggling with the legacy of the Thatcher years, especially the Fowler reviews and the 1986 Social Security Act changes.
In particular, the shifts from entitlement to discretion, exemplified by the Social Fund, and the exclusion of certain groups from the benefits system, notably 16- and 17-year olds.
Thatcher's legacy has forced the poverty lobby onto the defensive as it fights to simply to maintain child benefit, to restore benefits to 16- and 17-year olds, or to ensure that 18- to 24-year-olds receive the same rate of income support as over 25-year-olds.
Looking at the short-term future, the government's response to the Social Policy Research Unit's Social Fund research is awaited, as is the DSS review of severe hardship payments for young people.
In the medium term the lobby can expect the outcome of a public expenditure review which may introduce a compulsory ‘workfare’ element into the system, reduce entitlement for certain groups (young people usually being the mot obvious target), or indeed question the universality principle of certain benefits.
In the longer term, the new Child Support Agency represents a major policy shift.
Absent fathers on low incomes will face higher maintenance bills and mothers who refuse to name their children's fathers will face a deduction from their income support.
Again this change is being implemented by the Major cabinet, but follows from the Thatcher directive (or deterrent, some would say): ‘All absent fathers must pay’.
Most fundamentally, a lobby which is being forced to defend cuts will not be able to push forward new debates such as a basic income scheme or a comprehensive disability income scheme.
Major's administration may be remembered for bringing the community care changes into being, but this is another Thatcher legacy now being implemented in financial crisis.
Major's emphasis on rights, entitlements and citizens charters juxtaposes with the reality of community care and recent questions about resource-based assessments.
The rhetoric of user-led assessment and control of care packages is central to community care and the charters.
But the reality is a complete lack of legislative provision for advocacy, no statutory user involvement in assessment nor any statutory right to challenge your assessment.
Community care also highlights one of the fundamental flaws of charters — there is little point being able to complain about a service if it simply is not there in the first place.
Similarly Major's commitment to charters is somewhat contradictory in the light of the lack of legislative recognition for disabled people's rights and the recent talking out of the Civil Rights (Disabled Persons) Bill.
the upper limits placed on the Independent Living Fund will leave many disabled people feeling disempowered and disillusioned.
Without full anti-discrimination.
Without full anti-discrimination legislation, the charter will be meaningless for most disabled people.
The mathematically confusing and politically risky question of local government funding has worried both administrations.
Thatcher's climbdown over the phenomenally unpopular community charge has led to the phenomenally complex council tax.
The tax was rushed through Parliament to ensure its arrival on the statute books before the election, and it may repeat some of the community charge's mistakes.
Its system of rebates, discounts and exemptions, and the fact that it is partly a personal and partly a property tax certainly guarantee complexity with necessarily guaranteeing collectability.
Many low income families may still face enforcement action through private bailiffs at the door, rather than less stringent repayment methods.
The taper for withdrawing council tax benefit is much steeper.
So far, John Major has implemented Thatcher's strongly ideological social policies.
The ideology is talked about less (though Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley has his hour of glory at the Conservative Party conference), but on the evidence so far it is doubtful whether Major's much-vaunted caring image will ever filter through to meaningful policy change.
Major: ‘Caring’ charters, but will they work?
Thatcher: Legacy of cuts of her successor
IN BENEFIT
Home economics
From this month, social workers have to advise clients on new arrangements for meeting the costs of residential care.
Paul Burgess shows how to do the sums
What are the changes to the social security benefits rules as a result of the new role for SSDs in providing community care?
There is a big demand from social workers for more information about several important benefit changes.
Everyone involved with the implementation of the community care legislation must acquire a working knowledge or clients will get mistaken or confused advice.
The proposals and planning for community care have preoccupied staff for some time.
But it is still likely that many have only the broadest understanding of the changes.
This month we look at the new arrangements for meeting the costs of residential care places.
It is nonsensical for the government to suggest the benefit changes are, to quote the title of the regulations, ‘consequent upon the introduction of community care’.
They are not.
Community care is what SSDs have been doing for decades.
The Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons' Act 1970 provided the basis for much that comes under the heading of community care.
Where local authorities ploughed resources into it, as in Manchester in the 1970s, great things were achieved.
Manchester claimed its services for disabled people were so good, people moved into the area to benefit from them.
How many SSDs will be able to say the same in five years' time?
Cuts and capping have sadly put paid to that.
Cynics may even suggest the whole exercise, from the Griffiths Report onwards, is a rationalisation of the need to control the public costs of private residential care.
The fact that these have spiralled up from £10 million in 1978 to about £2 billion this year, simply confirms the cynics' view that the government has little grasp of cause and effect.
Since SSDs withdrew from sponsorship of private places — remember those days?— no one has exercised any professional judgement about the need for residential care at the taxpayers' expense.
It is ironic the new arrangements, in which social services return to the role of gatekeepers to public funds for residential care, are described as the introduction of community care.
So to the new benefit rules.
First, remember all those people who were in residential care on 31 March enjoy the right to have their future care costs met by social security.
They do not need to have any dealings with social services.
This applies even to those who were not receiving income support at the time.
Temporary and permanent residents can move between houses.
But if the former move out of residential care for four weeks and the latter for 13 weeks, or if either go into hospital for 52 weeks, the preserved rights are lost.
They will then need social services support to get their care costs funded by public money.
The first step for those now wanting help with the costs of entering residential care is to ask social services to assess their needs — as was the case under the old sponsorship arrangements.
If social services agrees, the next step is to find a registered home which is offering a place at the approved weekly cost.
The finances for, let us say, a female client are organised as follows.
The women's ability to contribute towards the cost is assessed and she needs to know at the outset what she will be asked to pay.
At this stage, a benefits checking service might reveal unclaimed benefits such as attendance allowance, which could attract a £33.70 severe disability premium.
Let us assume the client only has £70 in retirement and works pensions.
When she is in her own home this puts her above the income support level of £44 personal allowance, plus a higher pensioner premium of £23.55, totalling £67.55.
Entering residential care costs £185 a week.
As a result, social security introduces a new element called a ‘residential allowance’ of £45 a week (£50 in London).
This is a sort of notional rent payment, though it is not called that because social security does not want to be seen as having returned to paying rents.
So now we have her income support level increased to £112.55.
Because she has already got £70 of her own money, she will actually get £42.55 income support.
Finally, social services works out what it needs to pay towards the cost of the place.
The client has £112.55.
However, she must have a minimum of £12.65 pocket money.
So this is knocked off her £112.55 leaving her with £99.90 to pay.
This leaves social services with the balance of £85.10 to pay to reach the £185.
In some areas, both the client and social services will pay the home owner.
In other areas, social services will collect and pay the owner the full amount of money due.
Paul Burgess is principal welfare rights officer, Lancashire County Council 
Residential charges: Costing out care takes into account state and works pensions and allows a minimum of £12.65 pocket money
LETTERS
GUIDELINES ARE NOT A CURE-ALL
The tragic consequences of young people involved in care crime again stimulates calls for greater ‘control’ in children's homes, which after 15 years of working in this field I, and many of my colleagues, agree with.
The regulations recently produced were indeed unhelpful when attempting to contain disturbed young people, but it is again another example of a ‘knee-jerk’ reaction to believe that tighter guidelines will cure the problem.
Residential care of children has experienced consistent un-coordinated tinkering with policy for many years.
Recent reports following scandals and appalling practice have made recommendations on how to improve the service, most of which remain in some minister's waste bin.
It may help to improve the control guidelines, but not without a commitment to improve training for those who have to implement them.
More residential social workers are receiving professional training but rarely specialist training on how to help change destructive behaviour and its underlying causes.
Many current DipSW courses have been poorly conceived, introduced with too much haste and remove from practice the more experienced workers for two years without adequate replacement.
The service remains in a pit of despair compounded by underfunding and the closure of specialist resources such as Peper Harrow.
To lock up young car thieves is another example of bolting the stable door after the horse has fled.
A large proportion of these young people should have received help long before they take to such dangerous crime but nearly all the preventative services have been closed over the past five years.
Making social policy on the hoof and enforcing social work to use all its energy re-organising the services to a business model, will not stop more young people in public care dying in stolen cars.
CHRISTOPHER BROWN
CQSW post graduate diploma in therapeutic child care
Lecturer in social care, Newbury College
SERVICE CUTS
The Alzheimer's Disease Society is concerned about surveys by Community Care and Doctor which indicate that local authority financial cuts under the new community care system will affect elderly people and other groups (News, page 1 and ‘Can the rift be healed’ 1 April).
We estimate 600,000 people in the UK are affected by dementia.
Most are being cared for at home.
Carers are renowned for not asking for support.
Evidence suggests support like home help, day care, and other forms of much needed respite will be affected by cuts.
If community care is intended to give priority to the most vulnerable groups in society, the rising numbers of people with dementia and their carers must be addressed urgently as a specific group by local authorities, policy makers and government.
CLIVE EVERS Assistant director (information and training)
CORRECTION
Owing to an omission of copy, there was an error in the middle of David Howe's letter ‘Return of the Gatekeeper’(8 April).
The sentence should have read it: ‘It proved possible to maintain a limited number of local foster placements which would not have met the central standards of a specialist fostering team, but which met the temporary needs of certain local children more appropriately.’
LEARNING BY MEETING ‘SAFE MALES’
I am a male working with young children under eight years old and have been involved, to a greater or lesser degree for almost ten years.
Keith Pringle (‘Gender politics’, 4 March) would seem to suggest all the experience I have gained and the help and support I have given to young children has no value.
He suggests I should take responsibility for the actions of abusing men — that I should feel the guilt they obviously do not.
For those who are aware of child abuse issues, working with young children is an extremely difficult area.
Although the article devalues any contribution men may be able to make in this area I strongly refute this.
To say that sexually abused children will meet males throughout their lives is to oversimplify the situation.
Children must meet safe males when they are at their most vulnerable, not just in passing.
It is through this process that children learn not all men are abusers and also learn how to express their feelings appropriately.
If we remove men from the caring system because some abuse, will we then remove women because they will then represent the highest risk in a care situation.
We must protect children from abuse of this type but we must also protect them from abuse by the system.
These survivors must be allowed to live life as normally as possible.
Life includes contact with men in a caring situation, ensuring appropriate safeguards are taken.
M. TROWHILL Programme worker 
THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST
In her review of Positively Women: Living with AIDS (Books, 18 March), Michelle McCarthy claims ‘white, affluent gay men live longer with HIV/AIDS than poor black women’ and highlights this as ‘the politics of survival’.
Why does she focus on gay men?
Social inequities mean rich white people have access to better housing, diet, health care, and other facilities than poor black people and tend to live longer.
This is as true of other illnesses as of AIDS.
Sexual orientation, however, is not directly relevant: being gay does not give a man access to better ‘survival’ chances.
If Ms McCarthy thinks all gay men who have AIDS can be characterised as white and affluent, she is mistaken.
There is evidence that gay men seek HIV testing (and may receive AIDS diagnoses) earlier than other people.
The average interval between testing and diagnosis and death may be longer in their case than in other groups.
Nonetheless, that is quite different from ‘living longer’.
JAMES BAADEN 
VIGILANCE WILL PAY OFF
The jump Keith Pringle makes from the known fact that some men abuse is colossal (‘General politics’, 4 March).
If we hypothesise that most children who are abused by men, it does not indicate that all men are abusers, neither does the notion hold water that 77 per cent of sexual abuse within foster and residential care is committed by males.
It only demonstrates that 77 per cent of a group (those who abuse) are male.
We should not just trust people to get on with the task of caring for vulnerable children.
We should, as Keith Pringle states, make the ‘most intimate situations as safe as possible’ but not by precluding men.
Intimacy and nurturing do not have to be advanced either secretly or privately.
Carers and children need the protection of good monitoring.
To say, as Keith Pringle does, ‘lesbian women ought statistically to represent the safest carers’, from whatever point of view, only inflames and alienates.
We need to be vigilant, we need to continue to expand the diagnostic skill in recruitment.
We need a balanced methodology in reducing as quickly as possible the number of victims and the number of abusers within the care system.
But males retreating to the backwoods to beat their chests and nurture each other is not a healthy solution.
BARRY GORMLEY Social Worker 
FAMILY SEARCHES
Thank you for the informative and comprehensive article on the work of Familymakers (‘Making families’, 25 March).
I would like to point out an error which could be misleading to potential users of our service.
We normally take a decision about whether we start the search for a new family three months after the child is admitted as part of our evaluation process.
This decision is taken in conjunction with the local authority social worker.
JOHN M ELLIFFE Project leader  
INFORMATION PLEASE
On behalf of Wolverhampton Community Care Forum and as part of a research for an Open University course, I am investigating examples of local codes of practice on contracting for services negotiated between voluntary and statutory sectors.
I would like to year from any readers who are developing or have developed local codes.
GERALDINE CHILD 
I am a second year DipSW student looking at the needs of older people with learning disabilities.
I would appreciate any information especially concerning age appropriate forms of day care, social opportunities and residential provision.
CATHY BEELEY 
I am a second year DipSW student and would be grateful for any information or research on foster carers birth children regarding placement disruption.
CAIN MURPHY 
I am presently researching new and rewarding ways of proving day services to people who are Asian with learning difficulties.
This information will be used to create positive changes to the way services are assessed and delivered.
If readers have any knowledge of good practice, or are undertaking similar research I would be glad to hear.
JOHN CLARKE Day services manager 
I am collecting material for an MSW dissertation on the role of the probation service in influencing factors affecting the sentencing of 16- and 17-year-olds in a youth court of the Criminal Justice Act 1991.
I would like information on local inter-agency schemes and youth court strategies; assessment of ‘maturity’ in pre-sentence reports and any examples of overtly discriminatory sentencing of young people in this age group.
BILL ROBINSON 
I am writing on behalf of organisations in Bath and Wiltshire which provide residential services to people with learning difficulties.
We are investigating how we can involve our service users in evaluating services.
We would like information about how to involve users who are profoundly disabled, non-verbal or who have a sensory impairment in addition to a learning difficulty.
CAROLE PILLEY 
I am involved in setting up a group for day centre users with physical disabilities and want to inform disability service users of the new Community Care Act.
I would like help from those who have taken on responsibility to inform groups of the changes and want to find out where they found materials which were user friendly.
MONICA GREEN 
We welcome letters for possible inclusion on this page.
They should be typed and doubled spaced, and include the full name and address of the author, which we can omit if requested.
Send to:.
Alternatively, you can dictate your letter to us over the telephone.
Ring  on Wednesdays or Fridays between 3.30pm and 4.30pm.
COMMENT
Wagner's agenda
What other calling would employ teachers who have no professional experience of the subjects which they teach?
Consider three facts, arbitrarily chosen — half of all carers are over 65; 80 per cent of carers say they had no choice but to become carers; and for one person in a hundred residential care is vital.
Set this in the context of in the increasing graying of our society and we see the challenges which face social services.
Last week the Wagner Development Group put to rest that work which began with the 1988 Wagner report with the fourth and last conference jointly organised by NISW and Community Care (News, page 4), and the coincidental publication of the third Wagner volume Positive Answers (HMSO, £6.50).
But the task is far from over.
The work of the development group as well as the series of scandals in residential care since the report's publication continued to ensure that the report was not consigned to gather dust.
Wagner can count some worthwhile benchmarks — from the Caring in Homes initiative to the forthcoming Children's Charter and one or two legislative achievements — but it can also be justly proud of its part in seeing that residential care is on the political agenda, no longer a Cinderella service.
So, while it has been wound up, it concerns go marching only.
There are some obvious problems facing residential care — the lack of resources and the comparatively low numbers of workers who are qualified (20 per cent of care staff and 60 per cent of heads of homes) among them.
But there are other issues which must demand attention.
What other calling would employ teachers who have no professional experience of the subjects they teach?
The overwhelming generalist nature of social work education also fails residential care.
Too often local authority managers have a lack of commitment toward the sector.
Much of the debate in social services in the past 30 years has been about community care — what it is an how to achieve it.
The lack of a corresponding vibrant philosophical base fro residential care has impoverished it.
How can we know the answers if we do not even ask the questions?
Were we even able to answer the question posed by Barbara Kahan at last week's conference — Why have we tolerated neglect of training in child care for so long?— we might edge our way toward a new life for residential care.
There would be no better tribute to Wagner's contribution than to start defining those questions now.
RACE: COMMUNITY CARE
LIFE IN A COLD CLIMATE
Black elders suffer greater poverty than their white counterparts.
Shivraj Jadeja and John Singh show how they may be double penalised under the Community Care Act
Most black elders in Britain today maintain themselves either on the level of income support rates or below the poverty level.
Thus the DH comments in Caring for People about the relationship of services to those who cannot afford their full cost is particularly relevant: ‘In practice many consumers of personal social services cannot afford the full cost of the service and ability to pay does not, and should not in any way influence decisions on the service to be provided.’
How have black elders found themselves in their present socioeconomic position?
They fall into three main categories.
First, refugees are forced to leave former homes or colonies, like the Ugandan Asians in the early 1970s.
Second, elderly parents joining families who have settled in Britain, and third, economic immigrants of the 1950s and 1960s.
Many in the first two categories have had little opportunity to work and build state or private pensions.
Those in the last category came mainly in the middle of, or late, in their working lives.
They invariably came from countries with no state pension arrangements for most people, so they could only start contributing towards their pensions once they arrived in Britain.
For most this left insufficient time to build any significant pensions.
Many black people were in the lowest paid jobs, mainly in the manufacturing sector in unstable markets like textiles, heavy industries, and semi-skilled machine too manufacture.
In Leicester, for example, Asian workers are generally paid 20 per cent less than their white counterparts.
This has been the case in the past 30 years, and for those on low wages it has meant a relatively lower contribution has been made towards the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme.
Unemployment is also greater among the black population.
While someone is unemployed, only contributions towards the basic state retirement pension are credited.
Finally, many black and Asian people were, and undoubtedly still are, working for employers who are unlikely to run occupational pension schemes.
In 1990 we carried out a limited survey of 50 Asian elders attending a day centre based in inner city Leicester.
It found 70 per cent of those surveyed had never worked in the UK, 12 per cent had worked here for between one and ten years, 4 per cent for ten to 20 years, and 14 per cent for 20–40 years.
Fourteen per cent had only an occupational or state pension, while 16 per cent had one or other of these and also received income support.
Seventy per cent had only income support.
So 86 per cent of Asian day centre users relied on income support, while only 14 per cent have state and/or private pensions above income support rates.
In comparison, a survey of 1,200 white pensioners living in Melton Mowbray found only 2 per cent did not have a state pension.
Only 18 to 25 per cent of the survey sample relied on or had their income topped up by the then supplementary benefit.
There are three areas of concern: policies of charging for services; resource allocation to areas where black elders are concentrated; and care managers who hold budgets.
SSDs can charge for many services.
Many have been formulating charging policies for services other than residential and nursing care.
Some have formulated flat-rate charges for certain services and many continue to do so.
However, benefit rates do not usually include an amount to cover the cost of local authority charges for services.
If a charge is made to someone on income support, this reduces the income available to pay for basic necessities.
This will disproportionately affect black elders.
Resource allocation is also relevant, particularly where charging policies are formulated on a means-tested basis.
SSDs must take into account that contributions from black elders under such schemes are likely to be less than those of their white counterparts.
Finally, the possible actions of care managers cause concern.
The care manager will be given a budget and will be responsible for organising an efficient package of care to meet clients' individual needs.
For example, in one scheme for 35 highly dependent elderly people introduced by Kent SSD, home care managers were given a budget of £66,000 a year to spend on buying appropriate services and/or particular equipment to aid independence.
It meant clients received £36 a week for 52 weeks.
Many SSDs are developing or experimenting with similar schemes.
Assuming a means-tested charging policy, in another case two neighbours, both 70, require similar care.
They both apply for help under the scheme above.
The first is Asian and came to Britain in 1972.
He or she has worked in Britain for 44 years before retirement.
Table 1 breaks down their incomes.
The Asian client's basic pension does not take him or her above income support levels.
The white client's basic and additional pensions can take him or her well above these levels.
The difference in weekly income is £29.10.
Under the care scheme the Asian client would be unlikely to contribute towards any care package, while the white client is likely to contribute.
Without any precise calculations let us assume this is £8 a week.
Table 2 shows that the home care manager would have to allocate to the Asian client all necessary funds for care from the budget.
However, for the white client, since there is a client contribution, only 77 per cent of the budget is allocated.
Is it possible this would affect the home care manager's decision about the services to provide to each client?
Apart from arguing the need for adequate benefit levels to ensure that effective community care policies are possible, Saul Backer drew the link between SSDs handling care budgets and the DSS's social fund officers giving discretionary loans or grant payments.
He said: ‘SSDs have much to learn from the monitoring of the Social Fund and in particular on the use of discretion by social fund officers.
As social services takes over responsibilities for the community care there will be a qualitative difference between social fund officers’ decisions concerning packages of care if both are controlled by cash-limited budgets.
‘Where the use of discretion or assessment is to regulate and control the flow of money, be it of social fund officers or care managers, this promotes anxiety about possible injustices and discrimination in decision-making.’
Thus, with black people, particularly black elders, at the thin end of a inadequate social security system, there are fears this may disproportionately and adversely affect the community care services they receive.
SSDs must recognise the socioeconomic status of black elders, and ensure community care policies and resources reflect their ability to pay and receive services.
This would ensure services are provided in line with government objectives.
Eighty-six per cent of Asian day centre users relied on income support, while only 14 per cent had pensions above income support rates
Shivraj Jadeja is welfare rights development officer, and John Singh is a social worker, Leicestershire SSD
MANAGEMENT: MARKETING
MARKETING MATTERS
Do we under-estimate the importance of marketing social work and social workers?
Brian MacDonald believes we could more to help ourselves
Social work is criticised for the way it sells itself to its public.
But SSDs are anxious about, or even indifferent to marketing.
The Clyde report on the Orkney affair contains recommendations about promoting an understanding of social work's role in communities.
The Scottish Office asked SWDs to publicise their community care services, and the final examination in marketing for the Diploma in Management Studies at the Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen included a question about the implications of marketing for SWDs.
Marketing can be defined as the way an organisation matches its human, financial and physical resources with its customers.
The Institute of Marketing defines it as ‘the management process responsible for identifying, anticipating and satisfying customer requirements profitably’.
In SWDs and SSDs, it would be possible to accept the first definition almost unreservedly.
The word ‘profitably’ means that the latter definition poses some difficulties.
But it can be argued that marketing has a significant role within any social work agency.
Marketing social work has three distinct but interrelated areas: marketing the professional image; marketing the range of services provided by the department; and social marketing.
Marketing social work's image requires tact and subtlety.
Given the recent events in Orkney and elsewhere, promoting social work as a caring profession must restore faith in its activities.
In some sense this is no more than a public relations exercise, albeit a difficult one.
Social work's image has suffered over the past dozen or so years from a series of scandals where agencies' failures have been highlighted, often with total disregard to their successes.
When it comes to the second aspect — marketing the services offered by departments — it is possible to content that ‘top management does not understand what marketing is or its importance to an organisation's success.
These executives seem to equate marketing with selling and fail to consider other aspects of the marketing system.
They do not effectively co-ordinate their marketing activities.’
In many social work organisations such a comment is almost axiomatic.
One of the problems with social services is that, unlike material goods, they are generally intangible.
The task then is to ‘make the intangible tangible’.
This gives a clue to a major problem: the way services are described.
Marketing people suggest that are some characteristics which separate product and service marketing: a service cannot be touched; precise standardisation is difficult; there is no transfer of ownership; it cannot be patented; production and consumption are inseparable; and the consumer is part of the process.
Since many services are based on individuals are their relationship to the department and its staff, it is virtually impossible to achieve standard outputs.
Arguably, a major focus of marketing could be on emphasising the individuality of services.
Implementation of the Community Care Act is now upon us, yet many organisations have not really begun to explain to potential clients and stakeholders in the wider community exactly what care management is, who care managers are, what they will do, and what a care package can include.
Social work has also failed to distinguish between service features (the assessment aspect of care management) and the benefits (the care package).
There are elements which distinguish social services, and are at the core of the way many social workers operate.
But their marketable dimension is not recognised.
The public appears unaware that departments have moved over the years from a production orientation, where individuals were matched to available services, to a marketing orientation where departments seek to establish customers' needs through individual assessment and meet them individually by care management.
Making the intangible tangible need not be too difficult.
Welfare rights services, for example could be defined in a variety of ways which may not make them readily understandable.
If, however, they were described as services which can bring millions of pounds into the local economy annually, the perception of welfare rights might change.
Social work can learn a lot from the concept of social marketing, which is best seen in campaigns, from the movement of free slaves in ancient Greece to today's safer sex campaigns.
For example, the policy of moving individuals with learning difficulties from long-stay hospitals into the community could have been the focus of a social marketing process.
Yet each time a house is acquired in the community the same problems inevitably arise with local people.
Ground must be chosen carefully with the local community, and how to manage policy must be considered.
Much communication with local people will be through departmental staff.
Their personal communication skills are important.
They are the agents of change but departments may not always perceive this role.
We run the risk of damaging our own campaigns by not fully understanding the roles staff can play, or how they can damage the process if they do not understand their role.
We fail to engage in social marketing because we do not understand it.
To use the example of closing long-stay hospitals again, instead of seeing individual group homes on a case-by-case basis, departments could try to market the overall concept, with space within the marketing strategy for dealing with individual neighbourhoods where houses are located.
Marketing benefits the client.
We must shake off the image that marketing a service is somehow analogous to marketing goods and approach the matter more vigorously.
Marketing is something which should pervade the entire organisation.
Brian MacDonald is a social work manager with Grampian SWD.
He writes in a personal capacity.
SEXUAL ABUSE: HIV/AIDS
POSITIVE PROTECTION
The possibility of HIV infection after sexual abuse is yet another traumatic and complex problem for child protection staff.
Joy Francis examines early signs that SSDs are  beginning to take this on board The realisation that as well as the emotional, psychological, and physical damage caused by child sexual abuse there is the chance that a child may have been infected with HIV, is slowly making an impression on SSDs and workers in child protection.
How best to equip workers to tackle the thorny subjects of confidentiality, the pros and cons of having a blood test for HIV, and the reality of informed consent add another dimension of complexity and myth to the emotive area of child sexual abuse.
Though the number of cases where a link between HIV/AIDS and child sexual abuse has been made is relatively small, the long-term implications cannot be ignored.
The DoH guidance document for SSDs,Children and HIV , touches on the problem.
Testing and confidentiality are discussed, but more controversially under the small section on sexual abuse, the document claims that in certain circumstances, public health interests can ‘override the duty of confidentiality’.
A worker at Hammersmith & Fulham with extensive experience in both child protection and HIV/AIDS work, who would not be named, has strong views.
She feels the DoH guidance is not as detailed as it should be and, to some degree, is misleading.
‘It tends to say that if there is sexual abuse you automatically have to think about HIV.
I think this is a difficult line to take on the issue.
We would say to workers that if there has been penetration or an exchange of bodily fluids, then the subject may crop up on the agenda.’
Her worries extend to the role of HIV testing because of known cases where testing has been carried out without the child's consent.
‘If possible, and with the perpetrator's consent, I would test them first.
My concern is that when a child is tested for standard sexually transmitted disease, an HIV test is done as a matter of course without informed consent.
We are developing a training course to run later in the year.’
These grey areas show the need for clear procedural guidance for staff, carefully thought out training courses from SSDs, and extensive links between social services and health authorities to enable workers to weigh up the needs of the child, parental concerns, and the real risk of transmission to others.
Some of these seemingly insoluble issues were addressed in HIV/AIDS: The Hidden Agenda in Child Sexual Abuse .
Written by Mae Brown, Chris Bennetts and Jane Sloan, the book came out of their different professional experiences of working with boy victims of two paedophile rings disclosed in 1990 in Cornwall.
Representing education, health and social services, they separately address key areas of importance and difficulty in three sections: developmental issues, AIDS and counselling, and child sexual abuse.
Mae Brown, an educational psychologist, liaises with the SSD to look at the assessment and treatment of children who have been sexually abused.
She was brought in when it was discovered that the largest of the two rings, in Penzance, had contact with other rings throughout the country and many of the perpetrators had been in prison.
‘There was a genuine anxiety for the boys and the parents in this case, as there was an awareness of the extent of HIV infection among the prison population.
It is very difficult information you are dealing with.
Even at the most basic level, there is the issue about sexual terms.
You have to be straight and up front with children to let them know that it is OK for them to use their own words and explain their concerns in their won way,’ says Brown.
Workers need to have factual knowledge about HIV/AIDS which they can accurately pass on to a child to give the child a full picture of what is involved.
This was another reason for writing the book.
Chris Bennetts, senior health promotion officer for AIDS education, was actively involved in this area.
Until recently, her remit was to train staff about HIV/AIDS, and she informs children referred about the HIV test.
‘Working closely with the boys raised a lot of issues for me in terms of the importance of choice to the child.
I would make sure the child knew what we were talking about in terms of the test and confidentiality and the limitations of the test itself.
One difficulty is the agonising 12-week wait before a test can be carried out.
If the child doesn't want to go for the first test or even the second test, it is their right.’
Their work was made easier by the procedures Cornwall SSD already had in  place.
Its child protection procedures have information about what to do if a child is worried about HIV, and how to make an appropriate referral if HIV/AIDS came up as an issue for child who has been sexually abused.
Child health is essential in the procedures, as social work consultant (child protection), Jane Sloan testifies.
Though she works for the SSD, she is unusually placed in the health authority's child health department.
Working closely with two medical co-ordinators and a training officer, she supervises Cornwall's child protection procedures.
But she feels the personal supervision of staff outside the line manager structure is crucial.
‘We are still struggling with child sexual abuse and we are still trying to get it right from the child's point of view.
But to do this effectively workers need support.
For all our child protection inter-agency training we have got a standing agreement with private counsellors that if any professionals raise an issue that was personal to them, they could go away and have the first 12 counselling sessions free.’
What place HIV/AIDS and child sexual abuse should have on qualifying and post-qualifying courses is another area of difficulty.
At CCETSW this may be a problem as the four-year funded post of HIV/AIDS programme co-ordinator is not to be renewed.
Clive Turner, who has been in the position since September 1989, has written curriculum guidance on HIV/AIDS, for the DipSW course, but child sexual abuse is not featured because CCETSW's line is that sexual abuse and child protection are not DipSW level.
‘I know this position is not necessarily agreed by everyone, but I do think it is post-qualifying level.
My expectation of the DipSW is that students will have some idea of what HIV is and its social implications for people, and some idea about confidentiality and transmission.’
According to Turner, it is important to make a distinction between people's fears and the reality, for training to be effective.
‘SSDs have to think about the pace and level of training.
They have to consider whether staff are able to develop procedures and guidelines accommodating HIV/AIDS in the absence of having to deal with the problem at first hand.’
Turner agrees with Chris Bennetts' assertion in the book that the decision to have an HIV test should be the child's, but stresses that the child should be counselled.
He feels the inclusion of HIV/AIDS into the arena of child sexual abuse will be made easier for SSDs to develop within the existing child protection guidelines and framework.
He says: ‘What we are talking about is ensuring that the workers are confident in their own knowledge about HIV and are actually able to answer question, and can talk about sexual matters.
Worker in child protection are, or should be, confident about this anyway.
Another thing I like about the book is the point that if you are, as a worker, don't have the information, then you should say so, but add that you will find the person who does.’
The newness of the subject, the larger number of children affected by HIV, and the dearth of practice-based information are just some of the reasons Carol Lindsay Smith, Barnardo's national development officer for HIV/AIDS, feels there is a certain amount of uncertainty and inaction in this area.
To find out more about the problem, Barnardo's has created a post in South Yorkshire to deal specifically with HIV/AIDS and child sexual abuse.
Lindsay Smith says: ‘I think it needs a response from a range of professionals, as a person in child care would need information about HIV/AIDS and an HIV/AIDS worker would need to be informed about child protection.
The ultimate aim should be to reduce any unnecessary anxiety for the child and the parents.’
The lack of evidence and information about HIV/AIDS and child sexual abuse is making any debate on practice difficult.
But Jane Sloan, of Cornwall SSD, feel more money needs to be made available as ‘we haven't got enough money to get the resources to work with the problem.
We have only touched the tip of the iceberg’.
LEGISLATION: CHILD PROTECTION
THE AGE OF MUTUAL CONSENT
The Children Act requires partnership with parents in child protection decision, and says court orders should be avoided where possible.
But some workers still use the threat of court action to force parents into agreeing their children can be removed.
Dendy Platt reports
The Children Act intended parental responsibility to be shared when children are looked after by a local authority, but practice is proving less than perfect as new dangers emerge for children who are ‘accommodated’.
The child can now be removed ‘by agreement’, but often parents have little choice — if they agree, their child is taken away; if they don't, they are taken to court.
With the statutory requirements to examine placement opportunities within the extended family, there are more options.
Inappropriate uses of wardship employed in the eighties are being replaced by coercive ‘accommodation’ of children.
What are the necessary skills for partnership?
The threat of court action by some workers can be a genuine attempt to help parents understand the reality of their position.
But with other workers, the threat becomes an abuse of power.
This may be because of the perceived risk to children, or an attempt by the authority to minimise risks to itself.
Social workers and SSDs walk a tightrope between maintaining the spirit of partnership and creating a new, relatively unaccountable means of taking children away.
Particular skills and attitudes are needed to make voluntary agreements workable and fair.
Take the hypothetical case of Sheila, the 21-year-old single mother of Mark, aged six months, and two other children of three-and-a-half and two years.
Sheila lives in a council maisonette and has not been involved with social services recently, although she was in care for two years from the age of 14.
Child protection agencies became involved after an emergency hospital admission.
Sheila called her GP because for a week Mark had not been feeding properly, had become increasingly drowsy and was vomiting.
In hospital, he was diagnosed as having a subdural haemorrhage (internal bleeding affecting the brain).
The consultant believed Mark had been deliberately shaken, although there was no evidence of bruising or fractures, and he had sustained no lasting damage.
Sheila was angry and said Mark had not been out of her care during the past fortnight and insisted she had not shaken him.
CASE CONFERENCE
Following this, a case conference is held where the paediatrician states Sheila is incapable of caring for her child.
However, the older brother's nursery reports that although he is sometimes a little grubby, bonding and general care are perfectly adequate.
The health visitor says all three children have previously  thrived.
Although Sheila finds them a handful and is known to shout at them, she has always sought appropriate help.
The outcome is that Mark is placed voluntarily in Sheila's mother's care, 15 miles away, while a family assessment takes place.
Sheila is given details in writing by the social workers; she can see Mark three times a week, once at the weekend, supervised by his grandmother.
The other two children will stay at a family centre as part of her assessment.
Sheila will not be permitted to see Mark alone or outside these times.
She is advised she must co-operate voluntarily with this agreement, and if she does not, social workers will go to court for a care order.
Sheila talks to her mother about the situation and her mother says the social workers are quite right; Sheila was heavy-handed with the children and has had this coming to her for a long time.
A blazing row follows, which Sheila's mother reports to the social worker, who in turn asks her to keep a written record of contacts between Sheila and Mark for the family assessment.
Sheila's relationship with her mother remains strained.
This is a fictional case, but the key events have all occurred in real situations since the implementation of the Children Act.
Possible child abuse has occurred but the circumstances are open to many interpretations.
A case conference has decided to separate the child ‘voluntarily’ from his birth family.
Restrictions on parent/child contact have been imposed and these decisions have been backed by the threat of court proceedings.
An extended family placement has been used, but with minimal investigation of it suitability and minimal support to the carer.
How could this situation be approached differently?
Over the past decade, practitioners in neighbourhood or community-based teams have been developing closer relationships with the people they serve.
Mutual understanding has helped address these dilemmas.
Is the placement outside the birth family really necessary?
The assessment would probably be more realistic with Mark at home, given adequate community and extended family support; his needs for attachment would be prejudiced by a move.
Even if removing Mark is justifiable, research suggests returning him to his mother within six weeks would offer the best prospect for successful rehabilitation.
If the need to remove Mark is questionable, then the case conference should not recommend anything which the social worker will view as binding.
If a voluntary arrangement is anticipated, the recommendation should be as open as possible.
The meeting should only set broad parameters for the worker, then there would be scope for genuine negotiation, with the parent's real agreement.
In this case, Sheila might not agree to Mark's removal, but she might compromise over periods of respite care with his grandmother, which would satisfy the paediatrician's concerns.
For Sheila to be committed to the partnership and agreement it is vital it is openly negotiated and freely entered into.
Assuming the worst — that Mark has to be moved — is it justifiable to achieve this by threatening Sheila with legal action?
Clearly these threats contradict the spirit of partnership in the Children Act.
‘User agreement or a clear statutory mandate are the only bases of partnership-based intervention.
Sometimes, court action is the only alternative if agreement or a clear statutory mandate are the only bases of partnership-based intervention.
Sometimes, court action is the only alternative if agreement cannot be reached with the parent.
Rather than handing the parent a written agreement which was prepared beforehand, the social worker should explain the local authority's position sympathetically and clearly.
This position must be based on whether there is evidence on which a court could make an Order in Care Proceedings.
STRENUOUS EFFORTS
The worker should make strenuous efforts to help parents exercise their rights fully, for example by helping them obtain legal advice, and only after these steps have been taken, should a final agreement be signed.
The social worker must believe the best results for everyone are achieved when both parties have an equal right to be heard.
The worker who has lost this belief will convey this attitude to the parents, and partnership will collapse.
Specific limitations were placed on contact in the example above.
But under a voluntary agreement, the parent retains parental responsibility, and tight restrictions should only apply in extreme circumstances.
Even then, there is a good case for bringing it before a court so that each side is heard and specific boundaries are laid down.
Under the Children Act, if the restrictions could be achieved ‘voluntarily’ a court may consider it has a duty not to grant an order.
But it is still against the spirit of the Act to impose restrictions on contact where a child is accommodated by a local authority.
Extended family placements, as shown in this example, are often good child care practice.
they are not an easy option when professional anxiety is high.
We must ensure we are not placing a child in a family where his or her own mother may herself have been abused.
The family network should be fully involved before a substitute carer is chosen, then that carer must be offered at least as much support as local authority foster carers would normally expect.
Extended family placements are often good child care practice.
They are not an easy option when professional anxiety is high
In Mark's case, a link worker for his grandmother would help her manage the complexities of the changed relationship with Sheila.
Social workers' tendency to co-opt her into the professional team will be difficult for her to handle.
She should have an important role in supporting her daughter, when her support will hasten progress, and help to protect Mark.
If Sheila does not co-operate with social workers, it may not help if her mother is dragged in on the social workers' side.
Power relationships and relationships within informal networks are vitally important in all child care work.
The Children Act provides a structure for working within them; but it does not provide a base for practice.
Social workers can explore innovative schemes like family centres and community social work teams to help them develop skills they need, particularly in empowerment and anti-oppressive practice.
Without these skills, we risk creating a new tier of unregulated and unaccountable decision-making.
Dendy Platt is lecturer in social work at New College, Durham
LEGISLATION: CHILD CARE
FORM FILLING EXERCISE
Some SSDs have been taking part in a project tracking children's experiences of care under the Children Act.
Kendra Sone looks at the early findings
Social workers wanting to assess the progress of children in their care look closely at the child's placement.
If the carer is happy or the home satisfied and the child doesn't complain, there is a temptation to leave well alone.
But the school of thought which says ‘if it's not broken don't fix it’ does little to take social work practice forward.
Local authorities must be sure they are providing the right care for children, and with increasing pressure on budgets they must know the money is well spent.
Researchers have argued consistently that a coherent approach is needed to finding the type of intervention which works best for which children.
Now a DoH-funded project, Looking After Children: Assessing Outcomes in Child Care, aims to bring that ideal closer.
The Children Act emphasises the importance of monitoring children in care.
Volume three of the DoH guidance, on family placements, set outs how local authorities should plan and review.
Researchers at the Dartington Social Research Unit have developed materials designed to help SSDs meet those responsibilities and help make a child's experience of care happy and fulfilling.
The initial trials quickly revealed how difficult it is to develop one set of forms which can be used to assess the progress of all children
Looking After Children contains standardised forms for gathering information, plans and review and six schedules for different age groups, called assessment and action records, to chart children's progress.
The package is still being refined, and five local authorities have been involved with formal evaluation feeding back information from a core sample of 200 children who have been assessed using the schedules.
In less than two years the packs could be used routinely for all children in local authority care.
At first sight the schedules are daunting — a 30-page booklet for each age group asks specific questions about a child's health, educational progress, family and social relationships, identity, social presentation and emotional development.
Each form finishes with a summary of the work to be undertaken, by whom and by when.
Response so far has mostly been positive, says researcher Harriet Ward.
Despite initial fears that completing the assessments would prove arduous, workers and managers have found the forms useful for identifying gaps in care.
The Children Act says local authorities should provide the same sort of care ‘that it would be reasonable to expect a parent to give’, and the assessment and action records are designed to help authorities be effective parents.
When workers' minds are focused on children's emotional well-being it is all too easy to overlook the basics of good child care.
One manager who tried out the forms says ‘They helped us attend to the little things that parents do without thinking, like making sure children have had their immunisations and following them up if they're missed.
The forms also ask workers and carers to check whether a child knows how to cross the road safely or can make an emergency phone call.
At the National Children's Home Southdowns home in Hampshire the forms have influenced practice.
The project now ensures young people can use telephone boxes outside the home as well as inside, according to the deputy head Alan Clark.
Overall the project found the forms useful.
‘They made us more professional and were useful as a basis for court reports,’ he says.
But some aspects of the assessment and action records did not meet the project's needs.
In the section on behavioural development, workers or carers are asked to mark whether a child suffers form patterns such as marked clinging, eating disorders or tantrums on a sliding scale ranging from often to never.
Southdowns takes sexually abused young people and Clark says its assessments would need more specific detail about the frequency and seriousness of emotional and behavioural problems.
Other workers have echoed Clark's concerns about the sliding scales which ask social workers to make subjective judgements about children's skills or problems.
The researchers are reassessing the scales and they are likely to be replaced in the final version.
Ward says when the forms are revised they will also include more questions about sexual abuse and the therapeutic work being undertaken.
‘The questions on therapy are likely to be rephrased and divided into specialised and non-specialised assistance,’ she says.
The initial trials quickly revealed how difficult it is to develop one set of forms which can be used to assess the progress of all children.
Ward says authorities have found them unsuitable for children with disabilities.
Oxfordshire piloted the forms in Banbury from October 1991 to March this year.
Debbie Jones, who co-ordinated the SSD's response, describes the forms as a blunt instrument which do not properly measure disabled children's progress.
‘The questions on education are likely to reflect badly on the children even though everyone involved may be dong their utmost for them.’
Jones says Oxfordshire would like more comprehensive information on health needs and less on education.
‘Also more about the professional support needed from speech therapists and occupational psychologists.’
As a result of the pilots the researchers are working on a separate form for  children with disabilities.
They are also considering modifying the questions on race and culture which some respondents say must reflect the needs of children from minority ethnic groups more closely.
Paper tools produced by academics are often criticised by grass roots workers for setting standards too high and for using middle class standards to measure the achievements of children from working class families.
The project is addressing this by using the same forms to assess a comparison group of 400 children who have had no contact with social workers.
The results will show how local authority care compares with care offered by parents.
‘And show whether or not there are areas where the parents don't normally meet children's needs,’ says Ward.
‘We've been criticised for saying that all children under five should have books in the home.
But our interviewers spoke to families from all walks of life and found class had no bearing on whether or not they had access to books.’
By analysing the assessment forms, the researchers have also uncovered some weak links in local authority care.
Ward is concerned that some children may be missing out on sex education.
‘In the first pilot, 25 per cent of children who had received no sex education were aged 16 and over,’ she says.
In the comparison group, ‘most of these children got their sex education from television and school.
If children in care aren't attending school because of truancy or exclusions they could be missing out.’
Assessments are straightforward when a child is subject to a care order and the local authority has sole responsibility for that child's welfare.
But when parenting is shared the lines of responsibility are blurred and formal assessments can lead to resentment.
One manager reports that some parents reacted badly to the basic but intrusive questions.
‘We were asking them to play the main role in caring for their children, but they felt their authority was being undermined by the assessments.
It was difficult to get them to see the relevance of some of the questions.’
There are similar problems when using the forms to assess children in short-term or respite care.
Ward says: ‘Here, the question is how much responsibility does the local authority have for assessing children where there is no question about the standard of care already being provided in their own home.
Understandably, parents could see it as intrusive.’
But Ward maintains even when care is shared, the forms can help those involved to divide up their duties.
The pack says social workers should take responsibility for ensuring the forms are completed but they can be filled in by the person the child is living with.
Older children will want to play a part in the assessments and should be encouraged to do so.
The project aims to produce a final version of the pack for distribution in 1995.
A computerised version is in the pipeline along with a training pack.
Meanwhile Ward welcomes feedback from anyone who has used the forms, particularly those who have used the assessment and action record for children under-one.
The researchers' long-term aim is to find out what being a good enough parent really means and their conclusions to this million-dollar question will be eagerly awaited.
COMMUNITY CARE: LEARNING DIFFICULTIES
THE POWER OF PROPERTY
Home ownership is becoming a reality for people with a learning difficulty in the USA, as Terry Philpot discovered
A large, clapboard house on a leafy street in Brookline, a short bus ride from the city centre of Boston.
A house like any other in a street like any other: middle America in the city suburbs.
But what singles out this house, with its traditional porch and overhanging attic rooms, is that it is part of a way in which people with learning difficulties in the USA are security the ordinary life which the rhetoric of policy makers and politicians promises them but often fails to deliver.
In the fiercely free enterprise USA, home ownership, as in the UK, is the mark of responsible citizenship, and home ownership is just what the 12 people living in the clapboard house have achieved.
It is now seen as the marker toward the future for many people with learning difficulties.
Ten years ago director of Specialised Housing Inc David Wazansky was a social worker and director of clinical services at Dynamic Action Residents Enterprise Inc, a voluntary agency involved with fostering and housing for children and adults.
He decided home ownership for people with learning difficulties should be as much as part of the process of their lives in the community as any other.
So when DARE planned to sell one of its properties, Wizansky became involved with a group of parents of young adults with learning difficulties to buy property for their children.
Ownership is not available only to those about to raise their own mortgage or for those whose parents are able to do so for them
Within ten months the building had been purchased, converted, renovated, occupied by its new owners, and a condominium created — a housing association in which residents jointly owned the equity but were free to sell their individual shares if they wished to move.
Such an arrangement met a number of needs: privacy; an assured future in the parents' minds, as well as those of their children; a place in local life; independence; and a financial stake in the housing market.
The kind of people who were to live in the network of what now amounts to eight properties — six owner-occupied houses and two rented apartment schemes — were not people with severe disabilities and high levels of dependency.
Neither did the would-be owners want or need the staffed apartments and small group homes funded by Massachusetts' department of health, which in many cases offered no degree of permanency.
They were young people, some with jobs, living with their parents, for whom the prospects of a home of their own — let alone one which they owned — seemed an unrealisable dream.
There was only one criteria for entry into the scheme: would-be owners had to be able to look after their personal care needs.
Two years after the opening of a 769 Washington Street, Brookline, came a second house, and in spring 1987 the third was opened.
Now there is a waiting list of would-be residents for vacancies in existing houses or in new ones, and parents in Providence, Rhode Island, have asked the Wizanskys to help them set up a similar scheme.
(David and Margot Wizansky have no financial interests in the properties, but their company acts as a consultancy and can provide a management service.)
One problem not having to be faced is opposition from local residents.
The Fair Housing legislation outlaws any attempt to stop people with disabilities moving into an area.
Twelve residents live in 769 Washington Street, although it had originally been planned that there should be nine.
Residents own their own bedrooms and share ownership in the common part of the house — sitting rooms, kitchens, garden, dining room, guest rooms.
Many have their own mortgages, while for others their parents have bought their property.
Ownership is not available only to those able to raise their own mortgage or whose parents are able to do so on their behalf.
Federal subsidies can offer rental assistance, convertible to a mortgage payment, to low income earners.
The USA also has limited equity co-operatives to make housing affordable, while there can also be recourse to corporations and private foundations as possible sources of financial assistance.
The department of health will also enter into partnerships with families to finance direct costs.
As Margot Wizansky has said: ‘In this era of dwindling public resources families of the handicapped must be creative.
The problem of housing for handicapped individuals cannot be solved by each family operating alone.
It requires co-operation between groups of families and carefully chosen experts in the area of developmentally disabled and real estate.
In those groups where subsidies are needed, the partnership must extend to include the private sector.’
Weekly resident meetings are held to discuss any problems, and monthly maintenance allowances of $900 are paid to meet insurance, housekeeping bills, maintenance, food, and to pay for the salaries of the house manager.
It is the latter who supervises the operations of the house and helps residents out with the housekeeping and money management skills.
The residents interview and employ the house manager, and share in many  management decisions, like formulating house rules.
(Chairing the meetings rests with the house manager, but at Washington Street this is soon to be taken on by residents.)
The only registration of properties are as lodging houses and as a medical facility.
The latter is important.
Under byzantine medical and social insurance regulations in the USA, payments for maintenance and mortgage can be written off against tax.
For example, one man pays 90 per cent of the maintenance costs himself, all of which is allowable as tax allowance on medical grounds.
Parents can also set costs against tax.
If owners wish to sell, Specialised Housing (and thus those on its waiting lists) has the first option.
In the USA the benefits of a home of one's own, as generally understood — freedom, privacy, mobility, independence — are now a fact of life for an increasing number of people with learning difficulties.
In a country where innovation is prized in welfare as much as in technology, there is no reason that this right will not increasingly extend to other groups — Specialised Housing's initiative has already caused the families of people with a severely mentally ill child to start thinking whether such an option might be open to them — but the fact remains that in the USA parents have even fewer options than in this country.
Independence is something that all young people seek, symbolised by wanting a home of their own (though not necessarily, of course, one which they own).
The residents of No 769 and the other houses have no greater ambition in this respect than that of their non-learning disabled contemporaries.
Steve Maney lives in another of the three houses in Washington Street.
Of first moving in, he says: ‘It was scary.
I missed my parents.
But today, I'm not afraid any more.
‘I'm more independent.
I visit my parents, sometimes on weekends and holidays.
But I don't stay a week or so any more.
It's not like when you are at school.
I have a job now.
I have responsibilities.
‘What does it mean to me to be learning to live on my own?
It means everything.
I feel important.’
A home of their own: offering freedom, privacy, mobility, and independence