

NEWS
New for Nikon
Nikon has recently announced the launch of the Nikonos RS, the world's first underwater SLR photographic system.
The camera is a high performance, auto focus SLR, capable of working at a depth of 100m without a housing — twice the depth of the current Nikonos V.
The Nikon RS incorporates the advanced AM200 auto focus module found in the Nikon F4, F-801s and F-601 cameras.
The module allows the Nikonos RS to focus in light levels as low as EV-1, and enables focus tracking and freeze focus functions.
In addition, the Nikonos RS offers the professional and serious amateur underwater photographer matrix metering, power focus, automatic balanced fill-flash and rear curtain sync.
To complement the Nikonos RS, a number of new lenses, to be known as R-UW AF Nikkors, have been announced.
These comprise:
28mm f/2.8 wide-angle;
50mm f/2.8 for general and macro photography;
20–35mm f/2.8 zoom Nikkor — the world's first underwater zoom lens.
UK prices are still awaiting confirmation but it is likely that the Nikonos RS body will cost in the region of £2,000.
Further information can be obtained from Nikon on 
New Kodak ‘Ektachrome’ 400X
Kodak has announced a new ‘Ektachrome’ 400X Professional Film which combines a warm colour balance, ideal for cool scenes and white backgrounds, with high speed action shots — just in time for the Winter Olympics in Albertville.
The first Kodak ISO 400 reversal film for professional photographers has the speed required for fast shooting in low light conditions.
It also gives excellent colour, sharpness, and grain — features resulting from several new technologies, including:
A new yellow dye and spectral sensitisers.
A new interlayer inhibitor to prevent cross-talk among the colour layers during processing.
According to David Biehn, Eastman Kodak Vice president and General Manager of Professional Imaging, ‘The film provides clean whites and highly saturated blues and greens’, features asked for by customers.
Kodak ‘Ektachrome’ 400X Professional film will be available in the UK from March 1992 in 35mm format with 120mm format due in April.
New Courses for Fuji
Fuji has introduced a range of new courses in the Fuji Professional School of Photography, and has adapted the traditional courses to challenge the way photographers look at portraiture.
There will be eight major courses across the UK, each two days long, covering weddings, portraits, creativity, local industry, shooting for stock and business.
Stock library photographers Ethel Davis and Tom Mackie join the team for a course on new business.
Courses take place at the Guild Hall, Winchester (March 15–17), the Royal York Hotel, York (April 26–28), De Vere Hotel, Coventry (August 16–18) and Stirling Management Centre (Sept 27–29) with two courses at each venue:
Winchester:Successful Weddings and a New Look at Portraiture and Opportunities for Developing Your Business.
York:Advancing Style in Portraiture and Developing Your Business in Local Industry.
Coventry:The Complete Wedding and Portraiture — Working on Location
Stirling:Improving Your Creativity and Portraiture — from Classical to Carte Blanche.
For more information on the courses contact Marie-Louise Richardson at Fuji Professional on 
Fluid Heads from Maplin
Maplin Electronics, one of Europe's largest electronic component suppliers, has introduced a range of three tripods which all have fluid controlled tilt and pan dampers.
These ensure very smooth, jerk free panning camera movements, with the tilt damper being adjustable for stiffness.
Prices range from £44.95 to £59.95 and further details can be obtained from Maplin on  
Call for papers
Individual photographers as well as associations of professional photographers are invited to submit papers to be presented at EUROFOTO 92 International Convention 31st October to 4th November 1992. to be held in the Peak District town of Buxton.
The theme of the Convention is Professional Photography in the nineteen nineties with particular reference to the Single Market.
A number of European speakers have been confirmed together with others from Australia and the United States.
Associations wishing to suggest speakers, or individuals who feel they have a relevant message to put over are invited to write to: George A. Dawber, FNIPP, Convention Chairman  .
Photocolor FP
Photo Technology has announced a totally new chemistry that will process C41 compatible films and RA4 paper.
There are just two baths and the same solutions will process either film or paper in any order.
Chemistry used for film can go on to process paper and conversely paper used to process paper can again be used to process film thus giving maximum flexibility.
C41 films are developed in 2 min.40 sec. at 38 degrees C and bleach-fixed for 6 minutes — there is no rinse or stop bath between the two baths (a special conditioner is supplied for Fuji films).
RA4 papers have a total process time of 3 minutes at 38 degrees C. A range of processing times  and temperatures for film and paper are listed in the instruction book.
Photocolor FP is packed in kits to make 1.5 litres, enough to process 15×36 exposure films or, at least 60 10×8 prints, or a mixture of the two.
The 1.5 litre kit will retail at around £18.00 including VAT.
‘Green’ Backdrops
The new Masterpieces range of fabric backgrounds from Lastolite is available in a range of colourways, each reflecting rich colours taken from nature, their names, such as Larkspur, Lichen and Nightshade, reflecting this theme.
Supplied in three sizes, one collapsible 5′×6′ and two curtains, 10′×12′ and 10′×20′.
Prices start from £74.50.
For further information contact your Lastolite stockist or write to Lastolite Ltd .
Konica going green
Konica has begun using pulp mould instead of Styrofoam for camera packaging as part of its on-going commitment to environment protection.
The decision came after a year-long test to ensure that packaging made from pulp  mould was strong enough to protect cameras should they be dropped or roughly handled during transport.
Though pulp  mould , made of used paper packages, is inexpensive as a raw material, its processing cost, including labour, is more expensive than that of Styrofoam.
However, Konica decided on the substitution on the grounds of environment protection and resource saving and the new Big Mini Zoom camera is already being shipped out in pulp  mould packages.
Commissions
Stills, Street Level and Summerlee Heritage Trust are offering four commissions worth £2,500 toward the production of new work for a major exhibition on the them of The River, or Inland Waterway.
The exhibition will be launched simultaneously at Stills, Edinburgh and Street Level, Glasgow, before travelling to Summerlee, Coatbridge and other venues in Scotland and throughout the UK.
The deadline for the submission of proposals is April 1st 1992.
The project is based on the theme of the inland waterway and its significance historically, socially, environmentally and culturally.
The intention is that this theme should be approached in a number of ways, involving a variety of approaches to the photographic medium and the exhibition will also include archive material from the collection of Summerlee and other sources.
Submissions are invited from all artists/photographers who will be based in Scotland for the period of the commission.
Proposals from groups will also be considered.
Students in full-time education at undergraduate level are not eligible.
For further details about the project from Martha McCulloch or Catriona Grant, Street Level Photography Gallery and Workshop,
Choice of Polaroid Films
Following  its launch, Polacolor 100 film has been well received by the majority of professional photographers, particularly for its improved colour balance and increased colour saturation.
However, in some applications, Type 669 continues to be the favoured emulsion, particularly for high key and high contrast subjects, where the difference is in the film's sensitometry, specifically in the toe region of the curve.
Polaroid has decided to continue making Type 669 so that there is now a choice between the two emulsions — Polacolor 100 rated at ISO 100 and Type 669 at ISO 80.
Both films will now be available at the same price per pack from your local Polaroid Professional Dealer.
Leica School
If you've ever wanted to get your hands on a Leica then a series of three Day Leica School Courses may give you your chance.
The courses will allow those attending to use current Leica cameras, lenses, enlargers and projectors during the practical sessions.
Three practical sessions are planned during the courses, covering photography, colour printing and audio visual.
These sessions are balanced with lectures and demonstrations on photographic techniques.
All courses are held on the premises of Leica Camera Limited at .
The course fe is £100 per place and full details are available on request from Leica.
Planned course dates are: March 10–12, April 7–9, May 12–14, June 2–4, September 22–24 and October 13–15.
English Heritage recognises Roger Fenton
English Heritage has recognised one of England's greatest photographers by placing a Blue Plaque at the former residence of Roger Fenton (1819–1869).
This is the first time that a photographer has been recognised in this way.
Roger Fenton was immensely well known in his time for his landscapes and still lifes.
His landscapes were considered to be supreme examples of photographic technique, a number of them being published.
His campaigns to promote photography were typical of the man's belief in photography as an art form.
The Blue Plaque if English Heritage, at  will act as a further reminder of the work as a pioneer.
Student Agitation
The Student System II Developing Tank, from the Paterson Photax Group, is an entry level tank aimed at those who are starting out in darkroom work and don't want to spend a fortune on equipment.
Moulded in dense black plastic, the Student System II follows traditional tank design.
The spirals are adjustable to take 35mm or roll film and two full length 35mm films can be processed together.
Loading is of the recessed spiral face type where the fingers ‘walk’ the film into the spiral.
The Student System II Developing Tank is available now and retails at around £7.00
Lighting Kit
With the launch of  its 3200k Studio Kit, Photax has fulfilled the requirement of many photographers for a flexible, easy to use, low cost, studio lighting outfit.
Using the popular Interfit tungsten heads the Studio Kit comprises 2 3200k tungsten heads complete with bulbs, 2 30 cm reflectors, 2 three-section stands, 2 32″ white Interbrollies and a 2-gang mains lead.
All items pack into the custom fitted carry case for ease and safety of transport.
As the kit is based on the versatile Interfit system it can be upgraded to a flash kit by the later addition of 2 Interflash heads.
The recommended retail price of £199.99 inc.
VAT represents a saving of over £35 when purchasing the individual components.
DARKROOM
If you've found one grade of paper a little soft and flat and the grade a little hard , a little ‘pre-flash’ might help
Gene Nocon introduced me to the technique of pre-flash a few years ago and it altered the way I approach printing.
Today around 80% of the prints I produce now use this technique.
If you require a long, technical explanation of how pre-flash works together with such terms as ‘Gamma’ and ‘Exponential Progression’Gene's book,(Chapter 12.) will explain it.
If you can understand characteristic curves and have an understanding of what's happening mathematically or chemically it will help.
Pre-flash won't make a bad picture good, but you can now expose your bad picture well.
Of course I can't repeat Gene's formulae here, visit your library and take a look if you're interested.
Of course it isn't necessary to understand how pre-flash works to be able to use it.
Here is a simple working guide to the magic of ‘flashing’.
All photographic emulsions have a small time gap between the beginning of an exposure and when the image starts to appear.
Though not visible, you can use this to change the contrast of your paper.
Obviously this technique is not for multigrade users!
With film this gap is micro seconds though cine photographers have used it for years, flashing whole rolls of film.
I am led to believe Ansell Adams pre-flashed film for contrasty subjects.
One day I will understand Californian and read all his books — and get lucky and find my own ‘Moonrise.’
By filling this little gap by flashing, your paper will accept tone in the midtones and separate subtleties in the highlights as never before.
First you require a second enlarger, an old anything with a lens, together  with something that will give you reasonably diffuse light.
Wind the head to the top of the column, so your paper area is covered.
Step down, expose for 1 second, repeat 15 or so times.
Process for a precise time (see previous articles for time guides) and stick to this when making your prints.
Now inspect your paper.
Somewhere on your sheet a tone will appear.
A point where you've ‘fogged’ the paper very lightly.
If the exposure time is say 12 seconds, 11 seconds becomes your ‘maximum flash’.
If you've ended up with 2 secs. stop down and repeat until you get something more useful.
The calculated exposure time shouldn't change much from batch to batch, but test ½ a sheet for each grade.
Do a quick test.
Keep the same aperture for all grades and note ‘max.flash’ time on the box lid.
It's amazing how much ‘light’ paper can take.
Once you have established ‘max.flash’ you can use all of this flash time or smaller parts thereof.
A useful way of finding out how much flash to use is to produce a normal test strip from your negative in one direction across the paper and a ‘flash’ test strip down the paper.
You end up with a gridded image with each square a different combination of negative exposure and flash exposure.
Now you have a choice of combinations to use as your basic exposure.
With flash, burning in is still required to balance a print.
A heavily burnt in sky will blend better with the foreground as the flash will nudge those highlights along.
The joins between burnt in areas become less obvious.
Flashing can be used in another way.
If you like the  sebatier effect or as it's  more commonly known ‘solarisation’ you can now control it.
It's much better than switching the light on in the middle of development and hoping for the ‘effect’.
Place a large bin liner on the baseboard of your ‘flash’ enlarger and cover your floor with some plastic.
Keep a mop handy too as this can get messy!
Now make a test strip of your neg.
Develop for half of your normal time then place it quickly into the stop bath.
Let the print drain for a few seconds and place it on your flash enlarger (that's why the bin liner) and now run your flash test across the print Exposure times should exceed your previously established ‘max.flash’.
Finish deving your print for the remainder of your dev. time.
Stop and fix as usual.
Now have a look.
You will see that up to max.flash the image will look much the same as using the techniques described for pre-flash, establishing more mid and highlight tones.
Beyond this point you'll notice that the ‘mackie lines’ and frantic neg./pos. effect increases as the post-flash exposure increases.
Think a little laterally.
All these variables can be incorporated on one print.
If you really want you can balance your print at the burn and dodge stage.
Bring up all your little highlight tones, etc. at the post flash stage using times up to max.flash.
You can then vary the amount you want the picture solarised and selectively  solarise some bits more than others by burning in areas with your flash enlarger.
Use your test strip as a guide to how much flash to give.
Solarisation with control — great!
For solarising I now use multigrade at a fairly high setting for the neg.
I'm printing.
Usually ½ — I grade up on where I'd normally print it.
This gives me strong blacks.
Otherwise these prints can look a little flat with no real whites showing.
Obviously putting prints with stop all over will ruin your dev.
I use volumes.
Fortunately Joe's can afford for me to use chemicals and paper as I like.
Having an extra wash tray to rinse your prints before going back in the dev. will keep it longer.
Adding a few seconds to your dev.time to allow for the stop, etc. wouldn't go amiss.
If you do use this effect your print borders won't be white.
These can be bleached by applying a potassium ferricyanide solution to them.
Be careful not to go over the edge of the image.
Rinse the prints downwards so that the ferri.runs off the print and not over the image.
Then fix.
Turn your print on the ‘splash back’ 90 degrees and repeat for what becomes the bottom border each time.
Make up your ferri. solution fairly dilute and test on your test strip before applying to your finished image.
All of the above is carried out on your print while it's wet.
Place on your splash back and gently squeegee your print to dry it.
A window cleaner's squeegee is all you need.
If bleaching your borders is too much of a hassle, window mount your print.
Most good picture framers will cut a good matt from a large choice of card.
Little hand cutters are OK, I tend to lose my temper with them, but pro-type jigs will give a much neater result.
Presenting your pictures well will really make a difference.
I must thank Gene for showing me his method of flashing.
It's made an enormous difference to the way I go about my work.
Gene was always glad to show you anything he could, no secrets.
Sadly for us he's gone back to America — where they pay real money for what we do!
Of course it's much easier to demonstrate techniques than write then down.
However, it really is worth persisting with flash.
Your prints can really take shape.
More tips from my dungeon next time.
IRVING PENN
Irving Penn, one of America's foremost photographers, is seen by many as one of the few to master more than one genre of photography
Passage is the unassuming title of a recently published retrospective collection of work by Irving Penn, one of America's foremost photographers.
Such a deceptively simple greeting acts as the perfect foil for the vast, sumptuous feast laid out between the covers: an array of images that encompasses all aspects of the extraordinary and multifaceted career of a man who achieved mastery of not one but three genres — portraiture, fashion and still life.
The book's 468 photographs, 75 of which are in colour, are complemented by the inclusion of several examples of Penn's drawings.
The whole is prefaced by a warm and informative foreword contributed by Alexander Liberman, editorial director at Conde Nast Publications.
As the man who first hired Penn for Vogue magazine and who encouraged him to create the colour still-life that launched his career as a photographer in 1943, Liberman is also one who knows the artist and his work better than anyone.
Liberman found in Penn what he considered the essence of an original photographer, ‘a mind, and an eye that knew what it wanted to see’.
A Penn photograph, he says, ‘has an immediacy, an impact, and communicates a clear signal of what it is about…= He sees things one way and gambles all on this obsessive, incisive vision.’
This 300-page collection explores this vision through selections from nearly half a century of work, including advertising images and his renowned fashion photography for Vogue portraiture that ranges from indigenous people in full tribal dress from Dahomey, Nepal, Peru and New Guinea to tradesmen in full work regalia from London and Paris, from nudes to Hell's Angels, rock stars and hippies; and images of flowers, animal and human skulls, food and street refuse.
All are striking; some are beautiful, others startling and a few many invoke an involuntary shudder — such as the ‘Vogue Food Photograph’ of oyster complete with inquisitively crawling snails and a pair of skinned raw frogs' legs, or the ‘Bug in Ear’, showing a black beetle poised at the entrance to an aural cavity.
Of his pictures of refuse — at once alluring and repellent — Penn writes: ‘Evening as I walked from my studio to the train station I saw at my feet a treasure of the city's refuse, intriguing distorted forms of colour, stains and typography.
The gutters were rich with castoffs flattened and reformed by rain and traffic.’
PASSAGE Irving Penn
TREE PRUNER, NEW YORK, 1951 BY IRVING PENN
PABLO PICASSO AT LA CALIFORNIE, CANNES 1957 BY IRVING PENN
Perhaps unacceptable in their time, Penn's 1949 series of nudes were not publicly shown until 1980.
Their soft, fleshy, heavy contours — hardly the image of the perceived quintessential woman — were those of professional painters' models; what was important for Penn was that they were comfortable with their own bodies and not shy of intimacy with the camera.
‘The relationship between us was professional, without a hint of sexual response.
Anything else would have made pictures like these impossible.’
Born in New Jersey in 1917, Irving Penn originally trained as a painter, then studied design with Alexey Brodovitch.
In 1938 he began working as a graphic artist in New York, eventually becoming art director for Brodovitch at Saks Fifth Avenue.
Then his passion for painting diverted him to travels in Mexico for a year.
Upon his return to New York, Alexander Liberman, then art director for Vogue, offered him a job as his assistant.
While in Mexico, Penn had found himself wielding not just the paintbrush but also the camera, and Liberman, fascinated by the results, nurtured Penn's developing interest and gave him his first commission — a still-life cover for Vogue, October 1943.
After its publication, Penn never looked back.
Thus began a rich collaboration between the two that has lasted nearly five decades.
In his foreword, Liberman's intense admiration and respect for Penn doesn't preclude a bit of affectionate straight talking: ‘Penn is not easy to work with.
The most difficult moments of our collaboration involved getting through his very special resistances and hesitations in taking a picture.
All proposals had to go through a protective sieve, an inner filtration to correspond to the standard he sets for his work.
This matching of the imagined possibility of the suggested subject with his vision was a wrenching experience for both of us.’
For his part, Penn describes Liberman as his ‘good friend, teacher and inspirer’.
He continues: ‘Some of the best work for Vogue, although it may bear my signature, is in fact ours, the result of a special and close collaboration.’
Among the most exquisite images in the book are the series of what Penn calls ‘sentimental, painterly images of Frenchmen fishing on Sunday.’
Taken in the summer of 1951, using long telephoto lenses that enabled Penn to photograph almost without being seen, this is colour work of extraordinary texture and light quality — almost a harmonic convergence of two usually distinct mediums.
Indeed, Liberman notes: ‘Irving Penn is one of the great artists of light.
Above all, a Penn photograph is a beautiful image.
It increases our store of admiration for life's richness and beauty by increasing our awareness of life.’
Passage by Irving Penn is published by Jonathon Cape at £60.00.
NIGEL HILLIER
Nigel Hillier is a 31 year old freelance photographer from Lancashire.
His photographic career began when he was working as Ape-keeper at Chester zoo and was commissioned as the zoo's photographer.
He is presently covering rock concerts for Kendal council who are hosting an exhibition of his work later in the year.
His black and white, ‘ meditative ’, large format landscape shots are soon to be on exhibit in Bath and Newport, Gwent.
Photographers are a breed unto themselves.
What other artist would sell all they own to pursue the craft?
Nigel Hillier, 31 year-old freelance photographer did just that.
In order to finance an 11 month trip around the world shooting anything and everything that caught his well-honed eye, he sold his most treasured and expensive possession, his home.
‘It's not quite as romantic as you might imagine,’ he explains.
‘My girlfriend suggested it.
She's a writer and fancied doing some travel stuff.
I'd been doing a bit of photojournalism and had always wanted to see and photograph the world.
No-one in their right minds was going to sponsor us, so I decided to sell our semi-detached two-bedroomed house and just go.’
Within three months of the suggestion, the house — despite the recession and a deflated housing market — was sold and Nigel, his girlfriend, two Nikon cameras.
four lenses (a 20,35,55 and zoom), a tripod, ‘that was as essential on the trip as a passport,’ and 30 rolls of Kodachrome film (although Nigel prefers working in black and white, from the commercial angle colour film was better) were flying to India; the first port of call.
‘We didn't see any point in hanging around.
We planned where to go (ten countries, including Nepal, Thailand, Indonesia, Australia, Cook Islands and North America) and went.
It was about as spontaneous as you can get.’
This spontaneous attitude of Nigel's was adopted when choosing the landscapes.
‘I didn't plan what to shot, if something struck me as beautiful or aesthetically striking I would snap it.
On the whole I'd look for a combination of colours and light.
Light was most important and I was prepared to wait all day if necessary to get the real lighting.’
Some pictures in his portfolio required even more patience than that.
A shot of the heron pond in Grand Teton, Wyoming took three days.
‘I was struck by the atmosphere there’ says Nigel.
‘I wanted to get shadow to convey the haunting feeling of the place but despite getting there at 4.30am each morning and waiting all day for the sun to cast the right sort of light, I finally took the picture in moonlight three days later.’
Most of the shots in this collection, however, were taken at first light including those of which Nigel is most proud: ‘If I have to choose a favourite it would be the photograph of Bryce Canyon in Utah.
The shot was taken at dawn after two hours spent setting up.
It had to be first light because by 8.00am the sun was too bright and hot to bear.
‘It is one of the most beautiful places I've ever seen and I think the picture conveys that.
Nepal was stunning with its wild, untamed landscape.
I just shot as much as possible.’
It wasn't all hunky dory however, there were a number of occasions that Nigel would prefer to forget.
‘We nearly came a cropper in Indonesia.
We'd taken a small local boat — built for four people but with 15 on board not to mention some pigs and chickens — out to an island.
Half way there, the most almighty storm came up and we nearly sank.
I tried to take some pictures but I scrapped them, they didn't come near to showing how I felt.’
The United States was the scene for their stickiest and smelliest adventure.
‘We'd hired a camper van to get around,’ Nigel explains.
‘It was totally clapped out.
The accelerator cable broke in the middle of nowhere so we had to tie some string to it and while I drove, my girlfriend pulled on the string.
She was a bit heavy-handed and we kangaroo-hopped for ten miles to a garage.
After we got that fixed, we stopped in Yellow Stone park where they had these loos that were just holes in the ground and I dropped the keys to the van down one of them.
So there we are trying to fish out a bunch of keys from a three-foot pit full of human urine and excrement.
That wasn't a bundle of laughs.’
Despite, and maybe because of, the trickier moments, it was worth all the sacrifices and hardships.
The final tally of pictures ‘after ruthless editing’ amounts to 1000, some of which have been taken by the agencies; Tony Stone Worldwide and Landscape Only.
Even so, as Nigel admits, the trip was financially unworthwhile, costing in the region of £10,000 all told but he doesn't regret it.
‘It was the trip of a lifetime and I intend to return to the States — self-financed, I expect.’
But one thing Nigel won't be doing is selling his house again.
‘I wouldn't have missed doing this for the world, but I wouldn't sell up for another.
It's too traumatic coming back to nothing and besides, my girlfriend refused to travel with me AND my camera again, she needed a holiday when we got back.’
Nigel Hillier can be contacted on  .
WILD ORANGUTAN, SUMATRA
WEST COAST OF NEW ZEALAND
GRAND TETON, WYOMING, HERON POND IN MOONLIGHT
GOAN VILLAGERS PULLING IN FISHING NETS
ROD MORRIS
Photography to Rod Morris is a means towards knowledge — a way of knowing.
He works according to intuition and feeling.
Regularly, a least one day a week, he goes to one of a few chosen locations to shoot a roll of film and has been doing this now for several years and so has built up a record of places such as Trafalgar Square, Westminster Bridge and the South Bank in London.
His pictures are not narrowly documentary though but rich in personal observation and involvement in the visual event which urged him to press the shutter and preserve the stilled vision as a permanent memory-image.
He has therefore built up a heap of images which express something about a place and its people but also includes his own relationship to the world — what he likes, thinks and feels.
To him the camera becomes a tool which allows him to express his thoughts, feelings and moods in direct connection with the world; it allows his mind and spirit to react to and relate with the everyday world in a visible form thanks to the alchemy of photography.
This alchemical characteristic is peculiar to photography, where the mind and heart have potential to blend with the structure of the image, coding it above and beyond what is obvious at first glance.
Intuitively Morris takes full advantage of this essentially amazing characteristic of photography, and with years of practice has established his own photographic ‘language’ which is peculiar to him — photography in his own light as well as the world's.
Rod Morris was born in Southampton but his family kept moving around the country, and that continual movement is very likely the cause which has aggravated him into producing his latest body of work, ‘Planes and Boats and Trains’, which was recently exhibited at Sir John Cass School of Art.
Morris discovered the expressive potentials of photography while on an archaeological dig.
Taking it seriously he was accepted at Nottingham but soon found the kind of dogmatic regimentation which he was subjected to counter-productive.
He therefore became a part-time student at Sir John Cass School of Art in London, immediately responding to the sympathetic environment and finding a mentor in the teacher, Mick Williamson, who responded enthusiastically to what he was doing.
It was that connection and that relationship, claims Morris, which has made all the difference in his life.
Fortunate are they who find such a situation and friend when in need!
ROD MORRIS
ROD MORRIS
ROD MORRIS
ROD MORRIS
The years spent at Cass enabled Rod Morris to evolve at his own pace and allowed his intuition the subtle space it required.
He tried all sorts of subjects and approaches to photography and different camera formats and techniques as part of the course but doggedly stuck to his 35mm camera because of its portability, cheapness and speed of action.
It was well adapted to what he wanted: ‘The only demand put on my work is my demand.
I'm not doing it for monetary reward or because I'm asked to; I'm doing it because I feel I have to do it.
It is a way of understanding things.’
I asked Morris what motivated the theme of his current exhibition.
He explained that earning a living left little time for photography but holidays left ample time.
He therefore found himself shooting a lot of film at sites of travel.
‘Rather than most people sitting waiting at airports — reading a book, desperately trying to get through the time, I was trying to capture the kind of hell they were going through.
The other pictures may be more romantic, being about the excitement and expectation of travel, but the airport series is more about waiting, about the dehumanisation of the environment and awe in the scale of the aircraft.
‘The whole body of work is about travel but flying holds many fears and excitements for all of us.
I've started to look at this and want to explore it in greater depth.
The work is really about travelling.
I've never been a person for holidays but when I was sixteen I left drama college, with my grant, and tried hitching to Cairo; that's my idea of travelling.
I'm not looking for the exotic in my photographs.
What pleased me very much was that someone said of my first photographs taken abroad that they looked as if they could have been taken anywhere.
What this person meant was that they were more about me than Spain or Copenhagen.
I'm more interested in the subtle differences in places than the obvious landmarks.’
It became clear that travelling was important to Morris and so much an inspiration that if he ever felt bored at home or lacking in inspiration he just packed a suitcase and got on the nearest train to visit someone.
This present body of work is the closest that he has come to understanding what it is that attracts him to travel.
When he travelled across America it was not so much the places as the travelling which found its way into his pictures.
He appropriately quotes: ‘The journey is often more rewarding than the destination’.
For him ‘Life is a search and in itself is a journey.
I can see my life as a road, and I can go back on that road and see what I've passed and come to terms with and what I have passed by without realising and appreciating; how I've stopped in various cafes on the way and met interesting people in them and had fascinating conversations when all the time I should have been speaking to the person on the next table instead.’
Still Morris has few regrets.
He values the situations and people that have enabled him to be more himself, to find a dynamic fulfilment in the ability to express his deeper feelings, explore life further and evolve as a person.
In this journey, in which we are all engaged, it is photography which has allowed him to achieve something for the first time without struggling — given him a means of craft and communication which feels right and matches his natural capacities as well as being able to respond to his intuition.
The ‘language’ which he speaks through photography is both universal and individual.
That is the paradox of photography.
A paradox which allows for an exciting and fulfilling journey — one for which a single lifetime is too short.
TRAVEL AND EARLY COLOUR
Peter Lester takes a look at some of the pioneers of early colour photography
In the nineteenth century, foreign travel was regarded as a mind improving experience, and the latest steam powered transport made it more comfortable, safer, faster and eventually cheaper.
People from the upper classes were getting on the move, and photography often went along for the ride.
It would however, be spurious to suggest that every Victorian miss, sent to Switzerland for ‘finishing’ took a brass bound box camera and a dozen 12×16in plates along with her hat boxes.
Before the introduction of the Kodak camera in 1888, travel photography was usually only indulged in by professionals or serious amateurs.
As we have seen in previous items in this series, in the early days, photography was not a simple matter away from the studio.
Equipment was bulky and heavy and the process required a lot of fiddly manipulation.
As a subject, travel photography was immensely popular from the beginning, if you couldn't do it yourself, you could always buy a print or two which depicted the more interesting scenic points of your journey.
If you couldn't afford the luxury of foreign travel, then a lantern slide show or the extremely popular stereoscope could bring the world right into your parlour.
Battalions of courageous, if not always creative photographers were dispatched to the ends of the earth to record breathtaking views, edifying ruins and exotic peoples for home viewing on the stereoscope.
However, one can't help thinking that it must have been a source of frustration for these early travel photographers to be confronted by the riotous colours of the far east and Africa, knowing that it could only be reproduced in black and white.
To give a ‘true’ impression of the exotic splendour of these far off places, many photographers resorted to hand colouring their work.
A practical system of colour photography had been eagerly searched for right from the beginning.
One American daguerreotypes, a Baptist minister called Levi Hill, claimed in 1850 to have found a combination of chemistry which would record colour as well as tone, and he made several announcements promising to reveal the technique.
However, he never did, and friends claim that the poor man had come across the result by accident and then spent the next six years until his death trying to find the combination again.
NILE BOATS AT LUXOR BY HELEN MURDOCH
The first manor advance came in 1861 with J.Clerk Maxwell's additive colour theory.
At a Royal Institution lecture, he demonstrated that colour images could be formed from just three primary colours.
Maxwell took three  identical pictures of a brightly coloured tartan ribbon, consecutively through three separate filters containing red, blue and green liquid.
Lantern slides of each image were made, and projected at the same time in register on a screen.
Each lantern lens had the corresponding red, blue or green filter before it, and the result was a very satisfactory reproduction of the multicoloured tartan ribbon.
While hand colouring was fully accepted as a compromise, and in fact supplied work to the legions of miniature painters that had been made redundant by the advent of photography, experiments continued to be made all over the world.
Several other methods came to light and died through being impractical until a manor step was taken by a Dublin photographer John Joly in 1893.
He applied Maxwell's additive colour theory to the construction of a transparent screen, ruled with thin lines in the three primaries, which formed a tiny checked red, blue and green pattern  on the surface.
The screen was made to the same size as a photographic plate, and used as a contact filter in front of the negative during exposure.
THE PORTAL OF SAN MARCE BY HELEN MURDOCH
After the photographic plate was exposed, it was separated from the screen, developed as normal into a negative, then turned into a positive black and white transparency.
The colour screen was then replaced in contact, and fixed together permanently for viewing as a colour transparency.
When projected, the minute red, blue and green checks shone through the corresponding densities of image forming dark and light tone in the mono transparency, and the eye naturally resolved and mixed the colours to form an image closely resembling nature.
The humble potato is perhaps the most versatile vegetable in the supermarket.
The least skilled cook can probably name four or five different uses for it.
However, few people realise that the world's best known edible all-rounder, also played an important role in the next stage in the development of colour photography.
Where there is food, a Frenchman is never far away, but in this instance there were two — Auguste and Louis Lumiere.
They took Joly's method a step further when they patented their autochrome system in 1904.
This was the first practical method of producing colour transparencies, and it utilised minute grains of starch from la pomme de terre .
The potato starch was dyed in separate batches of red, blue and green, then mixed together in smaller quantities and sprinkled evenly over a glass plate with a tacky varnished coating.
The plate was then varnished and dried, providing a hard, multicoloured screen.
Panchromatic gelatine bromide photographic emulsion was then applied over this surface in the dark.
Exposure was made with the coloured starch ‘screen’ towards the subject.
As light passed through the tiny dyed starch grains, each one acted like a red blue or green filter, passing light of mainly that colour, and blocking out light of other colours.
The mono emulsion behind the screen was therefore exposed in relation to the colours of the subject.
The addition of the colour screen meant a great increase in the exposure time.
Also, as the screen was over sensitive to blue, filters had to be used to compensate.
The filter further added to the exposure time which could be up to 80 times that of a normal plate.
After exposure, the plate was developed conventionally to form a negative, then reversed by an additional bath of potassium permanganate and sulphuric acid to form a positive.
The end result was a colour transparency capable of recording, with a good deal of accuracy, the changing world of the new century.
By today's standards, autochromes were not wholly accurate in colour, but they were extremely beautiful, with an impressionistic feel that found favour particularly amongst those with leanings towards ‘art’.
They were very tricky to manipulate and inconsistent, however, several photographers achieved extremely high standards with the process.
Friedrich Paneth, a Viennese chemist and keen amateur  photographer, was particularly successful with the process.
Paneth's scientific background had trained him to note every aspect of every exposure, every detail of the development procedure and the effect which every variable had on his results.
This was a particularly important approach for exposure, as autochrome emulsions had far less latitude than normal plates.
Thus he gradually refined his technique, adjusting times and temperatures to the tightest tolerances to produce more consistent results than most other practitioners.
He seems to have had both a scientist's and an artist's understanding of light.
His extensive notes explain how he would calculate the exposure based on a proportion of the time being given when the sun was behind a cloud, with the balance being given as the sun emerged.
This technique not only combated the problem of contrast, which autochrome plates did not handle very well, but it also created what he described as a wonderful three dimensional effect when projected.
Paneth was a keen traveller, an interest which provided many opportunities for photography.
He journeyed throughout Europe and after his marriage in 1913 he went to Egypt for a four month honeymoon.
There he photographed most of the famous tourist attractions and bought home around 50 superb colour transparencies.
These are interesting and aesthetically pleasing documents of the time and place, but are doubly interesting because they are in colour, which seems to add an anachronistic modern feel.
Despite a brief interlude during the 1914–18 war, Paneth continued to use the autochrome process right up until 1938, although autochromes were no longer produced after 1935.
He fled nazi Germany because of his Jewish descent, and came to England in 1933.
He held several distinguished posts here and took British citizenship in 1939.
Paneth died in 1958, and his fabulous collection of over 400 autochrome plates was donated in 1979 to the Royal Photographic Society by his daughter Eva.
The plates, which measure 9×12cm are accompanied by all his technical notes, which makes them especially interesting.
As well as being one of the finest and most comprehensive sets of autochromes in existence, these charming images also offer a dimension which few other travel photographs of the period can offer.
An American, Helen Messenger Murdock, whose work also appears here, was another successful autochrome photographer.
Unfortunately, little is known about her life, however, it is understood that she worked regularly for the National Geographic magazine, for whom she did some of their earliest published colour photography.
There are though, records of a talk she gave to the Royal Photographic Society at Russell Square in London on October 28th 1913.
It appears that she was an FRPS, who travelled widely in her own country, in Europe and the middle east.
Her colour transparencies of the Grand Canyon were particularly well received by the gathering.
However, the chairman, JC Warburg, begged the audience not to judge the quality of the autochromes too harshly, as some had been developed on location with solutions made from water gleaned from melted snow.
Miss Murdock, who appears to have had a sense of humour, expressed her high regard for the autochrome process, the delights of which she said, were mainly due to the high number of failures that made the occasional successes all the more thrilling.
Robert Louis Stephenson had a phrase for it, ‘To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive, and the true success is to labour.’
VICTORIA GARDENS, BOMBAY
PHOTOGRAPHING IN SYDNEY
Charles Walker has recently returned from a world trip, during which he has been taking photographs in preparation for his next book.
Here, he offers observations on the joy and cares of photography in Sydney
Knowing that I would be visiting Australia on a project which did not actually take me to Sydney, yet sensing the need for images for general library use.
I talked the matter over with my agent.
He said that there is regular demand for shots of Sydney, and therefore it would be worth my while making a detour to extend my portfolio, I asked him to give me a list of potentially commercial sites in the city, based on his experience of sales and of demands.
Inevitably, the first location he mentioned was the Opera House, followed by Sydney Bridge, the river skyline, and, ‘if possible’, Darling Harbour.
These are the old favourites (if anything in Sydney may be called ‘old’) so far as library pictures go.
In fact, as a result of this talk, I made the detour to Sydney, and quickly found that there are very many interesting locations and sites in this lovely, if expensive capital, which lends itself with peculiar delights to the persuasions of the camera.
Among the delights my agent had not mentioned, the most interesting pictorial challenge turned out to be the newly-finished Chinese Garden — a meditator's dream, in waterfalls, placid lakes with tranquil reflections, and exotic mandarin houses — on the outskirts of Darling Harbour, on the corner of Harbour Street and Pier Street.
Another pictorial ‘must’ which my agent missed was the exciting monoline, which now serves the city, and for which several new stations have been erected in the past couple of years.
The Australians are a friendly, extrovert and untrammelled lot, so bureaucracy has not yet filtered through into the realm of photography.
Except in some of the nation park sites, permission to take pictures is generally not a requirement, so the photographer may just set up stall, in the fair certainty that he will not be accosted.
However, permission to photograph with tripod in the Chinese Garden is required, and may be obtained from the Manager, who is usually at the location — otherwise, permission-seeking may involve a visit to the Harbour Authorities.
No permission is required to photograph the monoline, unless you elect to do this inside a station.
I was generally pressed for time in my few days in Sydney, and did not have the opportunity to explore the graphic potential of the monoline as well s it deserved.
However, after a trip by taxi along the streets, following the line where possible, I did find that the best location, which showed the monoline to advantage, was at the end of the walkway to Pyrmont Bridge, just above the National Maritime Museum.
Here, permission was neither required nor sought, and the position provided a steady stream of trains running in my direction, along Pyrmont Bridge, with the evening sunlight streaming from back left, directly on to the sides of the carriages.
Of course, the Chinese Gardens and the Opera House — even the beautiful Darling Harbour, are commercial asides.
The doyen of Sydney is the Opera House.
It is this which offers the greatest challenge to a photographer.
This challenge is a peculiar one, at the moment, not merely because a good photographer must try (if only for the sake of his own integrity) to make something visually ‘different’ from the mass of photography which has gone before, but also because the Opera House is obscured at present by building operations.
At the present time, and for some months (if not years) to come, a subterranean roadway is being constructed under the harbour, and the diggings, scaffolding and shoring incurred by this vast undertaking are a pictorial eyesore.
The work is presently in operation to the Opera House side of the harbour basin, near Bennelong Point, which means that the standard photographs in daylight — across the water from the tourist boats, or from the bridge walkway at Campell's Cove, are not commercially viable.
However, since the silhouette of the Opera House is at its best from this vantage point, I did try some sunrise pictures, which gave a glorious red sky, and allowed the black shape of the Opera House itself to hide the diggings in the foreground.
If direct sunlight is essentially for the picture you have in mind, there are, in essence, only two good commercial positions to adopt.
Sunrise, which filters a wonderful golden hue upon the shell of the architecture, is perhaps best shot from the far side of the harbour, from Farm Cove, almost at the end of Mrs Macquaries Point.
The problem here is that, since one needs to be in place long before sunrise, in order to prepare for the shot, one cannot walk directly to the site.
It is not possible to follow the harbour road and pathway from the Opera House and along Farm Cove, since the botanical gardens section, which intervenes in the pathway, is locked between dusk and dawn.
Having met with this problem on my first day, the following morning I wised-up and took and taxi around the harbour, half an hour before sunrise, to approach Farm Cove by way of the delightfully named Woolloomooloo Bay.
This not only gave me access to the early morning shot of the Opera House from Farm Cove, but also a marvellous image of the disk of sun rising behind naval boats in the strangely-named harbour.
A fine composition, which projects the Opera  House against the magnificent bridge (classical ‘old and new’) may be had in the morning light, further down the walkway of Farm Cove, almost at the gates of the botanical gardens.
A similar composition also captures the post-sunset glow, enhanced by pin-pricks of artificial lights turning the daylight emulsion yellow, and the green glow of the bridge behind the architectural wonder.
A long-focus lens is needed for this kind of shot, however.
I used the longest of my Bronica range, which is the 250mm, and really needed a longer one.
In passing, let me record that I never use a 2X converter on the Bronica as the drop in quality is unbelievable.
I lament that there are no more powerful long-focus lenses in the Bronica range, for this means that I must carry my back-up Nikon, with fixed 500mm and 1,000mm for all really long shots.
Since I have mentioned the botanical gardens, let me say that one of my greatest pleasures during the Sydney shoot was taking early morning pictures in these gardens — especially of the superb skyline through the trees and flowers.
These images were entirely uncommercial, but at times one can afford to be prodigal and self indulgent.
BY CHARLES WALKER
The second good site for daytime Opera House shots is just before sunset, on Bennelong Point, just beyond Circular Point East.
From this vantage point, one looks down into the well which houses the external restaurants and bars, with the Opera House dominating the upper frame of the picture in the background.
The problem here is that, for good compositional reasons, one needs to keep in a section of the curve into the picture, however subtle this may be, one is faced with the problem of people.
As you know, the best commercial travel pictures avoid people like the plague.
Not only does clothing quickly date a picture, but ordinary people are far from having the grace and glory of good models.
Additionally, in this particular case there is another problem — since the shot is being taken a few minutes before sunset, the light is weak, and demands a long exposure.
People cannot be photographed well at a quarter of a second…= The problem can only be solved with patience, and with the realisation that, much as one is poised with the right pressure on the cable release, one may not actually get a shot because of the steady stream of people making their way (quite properly) to a performance in the hall itself.
I did not have the time for this myself, but clearly, a solution is to lie in wait for this photograph on one of those days when the time of performance does not coincide with the time of sunset!
Charles Walker Photographic,.
SEE HERE
 Photography's comprehensive guide of what to see at your local gallery
Nothing raises hackles quite so much as the question of access to the countryside.
The vast majority of our land — mountains, moors, lakes and rivers — is owned by a handful of individuals, private and public companies, trusts and associations, most of whom seem hell bent if not on totally excluding, at least on severely restricting our freedom to roam.
Some of the landowning agencies that are most restrictive are those which might be though to be answerable to the public, or have their best interests at heart: the Forestry Commission, the Ministry of Defence and sometimes even the National Trust come to mind.
Few walkers can have escaped the experience of finding their right of way barred by locked gates, barbed wire, standing crops, grazing bulls, farmers with dogs or keepers with guns.
Luckily we have the example of rights won for us by our forebears whose fight is continued by the Ramblers Association.
And we have poets and artists as allies.
The great Ewan MacColl wrote the hill walker's anthem, The Manchester Rambler, as a tribute to those who took part in the Great Trespass on Kinder Scout in 1932 and it is therefore particularly fitting that Fay Godwin should have chosen another of his poems to end her book Our Forbidden Land.
In the book, Godwin eloquently describes in words and photographs the ills our land is prey to.
Not only the limitations on access, but also the pollution, thoughtless exploitation and degradation.
It is difficult to read the book without sharing her anger and frustration, or feeling her love of open spaces.
The exhibition of photographs from the book, which is now touring, reaches the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland Gallery (RIAS), Edinburgh, in April.
Meanwhile, look out for the work of rock-climbing photographer, Greg Lucas, who has a very individual approach to the problem of access to private land.
He enthusiastically supports Ewan MacColl's sentiment, ‘no man has a right to own mountains’, by trespassing to climb — sometimes naked — on privately owned rock faces.
His exhibition closes at Derby's Metro Cinema on 1 March, but will no doubt appear at other venues soon.
ABERYSTWYTH
Ray Moore: 1920–1987.
The Last Ten Years, a leading independent photographer, Moore took as his main theme landscape and the mystery of the commonplace (until 4 Apr.).
Witold Krassowski: Images of Poland,a long history of oppression has made the Polish people tough, with a strong sense of national identity.
Krassowski's pictures bring out with humour and affection his countrymen's underlying strength, while facing up to the darker side of their nature (11 Apr. –6 May).
Mon–Sat 10.00–19.30, free.
BATH
Tansy Spinks and Susan Taylor , in a joint exhibition, Spinks shows work inspired by a visit to Prague, while Taylor has an installation created to mark women's fortnight in the city (until 28 Mar).
Alexander Rodchenko,a pioneer of constructivism, whose work has possibly had more impact in the West than any other Russian photographer.
The show includes 21 black-and-white images taken between 1924 and 1947 (4 Apr. –3 May).
Tue 10.00–21.00, Wed–Fri 10.00–18.00, Sat 10.30–16.30, free.
David Hockney — New Electronic Snaps,the artist uses still video cameras and colour copiers to make high tech ‘snaps’— mainly portraits of family and friends — in his Los Angeles studio (until 15 March).
Phase II,a collection of 50 large scale photographs by John Davies, which focus on the construction of the Phase II office building on the Broadgate development in the City of London (until 15 March).
Photobooth Collages,since 1985, Liz Rideal has been using photograph prints to create large composite pictures.
In this exhibition she explores the relationship between music and the visual arts by translating four moments representing the four seasons from the score of Purcell's The Fairy Queen in her distinctive use of line and colour (until 15 March).
Fish Tank Sonata,in a journey with a fish tank and a collection of kitsch objects, Arthur Tress creates an allegory on humanity's need for ecological understanding (7 Mar–4 May).
Panoramic Views,from the camera of Michael Westmorland (21 Mar–17 May).
The Ninth AFAEP Awards Exhibition,the Association of Photographers annual awards (25 Mar–10 May).
Daily 09.30–17.30, adults £2.50, concessions £1.25, family £5, yearly pass £10, concessions £5, free to members, disabled and under-7s.
BIRMINGHAM
Household Choices,Colin Shaw's contribution to a joint venture between the Victoria and Albert Museum and Middlesex Polytechnic, which asks the question: What makes a house a home?
(Until 26 Mar).
Daily 09.00–23.00, free.
BRADFORD
Stone Walls, Grey Skies,by the distinguished American Architectural photographer, George Tice, who came to Britain last year as Fellow in Photography at the NMPFT and Bradford and Ilkley Community College.
The exhibition is a result of his Fellowship work (until mid-Mar).
Printing Pictures,examines the craft of printing and processes developed in the quest for the perfect print (until mid-Mar).
Eyes to the Hills,a mountaineer's view of mountain landscapes (until Mid Mar).
Don McCullin — A Retrospective,a look at his finest work (until 5 May).
Tue–Sun 10.30–19.30, free.
BRISTOL
Getting in touch: Watershed New Contemporaries, six Avon-based photographers show portraiture which attempts to get beneath the surface of social and cultural identities.
Chosen by open submission, the six are: Lee Carter, Pia Everson, Amanda Gazidis, Roz Hall, Annie Lovejoy and Keith Whittle (until 22 Mar).
Scenes from Julie and Greg;She heard it on the radio,(Concourse until 22 Mar).
Work in Progress,by Malcolm Messiah (Concourse until 22 Mar).
Barrage, a Ffotogallery,Cardiff exhibition, which explores Cardiff Bay in response to the Barrage development there and includes work by photographers, Chris Colclough, Robert Greetham and Haydn Denman (1 Apr. –3 May).
Daily 12.00–20.00, free.
CAMBRIDGE
A Mass of Figures,Jim Harold examines the quality of space of an abandoned hospital in a photographic and sculptural installation (until 1 Mar).
How do Women Walk,Elspeth Owen's large projected images features striding figures and exaggerated forms like mythical giantesses stalking familiar ground (14 Mar–12 Apr).
Observances, Absent & Present,Kirsten Lavers and Kevin Weaver combine performance and photography to describe the many manifestations of photographic observance (14 Mar–12 Apr.).
Masters and Servants,an installation by Graham Tunnadine which involves an animated, talking hologram made by artificial intelligence pioneer Alan Turing in 1947 to point out the dangers of machine intelligence (14 Mar–12 Apr.).
Step,an installation by Richard Heeps on the nature of the relationship between father and son and the inheritance of masculine behaviour (14 Mar–12 Apr.).
Tue–Fri 10.00–17.00, Sat/Sun 13.00–17.00, free.
CARDIFF
Sebastiao Salgado,includes some of his most important work from the 70s to the present day (until 4 Apr.).
Mon–Sat 10.00–17.00, free.
Oriel The Friary .
Inscape Wales 3,includes work by photographer Helen Sear (until 28 Mar).
Mon–Sat 09.00–17.30, free.
CHELTENHAM
The Pursuit of Perfection,the National Portrait Gallery's major retrospective of society photographer Dorothy Wilding, who was the most successful and fashionable woman portraitist in the London of the 1920s and 1930s (until 4 Apr.).
Mon–Sat 10.00–17.20, free.
CIRENCESTER
People & places ,Powys photographer Cordelia Weedon highlights differences between intensive and extensive methods of farming in the countryside of the Welsh Borders (3 Apr. –9 May).
Mon–Fri 10.00–17.30, Sat 10.00–13.00 free.
DERBY
The A 38,David Buss has spent the last 20 years working at different places along the road that joins Nottingham and Cornwall.
He has produced 41 portraits of people who live, work or journey on the road (14 Mar–26 Apr.).
Tue–Sat 10.00–17.00, Mon 11.00–17.00, Sun & Bank Holidays 14.00–17.00, free.
Metro Cinema Green Lane 
Trespassing on Private Rocks,Greg Lucas has firm ideas about his right to pursue his interest in rock climbing wherever he pleases.
The exhibition records his climbs of outcrops on private land — hence the title (until 1 Mar).
Mon 10.00–18.00, Tue–Fri 10.00–21.00, Sat 14.00–21.00, Sun 18.00–21.00, free.
EDINBURGH
Inscape,celebrates 20 years of work by the influential British photographer, John Blakemore.
Primarily known as a landscape photographer, Blakemore's latest work centres on still-life studies of found objects and material from his garden (until 28 Mar).
The Highland Game,a photo essay on Scotland's highland estates by editorial photographer, Glyn Satterley Tue–Sat 12.00–17.30, free.
Our Forbidden Land,the RPS touring exhibition of images from Gay Godwin's book on the same name — her personal outcry against the institutionalised abuse of the countryside (22 Apr. –15 May), Mon–Fri 09.00–17.00, free.
GLASGOW
A Daughter's View,13 women photographers explore the relationship between mothers and daughters.
The exhibition, curated by Joan Solomon and Sue Isherwood, highlights the first and most significant relationship in most women's lives (until 22 Mar).
A Mass of Figures,Juxtaposing images of a cave and a disused hospital, Jim Harold investigates the boundary between mind and body (4 Apr. –3 May).
Wed–Sat 11.00–18.00, Sun 12.00–16.00, free.
KENDAL
Inside Out,hailed as the First Biennial of Contemporary Northern Photography, the exhibition has work by Neville Blaszk, Simon Dent, Mike Golding, Lynne Otter, Kate Tregaskis and Geoff Watson, all of whom live and work in the Northern Arts region (until 3 Mar).
Between a Pumpkin and a Stone,Oded Shimshon's series of images of a still life scene photographed in changing light conditions (6 Mar–7 Apr.).
Mon–Sat 10.00–22.00, free.
LEICESTER
Crossing Black Waters,the title is a translation of Kala pani; the name of the oceans surrounding the Indian subcontinent.
To cross them was to break tradition, to sever one's links and become an outsider.
The exhibition brings together work from artists based in the subcontinent and Asian artists based in Britain (until 28 Mar).
LONDON
The Ninth Awards Exhibition,around 300 of the country's leading professional photographers submitted over 2200 images for the prestigious Association of Photographers annual book and awards (until 19 Mar).
Mon–Fri 09.30–18.00, Sat 11.00–17.00, free.
Barbican Art Gallery Colour Photographs: Ancient and Modern,the first exhibition spanning the career of William Eggleston, American pioneer of colour photography, from his early black-and-white work to his most recent project, English Rose (until 4 May).
Mon, Wed–Sat 10.00–18.45, Tue 10.00–17.45, Sun/Public holidays 12.00–18.45, adults £4, concessions £2 (Thurs 17.00–18.45, £2).
The City After Dark,by Andy Cook shows London in the early hours of the morning.
The project drew inspiration from the work of Brassai in 1930s Paris (until 27 Mar).
Mon, Wed–Fri 09.30–17.30, Tue 09.30–19.30, Sat 09.30–12.30, free.
Nobby Clark's London,a selection of black-and-white prints of people and places in the capital, and a short B & w video of scenes from city life (until 14 March).
Mon 10.00–18.00, Tues–Sun 10.00–22.00, free.
Outer Space,is concerned with recent developments in photo-based installations and presents a range of cultural, historical, political and technological ‘spaces’ in an attempt to look beyond established attitudes to photography (19 Mar–26 April).
Tue–Thurs 12.00–20.00, Fri–Sun 12.00–18.0, free.
Turning the Map: Images from the Americas Part Two,challenges the European bias of the Quincentenary celebrations taking place this year in the Americas, from which Native Americans and their history are excluded (until 30 Mar).
Tue–Sat 13.00–18.00, free.
New German Photography,six bodies of work by recipients of the prestigious Krupp fellowships awarded over the past two years (Bill Brandt Room until 14 Mar).
Lost Charms,Graham Budgett's literal images of bracelet charms represent human characteristics that have been lost (Tom Hopkinson Room until 7 Mar).
Martin Cullen,the former amateur boxing champion explores emotions of anger, aggression and claustrophobia with tiny photo sculptures in small boxes (Portfolio Room until 7 Mar).
(Print Room).
Tue–Sat 11.00–19.00, free.
Out of the Frame,the compactness of the gallery restricts Mike Roles' unique photo sculptures to a couple of pieces, but many of the artists working maquettes should compensate for this (until 7 Mar).
Tue–Thurs 11.00–18.00, Fri–Sat 09.30–17.30, free.
Uneasy Landscapes,at the age of 47, after a successful business career, Eddie Dayan turned to his passion of 25 years and has devoted himself full-time to photography.
He imposes on his landscape photographs a very personal vision (until 7 Mar).
Ouka Lele,the first one-person show in the UK for the cult hero sometimes described as the Spanish queen of photography.
Her photographs deal with the Spanish preoccupation with death, sex and flesh (11 Mar–11 Apr.).
Mon–Fri 10.00–18.30, Sat 11.00–17.00, free.
Jazz at Ronnie Scott's,Selwyn Price already has an established reputation for his photowork images of ‘world’ music and has now produced a body of work aimed at capturing the energy and essence of live jazz at its best (until 22 Mar).
Mon–Fri 7.00–21.00, Sat–Sun 09.00–19.00, free.
George Platt Lynes,a rare collection of vintage portraits from the 1930s to the 1950s (until 13 March).
Neil Libbert,an exhibition of portraits by one of Britain's best editorial photographers (until 13 March).
Tue–Sat 10.00–18.00, Mon by appointment, free.
MARLBOROUGH
Landscape,an exhibition of black-and-white photography by Richard Draper.
Tue–Sat 10.00–17.00, Sun 14.00–17.00, free.
NORWICH
The RPS 135th International Print Exhibition,the 116 prints from the exhibition will be show in two parts during March and April (2 Mar–28 Mar) Mon–Sat 10.00–17.30, 10.00–23.00 on performance nights, free.
PONTEFRACT
Locals,portraits of local people in their home and work environments by Kevin Reynolds (until 22 Mar).
Mon–Sat 10.30–17.00, Sun 14.30–17.00, free.
OXFORD
Robert Doisneau: A Retrospective,over 350 of the photographer's images, the little known alongside the familiar.
The exhibition, curated by Peter Hamilton in close association with the photographer, will also show contact sheets and publications in which the photographs first appeared and provide an opportunity to assess the work of one of the finest photographers of the twentieth century (18 Apr. –21 June).
Arnold Newman — Five Decades,the only British showing of the exhibition curated by the Museum of Photographic Arts in San Diego.
Portraits of individuals who have shaped our lives this century by the renowned American photographer (18 Apr. –21 June).
Tue, Wed, Fri, Sat 10.0017.00, Thurs 10.00–21.00, Sun 14.00–17.00. free.
SALFORD
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Beats the Chinese Heart,a Viewpoint touring exhibition by Simon Buckley shows the mix of traditional and modern lifestyles in Hong Kong and looks at  how the Chinese community has attempted to recreate the atmosphere of Hong Kong in Manchester (until 2 Mar).
Images From Within: Homages, Hallucinations and Past Encounters,local artists Mark Warner, Clare Pickles, Stephen Ellis and Paula McNamara explore in their diverse ways the photographic image generated from within themselves.
Part of the 1992 Manchester International Festival of Impressionism (4 Mar–5 Apr.).
Tue–Fri 10.00–17.00, Sun 14.00–17.00, free.
SHEFFIELD
RPS Colour Group Members Exhibition,(16–30 Mar).
Open during college hours, free.
Edge of Invention: Steel, Image + Industry,1992 is the 250th anniversary of Benjamin Huntsman's invention of the Crucible steel production process.
The exhibition gives a contemporary overview of the historic link between Sheffield and steel (until 7 Mar).
Oleg Timechenko,constructs a photographic installation as part of a collaboration with the Mappin Art Gallery exhibition Heat + Conduct featuring nine artists from  Tbilisi (9–21 Mar).
Heat and Conduct,Miro Svolik's dream-like sequences (21 Mar–9 May).
Mon–Sat 11.00–17.00, free.
SOUTHEND-ON-SEA
Olivia Parker: Still Lifes, taken from The Photographers' Gallery Weighing the Planets series (until 13 Mar).
Miro Svolik: An Exhibition of Photographs,some of the images result from Czech photographer's work at Project UK '91 (until 13 Mar).
Jed Hoyland: Mnemosyne ,piscatorial still life images (until 13 Mar).
The Art That Threatened Art — Art Photography from 1840s — 1880s,(21 Mar–25 Apr.).
A Leap in the Light — Art Photography from 1880s — 1960s,(21 Mar–25Apr.).
Joseph Koudelka & Ron McCormick: Two Views of Southend (1970s),(21 Mar–25 Apr.).
Mon–Fri 09.00–19.00, Sat 09.00–17.00, free.
STOKE-ON-TRENT
Homes of Football , Stuart Clarke records what may be the final years of traditional support at football grounds (until 1 Mar).
UXBRIDGE
After the Wildwood , colour photographs by Aberystwyth-based Jeremy Moore explore our relationship with trees and woodland and indicate changes which have taken place over time, by referring to contemporary evidence (22 Apr. –17 May).
Open Wed–Fri 09.00–17.00 until 24 Apr.; from 27 Apr.
Mon–Thurs 09.00–21.00, Fri–Sat 09.30–17.00, Sun 14.00–19.00, free.
See Here is compiled by Ian Buchanan.
If you would like your exhibition to be included, send full details to him c/o Photography, Argus Specialist Publications,.
Tel:.
Fax:.
Information should arrive three months prior to the desired month of publication.
ROB DAWSON
Robin Dawson specialises in collage work, political and personal.
He grew up in Rutland (now Leicestershire) and after collecting a photography ‘O’ level, went on to do a furniture design course, ‘because I just wanted to get to London’.
Photography wouldn't let him go, however, and after serving out his apprenticeship with various studios he went freelance, working to commission and supplying picture libraries with travel shots.
A strong creative urge led him to experiment with collage, which he finds deeply satisfying.
He currently works from his studio and workroom built in a large living room at home in Bethnal Green, East London.
Robin Dawson turned to working with collage after becoming increasingly frustrated with feeling unable to say what he wanted with a single image.
‘I found there were limitations on conveying a point of view or a situation, and I suddenly thought: you can get a lot more information out of looking at something made up from several pictures.
Obviously it's got to be in some sort of order; composition comes into it just as much as taking a photograph.’
Dawson's compositions are both concise and detailed: witty juxtapositions of building, landscapes, objects, animals and people, whose message is emphasised by over-layers of printed words: logos, succinct headlines, snippets of self-penned verse.
He refuses, though, to call these lines poetry: ‘I wouldn't claim to be a poet — I just think words are important too.
The eye-catchiness of collage also renders it a particularly apt medium for getting a point across effectively.
Dawson's ‘Sign of the Times’, a comment on pollution and the environment, for example— submitted for Camerawork's exhibition of the same title — was designed to be different.
‘A collective image grabs people's attention more than yet another picture of a rainforest.
Just after the Gulf War, there was a lot of talk of pollution and green issues, and I had the idea of cutting a cross-section through London — underground, overground and sky.
But it's also a personal thing: I don't want to look as if I'm jumping on a green bandwagon, It's what I feel.
Similarly, ‘Cultural Genocide’ is his personal and powerful empathic response to the oppression of the Australian aborigines.
‘I'd come back from a trip to Australia with pictures of the aborigines.
‘I'd come back from a trip to Australia with pictures of the aborigines' match during the Bicentenary Day ‘celebrations’.
I'd taken a lot, but at the end of the day I only had a set of photographs that everybody else had — a load of people on a march.
So I made a collage that said something about that day and their plight, and named it after one of the banners they were carrying.’
Most of his pieces carry a specific theme.
Recently he's also begun exploring dreams (mainly his own) in collage.
‘Working with dreams in this way gives me a freedom to express, a release to be creative.
It can also throw up issues.’
‘Dreamtime in Katherine’ is a combination of dreams and memories, using images from Dawson's travels — dramatic Australian sky, English country church, horse and naked body shot on the isle of Lundy.
‘It's about how we're living in dream time: how the past becomes a bit hazy like a dream, and how dreams and memories get mixed up — the way you sometimes think: did I dream that or was I really there?’
Dawson originally trained in art and design at the London College of Furniture, ‘because it was the first course I got on.’
Photography was part of the    course; he found to his delight that he had the college darkrooms mostly to himself, and it became his main focus for the four-year course.
He went on to a few years' stint as assistant, ‘doing stuff from watches to bedrooms’, interspersed with occasional bouts of travel abroad, a period which proved ‘a lot of learning and finding out about me.’
Since 1985 he's worked to commission, from theatre work and interiors to furniture and corporate brochures.
For the last two years he's covered the City of London Festival, a smaller version of the Edinburgh Festival.
He also has regular part-time work as a lab technician.
‘Fields of Vision — Dreams of View’— Dawson's first exhibition dedicated to personal creative work and the result of two year's work in collage — is showing at  smith's Gallery 3 in Covent Garden from 17–22 February.
His previous shows have been mostly travel pictures, single black-and-white images.
‘At the moment I'm refining my creative work; I'm much happier doing that.
It's great doing a picture of Mozart's Requiem at St Paul's, but that's only once a year and it's simply recording something.
I'd rather exercise my brain a bit with something creative.’
Regular access to a lab has provided Dawson with facilities to experiment, and he's been working with solarisation, changing the colour of the base of the film.
He finds it adds a surreal quality to the ‘dream’ collages, and he's recently used the process to create a CD cover for a band called David Cross (ex-King Crimson).
Dawson enjoys using collage, especially his dream pieces, to express humour.
‘They can become a bit cartoony, and making people chuckle is just as important as raising an issue.
It's nice to go to an exhibition and find a bit of comic stuff.
Hopefully people will come to my show and laugh a bit too.’
Future projects include further explorations in collage and a trip later this year with a friend to South America with a view to producing some articles and a book for publication —‘with an unusual edge’, adds Dawson mysteriously.
More he will not say — watch this space…=
Robin Dawson can be contacted on  
MARJ CLAYTON
Marj Clayton is a Canadian born, 26 year-old travel photographer now based in London.
She's recently returned from Bolivia where an Arts council grant enabled her to shoot the natives living in the foothills of the Andes.
She has had a number of exhibitions in Canada and been published in Britain.
YOUNG GIRL IN DOORWAY OF BAKERY FOR SAVE THE CHILDREN, COCHABAMBA, BOLIVIA, 1990
Her intention is to gain sponsorship for further such photographic observations of native Africans, South Americans and Asians.
Most young girls of 25 would turn pale at the idea of being placed in a small Bolivian village where electricity and running water are next on the list of forthcoming attractions after sliced bread.
Alone, to be armed only with a Nikon FE camera, most ordinary young women would run screaming from the prospect but not Marj Clayton.
That is exactly what happened to her last year but then Ms. Clayton is no ordinary girl.
When the Arts Council awarded this young Canadian a grant of £2200 for a six month photographic mission to the Andes, she was delighted.
This, believe it or not, is Marj's idea of perfect happiness.
She welcomes discomfort, counts hostile situations and relishes third world countries, for she is drive by her life long ambition to be a travel photographer and this trip marked the first rung on the ladder.
‘I've always been fascinated by other cultures, traditions and people, particularly those removed from the Western World.’
She Says, ‘You can express so much with a picture of a person in their natural habitat.’
You may be able to say a lot but you don't get paid for doing it as Marj has discovered to her cost.
There is an all too small market for third world photography; so small in Canada that even the stock agencies won't touch it.
So, two years ago, she left her hometown of Thunderbay on the shores of Lake Superior and came to Britain where the prospect of finding outlets for her pictures are slightly brighter.
‘Mohammed had to go to the mountain, I've subsidised all my previous ventures by working and saving but to get my work published I realised my only chance was England,’ she says, where she has found three photographic agencies interested in buying her work and eight publications have bought selections of the Bolivian shots.
Slowly, but surely, her career is taking off.
‘It hasn't been easy’ she readily  admits.
‘My first paying photographic job was a friend of a friend's wedding.
I hate that sort of stuff but it pays and money from that goes towards my travel and equipment costs.’
MAN SPINNING WOOL, LA PAZ, BOLIVIA, 1985 MARJ CLAYTON
PLAYING IN FRONT OF HOME/STOREY LA PAZ, BOLIVIA, 1985 MARJ CLAYTON
MAMA LANCHI, BLIND MAID IN THE KITCHEN WITH HER DOG LUCY, COCHABAMBA, BOLIVIA 1990
Economy is just one of the reasons why she travels light, choosing to use as little equipment as possible.
In Bolivia she had only two cameras; her trusty Nikon and a Hasselblad CM 500 and a wide-angled lens.
Even some of that proved to be excess baggage however.
‘I rarely used the Hasselblad.
It takes too long to set up and the shutter speed is slow.
My work had to be spontaneous so I haven't time to work out lighting etc…= The Aymarians (Andes dwellers) are very shy people and if, and when, they did consent to be photographed, they'd insist it didn't take long.’
So necessity it would seem was another reason why she tended to use just the one camera.
‘There was a remarkable reticence by the Bolivians to be photographed,’ says Marj when describing some of the difficulties she encountered.
‘I could understand it with the men, who thought I was coming-on to them, but the women's reluctance puzzled me, until I discovered that the City people discouraged the country dwellers (she objects to the word ‘peasant’) from having their picture taken.
They tell them that foreigners just want to laugh at them, but I think it's because they're ashamed at the poverty these people are forced to live in.
They're embarrassed to have such primitive people represent the country to the rest of the world.
So when they did consent I worked fast.
After five shots, they'd get worried and shuffle off.’
Even so, she still managed to get through 200 rolls of the film in time.
Kodachrome 64, 35mm and black and white.
‘I prefer working in monochrome, you've got more control but I used colour as and when I felt the shot warranted it.
It's not a vocation for him but he's had a lot of work published including calendars and photographs for the sleeves of the telephone books.
He used to get bored driving around looking for locations alone and so bribed me to go with him by buying me a camera.
I was very young and shot anything and everything, but he gave me lots of advice.’
So good were her father's hints and tips that she was appointed official yearbook photographer at high school and from there she went on to study applied photography at college.
‘If my father formed my interest, Eugene Smith's work formed my direction.
College was dull, we covered the basics and then did a bit of everything — I hated portraiture, architectural and food shots — all the commercially viable stuff — but when I saw his work it struck a chord.
Mind you, I wouldn't risk my life for a shot in the way he did.
I'm an awful coward.’
Aiming to visit Sudan and Ethiopia next year to continue her work, I doubt whether many people would consider her so!
Marj Clayton can be contacted on .
PLOUGHING, INQUILIVI, BOLIVIA, 1990
L'HISTOIRE DE FRANCE
Having had the pleasure of interviewing Ralph Gibson on the occasion of the publication of his major work ‘Syntax’, for the now defunct ‘Camera’ magazine in 1984, perhaps this review should begin as per the forward of L'Histoire de France:‘Dear Ralph Gibson’.
However, I would not find myself being quite so complementary over the contents of this particular volume.
Gibson is without doubt a superlative photographer, a master of Black & White.
His critical eye revels in the play and contrast of light on form composing the stark minimal images that have all but become his trade mark.
But L'Histoire de France is his first exploration into the world of colour, and I for my part must admit to finding it a little less than convincing.
As with all Gibson's books, the images are paired on opposing pages being visually connected with one another either by implication, texture, pattern or in the case of this particular volume, often by colour.
There are, as always with the work of Ralph Gibson, images that stick in the mind.
One is unlikely to forget the lush quality of the velour curtain retained by a gold ring that adorns the cover.
Equally, the image that introduces the plates  subtly carries the artist's initials in a waft of black.
There are also a number of delightfully sensitive ‘colour touches’.
Thee being essentially black & white images with a splash/stroke of colour, and this is where I believe the strength of the book lies.
Witness the red band that dissects the coutured lapel of a typically Gibsonesque torso, the edge of a green  broaded drape lit by the light from an open door.
More subtle perhaps are the two blue pegs, hanging the old rag out to dry, or the pusse pink ‘SERVICE’.
Indeed it becomes increasingly apparent as one leaves through the pages, that Gibson's refinement and simplicity of vision, is matched by a correspondingly restrained colour palette.
But what are we to make of the very ‘soft’ image of the two highly polished leather boots?
Or the lush green grass  afront of the ‘diamante’ fence?
The relationship in both cases with the opposing image is both subtle and sensitive, but surely each image should be equally able to stand in  its own space, on  its own merit.
When looking back to ‘ Day's at Sea’, ‘The Somnambulist’ and other earlier volumes of Gibson's work, the relationships between the opposing images worked because each had a strength and purpose of  its own, although paired.
The very fact that they were conceived in black & white, helped to produce that visual strength.
In my view, an unsharp image in colour however beautiful will rarely be strong enough to stand on  its own, whereas the same image in black & white can through the nature of the medium, become a tantalising and thought provoking subject.
This is not to say that L'Histoire de France is not only a thought provoking but also a highly viewable volume — it most certainly is.
But it is I feel just a little overstated and  overrated to qualify within my ‘top-ten’.
VAL DAWSON
Accounts of unusual terrain and landscapes scarred by centuries of fiery eruptions, led Val Dawson to visit the island of Lanzarote, in the Canaries, a little more than sixty miles off the West African coast.
‘I had heard much about the Island, but could not have been prepared for the spectacle of some three hundred and eight square miles’ says Val, ‘I had five days in which to explore and photograph the unfamiliar panorama which stretched before me.’
Val set off for the interior in the best of the hire cars available, a well worn seat with grudging breaks, and drove alone on empty roads through a barren and alien territory.
Characteristic of Lanzarote are the numerous cones of extinct volcanoes, their surfaces smoothed and round by the dry, fierce winds heading out across the Atlantic from the Moroccan Sahara.
Large areas of island are covered with thick deposits of black volcanic ash, known locally as picon.
These undulated planes are punctured here and there by gaping, jagged craters, disintegrating hillsides and rugged lava beds.
Rainfall is minimal and the land is infertile, marked by erosion and extreme dryness.
In a desperate attempt to hold in what moisture there is in the thin soil, farmers have constructed low walls as refuges for vines and other crops.
This man made geometry stands our starkly against the natural undulations of the terrain to form abstract patterns and relieve the monotony of impassive emptiness.
In spite of the hostile nature of the region, the land yields grapes, onions, tomatoes and tobacco.
Cochineal beetles are bred among fields of enormous cacti.
It was in one of these fields, surrounding the tiny village of Guatiza that Val found a peasant woman harvesting the beetles from the underside of large, fleshy cactus leaves.
‘Her legs were bandaged in leather swathes, protecting her from the long, cruel needles of the prickly pear.
The villages seemed pleased to be photographed, and unused to tourists, treated me with benign curiosity.
‘Just outside the village I discovered a quarry of over a hundred metres in diameter.
From its floor rose several lava pillars; eroded, contorted shapes brooding in the deep pit.
I made my way down and photographed these natural sculptures, thinking of the centuries that wind had taken to mould and shape their contours.’
Perhaps these were the monoliths worshipped by the aboriginal Gaunches to which they offered sacrifices of milk, honey and sheep fat.
The  Gaunches' religion was purely  naturist ; they adored the sun, stars and the elements in general.
Like all primitive peoples they believed in spirits with influence over human life.
Val's journey took her away from the village, through arid plains and between inert and inanimate peaks.
‘I stopped occasionally to photograph a design branded upon a distant hillside made up of countless squat semi-circular walls protecting a meagre crop; or limp onion plants resemblant of hieroglyphs upon a furrowed wall; or a track which seemed to lead to only more emptiness’ 
It was along one such barren track that Val came across more the gaunt pillars of volcanic rock, ‘They were  like giant effigies presiding over their parched and desolate kingdom.
I photographed them against a backdrop of distant volcanoes using a yellow filter to accentuate the wispy white clouds above.
The scene before me was so different to the familiar landscape of southern England, domesticated by near hedgerows, roads, copses and buildings.
BY VAL DAWSON
‘Looking at the gravity and harshness of my surroundings I was temporarily dazzled in the glare of sunlight.
My glance fell upon a stricken shrub and I became aware of a terrible aloneness in that sullen and deserted place.
I thought again of the primeval inhabitants and their pagan rituals at the base of the monoliths.
Suddenly I wanted to hear the sound of human voices and to feel the warmth and comfort of loved ones.
Lanzarote seemed oppressive and unyielding.
Upon turning back towards the track I felt strangely relieved to see that the car was still there.’
Val Dawson can be contacted on  .