

Letters
Wisden Cricket Monthly welcomes Readers Letters on any cricket topic, contemporary, controversial, historical or humorous.
Please keep letters as brief as possible, and legible; we reserve the right to edit them.
Letters should be sent to:
No reprieve
Following South Africa's reintroduction there has been a great deal of discussion about whether the ban on Mike Gatting and his fellow ‘rebel’ tourists should be lifted.
If it were, players such as Broad, Gatting and Foster, who turned their backs on English cricket, would be in contention for recalls to the England Test XI.
This would be unfair.
Why?
Back in 1989 the England side was at an extremely low ebb, having just been humiliated 0–4 by Australia.
At this point England had won only one of their last 24 Test matches.
Those who went off to South Africa were duly banned.
Gooch took over as captain.
Players such as Lewis, Fraser, Malcolm, Stewart, Atherton, Hick, Turnell, Lawrence and Ramprakash were introduced, and within 2½ years England's Test records reads: P24 W8 D9 L7, a marked improvement despite a disastrous 0–3 defeat in Australia in 1990–91.
England's narrow loss in West Indies happened only because of injuries to Gooch and Fraser and rain in the Trinidad Test.
At home, England have been unbeaten in a Test series since that 1989 summer, beating New Zealand and India and manfully fighting back to level with West Indies last summer at 2–2.
Now, having beaten West Indies three times in quick succession after not having beaten them for years, outclassing New Zealand 2–0 out there, the first team in over a decade to win a Test rubber there, and of course reaching the World Cup final, England are now a force to be reckoned with.
To recall the South African rebels would be a total injustice to the current players.
WITH THE ‘rebels’ in those England teams, results might have been even better.
Has anyone bothered to canvas them as to their views on recent political changes in South Africa?
They may well be as overjoyed as all the erstwhile opponents in high places who brought such pressure to bear on the republic while apartheid existed.
It would be absurd to maintain the ban beyond the ICC meeting in July, for all other cricket ‘rebel’ around the world have been forgiven and ‘freed’.
Umpire's reply
I feel that on behalf of all my colleagues who umpire at all levels of the fame I have to reply to Tim Byran's letter (WCM May).
At one time boundaries were, in the main, marked by a white line, and it was only after a number of years of requesting the TCCB that in matches organised by them a rope be used to denote the boundary that this regulation was implemented, if my memory serves me correctly, for the 1983 season.
It must be remembered that na umpire in professional cricket is generally some 70 years at the nearest point from the rope.
There are other matters which must be observed, e.g. short runs, which may require an umpire's attention away from the fielding incident.
Any contact of the fielder's person with a rope may be slight.
It is impossible to observe from a distance.
As for the comment that umpires should start enforcing this law, I assure Mr. Byran that the first-class umpires' panel, the best in the world, are fully aware of the law, very observant, and most certainly fearless in its application.
One other reason for the use of the rope is to help the fielder know when he has made contact with such a boundary, and often a fielder has signified to the umpire that a ball has made contact with the rope of that he himself, while in contact with the ball, has touched such a rope.
There is no need to change this law, and as far as I am aware no need for Mr. Byran to distress himself upon the umpires' behalf.
THIS IS just another area of the game where clarification, when required, need not come from fielder or spectators but from the truth-seeking (and—finding!) eye of television.
Injury danger
WHILE ENJOYING the high quality of play by England during the recent New Zealand tour and latterly the World Cup, and appreciating the fitness they displayed, I couldn't help but wonder about the current medical practices being used to prepare players for matches while still injured.
There seems to be an increase in the use of painkilling injections and manipulation of injuries, quite similar to those used in football.
Perhaps this has something to do with the fact that Lawrie Brown, the England physio, was once the Manchester United physio.
Might not Derek Pringle's participation in the World cup final with the help of a cortisone injection have been at the risk of permanent damage to himself|?
I would rather see him and Chris Lewis (a constant injury worry) facing the Pakistanis this summer without carrying niggling injuries sustained in the winter.
Surely it would be better if time healed injuries, not sophisticated methods?
Hick's chances
WITH THE Test series looming, the debate regarding Graeme Hick's selection is in full swing after his disappointing start in Test cricket.
Although his initial performances have been below par it has by no means been the worst start to a Test career by a recognised English batman.
The following lists performances after 12 innings:
It can be seen that the next, the 13th innings was the breakthrough innings.
The following also has poor starts but had scored their maiden half-century by their 12th innings:
Apart from, Amiss none had really successful Test careers, although all except Turnbull eventually scored Test centuries.
World-class batsmen like Hick should be persevered with.
Who knows, the lucky 13th innings might just do the trick for Hick?
Before lunch
GERALD BRODRIBB'S article on wicketkeeper-bowlers in the February issue and Jack Burrell's interesting letter on the same subject in March reminds one that another wicketkeeper able to turn over a respectable arm was Warwickshire's Geoff Humpage, whose most unusual bowling feat occurred in the Warwickshire v Gloucestershire match at Edgbaston in 1980.
Humpage had been chosen as wicketkeeper and started the game behind the stumps, but with Gloucestershire finding little to worry them in the efforts of Warwickshire's regular bowlers, Humpage removed his pads and gloves, with Chris Maynard, playing as a batsman, taking over as wicketkeeper.
Humpage managed to dismiss both Gloucestershire openers, Broad and Stoviold, so the move by skipper Bob Willis could be accounted a success.
The point is that Humpage was brought on to bowl before lunch on the first morning of the match, and one wonders whether a selected wicketkeeper has ever been introduced into the attack to early a stage of a first-class match, especially since so far as I am aware Warwickshire suffered no injuries that morning.
Batsman the key
HISTORY suggests that Yorkshire may have increased their chances of regaining the elusive County Championship by signing Sachin Tendulkar instead of Craig McDermott.
Since the restrictions on the signing of overseas players were eased in 1968, I can find only one instance of a non-English-qualified  fast bowler helping his adopted county to the title, Wayne Daniel of Middlesex in 1977 (joint champions) and outright winners in 1982 and 1985.
This is not to belittle the exploits of Hadlee, Phillip or can der Bijl, who were essential parts of their sides' successes, but none of whom can be said to have been an out-and-out pace man.
Contrary to popular belief, it seems that a successful imported batsman, from Majid Khan at Glamorgan in 1969 through the likes of Asif, Kanhai, Richards, McEwan, Border, Kick (un-English-qualified as he then was) and Haynes to Salim Malik at Essex last year, makes all the difference.
How many championship winners' medals have Roberts, Croft, Holding, Patterson, Marshall, Akram, Donald or Younis in their collections?
When it comes to one-day cricket, though, that as usual is a different matter….
BBC v Sky
I AM writing to comment on the amazing article by Jonathan Rice on the Sky TV coverage of the World Cup (WCM May).
He, rightly in my view, expresses his dislike for the constant advertisements.
He regrets the occasional difficulties on the sound and picture quality (the pictures were of course bouncing across several satellites), and complains about the number of commentators.
The point he seems to have missed is that even if the BBC had not been outbid by Sky for coverage, it was, I think, unlikely that we would have seen (a) ball-by-ball-by-ball coverage (not highlights) during social hours on the following day.
Like the style of coverage or not, we undoubtedly saw far more cricket than we ever would have done had BBC had the contract, and for that I for one am profoundly grateful and not ashamed to admit that I purchased my Sky system purely because it was producing coverage of cricket that otherwise would not be available on TV.
I believe that your correspondent Vince Hughes (WCM May) has got it absolutely right.
Serving all
EVEN IN an increasingly selfish world I thought that cricket-lovers still retained some reputation for being a bit more fair-minded and generous than most, Vince Hughes's letter (WCM May) makes me wonder.
Not content that the BBC broadcasts most of a 30-hour Test match live, Mr Hughes wants news bulletins and horse-racing postponed because of the possibility that something significant might occur, even though the action will be replayed many times once cricket coverage resumes.
The fact that news bulletins and horse races are scheduled programmes which many millions 9f (non-cricket-loving) viewers may have turned in specifically to watch does not seem to have entered his thinking.
The BBC is a public-service network which has to balance the needs and tastes of all its viewers, cricket-lovers or otherwise.
Considering that the majority of the general public has little or no interest in the game, cricket is extremely well served by the BBC both in terms of the quantity and quality of presentation.
If the only thing that matters to Mr Hughes is saturation cricket coverage to the exclusion of everything else and regardless of quality, then Sky is for him.
it is worth reminding him, however, that unlike the BBC, Sky is a commercial organisation whose sole interest in cricket is with the profit which can be made from it.
If, and when, the profit disappears, so does the cricket.
Botham's 500
IN YOUR otherwise all-embracing reports on England's successful series in New Zealand, I feel you overlooked a noteworthy landmark in Ian Botham's Test career.
During his 100th appearance, he became the first player at Test level to dismiss 500 opponents (i.e. wickets and catches combined).
Indeed some research I've done on this shows that only three players have managed 400 such dismissals, namely Richard Hadlee, Hapil Dev and Malcolm Marshall.
Although a rather overlooked statistical record, I think in the light of all the fuss (and rightly so) made of Hadlee and Kapil Dev taking 400 wickets some praise for Ian in dismissing 500 opponents (or to be exact 501) in 100 Tests is worthy of appreciation and note.
WE LOOK forward to toasting Botham's 500 overall Test dismissals, but the 501 to date contains an overlap of nine caught-and-bowled.
His wickets (383) and catches off other bowlers thus aggregate to 492.
The coming season will tell.
Mangling the Manual
IN HIS gleeful excoriation of The British Academy of Cricket Manual for Gentlemen and Players in the January WCM , Mark Browning echoes the sentiments of your esteemed Editor, who called the book ‘…the greatest, the most conspicuous and distinctly unrepeatable load of garbage ever dumped on the cluttered book-market’(WCM Aug 1988), and both reviewers queried the sanity of any reader curious or gullible enough to read it in its entirety.
Let me hasten to assure authors Martin Ward and Paul Oldham that there is at least one person who has read the book from cover to cover and though it both clever and hilarious, a beautifully-sustained joke and the most original piece of humorous writing on the fame produced in years.
Whatever one's view of the literary merits of the Manual (and humour is in the final analysis a matter of personal taste), it is certainly wrong of Mr. Browning to imply that the book is inept, contains irritating mistakes and exhibits poor production values: this is simply not the case.
Even his charge of boring repetition is difficult to substantiate objectively: boredom is in the mind of the beholder and you doubtless could find many people who have enjoyed A la Recherche du Temps Perdu , a work not altogether renowned for its brevity or conciseness.
So, please, Mr. Browning — less of the vitriol, or I shall have to ask the chairman of the academy to impose the Ultimate Sanction of a Humiliation Notice in The Times !
next month in WCM:
Colourful coverage of the first Cornhill Test and two one-day internationals, England v Pakistan.
Cry Freedom
DONALD WOODS saw a dream come true with South Africa's entitlement to re-entry into international cricket, and the experience was enhanced by his journey with the team through the World Cup tournament.
The man who earned global recognition through his book Cry Freedom describes his feelings as South Africa's cricketers cam in from the cold
IT WAS through a mist of mixed emotions that I watched the South African team take the field at the Sydney Cricket Ground for their first match in the 1992 World Cup, against the Australians.
It was a moment of gravity following laughter.
I had half-managed to con a colleague in the Press-box into believing that the Brewongle Stand was named after an old left-arm spinner from Parramatta named Bluey Brewongle when I saw the dark-green uniforms emerging from the pavilion, and the emotions crowded in with a sudden impact.
The first and most powerful emotion was pride in what this moment meant for so many millions, and especially for their leaders, who had succeeded in making this return after 22 years of isolation conditional on the genuine opening up of cricket to all South Africans.
The second was sadness at the wasted years of cricket greatness for the likes of Mike Procter, Barry Richards, Graeme Pollock and others, although the sadness was not tinged by any regret at having jointed the campaign to exclude South African sport form international participation.
On the contrary, the sadness was outweighed by anger over the deprivations that had presented the emergence of black Pollocks and Procters for 200 years in South Africa — deprivations that were now being remedied mainly because of the success of the long boycott.
I thought of the most dedicated cricket fanatic I had ever known back in South Africa — a man who despite repeated heart attacks, doctors' warnings and family entreaties to stop playing the game, had persisted with club cricket to the end, in his sixties diving after slip catches as recklessly as he had in his teens.
This was Hassan Howa, guiding spirit for so many years of the non-racial South African Cricket Board of Control, who had first articulated the verdict on gradual reform: ‘You cannot have normal sport in an abnormal society.’
Whites who didn't know him, yet condemned him with borrowed certainty as someone who had little interest in cricket beyond its utility as a stick to beat the apartheid policy with, were typical of the society I came from.
We didn't know blacks, yet were always sure that we knew their real interests and what they were thinking!
Even recently a white South African registered surprise on hearing that Nelson Mandela could speak, 40 years on, with fresh enthusiasm of a Neil Harvey innings, 151 at Kingsmead, Durban in 1951, that Mandela had seen the young Harvey score.
Nelson Mandela interested in cricket?
Donald Woods, 58, was the only white members of the governing council of the South African Cricket Board of Control at the time of his arrest and banning in Johannesburg by state decree in October 1977.
In January 1978 he took an elaborate escape route with his family to Britain, as recounted in the 1987 film Cry Freedom, in which Steve Biko's story was also told.
Woods was recently described by Ian Wooldridge as the ‘bravest editor South Africa has ever known’.
Well, more so, actually, than South African Prime Minister D. F. Malan, who, on being introduced to Dudley Nourse's 1951 Springboks during their visit to Parliament in Cape Town on the eve of their departure for the 1951 tour of England, had said to the legendary Nourse: ‘I hope you are enjoying your visit to South Africa.’
That was in the days when Afrikaners weren't much interested in cricket.
I was pleased to see that in the 1992 World Cup team there were four Afrikaners in murg en beens (in marrow and bone) who had Afrikaans as their first language of fluency — Wessels, Cronje, Bosch and Sonald.
The next sign of progress in the development of South African cricket will be when a fair number of the team have Xhosa and Zulu as their first language of fluency!
At the SCG I was impressed with the way the South African pace bowlers tightened line and length after somewhat loose opening period of play no doubt caused by first-time tension and over-eagerness to do well for the folks back home.
Donald, Pringle, Snell and McMillan all looked  healthily hostile as they blew away the cream of Australian batting for under 200, and Hudson showed touches of class as South Africa won by nine wickets.
I was with the South African team throughout their travels in Australia and New Zealand and found them an exceptionally nice group; agonized with them on the eve of the referendum on reforms back in South Africa when there were last-minute scare reports of a major swing to the right wing; rejoiced with them when the vote when 68% for sanity, a far greater margin than any of us had dared hope for; and generally enjoyed with them their victories and their considerable achievement in reaching the semi-final stage.
I thought their finest moment was when, having lost the semi-final to England in a match controversially shortened by rain, they sportingly accepted what they regarded as a ludicrous interpretation of a ludicrous set of rules and publicly shook hands with the England team before starting on a lap of farewell of the stadium.
Peter Hain: looking further ahead
The pioneering South African team in West Indies: a tour inconceivable until very recently.
Standing — C. Smith (physio), J. N. Rhodes, M. W. Rushmere, R. P. Snell, T. Bosch, M. W. Pringle, W. J. Cronje, O. Henry, M. J. Procter (cricket manager); seated — A. C. Hudson, D. J. Richardson, A. P. Kuiper (vice-capt), A. Jordaan (manager), K. C. Wessels (capt), P. N. Kirsten, A. A. Donald, C. J. P. G. van Zyl
I thought they were lucky in their officials — executive leader Ali Bacher, ANC official Steve Tshwete, manager Alan Jordaan, and coach Mike Procter — and hoped they would enjoy to the full this honeymoon period of World Cup cricket in which their national fans were firmly behind them.
Ahead lay more normal days, during which they would experience more downs in proportion to ups and consequently discover the fickleness of supporters whose approval is conditional on success.
But the most significant success for South African cricket now depends on the township coaching project now depends on the township coaching project led by Bacher, Tshwete, Mackerdhuj and thousands of enthusiastic assistant coaches, many of them women, because it is from this and similar programmes that South African cricket will finally come into its full inheritance.
Already there is excited talk of such teenage stars as fast bowler Walter Masemola, left-hand opening batsman Kenneth Mahuwa, and Billy Mabena.
These will be among the names to watch for in four to five years as national teams become more representative of demographic reality in South Africa.
They, too, will owe a lot to the boycotters and sanctioners, including one in particular that I used to revile and later was honoured to be able to call friend — also a keen cricketer, a left-hand bat who as a schoolboy in Pretoria was thought promising enough to be headed for a higher grade of cricket one day.
Peter Hain, then as now more interested in real cricket than in racially-structured sport, was one of those who did more than most to fast-forward the process of making cricket accessible to most south Africans.
Like most of my fellow white South Africans in the early days of contention, I didn't realise at the time that people like Peter Hian and Hassan Howa were looking further than we were, and seeing further ahead than our own claustrophobic horizons.
but now we can acknowledge that the advance in South Africa's cricket prospects is as much in their debt as it is to the current leaders who have united South African cricket and allowed it, for the first time in two centuries, to look forward to drawing on all the resources of the nation's youth regardless of race, colour or creed.
The late Hassan Howa: guiding spirit
NEWS REGISTER
ENGLAND batsman mark Ramprakash was fined about £500, reprimanded and warned about his future conduct after an outburst in Middlesex's match with Cambridge University.
Ramprakash first ‘sledged’ opposing batsman Marcus Wight (who had dismissed him in both innings), then remonstrated with his captain, John Emburey.
Nottinghamshire manager John Birch, 36, has resigned, only weeks after signing a new three-year contract, to pursue business interests (he is the co-owner of a local sports shop).
County captain Tim Robinson — who missed the first month of the season after breaking his left thumb — has taken over temporarily.
Warwickshire's England allrounder Dermot Reeve missed the season's first month with a stress fracture of the pelvis.
Another international player in the wars was Worcestershire's Graham Dilley, who underwent an operation on his left ankle at the end of April.
He was expected to miss six week's play.
South Africa's first home Test for over 22 years — against India — will start at Durban on Nov 13.
Three other Tests will be played: at Johannesburg (starts Nov 26), Port Elizabeth (Dec 26) and Cape Town (Jan 2).
Seven one-day internationals are scheduled, as follows: Dec 7 (Cape Town), 9 (Port Elizabeth), 11 (Verwoerdburg), 12 (Johannesburg), 15 (Bloemfontein), 17 (Durban), 19 (East London).
Matthew Maynard has been named as Glamorgan's vice-captain.
He led the team in the early part of the season in the absence of Alan Butcher (leg injury).
Hampshire have named Malcolm Marshall as their vice-captain.
Former England opener Geoff Boycott chased and caught a thief who was trying to make off with his golf clubs and a holdall at King's Cross station in London recently.
Not so lucky were Boycott's former Test colleagues Jim Parks (jewellery and cricket memorabilia worth over £1000 stolen from his Sussex home) and Ian Botham (mobile telephone and radio taken from his car).
Botham took out his frustration on the Leicestershire bowlers the following day, recording Durham's first County Championship century.
New Zealand are to back attempts by India and West Indies to abolish the right of the International Cricket Council's foundation members (England and Australia) to veto ICC decisions.
‘It is an anachronism and New Zealand Cricket will support moves to have what is essentially an undemocratic rule removed from the ICC constitution,’ said NXC chairman Peter McDermott.
He added that New Zealand continued to support Zimbabwe's application for Test status.
Former England fast bowler Brian Statham, 62 on June 17, has resigned from the Lancashire committee after 21 years for personal reasons.
Surrey batsman Monte Lynch's 1991 benefit amounted to £107,000.
Barbados-born John Holder, who umpired four Tests in Pakistan in 1989–90, has been omitted from this year's panel for international matches, which comprises ‘Dickie’ Bird, Barry Dudleston, John Hampshire, Mervyn Kitchen, Battie Mayer, Ken and Roy Palmer, and David Shepherd.
The Pakistan touring team will receive a £50,000 ‘jackpot’ from sponsors Tetley Bitter if they manage to win eight of their 12 three-day matches against county sides.
They made a bad start by losing to Worcestershire, who received a £4000 bonus as part of the sponsorship package.
Work began on May 6 on the site of the new leisure complex at Chester-le-Street which will include Durham's permanent county ground.
Durham hope to start playing county matches at Riverside in 1995.
Ken Turk, the 67-year-old president and long time player for Hampshire club Hartley Wintney, collapsed and died at the wicket immediately after hitting a six against Shepherd's Bush on May 3.
Former youth-team captain Damien Martyn, the WA batsman, was the only uncapped player included in Australia's 13-man squad for their tour of Sri Lanka in August/September, Sheffield shield Player of the Year Tony Dodemaide, 28, won an international recall after a three-year absence, while Merv Hughes, Bruce Reid, Peter Taylor, Steve Waugh and former vice-captain Geoff marsh were omitted.
The full team is: A. R. Border (capt), M. A. Taylor (vice-capt), D. B. Boon, A. I. C. Dodemaide, I. A. Healy, D. M. Jones, C. J. McDermott, D. R. Martyn, G. R. J. Matthews, T. M. Moody, S. K. Warne, M. E. Waugh, M. R. Whitney.
In 1968 Bentley car formerly owned by Sir George ‘Gubby’ Allen and sold for £8000 at auction recently, gave new owner Jacob Rees-Mogg (son of former Times Editor Lord Rees-Mogg) a shock when the brakes failed while he was driving along the M4 motorway recently.
A brake-fluid leak was diagnosed.
BBC Radio Sussex sports producer John Lees is refusing to interview Sussex's new captain Alan Wells, because of Well's involvement with the ‘rebel’ England X1 tour of South Africa in 1989–90.
Sussex secretary Nigel Bett warned: ‘If they refuse to interview our captain they will not be allowed to report our matches.’
Ricardo Ellcock, the Middlesex fast bowler who returned early from England's 1989–90 tour of West Indies with a back problem, has been forced to retire after continuing to feel pain despite two back operations.
Barbados-born Ellcock, 27 on June 17, plans to study in America in an attempt to become an airline pilot.
Ellcock, who moved to Lord's in 1989 after seven seasons with Worcestershire, took 117 wickets (29.01) in his firstclass career.
In 1991 Cricket Society Jubilee Literary Award has gone to Alan Hill's Herbert Sutcliffe: Cricket Maestro , published by Simon & Schuster.
Others in the short-list were David Frith's By His Own Hand , Eric Midwinter's Brylcreem Summer , Peter Roebuck's Somerset history from Sammy to Jimmy , and The Narrow Line by Geoff Cook and Neville Scott.
Sir Donald and Lady Jessie Bradman celebrated their 60th wedding anniversary on April 30.
The TCCB, who are financing this year's competition, have decided that no trophy will be awarded to the winners of the Sunday League.
Former Australian batsman Bob Cowper, who made 307 against England at Melbourne in 1965–66, is to be the ICC referee for the first two Tests between England and Pakistan.
Clyde Walcott, the former Test batsman who is now chairman of the West Indies Board, will take over for the remainder of the series.
June 13 marks the bicentenary of William Lillywhite (above), ‘the Nonpareil’, one of the most prominent figures in cricket's development.
Born in Sussex on June 13, 1792, he was a slowish bowler of great accuracy, only 5′ 4″ tall, and his persistence with ‘roundarm’(as opposed to underhand) bowling led to legislation by MCC in 1835 permitting the bowling arm to be raised to shoulder height.
A member of a distinguished cricket family, Lillywhite died from cholera on Aug 21, 1854 and was buried in Highgate Cemetery, where an obelisk marks the grave
The old and the new: England team manager Micky Stewart (right) pictured with his successor Keith Fletcher, who will start a five-year contract in September when Stewart retires
Arjuna Ranatunga has been reappointed as Sri Lanka's captain, replacing Aravinda de Silva after a disappointing World Cup campaign.
Former Warwickshire wicketkeeper Geoff Humpage, 38, has rejoined with West Midlands police force, which he left on becoming a country cricketer in 1974.
Alistair Brown scored 210 and Paul Atkins 111 not out as Surrey ran up 364 for 1 in their 55 overs against Kent (207 for 8) in the county 2nd X1 limited-overs championship match at The Oval on May 8.
Hampshire batsman Robin Smith received some consolation for missing the World Cup final, in the shape of a £500 cheque from Test sponsors Cornhill as England's Player of the Year for his ‘major contribution to English cricket over the last 12 months’.
Five Wisdens (1938–41 and 1945) fetched £870 (plus 10% buyer's premium) at Dominic Winter's 112-lot auction sale in Swindon on April 14.
An 1899 Wisden made £200, while 1881, ‘82 and ‘85 (this signed by Sydney Santall, the old Warwickshire player) sold together for £440.
Many good buys were had among bulk lots of books, including Yorkshire and Kent annuals.
One lot featuring 34 books, Cardus & Arlott's The Noblest Game and Macartney's autobiography among them, sold for only £80.
A copy of Beldam & Fry's Great Batsman reached £120, and the limited edition Annals of Cricket (W. W. Read) made £130.
An autograph album containing numerous pre-war cricketers’ and footballers' signatures sold for £290/
The first of the Cricket memorabilia Society's London evening meetings was held at the Cricketers' Club of London on April 15.
The inaugural speaker was Irving Rosenwater, whose subject was the collecting of silk scorecards.
The meeting was sponsored by County Print Services.
Prize money for this year's five Texaco Trophy matches amounts to £29,525.
The winning team in each match receives £5250, while the Man of the Match award is worth £425.
The Man of the Series from each side will receive £575.
Brian Baldock, 57, the chairman and managing director of Guinness Brewing Worldwide, is the new chairman of the Lord's Taverners, succeeding the former Kent wicketkeeper Derek Ufton.
Indian legspinner Narendra Hirwani underwent an eye operation in Indore recently, and hopes to be able to play without spectacles in future.
Matt Coley hit 165 from only 68 balls, with 16 sixes, for King's College, Taunton against Somerset rivals Wellington School.
Ken Lawrence, the former sports editor of the Daily and Sunday Express , is the TCCB's new media-relations manager, succeeding the late Peter Smith.
Fifteen-year-old Adrian Clarke's painting ‘The Red Cricketer’— featuring the head of a cricketer with a ball whistling past his ear — is currently being displayed on the London Underground as part of the ‘Art on the Underground’ series.
The first poster went up at Oval station on April 14.
Aunshuman Gaekwad, 39, who played in 40 Tests for India between 1974–75 and 1948–85, has retired after a 24-year career during which he captained Baroda for 18 consecutive seasons.
He scored 143 in his final innings in January.
The higher of his two Test centuries was 201 against Pakistan at Jullundur in 1983–84, his double-century (652 mins) being the then-slowest on record.
Some 67 schools in the North-East are to compete for the £8000 prize money on offer in the inaugural Northern Echo Schools Cricket Championship.
NEW ENGLAND MANAGER
THE FORMER Essex and England captain Keith Fletcher, 48, has been named as the next England cricket manager.
He is to replace Micky Stewart, who retires in September on reaching the age of 60.
Fletcher, who has been given a five-year contract, captained England in seven of his 59 Tests, in which he scored 3272 runs (39,90), with seven centuries.
Fletcher first played for Essex in 1962, was capped the following year and captained the county from 1974–85 and in 1988, leading them to their first-ever Championship in 1979.
Under Fletcher Essex won all four of the major domestic trophies at least once.
In his first-class career he scored 37,665 runs (37.77), with 63 centuries.
NEW MCC PRESIDENT
DENNIS SILK, a three-time Cambridge Blue who also played for Somerset, was names as MCC's next president at the club's AGM at Lord's on May 6, Silk, 60, who retired recently as Warden of Radley College, takes over from Michael Melluish on Oct 1, and will be the first to spend two years in office, under anew rule passed at the AGM.
Dennis Raoul Whitehall Silk, who was born in Eureka, California and spent his first six years on a Red Indian reservation, scored centuries in the Varsity matches of 1953 and 1954, and captained Cambridge in 1955.
He also led MCC teams to New Zealand (1960–61) and North America (1959 and 1967).
He was educated at Christ's Hospital, where he was a contemporary of the current MCC secretary Lt-Col. John Stephenson and his predecessor Jack Bailey.
It was agreed at the meeting that MCC would contribute £25,000 towards a coaching trip to disadvantaged areas of south Africa by former West Indian batsman Conrad Hunte.
TEST TRIUMPH; DOMESTIC MUDDLE
The quest for effective penalties for slow over rates takes another twist and turn.
JACK BANNISTER clarifies and identifies the continuing weaknesses
IT IS THE small print which usually deceives the public, but rarely the players (to whom it is second nature to bypass the spirit of any radical change of legislation).
Attempts by the TCCB and the ICC to grasp the creeping bindweed of slow over rates have resulted in one thumping success — and apparently another ++ until the wretched small print is examined.
Cricket is not a sage betting medium, which is why punters asked to plunge on which authority got it right would have left their money behind.
Seldom, if ever, in the last 10 years has the world governing body of cricket made a decision which called for guts.
But this time the ICC has.
The TCCB, bless them, have tried with all their splintered might to redress a short-changing of the public by players in knockout competitions which has bordered on the fraudulent, and only came to a head following the Benson & hedges Cup final at Lord's last year, and the Oval semi-final of the Nat West Trophy a month later.
Compared with the ICC — whose point was brilliantly proved by strong refereeing at Bridgetown in April by Raman Subba Row — the English Board got close to the root of the problem but unaccountably jibbed at the final fence.
The success first.
In the historic Test match between West Indies and South Africa, the ambiguously-drawn rule about over-rate fines was read one way by the players — naturally — but in another way by the man who mattered, the match referee.
The rule says: ‘Over rates shall be assessed on 15 overs per hour, i.e. a minimum of 90 overs in a six-hour day, subject to the following deductions.’
There are several of these, the key one being ‘two minutes per wicket taken’.
The players at Bridgetown, and the umpires, took that to mean that 90 overs in a day would be reduced by time in proportion to wickets take; i.e. eight wickets=16 minutes=four overs=a minimum of 86 overs for the day.
‘Oh no you don't,’ said Subba Row.
He got together with Clyde Walcott, a happy refereeing choice for three Tests in England this summer between England and Pakistan, and they ruled that the rule called for 90 overs to be bowled every day,and the allowance for wickets would only be taken into account for fining purposes when each side's overall rate was calculated at the end of the game .
If only the English attempt to legislate against slow over rates was backed up with a different small-print.
Take the large type first.
The Board have upped the fines in the Nat West Trophy and the B&H Cup from the previously meaningless level of £100 per over not bowled by curfew time to an escalating scale ranging from £220 in the first two rounds to £330 in the quarter-finals, £660 in the semi-finals and…wait for it, £1320 per unbowled over in the final.
Raman Subba Row: strong refereeing in Bridgetown, Barbados
The theory is that if the players cannot be persuaded to give the public value for money, they must be forced into a slow trot by hitting them in the most vulnerable area — their back pockets.
So, at a stroke of the administrative pen, contests like those in 1991 between Lancashire and Worcestershire, and Surrey and Northamptonshire have been eliminated.
Or have they?
A more accurate appraisal of the new status quo is that that would be the case…except for the small print .
‘All fines will be levied equally between the county clubs and the players, with the contribution to be made by each individual player to any fine being decided by the county concerned.’
Both sets of rules for the domestic knockout competitions include the same addendum, which is anomalous on two counts.
It is the general practice for players to receive all prizemonies on offer, so consider the example of Lancashire last July in the first of the two knockout finals when the players received over £1000 each for finishing second to Worcestershire.
Under acting captain Neil Fairbrother, they managed 48 overs in the 205 minutes allowed for 55 overs.
Umpires David Shepherd and John Holder chivvied them several times, but although the players might deny it suited them tactically to keep as many of their batting overs in hand for the next day when better weather was promised, it is difficult to dismiss the thought that the level of fines was so derisory that they did not give it a thought.
Lancashire were subsequently fined £500, not £700, because of mitigating circumstances.
A repetition this year would mean a fine of £6600, which is why, on the surface, the Board has every justification to be pleased with the new scale of fines.
Except, because of the curiously selfless decision by the clubs to vote themselves half the financial liability, that figure is reduced to £3300, which, divided by 11, means an average payment per player of £300.
Not much, it is, when the winning finalists receive £27,500 and the losers half that amount?
At least it isn't if the clubs still allow the players to take all the prizemoney.
The argument is that the clubs are in charge of several factors which can affect the over rate, i.e. the balance of the playing staff, the choice of captain, stewarding of sightscreens, etc.
The intention of the Board was to gear the escalating fines to the increasing prizemonies round by round.
The clubs should have stuck to their guns.
If the players get all the loot, they should pay all the fines.
And what about the right of the clubs to impose a differential payment of fines by players?
Apparently it is not intended to decide that a bowler with a long run pays more than a dashing opening batsman, but rather to ensure that a highly-paid Test cricketer does not necessarily pay the same amount as a young uncapped player.
But why not, if both players receive exactly the same share of prizemoney, to which the Board have geared the fines anyway?
The constant battle between players and officials over the tempo of the modern game is like a tug-o'-war.
The shame is that, while the ICC have dragged the players over the gain line, the TCCB are still a big heave short.
A CUCKOO IN THE BODYLINE NEST
GILBERT MANT concludes his inside story of the stormy 1932–33 Test series, form which he is the sole survivor among the journalists who covered the tour
I DO NOT intend to deal with the Bodyline tour in detail; cricket buffs have read it all over and over again in 50 or more books and studies about the affair.
I want to concentrate on the week in Adelaide in January 1933 that brought it all to a head, and the personal dilemma I faced as the Teuter-Press Association correspondent.
Sixty years later, the story can be told with hindsight to anew generation of readers wondering how on earth the fame of cricket could have caused major sporting and diplomatic upheavals that rocked the British Empire, involved the Australian and British governments, and put a new word in the dictionaries.
For any history of the 1930s has to include Bodyline, along with the Great Depression, the rise of Adolf Hitler, and abdication of King Edward VIII, and the outbreak of the Second World War.
The tour started off quietly enough in Perth, picturesque capital city of Western Australia.
After comfortable MCC draws against Western Australia and an Australian XI, we set off by train for more than four months of practically non-stop cricket from one side of Australia to the other.
We went from city to city, from bush town to bush town, civic reception after civic reception given by local mayors with chains around their necks, musical welcomes with God Save the King and For They Are Jolly Good Fellows , and Plum Warner uttering platitude after platitude about the ideals of cricket and British fair-play, until the subject became uncomfortable and undiplomatic.
The first real sign of Bodyline came during a match against an Australian XI at Melbourne.
Bowling to a limited legside field, Larwood and Voce got a haul of wickets.
Jardine must have realised the potency of his secret weapon, and from them on he set short -leg-theory fields, with the deadly cordon of six or seven fieldsmen.
Batsmen began to be hit and the crowds became restive.
Then ugly.
The very sight of a bouncer drew boos, to be redoubled when Larwood switched his offside field to legside (usually in the third over).
England easily won the first Test at Sydney (Bradman did not play because of illness).
It was during this Test that the word ‘bodyline’ was coined by an Australian journalist.
The word was never accepted in the English camp.
Leg theory or fast leg theory were the euphemisms used.
Jardine was to say, ‘What is this Bodyline bowling?
The word was coined by a sensational Press to explain or excuse defeat.’
I had to conform; I do not think I ever used the term in my reports, except in parenthesis to denote a sort of dirty word.
Australian captain Woodfull is hit by a ball form Larwood in the Adelaide Test: a violent eruption of booing and shouting by spectators was triggered
Australia won the second Test at Melbourne, Bill Bowes stunning the huge crowd by bowling Bradman first ball.
The Don made amends in the second innings with a memorable 103 not out and the crowds held a ‘bob in’ collection to buy their idol a piano.
And so, one Test apiece, to Adelaide for the third encounter.
The capital of South Australia, Adelaide, with its beautiful cricket ground, was the unlikeliest setting for a donnybrook.
It was known as the ‘city of churches’ and had a rigid social, cultural and cricket Establishment.
Its people were said to be ‘more English and the English’.
One ball from Larwood brought everything to a climax on the afternoon of the second day's play before a record crowd of 50,692.
Stepping to his off, Australia's captain, Bill Woodfull, was hit heavily on the chest by the last ball of Larwood's second over and staggered back, dropping his bat.
Larwood was bowling orthodox off theory to a slip field, but the crowd was in no mood to differentiate between off theory and leg theory.
All the incidents in previous games combined into a violent eruption of booing and shouting.
There were to be extraordinary inconsistencies in the description of that fateful call by the main participants.
Jardine said Larwood brought the call back from the off side; Larwood said it was a straight ball; and umpire George Hele (at Larwood's end) said the ball was pitched short of a length on the leg side.
Still shaken, Woodfull picked up his bat again, but the roars of the crowd increased in intensity during the first ball of the next over when the offside field was suddenly changed to a legside field.
Again there are inconsistencies.
Larwood said Jardine motioned the field to the leg side; Jardine said Larwood asked for the leg field.
Whoever initiated it, it was an injudicious and inflammatory action to take and both players expressed regret later.
In the crow that day was cricket-lover Robert Gordon Menzies, Attorney-General of Victoria and afterwards Prime Minister of Australia.
He gave his version in his memoirs,Afternoon Light:‘Suddenly Jardine signalled to Larwood, and swung the field to the Bodyline setting.
It was almost as if he had said —‘This man is a bit groggy; let's dispose of him!’ that is how it appeared tome at the time, too.
I was sickened by the apparent ruthlessness of it, though afterwards I accepted the published assurances of Jardine and Larwood that there had been no such intention.
Be that as it may, I suddenly realised that this was not a game of cricket any more.
It was a war.
It is was allowed to continue, the main casualty would be the gracious and noble old game of cricket itself.
It had nothing to do with being Australian or  English.
It did not matter whether Jardine was a bastard or Larwood was a nice fellow.
The game of cricket was greater than them and greater than the rowdy, biased barrackers and all the other rights or wrongs.
The fact that it was all within the rules was immaterial.
I wondered what would happen in lower grades of cricket, for instance.
That big, burly young fast bowler of Barclays Bank, who sprayed the ball around wildly at any time, would most surely kill somebody.
But I was in a hopeless situation, an anonymous, unknown Australian, a suspect in English eyes.
If I showed the slightest sign of taking sides about Bodyline, or suggesting that it was a threat to cricket, my reports would be censored and I would probably be replaced.
That was when I felt that Sydney Southerton should have been there instead of me.
Southerton should have been there instead of me.
Southerton, writing under a byline, would probably have been able to speak his mind about the general atmosphere, although I did not know that his attitude to bodyline would be.
(Southerton was to make a scathing attack on Bodyline, sight unseen, in Wisden in 1934.)
So, reluctantly, I joined Jack Hobbs in not rocking the boat, reporting the play and the general uproar with perhaps too much impartiality.
My reports went to all British newspapers, with special direct services by me to India, South Africa and West Indies; even to King George V in Buckingham Palace, who loved his cricket.
In other words, I was to some extent leading the British public astray.
It has been on my conscience ever since.
I regret I can shed little new light on the mystery of who blew the whistle on the celebrated dressing-room scene after Woodfull was hit.
while he was lying on the massage table after his innings waiting for a doctor, Warner and Palairet called to express sympathy.
Most versions of Woodfull's reply seem to agree that he said, ‘There are two teams out there on the oval.
One is playing cricket, the other is not.
This game is too good to be spoilt.
It is time some people got out of it.’
Warner and Palairet were too taken aback to reply.
They left the room in embarrassment.
Not many hours passed before the Press had the story of the encounter in the supposed privacy of the dressing-room.
I can't recall who gave me the information.
It did not seem to matter at the time.
I think it was Clade Corbett of the Sydney Sun , who did not reveal the source of his information.
I do remember locating Warner in the bedroom of his hotel for confirmation.
At first he tried halfheartedly to appeal to me not to send the story to England for ‘the sake of the side’.
I told him everybody else had it, and it was worth my job with Reuters to withhold it.
Reluctantly, he agreed the exchange had taken place, and I rushed the story to London.
Warner accused Jack Fingleton, a professional journalist, of leaking the story, which he denied indignantly, and in fact the incident became almost an obsession with him.
Christopher Douglas was to write (in 1984): ‘It will probably never be known who leaked the story.
Bradman says it was Fingleton, Fingleton said it was Bradman, and Leo O'Brien (the 12th man) further confused the issue by revealing in a recent interview with Wisden Cricket Monthly that neither Bradman nor Fingleton was in the room at the time of the exchange, but (former Australian Test players) Ryder and Kippax, who were both reporting the matches in one way or another, were.’
Two days after this drama, Bert Oldfield, the Australian wicketkeeper, was felled by a ball on the temple from Larwood, bowling orthodox off theory to a slip field.
Oldfield said it was entirely his fault, but coming so soon after the Woodfull affair, the crowd went berserk again.
The Press enclosure was in the Members' Stand and the scene around us was indescribable as the staid ‘more English than the English’ burghers of Adelaide and their wives stood up booing and shaking their fists.
It was said that armed mounted troopers were grouped outside the oval to quell a possible riot.
I do believe that had one man jumped the fence, thousands would have followed him.
I believe that had there been television in those days, the British cricket public would have been shocked by what they say and called for an early end to it all, irrespective of the rights and wrongs of Bodyline.
I was leading the British public astray.
It has been on my conscience ever since…
At about midday the day after Oldfield was felled, members of the Press were invited to the office of genial WQ.
H. (Bill) Jeanes, secretary of the Australian Board of Control.
There he read out a cablegram that had been sent to MCC in London.
The contents stunned me, especially one word.
I raced back to the Press enclosure and cabled urgent-rate messages to London.
The messages would get to the Teuter office in under five minutes, a minor miracle in the days before satellites and the use of overseas telephones for Press work.
The text of the cable was: Bodyline bowling has assumed such proportions as to menace the best interests of the game, making protection of the body by the batsmen the main consideration.
This is causing intensely bitter feelings between the players as well as injury.
In our opinion it is unsportsmanlike.
Unless stopped at once it is likely to upset friendly relations existing between Australia and England.
I was riveted by the world unsportsmanlike’.
The English unsporting!
All hell will break loose in England, I though.
It would be about 2 am in London, I thought.
It would be about 2 am in London, still time to catch the stop-presses of the morning papers.
I prayed that somebody at Reuters would recognise the importance of the message.
Somebody did, I learnt later in the day and so did Viscount Lewisham, president of MCC.
Journalists woke him up in his bed with the news and, as I suspected, all hell broke loose.
The Australian Board has added insult to injury.
Not only had they sent a tactless cable but, seeing it was 2 am in England, decided to save money by sending it at reduced rates to be delivered when the MCC office opened at 9 am.
Viscount Lewisham was thus being asked to comment on a distasteful message from the colonies about seven hours before he would receive it.
A fulsomely congratulatory message to me from Reuters later in the day made me aware that no representative of my rival overseas agencies had been present at the Jeanes conference.
By sheer luck I had given Reuters their biggest news scoop since the assassination of Abraham Lincoln in 1865.
It was the beginning of a cable war between the Australian Board of Control and MCC, with both sides acutely aware of the massive amount of gatemoney at stake from record crowds.
The Australian Board eventually withdrew the stigma of ‘unsportsmanlike’ and the tour continued.
Meantime, Adelaide had become awash with journalists.
The Australian sensational Press excelled itself with stories of dissension in the MCC camp, with one preposterous story of Maurice Tate throwing a glass of beer over Jardine, a complete fabrication.
The Bodyline War was also being featured overseas, the Americans equating it with the ‘bean ball’ in baseball — a ball aimed at the opponent's head.
The Australian gutter Press cried ‘killers!’
The English gutter Press retaliated with ‘squealers!’
It would be an exaggeration to day that our party was ‘one big happy family’, but there was no real dissension.
Maurice Tate and the Nawab of Pataudi actively disliked Jardine, and Gubby Allen, in letters to his parents, recently made public, said he sometimes wanted to kill him.
Moreover, many of the party were deeply concerned at the idea of Bodyline being employed in English county cricket on their return home.
All these jealousies and disappointments and doubts were forgotten for the time being in the face of adversity.
We were a besieged party in a hostile camp, and it drew us together.
Relations between the two Test teams had soured, both on and off the field.
No longer were there any traditional visits to each other 's dressing-rooms.
Few of us were aware of the feverish political and diplomatic manoeuvres going on behind the scenes in Britain and Australia.
it was years before the full story was made public.
Worsening Anglo-Australian relations were the last thing the two countries wanted during the economic depression, yet Bodyline was even threatening a large British loan to Australia with a threat of sanctions.
After Adelaide, Bodyline was not exploited with quite the same intensity, but the crowds retained their fury at the mere sight of a ‘bumper’.
At the civic receptions they still sang God Dave the King , but we were no longer Jolly Good Fellows.
Little Eddie Paynter from Lancashire arose from a sick bed to hit a mighty six to  clinch the Ashes in the fourth Test at Brisbane, and nothing much else mattered after that.
We filed abroad the steamer for New Zealand like transported convicts.
Nobody from Australian cricket officialdom and not one member of the Australian team saw us off.
Warner had said, ‘Now thank we all our God!’ after the Ashes were won, and now we all echoed his words.
We were all glad it was over.
And that included me.
We had travelled about 40,000 miles, spent 63 nights in ships, 21 nights in train sleeping-cars and visited 30 different cities in five different countries.
Above: Harold Larwood could be said to have given his all — including the painfully damaged bones in his foot — for his country during England's 4–1 victory in the 1032–33 series
Cartoonists were kept busy during the Bodyline series, some mischievously, some, like this one, poignantly as the unhappy Australian summer drew to a close
New Zealanders gave us a rapturous welcome.
There has always been intense rivalry between New Zealand and Big Brother Australia.
The New Zealanders were jubilant that the Aussies had been humiliated, the more Bodyline the better.
The no-Bodyline, no-barracking matches in New Zealand were notable for Wally Hammond's 336 not out, breaking Bradman's 334 record against England in 1930.
On the way home through Canada I wrote the first few chapters of a book about my views on the tour.
Team members were greeted like conquering heroes on the return to Britain but the euphoria did not last.
disturbing new aspects of the tour began to circulate.
We went out separate ways, nearly all of us to be affected in one way or another by the Bodyline tour.
After it was all over, Bodyline was outlawed by MCC and world cricket; the wounds were healed; the British Empire was reunited.
Larwood refused to apologise for his bowling methods and was made a prime scapegoat of the affair.
He never played Test cricket again, but this was mainly because of the breakdown of his left foot in the fifth Test.
As noted Australian cricket-writer Ray Robinson put it, ‘Larwood died with his boots on.’
he was the finest fast bowler I ever saw.
Douglas Jardine was gradually dropped by the cricket Establishment and slipped into public obscurity.
He married and had four children and was adored by his family.
he died at 58 in 1958.
His grief-stricken widow destroyed all his cricket clothes and equipment.
I still regret that Jardine was do unbending towards me; we might even have become friends.
Bill O'Reilly has told me how he got to know Jardine in later tours of England as a cricketer and writer.
‘I drank champagne with him from a pewter pot in the rooms of the Master of Trinity at Oxford in 1948,’ he wrote.
‘We sank the bubbly as well as the hatchet.’
I'm sorry to this day that he and I could not have buried the hatchet as well.
Don Bradman, the catalyst of the affair, was only temporarily tamed, as his Test batting average of 56.57 testified.
Some criticised his method of combating Bodyline by stepping away to cut the ball to the off, but Bradman claimed that this exposed him to a greater risk of injury than the orthodox type of batting.
Neville Cardus wrote, ‘Bradman did little that was more wonderful and so highly charged with his own force of character than his dazzling improvisation, his neck-to-nothing brilliance, in the face of the ruthless challenge of Jardine.’
As for me, I obtained an audience with Reuters chairman Sir Roderick Jones to seek permission to write my book.
He asked whose side I was on, and when I told him I was strongly opposed to Bodyline he said he thought it would be better if I did not go on with it.
Understandably, I suppose, he did not want Reuters to become embroiled in controversy.
So it has taken me 60 years to finish the book I began in 1933.
The two pieces I have written for WCM are adapted from A Cuckoo in the Bodyline Nest which is almost completed and which I hope will be published later this year.
Readers will be interested to know that Mr Mant, now in his 90th year, has also recently had published a book on the fall of Singapore in 1942, another historic event to which he was witness.
COUNTY CRICKET
BRIDGING THE WINTER GAP
THE NEED FOR the majority of county cricketers to cobble together alternative employment for themselves for half the year has long been seen as a compromise on the professionalism of the game.
But now Nottinghamshire are hoping that a new £35,000 sponsorship with Midlands car dealers Swithland Motors will enable them to provide ‘job security’ for their contracted players all the year round.
Team manager John Birch (who shortly afterwards rocked the county by resigning, a few days after signing a new three-year contract) explained: ‘I have always felt that it was contrary to the best interests of a professional game to operate with a mainly semi-professional staff.
We've been trying for some time to employ as many players as possible during the winter, and this sponsorship means that it should be possible to take the worry of finding winter employment away from virtually all of them.
Derbyshire batsman John Morris: looking to resurrect a Test career blighted by the ‘Biggles’ incident
Sachin Tandulkar, Yorkshire's first-ever overseas player, does his best to look as if he has lived in the northern county all his life
‘Five or six of the younger lads will be fixed up in Australia, New Zealand or South Africa to further their education in the fame, and we usually reckon to have two or three players on international tours.
Others, like Tim Robinson and Derek Randall, have their own businesses so that leaves us to fix up about 10 or a dozen with work at Trent Bridge, coaching and helping the commercial department as well as working on their game.
Removing the worry of finding other jobs should make it easier for the players to focus on their cricket and there is also the hope that a couple of the kids to benefit from having our lads coaching them in the winter will develop into Notts players of the future.’
Lancashire's hope is that slow left-armer Alex Barnett, who has joined them from Middlesex, will develop over the next few seasons into the matchwinning spinner they have been seeking ever since Jack Simmons retired.
Neither of their offspinners, Dexter Fitton and Gary Yates, has yet claimed Simmons's mantle, and cricket manager Alan Ormrod admits: ‘The lack of consistent success from the spin department has been our most obvious weakness in the last couple of years.
Alex gives us some extra variety, he is a genuine spinner of the ball and he is keen to get his career moving forward after finding his progress blocked by the presence of Phil Tufnell at Middlesex.
They agreed to release him as an uncontested registration to enable him to find a county where he could hope for greater opportunities, and although we can't guarantee a first-team place, he'll get plenty of chances if he does the business.
But we must be patient.
The art of consistently successful spin bowling demands a long apprenticeship.
that's why we are not writing off our two offspinners.’
John Morris's international prospects have been widely written off ever since he played Algy to David Gower's Biggles in that amusing but ill-advised flying-circus routine on England's last Australian tour.
But his captain Kim Barnett believes Morris's England career can take off again and if he adds greater consistency and a harder-edged professionalism to exceptional natural gifts.
‘With players like Gooch, Lamb, Gower and Botham approaching the end of the road at international level an era is coming to a close,’ says Barnett.
‘There will be places up for grabs, but batsmen with less ability and in most cases less experience have overtaken John.
There's no reason for the door to stay shut for good over that flying incident, but it will only be opened if he wants it enough.’
Morris turned up for the new campaign with a sensational 133, the first 100 off 60 balls and the second 50 off only 16, against  Minor Counties champions Staffordshire in a pre-season testimonial match for Barnett.
‘It just made me wonder even more why such a destructive hitter has such a modest one day record, with an average of about 27,’ said his skipper.
A poignant moment from Durham's first-ever Benson & Hedges Cup match: Viv Richards of Glamorgan is caught and bowled by his old friend and former Somerset team-mate Ian Botham
Dean Jones lost no time in demonstrating his ability to hit the ball hard and often on his competitive debut for Durham, but the boundaries he scattered around and beyond the ropes during their Sunday League win over Lancashire were no more impressive than the speed with which he hurtled the singles and made ones into twos.
As his captain David Graveney observes: ‘He is bound to make a tremendous impact on our game by making everybody aware of what can be achieved by speed between the wickets.
I've seen him on television turning obvious singles into twos on huge grounds like Melbourne.
Now he is proving that he can do it here with 55-yard boundaries, and when he is batting with Paul Parker, another incredibly fast man between the wickets, it is going to be very difficult for sides to control them.’
Jones's international commitments (he departs for Australia's three-Test tour of Sri Lanka in August) will limit him to only four-fifths of the county season with Durham, but Graveney added: ‘His attitude to this situation is brilliant.
Because he will have to leave early to join up again with Australia, he feels he owes us runs from the word go.
He's a very aggressive batsman, but he finds the time to be a great encourager of his partners, and Phil Bainbridge is convinced that he's never run faster than when they were in together against Lancashire.’
There is no greater stimulant to enhanced performance than improved morale, and Leicestershire are happy to report that widely-reported disaffection in their camp is now ‘a thing of the past’.
It was no secret that the man-management methods of Bobby Simpson found favour with few during his two season in charge, and chief executive Mike Turner admits: ‘Our new cricket manager jack Birkenshaw has devoted a lot of attention to creating a new spirit in the dressing-room.
The atmosphere really is very good again.’
With seamers John Maguire and Craig Wilkinson following Simpson out of Grace Road, Alan Mullally is the only Australian left on the staff, and Mr Turner revealed: ‘there is now a strong hope that his fitness problems can be spoken of in the past tense.
He played a full season of grade cricket in Western Australia during our winter, without any recurrence of the back problems which limited him to under 40 overs in the Championship for us last summer.
With Vince Wells, our new recruit from Kent, making a very good early impression and Winston Benjamin returning this summer we are confident that we've reinforced our foundations.’
Yorkshire's Paul Jarvis also started encouragingly, with a career-best Benson & hedges Cup return against Warwickshire to comfort Yorkshire for the loss of their first-choice overseas players Craig McDermott.
The Australian's withdrawal from a three year contract immediately shifted a considerable burden back onto Jarvis, but the former England seamer is not lacking in confidence about his prospects.
Doubts about his motivation were expressed during a long absence through injury last season, and Jarvis claims: ‘It was pretty obvious that some people thought there wasn't really much wrong with me.
It wasn't until a physiotherapist found a vertical tear in the hamstring that they had to admit I was injured and that there was nothing wrong with my motivation.
‘Now I'm fit again and I have plenty of ambitions to fulfil.
if the ban on those of us who went to South Africa with Mike Gatting is lifted in July I believe I can win back a place in the England side.
but obviously I must succeed for Yorkshire first, and with a batsman, Sachin Tendulkar, joining us instead of another quick bowler it is more than ever important that I do so.’
CRICKET IN YOUR WALLET
THE reverse side of the new £10 note features a scene from one of the most famous of fictional cricket matches — the game between Dingley Dell and All Muffleton, as described in Charles Dickens's Pickwick Papers .
The new note was issued on April 29 
I spy three spinners
THERE WAS this bizarre dream I had.
One or two counties were actually playing three spinners.
And then, of course, I woke up and I dutifully read my papers…to discover it had actually happened.
It seems churlish to analyse whether such selection abnormalities were prompted by early-season strains.
One likes to take the more romantic and nostalgic view.
In any case, let's adjust the mundane balance of recent decades and start with the slow bowlers.
Shaun Udal is the 23-year-old Hampshire Offspinner who up to now in a brief career has stimulated discussion in the Press-boxes mostly over the favoured pronunciation of his name.
There are indeed more pertinent matters to exercise the media mind — following his career-best 8 for 50 against Sussex at Southampton.
He bowled for 23 overs and looked an old head, certainly not one who had failed to play a single championship match last season.
The first three Sussex batsmen were BOWLED by him.
Those present claimed there was not too much natural turn in the pitch to help him.
‘Shaun is a thinking bowler.
He knows the value of variety, and flights the ball well,’ a Solent admirer related.
Hampshire offspinner Shaun Udal took 8 for 50 against Sussex in his first Championship match for two years
Durham open their innings as a first-class county, as Paul Parker (left) and John Glendenen go out to bat against Oxford University in the Parks
On my next visit to Southampton I tried in vain for a chat with the young man who had just won a match for Hampshire and deserved to bask in a discreet amount of praise.
He was said to be level-headed and unlikely to be affected by a few fancy words.
But Mark Nicholas, his captain, took a rather more protective attitude.
He appeared to think too much acclaim might be detrimental as well as premature.
It does seem to me that young professional cricketers should be able temperamentally to cope with the occasional excesses of the Fourth Estate.
Skipper Nicholas understands the publicity business better than many of his counterparts.
I've always found him accessible himself.
Maybe there was a valid reason to steer Udal away from the notebooks.
So I'll simply suggest, on as yet limited evidence, that of the present nap-hand or so of offspinners with the apparent potential to elevate their status.
Udal could emerge as the best bet of all.
As far as I can see, he has no irksome signs of too much self-assurance.
And, whatever the visual indications in the Sussex match, he whispered to me — marginally out of the skipper's hearing — that he felt his natural skill was to spin the ball rather than flight.
Another slow bowler, though one with infinitely more experience, is Worcestershire's Richard Illingworth.
He has played for his country and gives the impression, out on the field, of being a wise old campaigner.
but one suspects there were times last summer when he was suffering some torment.
In fact, he came bottom of the county's Championship bowling averages.
he took only 26 wickets at 37.34.
The early wickets that came Illingworth's way this season must have been particularly timely to boost the morale.
There is Richard Stemp at his shoulder, hoping for increased scope.
One remembers when David Graveney and John Childs both played for Gloucestershire; the inclusion of two slow left-arm bowlers is not a complete rarity.
Tim Curtis is not afraid to leave out seamers — but it still looks as if Illingworth and Stemp will mostly be competing for one place.
By far the most intriguing announcement in Wales also carried a competitive element, even if it had nothing at all to do with slow bowlers.
The debate over Matthew Maynard's appointment as vice-captain of Glamorgan rumbles on in the pubs along the  banks for the Taff, Hugh Morris, who was overlooked, remains tactfully silent.
It was a surprising move.
Some still persist in their view that Morris burnt his boat when he chose previously to hand over the captaincy, saying in effect that he thought his cricket was suffering because of it.
Once intimate told me: ‘Now he'd just come back from the ‘A’ tour and his confidence was sky-high when he learned, at second hand as far as I know, that Matthew was going to be vice-captain.
Insensitively done, I'm afraid.’
How often have we heard that — and at how many different counties over the years?
Man-management never seems to improve that much.
Tony Lewis, the Glamorgan chairman and certainly a person of some sensitivity himself, has gone into print: to soften the arguments and smooth the flow of the ageless Taff.
Morris is due a benefit before too long and, despite fears in some Celtic quarters, I cannot see him leaving Glamorgan.
If the gritty Hugh is away opening for his country, then no doubt there is a stronger case for testing out the leadership qualities of Maynard, who has himself been the subject of some speculation concerning the furniture vans.
Viv Richards, who came for a quiet life, is left privately shaking his head and wondering whether there will ever be a perfect world — and a county side blissfully, permanently free from controversy.
Ironically, Morris could well have found himself taking charge of Glamorgan at the start of the season.
Alan butcher's calf injury has been a matter of growing concern.
We must now wait to discover how much Maynard relishes the captain's job, coming to him much earlier than he can have imagined, and whether — as in the case of Morris back in 1989 — it affects his form and composure.
It strikes me that Glamorgan have left themselves with another internal problem they could have done without now they are rebuilding and looking for stability after those years of committee trauma and musical chairs among the skippers.
Who takes over when Butcher gives up?
Someone is going to be very disappointed.
Before we leave Glamorgan, a word of congratulation to Stephen James, who has been opening in place of Butcher and compiling runs with the kind of technique that reveals how earnestly he is trying to establish himself this summer.
he made his debut as long ago as 1985; then came Cambridge, and intermittent promise back at Cardiff and Swansea.
Tony Middleton had his first Championship match the season before James.
he, too, has had to wait, partly because of Chris Smith's consistency.
But I have a feeling that the likeable Hampshire opener will develop into one of the most dependable top-order batsmen in the country.
There will be no dynamics, maybe not an obvious ability to adjust the scoring rate when it is needed.
He has all the same worked tirelessly through the winter months with coach Tim Tremlett, slightly changing his grip and attempting to add to his repertoire of strokes.
He's also a good judge of a quick run.
So, of course, is Paul Terry at the other end.
The telepathy is working and extra singles are being clocked up.
Hampshire have on paper a well-balanced side; they should be title-chasing.
That is also the hope of Warwickshire.
Andy Lloyd believes they ultimately failed last year because of the onerous programme confronting them, as they competed in all directions for an elusive honour: ‘There was so much concerted effort and no reward.
Now I'd like to thing that an equal amount of effort can work more in our favour if it happens to be channelled towards a specific competition.’
Early-season selection was not easy.
There were the injuries to Dermot Reeve, Gladstone Small, Tim Munton and Keith  Piper.
Lloyd did well to nurse Small through one or two key matches, relying on the bowler's experience even when not flat out.
Roger Twose had only two Championship matches in 1991, I'll be surprised if he fails markedly to build on that meagre statistic.
This Devonian is more than a useful one-day cricketer who does his stuff as a medium-pace seamer. he is rated as a sound technical batsman, sure-footed against the spinner and able to get the short-pitched bowling away.
This is — and we can say the same about a dozen or so batsmen in our region including Somerset's luckless Ricky Bartlett and Gloucestershire's Mark Alleyne — a crucial summer for him.
Warwickshire again look a team with an almost exclusively seam attack.
They will still be leaning at times on the accuracy of left-arm Yorkshireman Paul Booth or, for the one-days, maybe on Neil Smith.
But the relatively narrow seam of slow bowling in the county must be exercising the minds of Lloyd and Bob Woolmer.
There has remained for several seasons now an imbalance in the bowling resources at Edgbaston.
I was chided for implying in last month's notes that Somerset looked rather a better bet than Gloucestershire.
It is hard to revise that opinion, having seen the early results.
But I was around when Tim Hancock, a self-confident 20-year-old, completed his maiden hundred.
he has a burly pair of shoulders and an inclination to go for his shots.
Coach Andy Stovold has the kind of brief that cannot be envied as he tries to add technique and confidence to fledgling players.
Hancock could turn into one of his successes.
Warwickshire offspinner Neil Smith, who has been entrusted with the vital closing overs of several one-day matches
Richard Scott's injury was untimely, Left-hander Simon Hink's arrival from Kent, though heralded with no immediate personal landmarks, can still prove to be a quietly wise investment by Gloucestershire.
His partnership with Dean Hodgson, disappointed to be left out at the start, could develop into a reassuring one.
Latest quiz question for rainy afternoons: where will you find the latest twins in county cricket?
The answer is Somerset.
Keith and Kevin Parsons, 19 this May, come from Taunton.
Their ‘identical’ progress has been closely monitored through schoolboy cricket.
They have represented their country at Under-19 level.
Now the obvious ambition is to make their first-class debuts together.
Could be confusing from the scorebox — and the Press-box.
Vice-captaincy was an issue mentioned earlier.
At Somerset, the post went to Richard harden.
it was a popular one for a talented and local boy.
But there was a school of thought which advocated the claims of Andy Hayhurst, the Lancashire exile who has filled capably one of the opening-bat vacancies left by the departures of Cook and Roebuck.
Nice thought to give honourary life membership for former chairman Michael Hill and that elder statesman of the Press-box, Eric Hill, once Fimblett's partner at the top of the order.
Just under 40 years ago, he and two other journalistic colleagues — one of them the late Ron Roberts — had the courage to call a public meeting because they were so concerned about the way the county club was being run.
The Somerset establishment ganged up on them, wrongly accused them of being troublemakers, and one committee member tried shamefully to get them sacked from their newspapers.
Somerset CCC made its peace and admitted its mistake a long time ago.
The life membership to Eric is richly earned.
Fletcher moves on
BREAKING UP, as Neil Sedaka once put it, is hard to do.
In the case of Essex and Keith Fletcher it may well verge on the impossible.
Like Laurel and Hardy, Leiber and Stoller, and Callard and Bowser, the existence of one without the other is simply unthinkable.
small wonder the next England manager agonised so long over a job that any other candidate (were there any?) would have mulled over for about half a second.
On three tours with England ‘A’ Fletcher has always played his cards within a hair's breadth of his chest.
The overriding impression, nevertheless, was of a man content with his lot.
Breathing wisdom into young brains appeared to be enough.
but with Essex now well entrenched as a dominant force, the thirst for a challenge evidently needed slaking again.
If marriage really is more harmonious the second time around, England should be celebrating the return of the urn sometime next July.
If not, only one party is likely to seek a divorce/
It does not seem unreasonable to suggest that Graham Gooch would never have got any further than being Ted Dexter's favourite wet fish had it not been for Fletcher's overwhelming if understated influence.
That Essex should amass their highest one-day total a couple of weeks after sustaining their lowest, as they did against Scotland (388 for 7) and Lancashire (61), merely added gloss to the Svengali touch.
Forget the shambling, apologetic gait, forget the quizzical expression: the game has known few shrewder competitors than the Gnome.
Those of an unkind disposition might argue that mangling a non-first-class attack is not an especially big deal.
Sussex, though, are unlikely to be among the cynical chorus, not after their slip-up against the Minor Counties on a Marlow marsh made them the 14th first-class county in 55– or 6–overs play to have their colours lowered by junior opposition.
The pomp of Parks, Thompson and Dexter must seem further away than ever for a club that has now failed to progress beyond the group stages in 12 of the 21 Benson & Hedges Cup.
I'VE SPENT a long time cultivating this dour image, I'm not going to spoil it now.
Mark Ramprakash of Middlesex had a mixed start to the season, a 57-ball century following a £500 fine for an outburst against a Cambridge University batsman
Life, however, is more about building on the little triumphs than moping about disasters, and Carlos Remy certainly enjoyed a rare taste of the former during the Championship drubbing at Southampton.
One of the nine graduates from the estimable Haringey (now London) Cricket College to have passed through the first-class portals, the seamer from St Lucia found himself plopped at the top of the order in the absence of four injured batsmen, this despite a previous firstclass output of 0 and 4 not out.
In the event he contributed 26 and 13, outscoring David Smith during each of their liaisons.
It was back to the 2nd XI after that, but the memory will tingle for a while yet.
The other Hove pups are coming along nicely.
The absence of Neil Lenham (how many times have I written that, I wonder?) handed Keith Greenfield a more regular opportunity to open, one this Brighton beau has grabbed enthusiastically, twice registering 55-overs bests, narrowly missing a Sunday best and forming such a productive partnership with Jamie Hall that Smith found himself at first drop for the initial one-dayers.
Affluent if not always prudent strokeplayer, Greenfield was the first YTS graduate to sign for Sussex, and duly led then to the 2nd XI pennant in 1990.
If he seems to have had a foot in the door for an awfully long time then that is probably because he made his debut as an 18–year-old during the Dermot Reeve era.
The other foot may well have crossed the threshold.
Andrew Robson, a 21-year-old fast medium bowler from Tyne and Wear who toured Australia with the England Under–19 party three winters ago, has made a speedy impression since being released by Surrey.
He emerged intact from a chastening first championship appearance in a Martlet sweater, taking the only Hampshire wicket to fall on a gruelling opening day and bowling more overs than anyone all told.
With Adrian Jones experiencing run-up stutters, this was followed by a stingy stint against Gloucestershire in the B&H and then a career-best 4 for 37 to dismantle Somerset.
Ex-ovalteenies normally flourish at Lord's (Emburey, Selvey) and fade at Hove (Storey, Arnold, Long) but Robson, himself an ex-MCC boot-boy, could be an exception.
Unloading a winter's worth of frustration in just over an hour, Mark Ramprakash's murderous 57–ball hundred at Grace Road, the swiftest for Middlesex in one-day cricket, had flourish with knobs on.
As exorcisms go, it was infinitely preferable to hurling verbal stakes at a callow Cambridge offspinner.
Not the least remarkable aspect of that day was that the county should record their highest total in the limited-overs arena, no fewer than 15 years after M. J. Smith and Graham Barlow had given Sarfraz and Bedi a spring clean to register the only previous Seaxe score in excess of 300.
Since only Lancashire have won more 55– or 60–overs trophies (and barely at that, 7 to 6), this would seem to confound any theories about the one-day form being a batsman's prerogative.
That Ramprakash should have come so close to being suspended for his Fenner's folly was sad but instructive.
He received a ban some years ago for losing his temper while playing in that veritable hive of provocation known as Australian grade cricket, and this latest ruckus began, apparently, when Marcus Wight (whose father, the umpire, Peter, should have taught him better) proffered a few choice words of his won upon dismissing Ramprakash in the first innings.
Even Desmond Haynes has been known to succumb to ragging of that ilk, but he surely will have advised his county colleague that there is only one foolproof means of revenge.
Ah, growing pains.
Pain of a rather more tangible nature brought about Ricky Ellcock's tragically premature retirement.
Admittedly, the back condition responsible is partly congenital, but that cannot disguise the root cause, namely over-use.
That, at least, is the view of Johnny Johnson, the orthopaedic surgeon who treated him.
According to research conducted both by Daryl Foster, the Kent coach and Jim Davies, the Essex physiotherapist, the flogging begins in a fast bowler's mid-teens, when the bones are still forming, and continues unabated, the present county structure permitting scant time for recovery from the thump and grind.
Dare one hope that the Murrey Report will have alleviated the situation by the time these words are read?
For that matter, dare one write off Allan lamb's Test career?
On the evidence of his prolific plundering over the opening furlongs only those with a penchant for an eggy face would do so with any lack of compunction.
Notwithstanding an iffy technique against spin you would still back him to take the attack to Pakistan ahead of the brat pack snapping at his heels.
Lamb's statement of intent will nonetheless have been tinged with disappointment on a communal level.
Unfortunate to be grouped with Essex, Lancashire in the first place, but what, pray, is the point of 8.30 finishes in matches afforded a reserve day?
Beats me.
I must also admit to being at something of a loss to explain why Darren Bicknell continues to flit between millionaires' row and Cannery Row.
At his best, such as the 70 that kick-started Surrey's comprehensive B&H thwacking of Middlesex, there are few sweeter timers of a drive in the land.
There are far worse things an aspiring Test opener can do, moreover, than score a century in full view of the captain on the first day of the season.
Unhappily, the varnish was tarnished by a golden duck against Yorkshire, reawakening the ghosts of three ‘A’ tours that have done scant justice to a considerable talent.
The self-analysis is disarmingly frank, ‘Keith Fletcher and Geoff Arnold have both said that I'm my own biggest enemy, that I don't believe in myself.
I do feel I've under-achieved on the ‘A’ tours, constantly getting good twenties and thirties and no further, but maybe I was trying too hard.
I like to get on with it at home, but when I've toured I've been so desperate to do well, so conscious of not getting out, that I become negative.
having said that, I do believe I'm becoming a better player every season and the process hasn't stopped yet.’
Rudi Bryson had barely started his county career when he vindicated Robin Jackman's recommendation with one unplayable delivery, having Mike Gatting caught via a self-preserving splice on the same Oval surface that his new team-mates had earlier milked at their leisure.
Built like a prop forward, a pair of huge shoulders generate sharp pace from an approach that evokes a rampant rhino.
Inelegant, maybe, but mightily effective for all that.
The same could be said of Kent's Matthew Fleming, whose flair for adventure would have thrilled his late Uncle Ian to bits.
Having thundered 116 from 109 balls against West Indies last year, he had a ball against the Pakistanis, threatening a twist to a predictable tale with 74 off 44 balls in a one day warm-up that became a tad too hot to handle.
This was no passing hurricane.
Match-winning assaults of 69 from 51 balls against Somerset and 66 off 62 balls against Yorkshire brought Fleming his first two Gold Awards, helping Kent construct the only 100% record in the B&H zonal rounds.
Carl Hooper was another vital spark-plug with his cunning offspin, so too Mark Benson.
What with Alan Ealham directing the county's youth coaching, Mike Denness sitting on the general committee and Graham Johnson letting bygones be bygones by joining the cricket committee, the shadow of the 1970s looms large.
Who knows, maybe some of the magic is rubbing off.
ALL-TIME ENGLAND ONE-DAY XI
The special qualities needed for success in limited-overs cricket are now well enough known.
PETER HARTLAND looks down the corridors of history and produces what he sees as the supreme England one-day team
WHILE WATCHING the recent World Cup on television, I was struck, even more than I have been before, by how different are the demands on players in this form of cricket compared with the five-day game.
It follows, of course, that selectors have to look at very different criteria when choosing their teams, and nowhere is this more evident than in the field.
In the Test team, the three key fielding positions are those of the wicketkeeper and first the second slips.
To win Test matches, one has to take wickets consistently, and a high proportion of chances come off the outside edge of the bat.
Selectors have to ensure that they have three good specialists in this area.
In the one-day game, the priority is to save every run, and it is the outfielder who assumes hey importance.
As many of the XI as possible need to excel at intercepting, chasing and throwing — as well as catching, of course.
Similarly, the bowlers' principal purpose is to contain.
Wickets are important, but not at the expense of a high run rate.
Accuracy and steadiness under pressure are more important than the ability to produce the odd unplayable ball.
Although a minimum of five bowlers is needed, it is sensible to have a sixth, and even a seventh, in case of injury, or loss of form or effectiveness.
Batting in a limited-overs match is a high-risk business, and the batsman who is unwilling to take chances on improvised shots and sharp runs is of no use.
Speed of scoring, flowing from a range of strokes, is more important than a watertight technique.
Wickets have to be sacrificed in a challenging run chase, so it is essential that the sidebats down as far as No. 8, preferably lower.
With an efficient wicketkeeper to be included, it is clear that three or more allrounders are required.
Because the pace of the one-day match is so much faster, the strain on the captain is more concentrated.
he has to be able to sudden changes in the game's pattern, for a single lack of judgment is likely to be more decisive than in the longer game.
Taking all this into account, I decided to choose an All-Time England One-Day XI.
I am considering all players who have represented England in international cricket, not just those who have appeared in one-day international matches since their introduction in 1971.
The team will play to the rules laid down for the 1992 World Cup.
Of those English cricketers to have played in one-day internationals, the most successful have been Graham Gooch and Allan Lamb, both of whom average around 40 with the bat.
It can be estimated that na average of 40 in these games is the equivalent of 50 in Test cricket, where there is time to build an innings.
Lamb's achievement is the more impressive in that he hardly ever bats higher than No. 4.
G. L. Jessop magically comes into the picture to catch a top edge from All-Time XI teammate Allan Lamb
It is best, though, to start with the bowlers.
Who have been the most accurate and consistent English fast bowlers of the past 100 years or so?
Not Trueman, Tyson, Snow or Willis, certainly, nor Tom Richardson, who was always willing to trade runs for wickets.
Larwood stands out, but even he was not as accurate as Brian Statham.
The latter's fine outfielding is another attraction, though he was no batsman to speak of.
Larwood had a good arm, and was a useful lateorder hitter, but he cannot go in any higher than No. 9 in this side.
Sydney Barnes, probably England's greatest bowler, was virtually never attacked successfully, despite the many variations in his medium-pace deliveries.
he really has to play, even though he will contribute little with the bat or in the field.
If these three are all to be included, the remaining eight players must al be able to bat well, which means that we are looking for at least three allrounders, including the wicketkeeper.
One would have thought that Ian Botham would be an ideal choice, but his one-day record argues otherwise.
Chris Lewis is another contender, not least in the field, but he has not achieved quite enough at this early stage in his career.
George Hirst would contribute in all three departments: his left-arm inswing from round the wicket would give variety to the attack, he could make runs quickly (never mind that a large proportion would come from pull shots off the stumps), and was a superb mid-off fieldsman.
Another dynamic cricketer was George Lohmann, an essentially attacking bowler.
Tate or Bedser would manage a good economy rate, and the former would make some runs, but neither was the lithest of athletes.
Slow bowling can be decisive in one-day cricket, and we must have at least one tight spinner.
They do not come any more accurate than Derek Underwood, but his batting and fielding weigh against him.
Verity is another possibility, but I do not see him batting No. 8 in this team.
The same applies to Laker, and to another master of length and line, Alfred Shaw, Rhodes could bat, of course, and would get people out, but how many runs might he concede in 10 overs?
With this issue temporarily unresolved, we will move on to the batting.
Jack Hobbs has to open, and will no doubt adapt to whatever pitch or match conditions he is faced with, as well as saving plenty of runs in the field.
An attacking partner would be ideal, and I would go for the left-handed Woolley, one of the most rapid-scoring or batsmen, particularly against fast bowling.
With only two men outside the circle for the first 15 overs, he could run riot in the way that Greatbatch has done recently for New Zealand.
It is interesting to note that many fast bowlers during the 1920s and 1930s employed a long-off when bowling to Woolley, who was also, of course, a very useful slow left-arm bowler, who could probably be entrusted to get through 10 overs at reasonable cost.
One of the only two batsmen to average  50 in first-class cricket before the First World War, and with a career average exceeded only by Hick and Boycott among players to have represented England, K. S. Ranjitsinhji was another of the fastest scorers, dealing in deft deflections as well as, at times, the big-hitting game.
The Indian prince relished fast bowling, so will bat at No.3 in my side, and also field brilliantly anywhere.
When fast scoring is discussed, there is one name which comes up more often than any other, and which should, in fairness, have been the first to have been entered on this teamsheet. it has been estimated that Gilbert Jessop —‘The Croucher’— made his runs at an average rate of 80 per hour, a phenomenal statistic.
He made plenty of them too: hundreds and double-hundreds, including probably the most famous century in Test history.
Appropriately here, he was also one of the greatest of cover fieldsmen, and could bowl with pace but little accuracy from round the wicket.
Jessop could bat anywhere in the order, but I will have him at No.5, on the understanding that he is prepared to move up should the situation call for more urgency.
it would be nice to have him batting with Lamb during the last 20 overs.
I really should include one player who has actually produced the goods in the one-day arena, as opposed to those who might have done, given the opportunity.
it is only recently that advancing years have diminished Lamb's natural prowess in the outfield.
On this subject, I am going to jump the gun and name my 12th man, who is not really a genuine reserve, but simply England's best-ever allround fielder: A. P. F. Chapman.
The wicketkeeper needs to be able to bat, and for all Alan Knott's innovative ability and competitiveness, the vote has to go to Les Ames.
One place remains, and who shall have it?
Grace?
Hammond?
Hutton?
Great players all, but builders of an innings rather than consistently fast scorers.
What about Compton?
Opponents would have difficulty keeping him quiet.
Well, let us see what out team lacks at this stage.
We are a little short of slow bowling, having just Woolley, but also need someone who can hit out in the middle order.
A good fielder would obviously help.
And then who is going to captain this side?
There is no obvious candidate from among the 10 already chosen, and indecisive leadership can easily turn a one-day victory into defeat.
My final choice will doubtless find few supporters elsewhere, but I want someone with the dynamism to ensure that no winning opportunity is missed.
The team's full potential must be realised, and it will be led by Percy Fender.
But, I hear the man never captained England, and hardly ever appeared at international level.
Be that as it may, we have more than once witnessed the potential of legspin in limited-overs cricket.
Fender boasts one of the fastest centuries on record, and was also a good field.
Crucially, there have been few captains more adept at winning against long odds, which, as Pakistan have recently demonstrated, is the very essence of one-day cricket.
BIZARRE DISMISSALS
ENGLAND'S 1973–74 Test series in West Indies had many things to savour: Sobers became the first man to score 8000 Test runs.
Amiss and Boycott batted superbly (1084 runs between them).
Lawrence Rowe scored a triple and two single centuries, a certain A. M. E. Roberts made his Test debut, and Tony Greig bowled England to victory with 13 wickets in the final Test.
In this remarkable series, drawn 1–1, it was ironic that the most memorable event centred around one of cricket's most bizarre dismissals (or non-dismissals, as it turned out).
Going into the first Test at Port-of-Spain under the leadership of Mike Denness, England were put in and bowled out for a meagre 131 (Greig top-scored with 37).
On the second day they saw West Indian batsman Alvin Kallicharran amass what was then his highest Test score.
The little left-hander, 142 not out, watched from the non-striker's end as Bernard Julien played the last ball of the day, bowled by Underwood, defensively on the off side and turned to walk to the pavilion.
Alan Knott, England's wicketkeeper, obligingly removed the bails and began pulling the stumps out, presumably to save square-leg umpire Gosein the job.
Kallicharran, assuming that the entertainment had been concluded for the day, also set off for the dressing-room.
Simultaneously the ball reached Breig at silly mid-off. he claimed later that he reacted instinctively on seeing Kalli several yards out of his ground, threw down the bowler's wicket and appealed.
Umpire Douglas Sang Hue, who interestingly had moved into a square-on position and thus was perfectly placed to adjudicate, gave the startled batsman run out.
‘Kalli,’ wrote Denness in his autobiography, ‘was so angry that he smashed his bat so savagely on the pavilion steps that it broke in two.’
That's angry!
Uproar followed.
Many felt that what had happened may have been within the laws of the game but was certainly outside the spirit, and could have serious consequences for the rest of the tour.
A long meeting between the captains, umpires and officials concluded that it would be in the best interests of all if Greig's appeal was withdrawn and Kallicharran allowed to continue his innings.
This was delayed until after the rest day, taking much of the heat out of the situation, and a public hand-shaking by the two players concluded the issue.
As it happened, Kalli was soon out for 158, but his contribution helped West Indies to a decisive first-innings lead of 261 and, ultimately, an easy seven-wicket victory — their first defeat of England in the Caribbean for 20 years.
History Workshop
Huw Richard's series continues with a visit to Peter Wynne-Thomas at Trent Bridge
MOST HISTORIANS simply rely on archives — Peter Wynne-Thomas has gone a step further by creating one.
Go through an unobtrusive door at the back of the Trent Bridge pavilion then turn left into a book-lined room, and on any match day you'll find the central table occupied by the owner of a moustache of impressively Victorian dimensions, like as not tapping away on a venerable-looking typewriter.
Peter set up Nottinghamshire's library in the winter of 1978–79 with the assistance of then chairman Dick Milnes: ‘I spent the winter filling in gaps in the collection and disposing of the duplicates.
The question was then what should be done with it — and there was no point in setting up the collection unless it was going to be a working library.
I said that I would come in for every match and sit in the library and deal with questions and enquiries — there was no point in simply having it supervised by a steward who might know nothing about books or history.’
Club archivist
He was appointed club archivist and librarian, with a small honorarium.
Today the collection is one of the best in the country, and more readily accessible than that at Lord's.
He fields a steady stream of enquiries, not only from visitors —‘You never know what you are going to be asked next’— but from the growing number of researchers aware of his expertise and experience.
Much of the stock consists of books that might be found elsewhere — though rarely in such a comprehensive collection.
But there is also an important archive of unique research material, most of it contributed by Peter.
His researches go back to the 1950s: ‘I was always fascinated by history — I spent five years as an architecture student and the reason why I didn't get through was that by the end I was much more interested in the history of architecture than other aspects of the subject,’ he recalls.
A Notts member from 1949–50, he set himself the task of tracing every man who either had played for the county or gone from there to play for another county: ‘I had no particular idea of being a historian or publishing anything, and I wasn't particularly worried about the Hardstaffs, the Larwoods and the other famous players.
My interest was in the players who had been forgotten — I simply wanted to know what had happened to people,’ he said.
This pursuit of around 700 life histories occupied his spare time for years: ‘I spent 10 years in Nottingham library going through the old newspapers and noting every reference to cricket up to 1880.
After that they got so frequent that I had to select.’
This was supplemented by visits to the towns and villages of the county to interview relatives and search in graveyards and parish registers for biographical detail: ‘It was simple curiosity.
I was working on my own and I wasn't aware of anyone doing similar work — or that anyone would be interested in what I was doing.’
But what he did come to recognise was the inadequacy of existing literature: ‘I realised that the main writers on history and statistics at the time had done very little research and were relying on a few books.
They simply weren't aware of the mass of material available to them.’
Peter Wynne-Thomas, who created his own archive at Trent Bridge and is now the guardian of Nottinghamshire's impressive library
The work redoubled in intensity after the later 1960s, when he realised that he could afford to go part-time as an architectural assistant and create more time for the research.
The final product, published in 1971 with Dick Milnes's assistance, was Nottinghamshire Cricketers 1821–1914 , a limited edition of 250 including an essay on the career and life of every player form that period.
It was the second winner of the annual Cricket Society book award.
A second volume, covering the interwar generation, appeared in 1980.
Those two painstaking decades produced more than two books of biographies.
they created a formidably exhaustive archive of researched material on the game in Nottinghamshire — for instance there is a file on every county player in a cabinet in the library.
And they gave Peter an ideal grounding in the game's history: ‘I was very fortunate in that my county, Notts, were involved in so much — William Clarke, George Parr and the touring XIs, Alfred Shaw, Arthur Shrewsbury and the early tours of Australia — and there were a large number of players who appeared for other counties.
Simply by studying Nottinghamshire I developed a strong general knowledge of cricket.’
He was among the founders of the Association of Cricket Statisticians in 1973, playing a prominent role in their series of publications on the players of each first-class county and producing the A to Z of Cricket Records in 1976: ‘I had seen a book on the football records and persuaded the publisher to try a similar volume on cricket records — not only listing them by explaining them.
Previous record books had been rather austere collections of lists,’ he recalls.
The Notts archives were invaluable in producing his two books on touring teams: ‘Nobody had ever written a book on cricket tours and I reaped the benefit of all my early digging again.’
The two have since been combined in a single volume.
And a combination of that early research and the Trent Bridge base aided his biography of Arthur Shrewsbury,Give Me Arthur : ‘One day the door opened and an elderly man who introduced himself as a relative of Shrewsbury came in.
I asked him, ‘Have you got any old letters in the attic?’ and he said ‘Yes!’’, is his mildly amazed recall of this historian's jackpot — one which he then capitalised on by a determined digging out of all the other surviving relatives, enabling the construction of the definitive Shrewsbury family tree in the book.
Research skills
Having applied his newspaper-research skills to hunting out pre–1800 references to the fame, he hankers after an opportunity to produce a researched, scholarly history of the game as a whole: ‘There hasn't been a proper history since Rowland Bowen's, and a great deal has been discovered since then.
Altham was a nice writer, but he wasn't a researcher.’
Succeeding in this would make up for previous frustration in attempts to follow Bowen.
After several years as a regular contributor and recipient of the irascible Mahor's voluminous correspondence, he was due to succeed as editor of Cricket Quarterly in 1970, and was foiled by a change of mind: ‘he decided that it was too personal a project, and he couldn't let anyone else take it on,’ he remembers.
Finding a publisher prepared to fill this considerable gap may not, he recognises, be easy.
But he'll go on applying the skills learnt on those days in the Nottingham library to a wider cricketing canvas, and using that cast accumulated knowledge to enlighten others — not least the thousands of schoolchildren who visit Trent Bridge in parties each year: ‘Last season we had several hundred children through on the day when Derek Randall needed one run to complete his 20,000 for the county — and I made certain they all knew about the landmark.
When Derek got the run they all cheered and a reporter commented that they had given him a great welcome, but could not possibly have known the significance of the run.
I was able to tell him that Nottingham children are better educated than he realised!’ he recalls happily.
FORGET ABOUT THE PAST
QAMAR AHMED looks at the Pakistan tourists
INTOXICATED as they are with the feeling that they are the World Cup champions, Pakistan, after only a brief stay at home which included a pilgrimage to Meccas at the government's expense to offer their thanks to the Almighty Allah — besides cash awards at home from every quarter — are now here to take on England in a series of five Tests, and, for the first time in this country, five one-day internationals.
In this, their third full tour and their ninth Test-playing visit to England, lasting 117 days, Pakistan will be playing 34 matches, including a three-day game against a World XI which itself will be a test of their nerves and fitness.
Gruelling and demanding as the tour is likely to be, the tourists will of course be aiming to win yet another series in England.
Psychologically, in fact, they have a slight edge over their indomitable opponents.
In England in 1987 and at home immediately after the 1987 World Cup, Pakistan defeated England in the Test series by a 1–0 margin.
Sadly, though, the series in Pakistan was marred by umpiring controversy, and a whole day in the Faisalabad Test was lost as Shakoor Rana and Mike Gatting allegedly threw insults at each other after the England captain was warned for incommoding the batsman.
However, although that was all in the past the memory of it lingers on whenever a match between the two countries is mentioned.
I only hope that both teams will restrain themselves and will try to avoid carrying on the so-called ‘feud’.
both sides are full of promising and talented men, and the present series could well become one of the best played between the two countries if good sense prevails.
The England captain is a level-headed man, and Javed Mianded, who turns 35 on June 12, is a much matured person with the added responsibility of leading his team to England for the first time, although he has captained Pakistan in 28 previous Tests, winning 11 and losing five, the rest being drawn.
The masterly batsman Mianded is no stranger to English conditions or English cricket.
Over the years he has played league cricket and county cricket for Sussex and Glamorgan with resounding success, and on his last trip to England thrilled the crowd with a magnificent display of strokemaking at the Oval, scoring 260 as Pakistan ran up the imposing total of 708.
After Imran Khan was ruled our of the tour because of his shoulder injury, Miandad was the obvious choice, and a popular one too from the players' and selectors' points of view.
Another fine batsman, Salim Malik, is his deputy.
The team is a blend of youth and experience, and comprises eight batsmen, six fast bowlers, two wicketkeepers and one specialist spinner.
Five of them might be termed allrounders: Asif Mujtaba, Naved Anjum, Wasim Akram, Aamer Sohail and Shoaib Mohammad can all bat and bowl well, while Salim Malik and Inzamam-ul-Haq are also occasional bowlers.
Opener Ramiz Raja started the tour in fine form, with an innings of 172 against Worcestershire.
Seven members of the current team — Mianded, Salim Malik, Asif Mujtaba, openers Shoaib Mohammad and Ramiz Raja, and left-arm pace bowlers Wasim Akram and Salim Jaffer — were here on their last tour.
Wicketkeeper Moin Khan and batsman Zahid Fazal have toured with the Under-19 side, and the others have all played county or league cricket over here.
Rashid Latif, the deputy wicketkeeper, and medium-pacer Tanvir Mehdi toured Sri Lanka last July with Pakistan's ‘A’ team.
And remember, they are all products of Pakistan's domestic cricket competitions, which are competed for by the commercial organisations and regional teams which have always been condemned by Imran — who for the last decade had not played domestic cricket in Pakistan.
None of the players in this team has been ‘picked out of nowhere’: they have all come through the system.
Pakistan's major setback, of course, is the back injury to Waqar Younis, who missed the World Cup and is still not fully fit.
it is hoped that he will be able to play in the Tests, if not in many of the other matches.
Pakistan's strength lies in their superb and well co-ordinated pace attack.
Apart from Waqar and the excellent Wasim Akram, Aqib Javed is also a fine bowler, and has gained in experience after playing for Hampshire last summer.
Left-arm medium-pace) and Tanvir Mehdi form a useful back-up attack.
Legspinner Mushtq Ahmed, who mesmerised many in the World Cup, will be a treat to watch, while Asif Mujtaba bowls   left-arm spin with nagging accuracy.
Salim Malik is an intriguing legspinner, Shoaib can keep an end tight with his offspin, and both Aamer Sohail and Inzamam-ul-Haq can bowl left-arm spin if need be.
THE PAKISTAN TEAM 1992 
They are a nice group, touring under the experienced eye of coach Intikhab Alam, the former Pakistan captain and Surrey player, with Harvard-educated Khalid Mahmood as the tour manager.
Sadly, however, the team was being painted as a bunch of indisciplined rogues even before the tour had started.
They have been accused of sledging in the World Cup — as if no team had been guilty of that before.
I think we should forget about what may have happened in the past and pray for a series which might well become a classic.
All rounder Naved Anjum will be hoping to add to his pre-tour tally of two Test caps
left-arm pace bowler Salim Jaffer will be hoping to avoid a repeat of his 19878 tour, which was ruined by injury
ALL THE FAMILIAR FACES
FRANK KEATING welcomes the Pakistan tourists — and their mercurial captain
TELL you what,Test Match Special may have celebrated its being saved for the nation by ditching Don Mosey.
But one of the reasons the jowl-wobbling old curmudgeon will certainly be missed at the microphone this season is that he, above all, made a decent, straightforward reporter's fist of identifying the tourists on the field.
The bad form reached a giggling rock-bottom last year in Sri Lanka's Test match at Lord's when the difficulties of both pronunciation and identification proved insurmountable to most in the box.
Why?
The leading soccer and horserace commentators, with sometimes far more difficult foreign names coming at them at full pelt out of the fog, seem to manage wordperfectly and not give up the ghost in a surfeit of sniggers.
On Pakistan's last tour it became quite embarrassing when the boys in the box were first let loose in the one-dayers.
No thought of any homework, and it was patently obvious that only Imran Khan and Javed Mianded seemed to be recognisable down there.
Apart from those two, like Chinese people to the Duke of Edinburgh, cricketers from Pakistan all look alike to Johnners.
The old boy soldiered on, perplexed, till almost teatime on the first one-dayer, before throwing in the towel with blanket irony —‘Well, if I don't know their names, at least it's jolly nice to see all the familiar faces again.’
Pakistan's opener Aamer Sohail had played in 17 one-day internationals before this tour, but never yet in a Test match.
The talented left-hander did well with the bat in the World Cup, where he also managed to upset several of his opponents
Next to him, the dear old thing, Blowers, at least persevered to the end, but did admit finally, ‘Gosh, it's difficult to identify these chaps.
sometimes they turn out to be brothers, or cousins, or sometimes not to be related at all.’
Better on buses is HCB.
And was it Trevor who opined about the Pakistan side that it was ‘full of too many chiefs and not enough Indians’?
Talking to chiefs, it is grand to have that mischievously volatile character back among us, and doubtless intent to upset a few applecarts.
Javed — old ‘Mum- ‘n-Dad’ himself — really gets under bowlers' skins.
And having got under them, he can't half tear them to pieces.
What a bat.
Jonah Barrington, Britain's squash-rackets hall-of-famer, has come up against the Pakistan sportsman's competitive edge more than a few times down the years in that windowless torture-chamber which can be a squash court.
Says Jonah, ‘They have a combatively resplendent fire in their genes and bellies.
They also keep their eye on the ball.’
Javed at the crease is more than the uncomplicated warrior, laying about him with pride.
he is more of the Orient, more of the lowland plains; cunning and clever, a cruel swordsman equally adept, as the mood and the challenge takes him, with claymore, scimitar, or foil; kestrel-eyed, smiling, whipwristed; long on patience if so inclined, short of stature and short of fuse.
A tremendous opponent of rare talent.
He will be 35 between the Edgbaston and Lord's Test matches.
We shall know by then if the extraordinary nimbleness and decisiveness of his footwork remains, and if the eye is as glinting as the conglomeration of gold charms that dangle from his necklace.
An early mention in Wisden came in 1976.
In the Sussex 2nd XI averages, it said simply: Also batted, Javed Miandad…
Nothing more.
In fact, wrote John Arlott soon afterwards when the astonished south of England grapevine had recovered itself, ‘He struck 227 runs of such quality against Hampshire 2nd XI that experienced players on the other side were amazed at his brilliance.’
Most of them still are.
WEST INDIES v SOUTH AFRICA TEST MATCH
A Pyrrhic victory
South Africa looked set to mark their return to Test cricket after 22 years with a notable victory in their first-ever match against West Indies — but a dramatic last-day collapse shattered their dreams.
However, as STEPHEN THORPE reports, this historic match was marred by a spectators' boycott which kept the overall crowd down to 6500
AN EPIC match, of huge social and political significance beyond the narrow confines of Barbados, had almost everything save perhaps a crowd, and reached an enthralling climax on the final morning when South Africa, needing only 79 runs with eight wickets remaining for an historic victory in their first Test for 22 years, were swept away on a floodtide of West Indian pride and aggression.
If the manner of victory was nothing new, ushered by irresistible fast bowling from Curtly Ambrose and Courtney Walsh on a degenerating strip, much of the preamble was a welcome refresher course in what cricket, and its intrinsic art, used to be all about in these parts.
The ICC ruling limiting bouncers to one per over took full effect, with match referee Raman Subba Row and the chairman himself, Sir Colin Cowdrey, in situ to reside over any inconsistencies.
The end result, more front-foot play and a blossoming again of the over-drive, made for a compelling contest and an array of subplots to confuse even the most ardent of Agatha Christie disciples.
A pity then that the backcloth — empty seats and bare bleachers — was far removed from the traditional passion and excitement associated with Kensington as could be imagined.
Jamaica's Jimmy Adams made a notable debut at Bridgetown, adding a crucial innings of 79 not out to a wicket with his fourth ball in Test cricket
Moreover, it seemed ironic that South Africa's reimmersion in the Test arena should be marred by such a local show of disaffection, a boycott naive and myopic in concept and of no relevance to racial reform in the Republic, which may yet have repercussions in the Caribbean game as a whole.
The omission of Anderson/Cummins, a 25-year-old fast-bowling son of the soil, who contributed 12 World Cup wickets and five in the earlier one-day encounters, was a mere catalyst in a perennial saga of discontent among the Bajan populace.
The selectors have long refused to hear a strident case for Carlisle Best, and locals were also miffed that Desmond Haynes was overlooked for the West Indies captaincy.
Roland Holder, the current Barbados captain, who fared better than Jimmy Adams in the preceding England ‘A’ tour, was not even mentioned in dispatches.
No matter then that Courtney Walsh, with experience in 50 Tests, should gain selection over Cummins and that Kenneth Benjamin, an impressive ‘A’ team spearhead, should be given a chance?
For sure, an unprecedented run of success nurtured by a clutch of world-class players has masked endemic problems in the management of West Indian cricket in the last decade, and other territories are unhappy at the efforts, too, of the so-called ‘off-shore’ agents in the Board hierarchy.
This is not to condone a boycott lightened only slightly before the start by a placard reading ‘No Cummins, No Goings’.
Kepler Wessels, a veteran of 24 Tests for Australia, led a team of debutantes into the field after winning the toss, and saw West Indies off to a flyer with Haynes and Phil Simmons, still not convincing in the longer fame, punching holes in the off side whenever Donald and Pringle overpitched. business as usual, we thought — but we were wrong.
The crowd swelled to over 3000 in the morning session, latecomers arriving to see Simmons drive a lethargic shot to mid-off, then Haynes, after the break, nicked a Snell outswinger to slip for 58.
Brian Lara, playing only his second Test after 24 one-dayers, did not last long after Wessels had reprieved him at slip first ball, gloving Bosch down the leg side for David Richardson to snatch a magnificent one-handed catch.
Richie Richardson, in his first Test as captain, and Keith Arthurton, the flamboyant Nevisian left-hander, set about restoring momentum in a partnership of 82 in 19 overs before the rot, or rather an indisciplined passage of batting, set in.
West Indies lost seven wickets for 43 in a late-afternoon collapse on an excellent pitch, which served to highlight again the middle order shortcomings of a team in transition.
South Africa simply stuck to the task, and Richard Snell, Somerset's new overseas man, reaped due reward for a lively display of outswing with 4 for 83.
Arthurton, who had profited through glorious square-driving in his top-score of 59 after twice being caught at slip off no-balls, essayed the shit once to often against Pringle.
Richardson touched another Snell drifter, and thereafter only Adams could worthily claim ‘dismissal’, when Donald bowled him.
West Indies had sunk to 262 all out.
Kepler Wessels leads out his young South African side for the Republic's first official Test match for more than 22 years.
Wessels became the 13th player to have played Test cricket for two different countries
The second day, and some of the third, belonged to Andrew Hudson, who drew strength from the eerie vacuum to become the first to score a century on Test debut for South Africa in 104 years.
The lack of atmosphere, extending even to the non-appearance of MacFinall's cymbal-and-drum ensemble, which has driven the pulse of many a West Indies advance in the past, was again painfully evident as 12,000 deigned to stay away, but King Dyall did at least make a cameo appearance in an outfit that for once defied description.
Hudson, the 26-year-old Natal opener, would not have noticed, rapt as he was in a deep reverie of concentration and technique which eventually produced a monumental 163 off 384 balls in nearly 8¾ hours.
Walsh dropped him at long leg off Ambrose on 22 then, at 66, crucially, David Williams, another first-timer at this level alongside Adams and Benjamin, floored a regulation catch behind, thereby allowing Hudson further demonstrations of a trademark straight drive.
He stayed till the last ball before lunch of a gripping third day, when Benjamin yorked him off stump; his 163 was a remarkable effort after previously recording only four first-class centuries.
Adams had already given notice of intent overnight with his occasional left-arm spin, when Hansie Cronje (imprudently cutting at his fourth ball) offered a first Test wicket, and, suitably encouraged, the Jamaican picked up three more in an impressive 21-over spell of slight and turn which restricted the visitors' lead to 83.
Kuiper was a model of restraint, needing 45 balls before finding his second run.
The West Indian response was still driven by deathwish.
Haynes played on second ball, but the bails stayed intact.
Bosch reared one off a length to have Simmons caught at gully, and Lara proceeded with all guns blazing as if victory was but a boundary away.
he may already be classed as a great batsman, but luck rode with him when square-leg umpire David Archer ruled not out after Lara dislodged a bail turning Bosch to long leg.
The Trinidadian added 46 with fellow left-hander Arthurton at a run a minute before Donald transported the latter's off stump with a beauty pitching on leg, and then Lara became victim to circumstance, or poetic justice, given out caught for 64 off a ball that appeared to brush the pad.
Adams held firm while the tail crumbled again, and West Indies retired on 184 for 7, a meagre lead of 101, facing shock defeat.
Andrew Hudson hooks his co-Man of the Match Curtly Ambrose for four during his monumental innings of 163.
Hudson, 26 became the first player to score a century on Test debut for South Africa
Wessels stated that the game was lost on the following morning, later lamenting ‘You carn't bowl one good ball then three bad ones,’ as Adams took full advantage finishing with 79 not our in almost 3¾ hours after sensible, solid support from Walsh and Patterson.
South African required 201 to win and, though Hudson (0) and Rushmere went cheaply, Wessels and Kirsten weathered the storm, posting 95 in 42 overs by the end of the fourth evening.
They wanted 79 for an unexpected triumph; but then Wessels, after a true captain's innings, failed to add to his overnight 74 when Lara held a superb stooping slip catch off Walsh.
While the ebb and flow to this point had been absorbing stuff, the ensuing capitulation was nothing short of astonishing, far more dramatic and conclusive than that suffered by England two years ago; but still never totally unexpected on a pitch showing wear and uneven bounce in equal measure.
Eight wickets disappeared for 25 in 20 overs and, though Ambrose was judged joint Man of the Match with Hudson for his 6 for 34 and match figures of 8 for 81 in 60.4 overs, Walsh was also a prime architect of destruction.
Jagging the ball disconcertingly both ways, he accounted for the experienced Wessels, Kirsten and Kuiper, then Snell, in an morning spell which read 11–7–8–4, before Ambrose administered the coup de grâce .
Stumps were uprooted, an impromptu lap of honour instigated by Desmond Haynes, who quickly collapsed in a tearful heap, and Richardson snatched an Antiguan flag in scenes of wild abandon.
At the death, Mike Procter, the South African coach, stood ashen-faced and  speechless for a full 10 minutes on the pavilion steps, unable to take in what had just transpired.
later, though, he mentioned ‘a lack of positive approach and waiting for the runs to come’.
Jimmy Adams, too, who must have pushed match-award adjudicator Everton Weekes close to a three way split, sat head bowed in the dressing-room, contemplating the following week's engagement at Eppleton in the Durham  Senior League.
He can console himself with a winter passage booked to Australia, and the knowledge that his talent and determined character have finally set him on a rightful path to the pinnacle of the game.
Richard Snell, Somerset's new overseas signing, took four wickets in each innings
‘Comprehensively bowled’: Keith Arthurton is bowled by the lively Allan Donald as West Indies' second-innings decline continues
The occasion highlighted again the myth that the Caribbean holds cricket dear above all else.
West Indians are great West Indian watchers, preferably when they're winning, and are quick to foul when things do not concur with insular desires and outlook.
The charge of parochialism is nothing new: indeed it's time-honoured fixture of the West Indian game, yet other extraneous influences undoubtedly came to bear here.
Barbados is far from the idyll of a decade ago, with poor political leadership and direction, an economy in deep recession, and an increasingly angry people at odds with their lot.
Too much of a good thing for too long, in fact, mirrored in their supremacy at cricket, but when matters go awry through the dictates of cyclical change, then rebellion and recalcitrance appear the sole riposte.
British Petroleum South Africa underwrote the cost of the tour, so no material loss was incurred, but either way the action deprived the West Indian Board coffers of a large amount of money which would have been ploughed back into very necessary ground and youth development in the region.
Credit to the team, however, who rose above the boycott, preserving a remarkable sequence of success at fortress Kensington, 11 wins on the trot now, after a last defeat way back in 1934–35.
South Africa, for their part, dignified in defeat, can bask in the afterglow of their second coming, content in the knowledge of having bridged a great divide.
Yet, sad to relate, the game will always be remembered for the wrong reasons.
This was indeed a Pyrrhic victory, because West Indies cricket was assuredly the loser.
QUOTE: EVERYWHERE we've gone there's been a tremendous feeling of warmth shown us.
The acceptance of our presence throughout the Caribbean was going to be the most vital thing, because the people here took the anti-apartheid struggle very seriously.
Donald is bowled by Ambrose to complete South Africa's last-day disintegration, and West Indies have won the historic Test by 52 runs
Umpire Steve Bucknor and Tertius Bosch discuss the Brian Lara ‘hit-wicket’ incident.
the Trinidadian, given not our, went on to score 64
WEST INDIES v SOUTH AFRICA ONE-DAY INTERNATIONALS
Simmons subdues South Africa
First match Kingston, April 7
A HARD-HITTING innings from Trinidad's Phil Simmons lifted West Indies to an impregnable 287 for 6, the highest-ever in a one-day match at Kingston.
Simmons blasted five sixes and 12 fours as he moved to 122 from 113 balls.
One of his two sixes off left-arm spinner henry went out of the ground, and play was held up while police vainly chased a thief who made off with the ball.
His other sixes came off Snell and the expensive debutant ‘Corrie’ van Zyl (2).
Lara, sweeping frequently, made a bright 50, then Richardson — booed loud and long as he came in for his supposed anti Jamaican selections and his team's poor World Cup performances — made 30 of a stand of 106 with Simmons.
Despite three late wickets for Kuiper and four catches for skipper Wessels, the South Africans' target always looked to be a distant one, and the problem worsened with the early loss of Wessels, run out by the predatory Arthurton.
Hudson made 50 before, suffering from cramp, he gave a return catch to Patterson, and after 20 overs South Africa (82 for 2) were in touch with the home side's score at a similar stage (88 for 1).
From then on, though, wickets tumbled, with only Cronje (42) exceeding 20.
Second match Port-of-Spain, April 11
WEST INDIES clinched the three-match one-day BPSA challenge Series with an overwhelming win in Trinidad, overhauling the visitors' modest total of 152 with all their wickets — and a massive 24.1 overs — in hand.
South Africa, put in, took 13 (with eight extras) off Ambrose's first over, but were soon in trouble, Wessels giving a catch behind in the giant Antiguan's next over.
Hudson was run out by Simmons from backward point, then Kirsten, the last experienced batsman, went to Cummins.
Kuiper lasted for 64 balls, scoring 19 singles before falling to Harper.
Cronje and Rhodes tried to rectify the situation, but both were eventually run out, Rhodes after top-scoring with 45 from 72 balls.
When West Indies batted, Haynes edged the first ball of the innings for four, and the home side never looked back.
Local boy Lara, making his first international appearance in Trinidad, went to 50 in 49 balls, and finished with 86 from 91 balls, with 13 fours and two sixes.
Haynes, the senior partner but content to play second fiddle this time, faced 71 balls and hit a six and seven fours, and extended his record one-day aggregate past 7500 runs.
Third match Port-of-Spain, April 12
ON A SLOW pitch with little bounce, South Africa once again were unable to set the home side a testing target, and saw West Indies complete a clean sweep of the one-day international series with seven wickets and seven overs to spare.
Put in, south Africa — who rested Donald, Henry and the injured Rhodes — made a useful start, the openers putting on 54 before Hudson departed in the 18th over.
The middle order, though, was unable to force the pace: Wessels top-scored with 45 (77 balls), but boundaries were few and far between, although Cronje once lofted Cummins for six.
Haynes fell to the first ball of West Indies' reply, but the local pair of Lara and Simmons added 78 before the former fell to Kuiper.
This brought in Richardson, to a much warmer reception than he had received in Jamacia, and he again shared a hundred partnership with Simmons, who was on his way to another century, the second fifty of which cam up in only 32 balls (including successive hits for 4, 6, and 4 off Bosch), the first half having occupied 103.
Simmons, who changed his bat three times during his innings, hit 10 fours and two sixes in his fourth one-day century: it was hit second in successive innings, and his third in four matches in which he batted.
Phil Simmons: 122 in the first one-day international and 104 in the third — and didn't bat in the second
ENGLAND EXPECTS
Thoughts after Bridgetown…
OVER THE past 20 years the West Indian pace attack has systematically demolished every batting line-up that dared turn up at the same ground.
It is only a matter of time before a Test-playing country will break with tradition and send a note — Sorry, visiting sick aunt, entire country unavailable!
And given the carnage of blood and broken bones, who could blame them.?
Throughout this period, the impression gained from Lloyd, Richards and now Richie Richardson is that, given the slightest encouragement, they would gladly select nine fast bowlers in their XI before embarking on a frenzied island hop in search of a fast-bowling wicketkeeper.
Exaggeration?
Maybe.
But so ill-matched had the contest become that respective boards of control no longer appeal to the ICC for a ruling on intimidatory bowling, preferring instead to petition directly to Amnesty International.
West Indian officials contend they are merely selecting those players available.
which translates roughly into…never mind the quality, feel the pace.
A standard response, yet one that begs the question, just how do they manage to mine such a rich vein of talent?
Max Boyce once unwittingly touched upon this cricket conundrum when he wrote of a factory under the hills that produced outside-halves for Wales.
Earlier still, rumour had it that England selectors needed only to whistle down a mine-shaft for a couple of fast bowlers to arrive in the next cage.
Obvious when you think about it, from picking the seam to…er…picking the seam.
It would perhaps be putting too much faith in the chain of causation to argue that pit closures and decline in the coal industry over the past decade had anything to do with England's failure with the new ball.
For to do so would suggest that salvation lay with the appointment of Arthur Scargill to the TCCB.
Now there's a though.
All of which, however, little solves the problem of why, Willis and Botham apart, and on their day Lewis and DeFreitas, have England been unable to produce a fraction of the talent that has flowed unabated, and appears still bottomless, from this tiny cluster of Caribbean islands?
As we stand at the dawn of another pace-dominated summer, One Short went in search of answers.
Ingenuity
Sociologists and anthropologists provide a number of theories for this far from equitable distribution of talent.
yet such reasoning, whether poverty, self-expression, financial regard, national pride, political statement or simply as a means to shift the black man's burden, exists to no less a degree in England to day.
The answer, if one were to be found, quite obviously lay outside the restrictive confines of manly pursuit.
Casting the net wide, One Short pursued all branches of the creative arts, coming finally to music; but not, as might have been imagined, calypso or reggae, rather that of country & western and one song in particular.
the lyrics of Johnny Cash's A Boy Named Sue tell of adversity, by way of an unusual Christian name, thrust upon a youngster.
The outcome of which, bruised but happy, note here the key words, is maturity at pace.
Now not for one moment is this to suggest that the West Indian pace attack are a bunch of big girls.
And before the letters flood in from feminists, neither is this meant as a slur on womankind.
Research confirms, however, that in the case of Caribbean cricket folklore there is more than meets the eye.
West Indian parents have brought a touch of ingenuity to their adversity.
Cricket represented a better life for their children.
But how were they to ensure survival in the game, and then at the highest level?
Deliciously simple, devastatingly effective; a random survey of opening bowlers produced the following names, along with a quite distinct behavioral pattern:
Negligent
The rationale, let us call it Cash's law, appears to be the sillier the Christian name the faster and nastier the bowler.
This would explain the rapid rise to maturity of the likes of Marshall, Patterson and Ambrose.
And this in a discipline where the norm is usually mid-to-date twenties.
On the subject of batsmen and short-pitched bowling; none apparently has been game enough to demand a fuller length, especially as this involves addressing such request to the likes of Denzil, Balfour or Elconn.
West Indian dominance owes much to the foresight and imagination of parents and grandparents.
In contrast, their English contemporaries displayed a lack of invention near negligent in proportion.
The occasional freethinker touched upon Cash's Law — John Augustine snow, Frederick Sewards Trueman and more recently Gladstone Cleophas Small — but all too soon the banality returned with the likes of Norman, Graham, Les, Chris and Derek.
Some years ago, the young pretender Willis added Dylan to his forenames of Robert George.
This, alas, was unconnected with Carib thinking.
The addition was believed to relate to his passion for the music of the 1960s protest singer.
Detailed observation of Willis over the years, however, and his general ‘out to lunch’ demeanour, suggested Dylan to be more a tribute to that rather vacant rabbit of Magic Roundabout fame.
The likelihood, then, in the coming months is of much media debate over England's lack of firepower.
The answer, and remember you read it in WCM first, would appear to lie in the hands of all right-minded people.
And especially those, whether by accident or design, involved in family planning.
To this end, and for the sake of English cricket, parents-to-be are urged to give due and earnest consideration to the naming of all future male offspring.
As Nelson would have it, England expects….
Overseas Readers
It's cheaper and much quicker by air!
A direct airmail subscription to your home is actually cheaper than buying WCM over the counter in Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, West Indies, South Africa, etc.
AND you receive the magazine within a few days of UK publication.
See application form on page 44.
THE LONG SUMMER DREAM
JOHN BISHOP rounds up a long, eventful season in South Africa
THE long summer dream might have ended with a rude awakening in Barbados, but the 1991–92 season will be remembered as one of the most dramatic and exciting in South African cricket history.
Enthusiasm for the fame touched fresh heights in South Africa as supporters, for the first time, could plop themselves down in front of the television set and follow their players' (unpredictable) progress in genuine international competition on the cricket fields of the world.
(Television was introduced to South Africa during the years of isolation.)
No-one was more closely involved in an emotional, controversial and fluctuating summer than the much-travelled Kepler Wessels, who thought his international career was over when he left Australia and returned to the country of his birth five years ago.
His fortunes, internationally and domestically, as player and captain, seesawed alarmingly during the 1991–92 season.
The hectic action started in November with Clive Rice's public-relations visit to India — Wessels's successes on the tour earned him the man-of-the-series award — and ended six months later in frustration as the West Indians turned imminent defeat into a remarkable victory in one session on the final day of an historic Test, denying two excellent half-centuries by Wessels and Andrew Hudson's debut century, the first for South Africa.
In between, and amid the unprecedented furore over the axing of Clive Rice and Jimmy Cook, Wessels had become South Africa's new captain and had taken the squad to Australasia for the World Cup.
South Africa mixed a couple of purple patches with several black ones during the tournament but, generally, exceeded expectations in just failing to reach the final of the World Cup.
it was the story of South Africa's international summer, one in which they briefly touched heights and revealed glimpses of talent yet never quite reached their ultimate objectives in their travels through India, Australia, New Zealand and finally in the Caribbean.
Meyrick Pringle, the Test fast bowler from Western province, topped the domestic averages with 31 wickets (13.58)
Back home, however, Wessels and Eastern Province did follow through to pick up most of the silverware, regaining the Castle Cup (formerly the Currie Cup) title and snatching a stunning victory in the Benson & Hedges Night Series final.
And that was particularly satisfying for Wessels after the disasters of the previous summer, when EP failed to retain any of the three titles and there were constant reports of unhappiness in their dressing-room.
They went into the season without their Australian pace pair, John Maguire and Rod McCurdy, who had played pivotal roles in their 1989–90 clean sweep, while dissatisfied South African opener mark Rushmere had to be persuaded to stay after being linked with a move to Western province.
But EP, after a slow start, found their winning ways again with Rushmere and the new-ball pairing of young paceman Rudi Bryson, considered unlucky to have missed selection for the World Cup, and West Indian Eldine Baptiste their most successful performers.
The Castle Cup, happily run on a league basis again, was stretched into a four-day competition to prepare South Africans for their return to Test cricket.
Border, with Peter Kirsten their outstanding player — he was sixth in the batting averages with 388 runs at 43.11 — returned to this premier competition which had to be decided, unsatisfactorily, over one round because of the congested season.
Eastern province won four of their six matches to end on 28 points, but were chased all the way by the young orange Free State side, led for most of the summer by the 22-year-old Hansie Cronje.
Rushmere topped the batting averages with 372 runs (62.00) in seven innings, while his World Cup team-mate Meyrick Pringle (WP) was the most successful bowler, picking up 31 wickets in the six matches at 13.58.
Franklyn Stephenson, the West Indian allrounder, made valuable contributions throughout the summer, finishing fourth in the batting averages (432 runs in nine innings at 48.00, with a century and three half centuries) and sixth in the bowling (25 wickets at 19.52).
South Africa's World Cup players were surprised he could not make the West Indian squad.
Another West Indian, Ezra Moseley, was second to Pringle in the bowling averages.
He was leading wicket-taker with 35 in six outings at 17.37, and was followed by Tertius Bosch (23 wickets at 17.95) and Bryson (30 at 18.17).
Baptiste was eighth with 26 wickets at 20.85 apiece.
Free State gained some reward when they whipped EP in the final of the Nissan Shield one-day competition.
EP were bundled out for 120 in 50 of their 55 overs, as Corrie van Zyl took 4 for 24, and Cronje's Free State raced to victory in 33 overs with six wickets in hand.
But the best was saved till last, when Western province and Eastern province produced an excellent Benson & Hedges day/night final at the packed Wanderers, just a couple of days after the South Africans had returned from the World Cup.
WP raced to a formidable 244 for 2 in 45 overs as Adrian Kuiper (107 not out) produced the innings South Africans had hoped to see in the World Cup.
His team-mate Terence Lazard was not out with 108, and few gave EP much chance of matching a rate of 5.5 runs to the over.
But Wessels, with 103 off 124 balls, and Rushmere (64) took them home by six wickets with five deliveries to spare, a fitting end to a summer which saw the domestic game overshadowed by international action on foreign fields.
DIEHARD
OFFSPINNER Jones of the Guards Brigade
Wouldn't let go of his hand-grenade.
‘Aim for the trenches an' lob it straight in;
sharpish, for Gawd's sake, yer've pulled aht the pin!’
Corporal's advice no impression could make.
How could he know there was honour at stake?
Prior to becoming a stain on the moss,
Jones yelled, ‘I'm damned if I'll bowl a full-toss!’
New Zealand Notes from Terry Power
APRIL IS selector selection month in New Zealand.
The context included the selector' five changes between the first and second Tests against England, the bog losses of that tour, and the subsequent glorious run in the World Cup.
It also involved a sensational TV interview martin Crowe had with his brother Jeff in which he revealed he had been asked to resign as captain on the fourth day of the third Test.
Don Neely said that Crowe was asked at this time whether he was available for the World Cup if somebody else were skipper: ‘I won't tell you his reaction.
I'll leave it to your imagination.’
In hindsight, with Crowe having led the team imaginatively and been the most successful batsman of the World Cup, this initiative of the selectors does not seem bright, but it was more understandable when it was made.
New Zealand Cricket had decided that there will be four selectors, with the coach being added to the panel.
Former Otago and NZ wicketkeeper Watten Lees's contract as coach had expired.
he did a very good job, with plenty of the man-management skills which are not Martin Crowe's forte.
Former NZ captain Geoff Howarth informed the nation of his availability through the tabloid Sunday News , but there wasn't much doubt that Lees would be reappointed if he wanted the job.
However, his young family is very important to him, and he had reservations about being a selector because players might be inhibited from coming to him with their problems.
He also had to juggle the practicalities of being coach, going on part-time high-school teaching, and seeing if Otago Cricket Association would continue employing him in the off-season as executive director when he wouldn't be around for much of the summer.
It shows how difficult it remains to make a cricket-related living in what is still the smallest populated Test country.
Despite Howarth's greater playing frame, Lees was reappointed for a year.
There were six candidates for the other three selection jobs.
The three incumbents, Neely, Ross Dykes, and Bruce Taylor, were joined by Glenn Turner, m Lance Cairns (who also offered himself as coach if Lees didn't stand), and Bruce Morrison (who dismissed Dexter and Parfitt in his only Test, in 1962–63).
The upshot was that Neely, Dykes and Taylor were re-elected.
Retirements
TWO notable retirements are reported from Wellington: Evan Gray, 37, played 10 Tests in five countries on six tours, but none at home.
Bruce Edgar adjudged him unlucky, but his record was modest: 17 wickets at 52.11 and 248 runs at 15.50.
On Test debut at Lord's in 1983 this slow left-armer had three consecutive England middle-order wickets — Gower, Lamb, Gatting — in his first spell.
On his other trip to England, in 1986, his top Test score of 50 at Trent Bridge, out of 176 in five hours with the faster scoring Hadlee and Bracewell, contributed to NZ's match and series victory.
When he reached 120 matches in January, Gray had played more first-class games for Wellington than anyone else for a NZ province, in a career which began in 1975–76.
Steve Woodward was regarded as NZ's senior umpire after Fred Goodall retired.
he stood in both the most recent World Cups and 24 Tests, equal-top for NZ with Goodall, but was conspicuously not appointed to any of this year's series against England.
Late in his career sales rep Woodward was involved in several matches where many thought there was more time than necessary spent off the field.
Test captain turned sportscaster Jerry Coney smiled that Woodward acknowledged only one mistake, a caught-behind appeal turned down in Napier in 1979 against Pakistan, which Coney said would have lifted his career tally of Test wickets from 27 to 28.
Smith tops James
Rod Nye marks the passing of a significant wicketkeeping record
: WHEN Ian Smith caught Graham Gooch off the bowling of Danny Morrison in the first Test match last winter he broke a New Zealand wicketkeeping record which had stood for 45 years.
It was fitting that Smith's 423rd first-class dismissal should be that of an Englishman.
The previous record-holder, ken James, had achieved many of his dismissals on English grounds in a productive career for Northamptonshire between 1935 and 1939.
In 101 matches for the Tudor Rose county James caught 174 batsmen and stumped 45.
Before playing for Northants the cheerful James had played for Wellington in New Zealand.
He was selected for two tours of England, in 1927 and 1931.
After playing against Douglas Jardine's MCC team in New Zealand in 1932–33, James journeyed to England.
Writers enthused over Jame's wicket-keeping skills on the 1927 tour, when he stumped 42 (31 off legspinner Billy Merritt) and caught 43.
O. S. Hintz, in his book The New Zealanders in England 1931 , wrote of James's form on his second trip to England: ‘I have seen both Oldfield and Duckworth in action and neither of them have appeared to be his superior.
When he is really inform it is a treat to watch his work on the leg side, and few who saw it will forget that catch which dismissed Paynter in the watery third Test at Old Trafford.’
By 1938, James had a secure place in the Northants 1st X1.
For the county's match against the Australians he was joined by two other New Sealanders, a more mature Meritt, and Frank O'Brien.
Merritt and O'Brien had formerly played together for Canterbury.
Off the bowling of medium-pacer Reg partridge, James caught Don Bradman.
Walter Hadlee, a tourist to England in 1937 and 1949, described the skills and wiles of James and Merritt: ‘James was a brilliant wicketkeeper.
I doubt if we've had anyone better.
We called him ‘Scup’.
he was brilliant.
he stood over the stumps to the quick bowlers and brought off stumpings down the leg side, the hallmark of a great keeper.
They don't do it now.’
Hadlee reflected for a moment: ‘I suppose there's something to be said for that.
The argument is, and I accept the fact, that bowlers probably prefer their keepers standing back taking catches rather than looking for rare leg-side stumping opportunities.’
ken James: previous record-holder
Hadlee professes great admiration for New Zealand's wicketkeepers of modern times, the late Ken Wadsworth, and the incumbent record-holder, Ian Smith: ‘But James had that ability to stand up for the one down the leg side, and the bails would be off in a flash.
It was a real art that seems to have been lost today.
Maybe not so much lost a never cultivated.
but you wouldn't be standing out of your crease with James about!’
He was still looking through an old but faithfully-kept scrapbook.
He chuckled: ‘Merritt was a teaser.
He invited you up the pitch to meet him on the drive.
Then the ball would drop quickly and spin away.
A teaser, James did the rest.’
Kenneth Cecil James was born in Wellington, NZ on March 12, 1904.
He died in Palmerston North on Aug 21, 1976.
Coincidentally, Bert Oldfield, the great Australian wicketkeeper, and ken Wadsworth, New Zealand's first-choice keeper from 1969 to 1976, also died in August 1976.
The Pearls of Morning's Dew
CLIFF HARRIES tracks down a South African antihero from 1960
THE NAME of Geoff Griffin may mean little to today's cricket enthusiasts, but this South African bowler, who appeared in only two Tests, is unique in having scaled the heights and plumbed the depths in one and the same match!
He was certainly born under an unlucky star, or, like Chesterton's donkey, ‘when fishes flew and forests walked and figs grew upon thorn, some moment when the moon was blood then, surely, I was born!’
The last lines are no less appropriate: ‘Fools, for I also had my hour, one far fierce hour and sweet.
There was a shout about my ears and palms before my feet!’
Griffin was fated to become the first (and still the only) bowler to achieve a hat-trick in a Lord's Test and, in the same match, also to become the first man to be called for throwing in a Test in England.
He never played in a Test again and was to retire three years later.
Ever since the unhappy events of 1960, I have wondered what happened to this gentle soul who, even as his world tumbled around his ears, always comported himself in an exemplary manner.
So, somewhat in the footsteps of the pursuers of Colonel Fawcett, who disappeared many years ago into the jungles of South America, I set out after my man, who had slipped away, sadly and silently, back into the dark continent and seemingly into history.
My search was soon rewarded.
I had written to the South African Cricket Union asking for his address and, some weeks later and to my great delight, a letter arrived from Geoff Griffin himself!
It was an extremely friendly letter offering me a pint if ever our paths crossed and assuring me that he was, indeed, alive and well.
He lives in Durban and is a director in a business in the liquor industry — hotels, bottle-stores and a beer hall plus six shops (general dealers).
He has recently ventured into an export business and hopes this will flourish with the lifting of sanctions.
he has two sons and two daughters, one of whom has recently made him a grandad and, although he confesses to still having the odd game of cricket, his main pastime nowadays is deep-sea fishing.
His observations on the 1960 your are interesting.
he says that, having achieved the hat-trick at Lord's and having toured England at such a tender age (he was barely 21) was a ‘fine antidote to any sore feelings that most people imagined’.
He says that the umpire who brought about the throwing controversy never called him in a first-class match, only in a festival game.
‘Makes one think,’ he says, ‘after being passed as fair by 90% of English umpires and the top English coach, Alf Gover…
Enough of what I regard as a premeditated incident at Lord's.’
Many shrewd judges, both on the veldt and in England, though that the Springbok selectors were taking a massive gamble with Griffin, who had already been called for throwing in his own country, especially as unfair bowling had lately become a major issue.
The 1960 tourists were the first South African cricketers to be aware of the growing resentments to apartheid and the whole trip, destined to be the last full English tour by the Springboks, was overshadowed by demonstrations.
The tourists had a fairly run-of-the-mill squad, with no major worldclass batsmen and, Adcock and Tayfield apart, no bowler realistically capable of running through a batting side as strong as England's, with players such as Cowdrey, Dexter, Barrington and M. J. K. Smith.
Griffin ran into problems quite early, against MCC in fact, at Lord's, where he was called three times fro throwing and once, simultaneously, for dragging.
He missed the next fixture at Northampton but re-appeared at Trent Bridge for the Notts game and was called eight times for throwing and seven times fro dragging.
it was at this crisis point that the tour management decided to send him back to school — to Alf Gover's famous establishment for an intensive three-day course.
South African fast bowler Geoff Griffin arrives at the bowling crease, his bent right arm suggesting a throw rather than a legal ‘bowl’
Geoff Griffin pictured on a recent trip to Lord's, where he took a Test hat-trick and was no-balled for throwing
A larger crowd than normal subsequently turned up at Cardiff to see if Gover's cure had worked, and Griffin sent down 18 blameless overs but failed to take a wicket.
The selectors kept faith and picked him for the first Test at Edgbaston, where he bowled 42 overs without trouble, taking four wickets in his maiden Test, which England won, fairly comfortably, but 100 runs.
he played once more before the Lord's show-piece and was called six times for throwing in the Hampshire match, but the selectors decided to risk him again in the second Test, where he was to meet his fate at the most  famous ground in cricket.
Umpire Frank Lee called him on 11 occasions for throwing in England's only innings and, after the home side had wrapped up the game early, he was again called, in the exhibition match which followed, by the other umpire, Syd Buller, and was forced to complete his only over underarm.
His three consecutive victims, incidentally, had been M. J. K. Smith, Peter Walker and Fred Trueman.
The sensational events connected with the unfortunate Griffin overshadowed a fine performance by the England side in winning by an innings and also by Brian Statham, who had his best-ever Test figures of 11 for 97.
The root of Geogg Griffin's problems lay in a childhood accident that had bent his right (bowling) arm.
he also opened up early at the wicket and had a tendency to bowl from the edge of the crease, which caused him to get the right shoulder in front of the left as he delivered and, with hardly any follow through, the only way he could generate any great speed was by a late acceleration of the bowling arm.
This made it appear that he threw the ball when bowling at his fastest; when he reduced his pace he was relatively innocuous.
After the Lord's Test, further cures were tried, even a light weight metal sleeve over the elbow, but nothing worked and the unlucky Griffin was condemned to play out the remainder of the tour as an occasional batsman.
He later served Rhodesia for three seasons before retiring at 24.
To his eternal credit, Griffin maintained his dignity throughout all the traumas and had the great consolation that his name will live as long as the great game is played.
he was, indeed, King for a day, and to revert to another poetic analogy, this time from Robert Herrick's Daffodils —
‘We die, as your hours do, and dry away like to the summer rain, or as the pearls of morning's dew, ne'er to be found again.’
THE HALF-CENTURY
by Andrew Cuthbert
IT WAS a perfect day for a game of cricket.
The late-summer sun had lost enough of its strength to cast a glow over the wealden village.
The ground was situated within sight of the village pub.
A lane ran along one end of it.
Lined along the lane were the village hall, the pavilion and a number of small timbered cottages.
At the other end of the ground a river ran.
The ground was bounded by a main road on one side and a meadow on the other.
It was getting on for 5 o'clock and the village were batting.
They were chasing a total of 160 and were ticking along nicely.
My eye was caught by one of the men in.
In his mid-forties, I guessed, and carrying a bit of weight.
But he had a very sound technique.
He was timing the ball well and doing what I could never master when I played: he was hitting proper cover-drives.
He was getting over the ball, keeping his head down and just stroking it.
He didn't put a lot of power into his strokes, but he was regularly getting twos and threes.
This was just the ticket, I thought, sitting on my canvas chair, quietly digesting my cake.
I heard the scorer say my man had 35.
I discovered later he was the marketing manager of a company that sold agricultural fertiliser.
It was at this point I noticed a change come over his team mates.
They all started watching the game very intently.
Now usually someone will be reading the Sunday papers, another will be bowling at his five-year-old son.
Others might be talking to their girlfriends or just idly smoking and looking at the sky.
But now the whole team were keenly focused on the game.
I checked the scoreboard.
They still had another 40 or so runs to get.
And they still had five wickets in hand.
So the game wasn't at the crucial stage.
Most puzzling.
then I noticed them exchanging terse remarks every time my man was facing.
I had another good look at him.
Was he limping, were they deciding to send out a runner?
But no, as I watched, he turned a ball elegantly off his legs and called for a quick single.
No sign of a limp.
I couldn't work it out.
He, however, was oblivious to his team-mates' attention and had soon passed 40.
Another well-timed cover-drive beat the fielder and this time it reached the boundary.
This brought him to 45.
The tension among his team-mates was now palpable.
Then the penny dropped.
They must have put money on his reaching 50.
That had to be it.
But when I looked again at the taut group riveted to the game, now not even speaking, I had my doubts.
It must be an awful lot of money to make them this worried.
Second ball of the next over, the bloke at the other end called for a single.
The next ball, the bowler, by now heartily sick of the sight of my man, dug one in short.
He tried the hook, got a top edge and it went for two over the keeper's head.
Forty-seven.
Now I got worried.
His team-mates seemed to have stopped breathing.
He let the next ball go by outside leg stump.
The bowler adjusted his line and dropped the next one on leg stump, on the half-volley.
By now my man was seeing the ball like a melon.
He leaned into it and the fielder at midwicket could only turn and jog after it all the way to the boundary.
I leapt out of my chair.
He'd done it!
Still clapping, I sat down and looked to see how his team-mates were taking it.
They were still watching him with fox-like concentration.
As he lifted his cap to acknowledge the applause, they froze.
As he took guard for the next delivery, they uttered a communal sigh of relief and turned away from the game.
The group broke up as they wandered off to see to their spouses, children or cups of tea.
The next over my man was run out trying one more quick single than his tired legs could manage.
But the team managed the 160 with two wickets in hand.
Later, in the pub, I buttonholed the village captain.
I had to have an explanation for his team's strange behaviour.
‘Oh, that's simple,’ he said.
‘Last time Tom played for us was two months ago.
he made a fifty that day, lifted his bat above his head and had a heart attack.’
The Old Stager says…
Basil Banks eavesdrops on one of club cricket's self-styled experts
ONE OF THE beauties of cricket is that he who falls can rise again or, as the Captain once put it, ‘He who normally fills an insignificant gap in the ramparts one day awakes to find his cannon blazing in glory.’
We didn't all fully follow the metaphor, but the gist of it was unmistakable.
Such a moment came for the Small-holder, one of our regular openers.
He was always available, fair weather or foul, home or away, and his father had been a much-respected captain of our village team two or three decades ago.
He therefore had high qualifications to be a regular opener except, perhaps, in the matter of scoring runs.
He could exhibit such a stolidity in this regard that the Captain more than once suggested that he might drop down the order, ‘to add ballast to the middle’.
‘Oi'm a nopenin' baht,’ the Smallholder had replied, with the same stolidity that marked his demeanour at the crease, ‘and you messes with a nopenin' baht at your peril.’
O oever ahst Len' Utton to Baht dowen the order?
Answer me thaht.’
The Captain, not having the names readily to mind, dropped the matter and chuckled to himself about it for a week.
Our self-appointed mentor, the Old Stager, tackled him in the same vein, although with a shade more directness: ‘Why don't yer niver get no runs?’ he asked, by way of leading up to the subject.
The Smallholder looked at him long and hard.
‘Oi builds me innins.
Thaht's what a nopenin' baht's for.
Oi'm not one of your Flahsh 'Ahrrys, sir, Oi'm a builder of a ninnins.’
‘But yer always the first man aht,’ pointed out the Old Stager agreeably.
‘Bowlers allus goes for the man as is buildin' a ninnins. 'E's the one they fear.
It's nahtral, innit?’
‘But yer can 'it 'em,’ argued the Old Stager.
‘I seen yer 'it that boundary agin Parklea two year ago.
Remember?
You 'it acrorst the line o' the ball, I grant yer, but it come at a fair lick, one bounce.’
‘Oi already 'ahd 10 on the board boi then,’ explained the Smallholder, a faint wisp of happy remembrance tugging at a few cheek muscles.
The conversation lost some of its helpful nature after this and was ended only when the Smallholder demanded to know ‘Ooever ahst Andy Sandham to baht dowen the order?’ and even the Old Stager forbore to express the comparisons between Sandham and the Smallholder which billowed behind his lips.
IT WAS a great delight to all when the Smallholder came into his own against Morton Westlake.
There was a special edge to this match because they had beaten us easily in each of our past five encounters and had at first declined a fixture this year.
Very late in the day they had written to say that some arrangement had fallen through and they would be prepared to play us if they could find sufficient members interested in taking part.
Out players were apoplectic and our secretary, a local bank manager, talked of suing for libel; but the Captain threw back his head with two guffaws and said of course we'd play them and show them a thing or two.
Christian forbearance is a great virtue, but not always when others find it unbearable.
However, play then we did and, heaven be praised, we did show them a thing or two.
We had them out for 66 and by the tea interval we were 42 for 0.
And the person responsible for our batting success was the Smallholder.
The Computer Programmer, with whom he opened, was struck badly on the hand, and although he continued batting, there was no power in his strokes.
Whether it was when he'd scored 10 or at some other delicate fulcrum in his innings that the Smallholder decided that he'd sufficiently built his innings and could start unleashing his shots I know not, but the incontrovertible fact was that by tea he had 34 to his name, including five boundaries.
Even the Old Stager appeared moved.
‘By Gawd, ‘e ‘ll niver last, playing acrorst the line like that!’ he exclaimed, as another four sent legs waving in evasion.
THE OLD Stager had no official standing at the celebration of tea, but custom had confirmed that he be allowed to sit demurely, his chair a little apart from the table, while the protagonists disported themselves on sausage-rolls and scones.
it was the Old Stager's habit the while to extract half a marmite sandwich from a plastic bag and munch and snarl quietly while the great ones chatted.
Because on this occasion the fame seemed such a foregone conclusion, there was less talk than usual about its progress, which was a disappointment to those on our side who desperately wanted to be able to display modesty about their achievements.
Comment from Morton Westlake centred on how jolly good the scones were, how you could get a jolly food tea at the Waldorf in London, and the astronomical prices which some had paid for their seats at the forthcoming Test match at Lord's. it was the Old Stager who brought them back to the match in hand.
‘S funny, innit,’ he ruminated, ‘ow we got yer on the run today, arter all yer wins over us in the past?
‘Ooda thought it?’
He smiled a marmite-stained smile and gnawed at another corner of his sandwich.
The opposition gallantly responded.
‘Well, we're sorry not to have Laurie Melchett playing today.
He's our fast bowler, you know — took seven of your wickets last year.
You were floundering all over the place, if I remember,’ said Waldorf.
‘I think we may have been too good over the years,’ observed their wicketkeeping Vicar.
‘Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth,’ quoted our Baptist Minister's Son, who is very good on these theological points.
Their Vicar rocked to and fro, laughing uproariously and going very red.
‘I do think,’ he said, suddenly solemn, ‘that the beauty of cricket is that the first shall be last and the last, on an uncertain wicket, can be first.’
‘Oh, yer right,’ exclaimed the Old Stager, putting the crust of his sandwich on the table.
‘The beauty o' the game, as I see it, lies in its  impredictability .
It lies in the sporting feelings it draws aht o' people.
The beauty o' cricket — I 'ope yer agrees with me, gentlemen — is the team spirit what it revokes and the goodwill and respeck for opponents what  perculates the game, as represented ‘ere today as we — you — share them scones together.’
‘Amen to that,’ echoed their Vicar amid some sporadic clapping.
‘YOU really went over the top today, Charlie,’ grinned the Captain to the Old Stager as they reassembled for the match.
‘Sportsmanship!
Team spirit!
Goodwill!
Respect!’
Well, that's right, innit?’ said the Old Stager defiantly.
‘I believe it.
It's them things what it's all abaht…
Nah then,’ he addressed the Smallholder, who was preparing to build his innings further, ‘git aht there and smear them arrogant buggers’noses in the dirt.’
I BLAME THE GOVERNMENT
JONATHAN RICE gets the early-season jitters
A VERY terrible thing has happened at out club.
We have purchased some sightscreens.
I blame the government.
The start of every cricket season causes cricketers of all standards and all ages to ask themselves the basic question, ‘have I still got the old skills?
Will my cover-drive still leave the off-side fielders rooted helplessly to the ground as the ball speeds to the boundary?
Will the outswinger still swing as late as it did last summer?’
In many cases it might be more appropriate to ask, ‘Will my cover-drive make contact with the ball?
Will my outswinger even pitch, let alone swing?’ but the fundamental doubt it common to all cricketers in the first weeks of a new season.
Can I still play this game?
The confident cricketers are the ones who set themselves targets of achievement, which range from Sir Richard Hadlee's carefully calculated and perfectly achieved ‘double’ season in 1984, to my hope that perhaps I will perform the somewhat lesser treble of at least one run, one wicket and one catch for the village this year.
But my hopes of achieving even this modest target have been dealt a body blow by the off-season purchasing policy of our committee, which put sightscreens before deckchairs and a new tea urn in its list of priorities.
Now we have two wonderful sightscreens, and to make matters worse they have been positioned at either end of the ground.
How an I going to take any wickets at all if I cannot float my deceptively slow left-armers out of the darkness of the trees at seven o'clock on a late September evening?
My only chance of glory is if the batsman is unsighted from the beginning, and our new sightscreens are there precisely to prevent that happening.
Our committee, dominated by batsmen and wicketkeepers unfortunately, think that the sightscreens are a Good Thing, but there are also those of us whose playing career is prolonged only by the knowledge that with village pitches the state they are, even a bad player can hope to strike lucky now and again.
If conditions improve too much, only the half-decent cricketers will survive and I, and many like me, will be forced into premature retirement before the age of 60.
When 6′ 8″ tall Curtly Ambrose is bowling, sightscreens are often not high enough to be much help
Cricket is the only even vaguely athletic endeavour I involve myself in, unless you count walking the dog or grovelling to my bank manager, so if I am forced to give up the game by the purchase of these new sightscreens, my fitness will suffer.
My body will cease to be the temple of physical perfection that it currently is, my old aches and pains will return and my reliance on the ministrations of the NHS will increase.
All because of those new sightscreens.
And how did Saltwood CC, up there in the Aldershot FC class among financially-sound sporting organisations, get the money to buy these sightscreens?
Easy.
We got a grant from the Foundation for Sport and the Arts, which the government set up last year.
That is why I blame the government.
I am sure they had the pious hope that this foundation would actually serve to increase the nation's general fitness by pumping money into sport, but if the money is to go on improving facilities at cricket clubs and down the country, then a large number of cricketers who rely on lousy playing conditions for their place in the side will be forced into retirement.
The nation's fitness will therefore be adversely affected by this largesse, not improved.
Consider the sums.
A report in the Evening Standard in late April stated that ‘The Foundation has provided more than £60 million in its first year for sport and art organisations throughout the United Kingdom.’
let us say for argument's sake that half of that money — £30 million — has gone to sport.
that is more than Mark Enson and Mark Nicholas earned from their benefits, more even than Kenny Dalglish has been able to spend on building up Blackburn Rovers into a middle-of-the-table Second Division team.
I know that not all of it has gone into cricket, but as we know that the Prime Minister, the chairman of the foundation and at least two of the trustees are cricket fanatics, we can expect that perhaps £5 million has been granted to cricket.
That £5 million will buy an awful lot of sightscreens, heavy rollers and bags of loam all designed to improve the country.
All designed to force the early retirement of old lags like me.
Then what am I going to do at the weekends?
The terrible prospect rears its ugly head of having to mow the lawn, fix the gutters, creosote the garden shed and push the Saturday-morning supermarket trolley.
This is not what life is supposed to be all about.
May I suggest that the government abolish forthwith the Foundation for Sport and the Arts, and replace it at once by a Foundation for Gardeners, Handymen, Babysitters and the Arts.
The money that currently goes into forcing less-talented cricketers into retirement can be redirected into the purses of these cricketer' wives, who can thus get all the jobs done that their sporting husbands have not found time for.
Husbands will stay fit, happy and in the village XI, while at the same time gardeners, handymen and babysitters will be able to build thriving businesses in a free-market economy, thereby dragging us all out of recession.
Only the sightscreen manufacturers will do badly out of this idea, and I have no room in my heart to worry about them.
Obituary
Stuart Surridge
Famed Surrey Leader
WHEN Stuart Surridge led Surrey to the County Championship in 1952, his first season of captaincy,Wisden , in choosing him alongside Tom Graveney, Fred Trueman, David Sheppard and Harold Gimblett as a Cricketer of the year, captured his salient qualities in a sentence: ‘Though not always free from criticism as regards tactics and the manner in which he handled the bowling, he brought to Surrey a spirit of consistent enterprise and aggression such as they had not known since the days of P. G. H. Fender's captaincy 20-odd years previously.’
Quoting Surridge's formula —‘Attack all the time, whether batting, bowling or fielding
— the Almanack, let alone cricket followers at large, could scarcely have guessed that Surridge would steer the county to four more Championships in a row before handing over to Peter May (who kept the Championship pennant at The Oval for two further years).
Surridge's five in succession remains a unique achievement.
Born in Herne Hill on Sept 3, 1917, into a bat-making family, Walter Stuart Surridge, who died at 74, after a heart attack, on April 13 in Glossop, was educated at Emanuel School, Wandsworth, m where he switched from wicketkeeping to fast bowling when a gap occurred in the school XI.
Through Easter coaching at The oval during the 1930s, at the hands of Alan Peach, and winter attendance at the Sandham-Gover indoor school, he improved his game, and first played for Surrey II when 20.
In 1939 he had his first-class debut for Minor Counties against Oxford University at Oxford, and took 8 for 100 in the match.
It was not until 1947 that he was selected by Surrey for a Championship match, and in 1948 he twice took five wickets in an innings.
In the next summer he continued to make contributions in the three departments, his 6 for 49 and 41 not out helping Surrey to beat Middlesex, eventual joint-champions with Yorkshire, in the Lord's local derby/
His influence grew by the season, and in May 1951 he achieved, at The Oval, what were to be his career-best batting and bowling figures: 87 against Glamorgan (10 fours and a six; 161 in 110 minutes with Geoff Whittaker for the ninth wicket) and 7 for 49 on a helpful pitch against Lancashire.
His most productive bowling season was 1952, when he chalked up the first of his five successive championships.
He took 78 wickets that season at 25.21, and put his tall, broad frame to good use at the batting crease with 541 runs (17.45), including a 22-minute half-century at Chesterfield.
Having taken over from Michael Barton as captain, Surridge led boldly, the sum of his character and his various skills proving formidable even if, paradoxically, he would never have been considered a batsman or bowler of the highest class.
He played three times for the Gentlemen against the Players between 1953 and 1955 as Surrey forged on to Championship victory after victory.
With a world-class attack of Bedser, Laker and Lock, and then Laoder, with McIntyre behind the stumps, and with a batting line-up —Barrington, May, Eric Bedser, Constable, Dave Fletcher, Tom Clark — capable of making swift runs, and with Surridge himself, Lock and Stewart foremost in a ring of rapacious close catchers, Surrey were irresistible.
In those five seasons of triumph, 86 of their 140 championship matches were won and only 20 lost.
With frequent daring declarations, two-day victories were not great rarities — Warwickshire were beaten in a day at The oval in 1953 — and in 1955, to Surridge's particular pride, all 28 matches were decided, 23 in Surrey's favour.
Much of this success was rendered possible only by Surrey's strength in reserve.
Accusations of ‘doctored’ oval pitches were countered by pointing to the away victories and especially to the number of wickets taken by Laker and Lock on ‘away’soil.
W. S. Surridge 1917–1992
One of the sweetest successes was against the Australians, when Surrey became, in 1956, the first county for 44 years to beat them.
laker had his first 10-wicket haul in the visitors' first innings, and Lock took 7 for 49 in the second.
Surridge's ebullience and enthusiasm continued to flow, his force of personality holding together some pretty strong-willed characters in his XI, and the crowds they attracted to The oval were often huge.
Stuart Surridge was regarded by Jim Laker as the ‘finest captain under whom I ever played’, while Alec Bedser put a spotlight on Surridge's special quality when he wrote: ‘One of the privileges of friendship is a free exchange of views, and we could always tell him honestly what we thought of his plans, and, in turn, he could be equally honest with us.
There was no rancour, although there was no shortage of plain talking…
Stuart earned our respect because he was fearless and was prepared to listen.’
In 1981 Surridge became a genial and hearty president of the club for which he had taken 464 wickets (29.64) and 360 catches (58 in 1952 and 56 in 1955) and scored 3697 runs (13.02).
His son, ‘Tiger’, played once for Surrey in 1978.
W.D.
Wickson
BILL WICKSON, who succeeded Bernie Coleman as Surrey CCC's president on April 13, died suddenly two days later.
he was 77.
A retired headmaster, he had contributed much to Surrey's youth cricket development.
He retired as Young Cricketers administrator in 1990. he was also connected with?
Corinthian Casuals FC for many years.
On the night of his accession to the Surrey presidency he had addressed the club members at the AGM with a moving inaugural speech.
Ian Hartland
FORMER Canterbury opening batsman Ian Robert Hartland (16 matches 1961 to 1966) died of cancer in March at 52. he was the father of Blair, who made his Test debut for New Zealand against England in January.
In 1961 Hartland scored 62 for NZ Colts at Ashburton against Dennis Silk's MCC team.
His best season was 1964–65, when his 296 runs at 37 helped his province win the Plunket Shield.
Both his top scores of 60 came that summer: against Central Districts and the touring Pakistanis.
Tall and a good driver, he finished with 613 runs at 24.5.
Fortified by painkillers, he was at Lancaster Park to see his son help Canterbury win the Shell Cup and score 22 and 45 on his Test debut.
John Archibald Ralph Oliver — Feb 24, aged 73, Bedfordshire (152 marches) 1935–61, captain 1954–61: over 6000 runs as opener, 230 wkts with medium-pace and offspin.
Played three times for Minor Counties, and served on MCCA committees for over 30 years.
Only fc match Minor Counties v Kent, Canterbury, 1951, scoring 84 not out in over three hours and 9, thus finishing with fc average of 93.
Club cricket for Luton Town, hockey for Beds, football for Corinthian Casuals.
Raja Bhalendra Singh — April 16, in New Delhi, aged 72.
Cambridge Uni 1939; 1952–54.
In 13 fc matches scored 392 runs (21.78), with a century (109) for Southern Punjab v Northern India, Pataila, 1943–44.
Slow bowler: 25 wkts at 27.
Son of Maharaja of Patiala.
Former p[resident of Indian Olympic Association.
Ed.
Aitcheson College for Chiefs, Lahore,.
Members of Punjab Assembly 1958–62.
Eminent in admin other sports.
Awarded Padma Bhusan for role in 9th Asian Games, Delhi, 1982.
Ken Turk — May 3, aged 67. president of Hartley Wintney CC.
Died after collapsing on pitch, having hit a six in last-wicket stand in 2nd XI match against Shepherd's Bush.
Played for the club for over 40 years.
BOOK REVIEWS
All reviews by David Frith
‘Chuck’ the tragic charmer
A WAYWARD GENIUS
IN ENGLAND ‘Chuck’ Fleetwood-Smith is probably remembered, if at all, merely for having twisted down 87 overs and taken only Hammond's wicket for 298 runs when England scored 903 for 7 at The oval in 1938.
In Australia his memory is revered for being a left-arm unorthodox spinner who occasionally sent down literally unplayable deliveries.
It was also known that he was a hobo in his final years, and that he had always had a keen eye for women.
Of all the cricket biographies as yet unwritten, this seems to have been the one which had stored in it potentially the greatest degree of ‘human interest’.
Sydney Morning Herald sportswriter Greg Growden's task was not easy, for not only was Fleetwood-Smith's life story shrouded in all kinds of mysteries — from his name and birth-date (1908, not 1910) at one end to burial details at the other — but there was a general reluctance among acquaintances to resurrect the past, for this ex-Test cricketer was, like many a scoundrel, loved by most who knew him.
He smoked a pipe and drank while at primary school, was expelled from college, and spent his teen years seducing local girls on trains.
Arthur Mailey, whose skill and amiable manner attracted F–S to cricket, was later to write that by F–S's standards, other spin bowlers were merely allowing the ball to ‘slip from their fingers’.
He hated the game's tensions and pressures.
That was when his ‘ridiculous’ behaviours would start: making magpie calls, crying ‘Woop woop!’to the crowd, mimicking English batsmen's upper-class accents.
The admiring O'Reilly recalls that he was ‘definitely a screw loose’, with ‘this devilish, evil look in his eyes’.
But he was a charmer.
The Errol Flynn looks crumbled with age, and the man whose strike rate in first-class cricket was better than O'Reilly's, Mailey's or Grimmett's entered the twilight world of trampdom under the bridges of the Yarra, drinking meths and fossicking for food in garbage-bins.
Arrested for vagrancy, he dried out in hospital, where molested the nurse.
His plight is movingly described without recourse to glorification or undue sympathy.
As a cricketer he deserves to be remembered for his 6 for 110 which levelled the 1936–37 Ashes series at Adelaide, or specifically the ball with which he bowled Hammond in that crucial innings.
As a man, he lends himself to a story as haunting as any in cricket.
THE TWELFTH MAN
MANY MORE cricketers have been killed while batting at Lord's in fictional matches than in real life, mercifully.
John Parker, who himself took a nasty knock on the head while batting in a famous Press match at Harrogate in 1977, stiffens his reader on page 9 by having the bumptious captain of Surrey keel over ‘like a battleship hit by a torpedo’.
Like an old English B movie script, the story progresses with detective-inspectors in mackintoshes and ‘audible gasps’ and ‘unmarked black Rovers’.
Roger North, the young Surrey allrounder, is the hero, with strong love interest, and a climax to tempt film-makers as he climbs up the gasholder at The Oval with the villain.
‘Hmmm,’ says the inspector at one point, ‘there are too many coincidences.’
True.
And at least one piece of forensic originality, for — prior to this novel — there was no recorded human fatality resulting from the venom of the Queensland can-toad.
Corny, but you'll love it.
GRAHAM GOOCH
THE ENGLAND captain's name has appeared under several titles, but this happens to be the first full-length biography.
And it portrays him both accurately and feelingly.
Saviours of England's Test image as the 1980s gave way to the 1990s, he is yet lugubrious except in the most private environs and incurably introverted.
His passion for training and dedication of the overt kind has lifted a demoralised Test team up from its knees, always bracketed with his own phenomenal contribution with the bat.
The photograph on page 136 is the ultimate in portrayal of a fighting soldier placed in the context of a cricket match: unshaven, helmet and armguard in place, features contorted, limbs braced as the enemy fires at him.
Gooch was not always to convincing a figure.
He had the worst of all Test baptisms, in 1975; went further into his shell when heavily criticised for touring South Africa in 1982 (a £25,000 libel settlement from the sun a compensation); and found country captaincy too much first time round.
The hostile reception he received in the Caribbean in 1986 marked another low point, so that in the best tradition of film scripts, from a sea of adversity arose a hardened hero, utterly uncompromising, a succession of glittering prizes — personal and national — to be seized by him one after the other.
Always, it seems, success for Essex meant as much for him as Test triumph.
Last year he scored 259 to make sure of the 1991 County championship, and plodded off unemotionally: though he did concede to emotion on the balcony when the victory was eventually sealed.
It  is an interesting character study, not least when his relationships with Gower and with Tufnell are examined.
THE ILLUSTRATED HISTORY OF COUNTY CRICKET
DESPITE THE flow of Helm county histories and other recent surveys of the county game through its 100-plus years, we have another, its offered raison d'être being a compulsion to relate the fame to ‘the changing context of society at large’.
Hence: ‘Many now forget that the rules of most sports were framed in Victorian times without resort to enforcement then ‘in’, and weren't prison sentences then stiffer?
Today, by contrast, when the penal code has grown soft, cricket's regulations relating to conduct — which has also deteriorated — are tougher .)
it is further suggested that ‘nostalgic playback’ began after the 1914–18 war.
yet there is documentary evidence that nostalgia is as old as cricket itself.
Still, this is what debate is all about.
The book is highly priced despite Bass's sponsorship (cash which must have made its way into the pockets of publisher and author).
The pictures are of variable quality, some fresh, most familiar, and the one purporting to be of F. R. Foster showing, in reality, Warren Bardsley.
A SPRINGBOK DOWN UNDER
SIXTY YEARS ago South Africa visited Australia and lost all five Tests.
They had some fine players in their side — Cameron, herby Taylor, Mitchell, Bell, Balaskas, Morkel, Vincent — but Australia had Bradman (806 runs at 201) and Grimmett, whose 33 wickets for 557 placed him behind left-armer Ironmonger, who took 31 for 300 in the series.
Ken Viljoen, then 21, made the Springboks' only hundred in the Tests, and it is from his diary that the authors have recreated the events of 1931–32, on and off the field.
Augmented by informal photographs, the contemporary words conjure up the feel of life in the 1930s, when cricket seems somehow to have been more wholesome and felicitous.
Only H. W. Taylor was married or over 30, and Viljoen's diary suggests a vigorous special existence between Tests — which may have contributed to the welter of dropped catches which helped sway the issue.
but South Africa were also caught on drying pitches, and in the fifth Test, at Melbourne, they were thought lucky to have reached 36 in their first innings.
Second time round they did better, reaching 45.
At least they won both Tests in New Zealand.
The book is a twin delight in that the pictures are rare and interesting and the observations are infallibly evocative: Eddie Gilbert, the Queensland Aboriginal (the all-white South African party made it clear they had no objections to any opponent on colour grounds), bowled off six paces and delivered the ball ‘like bullets’; there is a colourful cameo of Tasmanian wild man Laurie Nash; the just-completed Sydney Harbour Bridge is explored; and Viljoen asserts that ‘if there was no Bradman, I'm afraid there would be no NSW or Australia’.
The Don, Keith Rigg and ‘Stodgy’ Steyn give their recollections, the book closing with a ‘what happened to them’section.
A very special offering.
TANGLED UP IN WHITE
THE former Somerset captain (described rather surprisingly on the flap as ‘former England cricketer’) seems to be making rather louder noises as a journalist — particularly in Australia — than he did as an intense and determined batsman.
Some of the fruits of his literary labours are gathered here in an anthology sourced from newspaper writings and his previous books, with scrutinies of most of the top players of the past few years, Test and county.
Brian Close always makes good copy, but the acquaintance stretches from the Garners and Vivs to Gower and Border and Jones and Waqar.
A few historical essays are dropped in, as are some on South Africa and a reported Test match or two, and a rather malodorous 16–page playlet.
The ‘maxims’ at the end are not quite in the class of Sebastian Melmoth , but throughout there is barely anything which wasn't chiselled out with both care and flair.
WILLS BOOK OF EXCELLENCE: ONE-DAY CRICKET
A COMPANION to the 1987 Wills book of Excellence: Cricket , this concentrates on the limited-overs variety, starting with an elegant mini-history of the game, analysing its attractions and flight-path.
Well illustrated throughout in expansive colour, it gathers together chapters on the first four World Cups, Packer cricket, Sharjah etc, and individual feats, with a chosen World XI.
The all-conquering West Indies are toasted, as is India's timelessly heroic 1983 World Cup-winning team.
A records section finishes the volume, after the technical views of Vengsarkar, Shastri, Azharuddin and umpire Reporter.
OTHER TITLES RECEIVED
WORLD CUP CRICKET 1992:— Hot-off-the-press paperback covering the World Cup which touched everyone but which could be won, alas, by only one country.
The writers are three bright operators from Melbourne's Age newspaper, their work edited by Patrick Smith, who has assembled a good range of pictures, some in colour, with player profiles dotted among the match reports, and scorecards by Ross Dundas.
Truly a team effort in that none of the reports is signed.
WORLD CUP 1992 SOUTH AFRICAN SOUVENIR BROCHURE — official pretournament souvenir bearing the imprimatur of the UCBSA.
Ali Bacher writes of his ‘dream come true’ and President de Klerk registers a goodwill message.
Nelson Mandela acknowledges the ‘magnificent pioneering role that cricket embraced to place sport in our country on a firm non-racial basis’.
Steve Tshwete, Kepler Wessels and Adrian Kuiper are profiled; previous World Cups are summarised; estimated playing personnel are listed; blank scoresheets await the details which may now be identified.
ESSEX COUNTY CRICKET CLUB 1992 YEARBOOK — Bulky annual marking champions' continuing boom: beneficiary Pringle is lauded, as is veteran Childs; memorable matches series continues, as told by participants; strangest scorecard is France v Essex, with such Gallic scorelines as D. E. East c S. Karunanayake b Karunaratne.
KENT COUNTY CRICKET CLUB 1992 ANNUAL — Editorial protest at the continuing disturbance to county cricket's structure and acknowledgement of a 1991 deficit of almost £70,000 prefaces optimistic report on the newly-built indoor centre and reflections on 150 years of cricket at Canterbury, including a Blythe/Fry incident in 1911.
Good range of features and colour action photos; full review of ‘91 and records.
MIDDLESEX COUNTY CRICKET CLUB REVIEW 1991–92 — Another club lamenting a disappointing 1991, though not financially.
Nice cover picture of two Middlesex and England greats, Compton (president now) and Gatting.
SUSSEX COUNTY CRICKET CLUB HANDBOOK 1992 — Norman Gifford reminds members of the dreadful injury toll last summer, while captain Alan Wells (253 not out v Yorks, Middlesbrough) expresses faith in his playing squad (‘as strong as any in the country’).
A decent financial surplus is reported.
Full record of season, and solid club records section.
John Vinicombe amuses with press-box reminiscence.
THE YORKSHIRE COUNTY CRICKET CLUB YEARBOOK 1992 — McDermott's withdrawal came at a bad time: an anticipatory profile of the Queensland firebreather leads the 92nd edition, followed by a réumé of others born outside the county line.
Interview with Phil Carrick; wry reminiscence from Ted Lester, batsman, talent-spotter, scorer (600,000 runs, 350,000 miles); Yorkshire in 1892, even then not without its worries; celebration of the 2nd XI championship 1991; and Martyn Moxon's report, proud and hopeful.
Annual report, full scorecards, and records section.
CENTRAL LANCASHIRE LEAGUE CENTENARY YEAR 1892–1992 — meaty history of a prosperous league overflowing with great-name professionals.
General summary is followed by individual club histories, with some group pictures.
Among the earlier illustrations is a letter (1910) from Winston Churchill, then Home Secretary, acknowledging a condolence letter upon King Edward VII's death.
Moderns will gasp at the size of some of the pre-war crowds.
Several Test teams could be commissioned from the combined ranks over the years, Garry Sobers rising supreme.
Admirable club records complete a worthy history.
GODALMING CRICKET 225 NOT OUT — Unusually broad-based survey of cricket in an area rich in history, taking as its start G. B. Buckley's reference to matches in 1767.
The tragic surrey and England player Julius Caesar's story is told, and Godalming marches at Lord's and The oval are traced.
All-England XIs played in the area, and pre-war touring Test teams came down.
The Australian Aboriginals of 1868 played here, as did Ranji, Bosanquet and Jardine.
Charterhouse links are strong too.
Some enchanting illustrations.
BOBBY PARKS BENEFIT YEAR 1992 — Handsome benefit production for Hampshire's ‘mr Nice Guy’.
Contributions from Godfrey Evans, John Woodcock, alan Knott, David Gower, Mark Nicholas, Dad and many others, with Bob Taylor recalling that memorable wicketkeepers' convention during the 1986 NZ Lord's Test.
SOUND TAPES
DON BRADMAN: Sir Donald's Speech at the Opening of the Bradman Museum
‘THE TROUBLE with English cricket,’ John Burns, MP, told the young Bradman in 1930, ‘is that it's too full of Cuthberts, Berties and Percies!’
This and many other recollected gems stand out in The Don's admirably planned and delivered speech at the 1989 dinner marking the opening of the Bradman Museum at Bowral, NSW and the Bradman Trust.
At 81 he knew he was about to play a longer ‘innings’ that evening than at The oval in 1948, though the use of the word ‘memorial’in respect of the new foundations ‘presupposes my death — not a subject I'm approaching with any enthusiasm!’
Sole survivor of the first Australian XI he ever graced, in 1928, he speaks feelingly of his parents and wife and travels and concern for the game.
Later comes the address given by Sir Denys Roberts, surely the most amusing MCC president ever.
Funny from the start, he becomes serious only to pay a sterling tribute to the finest batsman of all, and to announce MCC gifts of £20,000 and copies of two paintings to the cause.
CLASSIC CRICKET HITS
SIXTEEN Australian recordings ranging across 60–odd years will, on the whole, be new and fascinating listening to cricket-lovers.
Recent productions like Ian McNamara's Letter to Allan Border and Mike Brady's The Game is Not the Same Without McGilvray slot alongside the revived Our Don Bradman and Our Eleven (1930), both sung by Art Leonard, and Bradman's How It's Done and (piano solo)Our Bungalow of Dreams , components of the precious old 78rpm of 1930, of which so few copies survive.
How McDougall Topped the Score is another classic included, and in time Paul Kelly's long (7.245)Bradman may come to be regarded as such.
My First Time at the SCG (Colin Buchanan) and Radio Days (The Kanes) are brand new.
WICKET TO WICKET
CULT figures on Australian radio, ‘Roy and HG’ natter away about the cricketers of recent years, superbly dry and yet ‘over the top’, some of their remarks surely bordering on the actionable.
Arguments are put forth for scrapping leg-pads, introducing the 20-ball over, taking Test cricket off TV in order to boost the Sheffield Shield, and increasing interest by bringing nudity into cricket.
‘neutral’ umpiring could be achieved by having Pakistani umpires in Tests worldwide.
It is like eavesdropping at a match, though such ‘alternative’ humour is very rare.
Benaud's tuxedo preference, Doug Walter's coal-scuttle full of beer…
It's the tone of voice that tickles as much as anything.
It all makes WCM's Old Stager seem rational.
VIDEO REVIEWS
WORLD CUP CLASSIC MATCH HIGHLIGHTS: Week One
THESE FOUR boxes of action highlights from Pickwick enable the devout to exhume the 1992 World Cup, feeling it again as if they were in attendance in Australasia once more or seeing much of it for the first time if sleep and work schedules got in the way during those 33 hectic days and nights.
Sixteen matches are featured, excluding England's horrific hiccup against Zimbabwe and the run massacre between Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka.
In fact those two countries fail to feature at all.
The programmes were clearly adapted from where Channel 9 and New Zealand cameras operated, and the original commentary remains, ranging from the gormless and hysterical to the measured, shrewd and ostensibly impartial.
The amateurish voice which drops in the video links tends to irritate.
But the incident, so much of which will live forever in the mind's eye, leaps vividly onto screen.
Robin Smith's power play against India at Perth (Week 1) and the demolition job England did on Pakistan at Adelaide (Week 2) put them into the favourites' spot at the same time as Australia absorbed one stunning setback after another, alleviated only by the thrilling one-run victory over India at Brisbane.
‘parky-starn’ came back form the dead, and all was history by the time they faced England in the final on March 25.
The gaze will fix hypnotically on Gooch's dropped catch, Inzamam's savage hitting, and the mixed luck early in England's innings, when Botham probably didn't touch the fatal ball and Stewart, just before his actual dismissal, probably did.
See again Mushtaq's lovely googly which sank Hick and the speedy Akram incutter which took out the dangerous lewis first ball: Fairbrother's heroic counterattack, his face genuinely strained: that final catch to clinch Pakistan's victory…off Imran's final ball in international cricket?
And yet the most dramatic shots are probably from the SCG the night the reins fell on South Africa and England, and cricket made a memorable fool of itself.