

A PLACE IN THE SUN
by Fiona Lewis
The first things Dipesh Shah did when he became managing director of BP Solar in March 1991 were to set a target for the next two years and to articulate it to everyone in the company.
The overall goal was ‘sustainable viability’ by the end of 1992.
That in turn translated into two sub-goals: first, that the business should fund future growth from its own resources, without recourse to corporate funds; and, second, that it should make a profit.
Although the business only just failed to meet the first target, it did become financially self-sustaining six months ahead of schedule.
‘We expect to complete the turn-round in the first half of 1993,’ says Shah, ‘and to be profitable on a global basis in the second half.’
Commercial reality: The reason for setting such public targets was that Shah wanted everyone, inside and outside BP Solar, to be absolutely clear about the company's status.
It's a business enterprise and will stand or fall as a business.
Shah wants to be rid, once and for all, of the suspicion that solar is just a fringe technology that happens to earn BP brownie points from environmentalists and the governments of developing countries.
That it does enhance BP's reputation is, of course, important, but it's not the prime objective.
The driving force is ensuring satisfactory business returns.
Meeting the initial targets will take BP Solar through a crucial psychological as well as business barrier.
‘We'll be the first solar company to be a viable business on an international scale,’ says Shah.
‘We've achieved this through significant growth of our business, by changing our strategy, our organization and, most importantly, the way we work in BP Solar.
The emphasis is on teamwork and on productivity; our productivity per employee has more than doubled over the past two years.
Every member of our 300-plus Solar ‘family’ has contributed to our success.’
World market: The global market for solar energy is worth about $500 million, two-thirds of it shared among many tiny private companies.
The remaining third is divided among four big players: BP, Siemens, Solarex (an Amoco subsidiary) and Kyocera of Japan.
Three years ago BP wasn't even in the top half-dozen.
Today, on most measures, it's one of the top two, Siemens being the main competitor.
BP Solar's turnover last year was $40 million (compared with Siemens' $50 million), and it grew by 35 per cent, way ahead of the industry growth rate of six per cent .
But Shah is far from complacent.
He has just set ambitious new targets for the next three years.
He wants to double turnover and significantly improve profitability to more than five per cent return on sales.
Making electricity: Photovoltaics is the technology of converting sunlight directly into electricity.
This can then be used for everything from lighting to running electrical appliances.
(See box)
Strategists at BP Solar's headquarters in Surrey, UK, divide the market into three segments.
The first, well-developed now, is the so-called ‘professional’ market of solar-powered equipment for specialist users.
This ranges from remote repeater stations for telecommunications to solar-powered cathodic protection for oil pipelines.
The second important segment is rural electrification.
Nearly two-thirds of the world's population has no access to electricity.
Many are in areas so remote that they have no chance of being connected to their country's national grid for years to come.
Photovoltaics lets those people make their own power on the spot by capturing the sun's energy.
The third, comparatively new, market segment, is one in which BP has become increasingly prominent over the past couple of years.
This is the integration of photovoltaics into existing generation and transmission systems in developed countries.
Major growth: Shah thinks this could become a major growth area.
Integration takes two main forms.
It is, in the jargon, either ‘distributed’ or ‘centralized’.
In distributed integration, users build solar panels into the roof of their house (or factory) and export any surplus solar-generated electricity (whatever they don't use themselves) back into the national grid.
A two-way meter measures how much electricity has been imported and how much exported.
The bill is based on the net balance.
Germany, Switzerland, Spain, Japan and several American states have already enacted legislation which obliges the generating company or utility to accept this exported power, says Shah.
‘A typical household might, as a result, cut its power requirements by 30 to 50 per cent, so it's not insignificant.’
BP Solar is also working on a scheme to integrate photovoltaics directly into the cladding of office blocks.
Even in the UK, where light levels are low, about 10 per cent of the average office building's power requirements could be satisfied in this way, says Shah.
‘And in East Asia or other parts of the world where light conditions are better, we're talking about 30 per cent.’
Centralized integration is about using photovoltaics to complement the output of conventional power stations, using techniques such as‘peak shaving’.
‘All power stations carry a certain wastage,’ explains Shah.
‘They're built to cope with the largest demand, although most of the time that demand is simply not required.
If the utilities can find another way of generating electricity that reduces the excess capacity that needs to be built, their investment requirement will be significantly reduced.’
How quickly the solar market grows from now on will depend, crucially, on its cost.
It will be driven in equal measure by technological advances and improvements in manufacturing.
‘In our case, manufacturing improvements have been significant,’ says John Driver, head of global manufacturing.
‘Unit costs have been reduced by a third over the past two years.’
The price of photovoltaic power has dropped more than two-thirds in 12 years, and is continuing to fall.
It's already competitive for most remote site applications, says Shah, who reckons that distributed integration will be cost-competitive by the end of the decade.
But the idea of full-blown solar power stations is unrealistic in the foreseeable future.
Photovoltaics is still five times as expensive as conventional power generation.
‘It's very hard to predict because the costs are coming down rapidly, but I can't see it being an economic proposition until well into the next century,’ Shah concludes.
The technology
The building blocks of photovoltaics are the solar cells that capture and transmute the energy from sunlight.
Individual cells are linked together to form panels, and the panels in turn can be linked to form arrays.
The panels or arrays are used to run electrical appliances or systems and are connected to batteries to store surplus power.
BP is working on three different types of solar cell: the conventional screen-printed cell, the high-efficiency laser-grooved cell (Saturn), and the thin-film cell (Apollo).
Conventional cell: The conventional cell is made from wafers of monocrystalline silicon, the semiconductor material used in microchips.
When light strikes the silicon, it releases electrons that move through the material.
Screen-printed silver metal contacts on the surface of the wafer collect the streams of electrons and produce an electric current.
The conventional cell is, typically, 12.5 per cent efficient; for every 100 watts of solar energy falling on the cell 12.5 watts of useful electricity are generated.
High-efficiency cell: Like the conventional cell, the high-efficiency cell (Saturn) is based on monocrystalline silicon.
However, instead of screen-printing the metal on the surface of the wafer, with Saturn cells a groove is cut into the silicon by a laser and the metal is electroplated in the groove.
The minimum width of contact that can be laid by screen-printing is 150 microns, while laser-grooved contacts are only 30 microns wide.
The difference is important because the metal reflects any light falling on it.
That light is lost; it does not penetrate the silicon and release electrons.
The narrower the contact metal strip, the greater the area of silicon left free to capture the light.
About 15 per cent of the surface area of a screen-printed cell will be covered by metal.
Laser grooving reduces that to two or three per cent.
This, together with other advantages, means that Saturn cells have a typical efficiency of 17 to 18 per cent.
Thin film cell (Apollo): Silicon does not absorb light particularly well.
It needs to be about half a millimetre thick to absorb the whole solar spectrum and, since it's an expensive material, silicon-based solar cells are comparatively expensive to make.
BP Solar is developing a technology based on an alternative semiconductor that can absorb the whole solar spectrum in about one-thousandth of a millimetre of material.
The best efficiency achieved to date is about 10 per cent.
This is lower than both types of silicon-based cell, but the thin-film cell is much cheaper to make.
BP expects to have Apollo cells on the market within three years.
The applications
Bringing power to Sri Lanka: The Mahiyangana project in Sri Lanka is one of the biggest and most complex remote-area projects ever undertaken by BP Solar.
The $1.5-million scheme has brought solar-generated power to more than 120 sites in a 10,000-sq-km area of Uva province in the south east of the island.
The impact has been dramatic.
‘At one hospital site, Ekiriyankumbra, the transformation was incredible,’ says Dr Bruce Robins, BP Solar Australia's manager for professional sales.
‘On a site visit before we started the project, we found the hospital grounds overgrown and the wards empty because of lack of medicines and basic facilities.
The ambulance had four flat tyres, the doctor wasn't there and no one knew when he'd return.’
After solar-powered lights, vaccine refrigerators and a water supply had been installed, it was totally different.
‘The wards were full and a very enthusiastic doctor said that, for the first time, he could use his training to help his patients because he had immediate access to vaccines and medication,’ reports Robins.
Sun and water power in Toledo: BP Solar Espana is helping to connect a 1MW photovoltaic plant to the Spanish grid near Toledo in central Spain.
BP is supplying 550KW of high-efficiency (Saturn) solar modules.
The plant is being installed near an existing hydro-electric power plant so that its performance can be evaluated and compared with that of hydro power.
The hydro-electric system has a special problem in the summer.
Sometimes the main reservoir runs so low that there's not enough water for full power generation to take place.
This is one area where solar power could help.
One possibility being considered is for solar power to be used to pump downstream water back up to the main reservoir, so restoring the head of water needed to generate hydro-electric power.
This is the first major grid-connected project for BP Solar.
‘It will demonstrate the potential for photovoltaics in such applications,’ says Javier Anta, manager for BP Solar Espana.
‘The project has attracted enormous interest at all levels in Spain.’
Solar-powered house in Europe: BP Solar has established itself as one of the top two suppliers of photovoltaics in Europe.
Applications of the technology include individual houses in Germany and Switzerland that generate power during the day which is fed into the national grid, from which power is drawn at night.
In parts of Norway and Sweden, solar energy provides power to remote houses in environmentally sensitive areas.
An extensive sales network has been established throughout Europe.
‘The team had a very successful year in 1992, and is expecting an even better performance this year, despite the recession,’ reports Dick Evans, who heads the European commercial team.
DIPLOMATIC INCIDENTS
Once an ambassador for Britain and head of the Diplomatic Service, Sir Patrick Wright is now a non-executive director of BP.
He talked to Malcolm Brown about a life which continues to be full of interest and surprise
Non-executive director Sir Patrick Wright recently found his skills being used in a rather unusual way.
He was accompanying the chief executive of BP Exploration, John Browne, on a trip to the former Soviet republic of Azerbaijan where BP and Statoil are discussing offshore developments in the South Caspian Sea with the Azeri government.
During the round of visits to VIPs, Sir Patrick, former head of the British Diplomatic Service, found himself in conversation with the country's head of state, President Elchibey.
They talked neither in English nor Azerbaijani, nor the business language, Russian, but in Arabic.
‘The president was a former Arabic interpreter in the Soviet foreign service,’ explains Sir Patrick, who himself learned the language in the late 1950s at the Foreign Office's Middle East Centre for Arab Studies (MECAS) in the hills behind Beirut.
Effortless transfer: Sir Patrick, who joined the BP board shortly after he retired from the foreign service in 1991, seems to have transferred effortlessly from Whitehall to business life.
As well as sitting on the BP board, he is a ‘non-exec’ at Barclays Bank, De La Rue and the BAA (formerly the British Airports Authority), and an advisory director of Unilever.
Even with those commitments, he still regards his lifestyle now as rather relaxed.
‘I'm keeping busy, but busy-ness is comparative.
I don't think it would be possible to be busier than I was when I was permanent under-secretary.
Two years ago, I really had very little time to myself.’
These days he has plenty of time to run the legs off his dog Quintus in nearby Richmond Park, just outside London, to indulge his hobby of stamp collecting and just to read novels, something that went by the board during his last few years at the Foreign Office, familiarly known as the FO.
In career terms, Sir Patrick regards himself as the ‘freak’ of the Wright family.
The Wrights had always been classics masters at the great public schools, or clergymen.
Patrick, who read Greats at Oxford, felt it was time the mould was broken, but says he was astonished when, after graduating, he came equal first in the Foreign Office exam.
‘I think you would really have to be an extraordinarily immodest person to expect even to pass, let alone come top, in an exam which allows in — then and now — something like 15 to 20 people a year out of up to 2,500 applicants.’
Beirut: His first embassy posting was as a Third Secretary in Beirut.
There he met his wife-to-be, Virginia…and the spy Kim Philby.
He remembers Philby as a brilliant journalist — he was in the Lebanon as a correspondent for The Economist and the Observer — but also as a person of very obvious human failings.
‘He regularly got very drunk and, even when sober, had a very bad stammer.
I'd think he was a man who women were probably tempted to mother.’
In retrospect he finds it extraordinary that, with all the drinking he did, Philby was able to maintain his double life.
But Sir Patrick certainly never guessed what was to come.
‘There are one or two people who claim that they now remember hints dropped by Kim Philby, but I can't say I can remember anything at all.’
After Beirut, Sir Patrick held a string of the sort of jobs the FO reserves for high flyers — postings to Washington and Cairo, private secretary to the then permanent under-secretary, Lord Gore-Booth, and then, in the mid-1970s, private secretary (foreign affairs and defence) to two prime ministers, Harold Wilson and James Callaghan.
Politics of oil: Just before his attachment to the premier's office at Number 10 Downing Street, he got a very good grounding in oil politics as head of the FO's Middle East department.
‘The oil price crisis in 1973 frankly took most people, both oil analysts and foreign policy analysts, by surprise,’ says Sir Patrick.
‘But what was quickly very clear was that the oil scene was never going to be the same again.
Only then did most of us realize the extraordinary power in the hands of the major oil producers, a power that was to revolutionize the relationship between the West and OPEC.’
Ambassador: Following his time with Wilson and Callaghan, Sir Patrick got his first embassy, Luxembourg, in 1977.
It was the perfect place to learn the ambassadorial trade.
The whole country is less than 1,000 square miles in area.
‘I was extraordinarily lucky in starting off in a post that was small enough and compact enough to enable me to meet quite a sizeable proportion of the population.’
Much of the contact-making happened not at diplomatic functions but in the marketplace, he recalls.
‘You could meet Luxembourg cabinet ministers or members of the royal family doing their shopping on a Saturday morning.’
Diplomatic service: After Luxembourg he served as ambassador to Syria and Saudi Arabia.
Then, in 1986, he was asked to become head of the Diplomatic Service.
‘I was, frankly, surprised, but didn't take very long to make up my mind that this was not an invitation you could refuse…or that I wanted to refuse.’
He spent five years in the top job, a hectic period which embraced not only the collapse of communism in eastern Europe, but, at the very end, the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the Gulf War.
Importance of contacts: Sir Patrick is quite happy with the thought that one of BP's intentions in inviting him to join its board must have been to gain access to his little black book.
‘When a board decides to invite somebody to be a non-executive director, one of the questions it should be asking itself is: ‘What value will this person add to the board?’
One of those bits of added value must undoubtedly be the additional contacts which that person can provide.
In the case of a retired official or minister, clearly there are contacts with Whitehall and Westminster, but in the case of somebody who's spent his or her life in overseas service, there are also contacts with other governments.’
The role of the non-executive: Of course, not all of a non-executive's time is spent looking outwards at the wider world.
They have to look inwards, too — sometimes very closely — at the workings of the organization itself.
It was the BP non-executive directors who last year decided that there should be fundamental changes in the very top level of management, and that the jobs of chairman and group chief executive should be vested in two different individuals.
The departure of Bob Horton was a traumatic event, but Sir Patrick suggests that there was probably no group of people better qualified to take such a decision than BP's non-executives.
He himself was still relatively new to the board, but aligns himself completely with the decision.
‘I now feel, after a year and a half on BP's board, that I know enough about the company and the way it works to be able to make judgements about its style of management.
How much more able to make that judgement were those colleagues who had already been on the board for seven years or more?’
Part of the team: Sir Patrick says the atmosphere now at BP is quite determinedly one of teamwork.
A sizeable number of middle and senior managers are invited to join the directors each month for the regular post-board lunch.
‘We never find ourselves sitting next to another director at lunch, which I think is an admirable arrangement.
It means that, by a certain amount of fairly skilful organization over the year, you're meeting a good cross-section of senior and middle management.
That's just an example of the way that John Ashburton and David Simon run the ship, and I think it's probably quite a good example of teamwork, too.’
No regrets: Sir Patrick has no regrets, he says, about all the new commitments he has taken on, and only one tiny regret about his tenure as head of the Diplomatic Service.
‘I sometimes wonder,’ he ponders wryly, ‘whether I was right, when I was permanent under-secretary, to have allowed somebody to put a portrait of Sir Henry Wotton in my office.’
Sir Henry, it will be recalled, was the seventeenth-century poet and diplomat who defined an ambassador as ‘an honest man sent to lie abroad for the the good of his country.’
Not so, says Sir Patrick — he wouldn't last five minutes if he did.
Perhaps Sir Patrick should encourage the FO to commission a portrait of a more modern sage, Sir David Frost, to hang alongside Sir Henry.
Frost, one might think, righted the balance a little when he said on British television some years ago that diplomacy was: ‘The art of letting somebody else have your way.’
WEIGHING UP THE BALANCE
In 1950, the world produced about one million tonnes of plastic.
Within 40 years, that figure has shot up to almost 80 million tonnes.
What is happening to all the waste?
Shield reports on BP's participation in this environmental debate
Imagine a life without plastics.
From first thing in the morning, when you turn off the clock-radio, throw back the fibre-filled duvet and activate the toaster, to the end of the day when you switch the TV off and the kettle on, plastic items have become an indispensable part of our lives.
Within 40 years, plastic has taken over from glass, metal and paper as the material of choice in many sectors.
It's lighter, lasts longer, is more convenient and hard-wearing; and it represents a more efficient use of energy.
Its wide range of properties makes it more flexible than probably any other substance on earth.
The move to plastics has been most marked in the packaging sector.
Without plastics, as a German study carried out in 1987 showed, packaging materials would cost twice as much, use twice as much energy, produce 150 per cent more waste and treble the weight of materials.
Disposable society: So why do we still hear clamour from the environmentally conscious that plastics represent everything bad in our disposable society?
‘Quite simply because people don't see plastics as reusable,’ states Ian Dent, manager, plastics and environment, in the Polymers division of BP Chemicals.
‘And that's largely a case of bad communication.
Part of the blame for that has to be accepted by the industry, which has been guilty of complacency.
‘After all, bottle banks have given glass a good green image and we're all now used to recycled paper.
But plastics aren't perceived as recyclable and so are labelled as environmentally unfriendly.’
It's true that recycling of plastics hasn't yet reached the scale of paper or glass, but the label of environmental enemy is undeserved.
In western Europe alone, around one million tonnes of plastics waste are recycled each year.
At Michelstadt in Germany, just south of Frankfurt, BP Chemicals' Plastics Fabrication group operates one of the largest mechanical recycling plants in Europe, dealing with 18,000 tonnes of waste a year.
But, as Dent points out, recycling isn't always the right answer to disposing of waste plastics.
‘To be acceptable, recycling has to be cost-effective as well as good for the environment,’ he explains.
‘The two don't always match.
Recycling is an industrial process in itself, carrying its own costs and responding to its own markets.
We've seen how flexible plastics are in use.
They're just as flexible in the way they can be reused — whether by being refilled with products or incinerated to recover energy.
To find the best solutions for managing waste from both the environmental and economic viewpoints, all these options have to be considered.’
Look at the source: Of course, BP and the rest of the plastics industry haven't been sitting around waiting for the environmental debate on waste to start.
For many years the industry has been examining its production processes to see how resources can be used more efficiently — which generally means getting more out of less.
In polymer production, for example, BP won the 1990 European Better Environment Award for Industry for its fluid-bed process for polyethylene production.
Other companies are also looking for ways to reduce the amount of energy consumed in the major processes for making polymers.
BP's customers too have been following the trend by producing their plastic products more efficiently.
The weight of the humble plastic carrier bag, for instance, has been reduced by a staggering 70 per cent in the past 20 years.
‘This kind of weight reduction can't be met by plastic's rivals — and it all adds up to a reduction in waste at the beginning of the cycle, which is where the environmental action should start!’
Dent says.
Unfortunately, the general public is not yet as aware of these technical achievements as they are about the waste they dispose of in their dustbins each week.
Bury it underground: There's a popular misconception that plastics constitute a hazard to the environment by taking up most of the space in landfill and that, because they don't degrade, cause lasting damage.
In fact, says Dent, these are both fallacies.
Plastic only takes up one-fifth of landfill space generally in western Europe, a figure that reduces to approximately 12 to 15 per cent when the waste is crushed.
Dent adds: ‘People have a vision of a landfill site being like a giant compost heap.
This is not the case.
The waste is compacted as tightly as possible so the space can be used efficiently and the possibility of liquid and air emissions can be excluded as much as possible.
After all, landfill gas — mainly methane — is about 30 times more potent as a greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide!’
What he feels is an even more important point is that the prerequisites for degradability are also excluded, if air and water are excluded.
‘This point was well demonstrated by Professor Bill Rathje, who dug up from landfills in Arizona, USA, newspapers 30 years old on which the headlines could easily be read,’ comments Dent.
‘And newspaper is a product that most people believe is readily degradable.’
Recovering energy by burning: Landfill is becoming a less attractive solution for disposal, anyway, because the amount of space available is finite.
In Japan and traditionally eco-friendly European countries such as Switzerland and Denmark, it has never been popular.
There the trend has been to turn waste into energy by incineration — energy recovery.
‘Since plastics are derived from oil, their energy value is high,’ Dent explains.
‘Only four per cent of the world's oil production is used to make plastics.
However, unlike most of the rest of the oil barrel that goes directly into use as a fuel, the four per cent that is made into plastics retains its energy properties and, tonne for tonne, has double the calorific value of coal.’
Plastic waste can therefore be used as a valuable — and renewable — source of energy.
‘This comes as a surprise to most people,’ he says, ‘as they view plastic as a material that only uses up, rather than recycles, our natural resources.’
The public is naturally concerned about emissions from incinerators, but governments in developed countries are acutely aware of these concerns.
Ever tighter regulations are being introduced to protect the environment from emissions contributing to the greenhouse effect or acid rain.
In turn, the waste management companies that operate the incinerators are redesigning their equipment to reduce these emissions to comply with new legislation.
‘In the search for alternative fuels,’ argues Dent, ‘the potential value of waste shouldn't be ignored.
This is especially true in the case of plastics which have such a high energy value.’
Mechanical recycling: Which brings the plastics waste conundrum back to recycling.
This is generally done by mechanical means, crushing solid plastics and using the residue to make other items.
‘The aim is, where possible, to turn a short-life product into a long-life one,’ comments Dent.
‘For instance, plastic vending cups can be recycled into measuring rulers, and plastic packaging into synthetic wood for outdoor furniture.
Who would have thought that the Coca-Cola bottle in your fridge today could turn into a fibre tomorrow to make carpet backing or filling for your anorak?’
Mechanical recycling does have limitations.
It's fine when plastic is relatively clean and different types can easily be segregated at source, such as in agriculture and distribution.
But the plastics in the waste collected by local authorities tend to be dirtier and of mixed types, and the recycled product made from them is more difficult to control and guarantee, especially for applications that will be in contact with food.
(Food wrapping is traditionally the main use for plastics.)
Pioneering development: Until recently, research into that problem had led to only limited advances in chemical recycling — that is, taking the waste and converting it back into one of its raw material process stages, then to be reprocessed back again.
The same sort of thing happens in the glass, paper and metal industries, where recycled products are used in the original production processing stages.
‘This is what we're seeking to do with chemical — or feedstock — recycling,’ says Dent.
Thanks to a pioneering development by BP Chemicals, the future looks much more promising.
A feedstock of waste plastic is subjected to very high temperatures to reduce the mixture to the basic chemicals from which it was originally made.
Dent explains: ‘Our process seeks to provide a simple, yet robust, system that can feed the treated plastic waste back into the processing of chemicals and can easily be used alongside refineries or chemicals plants.’
So far, BP has invested considerable sums in taking the system through successful laboratory trials.
However, as the company's research work has been presented in European seminars recently, BP has stressed the need for the involvement of the industry as a whole in sharing responsibility for scale-up and operation.
This process appears to have the potential to offer the most elegant solution and to accept the larger volumes demanded by the public and legislators.
Says Dent: ‘The plastics industry has a tradition of pushing back the frontiers of technology.
So it's not surprising that, faced with the challenge of reusing its waste, the industry is finding solutions through its excellent scientific and technological base.’
The next stage of development will be to build a larger pilot plant.
Its location and the names of the major players in the consortium financing it will be announced shortly.
Full-scale operation is scheduled for the end of the decade.
Legislative pressures: ‘As in so many areas of our industry, we have to move fast to keep up with changing laws,’ adds Dent.
Germany, France and Italy already have laws dealing with plastics waste.
The European Community has set a target to reduce landfill use from its present rate of 70 per cent to 10 per cent by the beginning of the next century.
The USA follows similar guidelines, on a federal basis.
Individual states have been asked to achieve a 25 per cent recycling rate.
Japan still favours incineration.
Developing countries in the Far East, that use much less plastic than the developed world, have cottoned on to modern waste management schemes very quickly.
But Dent repeats that recycling may not always be the best option from an environmental viewpoint for managing waste in general and disposing of plastics in particular.
All methods must be considered and the decisions taken must balance environmental and other benefits.
When those messages are understood, he believes that the image of plastic as an environmental enemy will change — to become a flexible friend to humankind in the home, factory, hospital or spaceship.
CHANGING THE MAP OF EUROPE
Valerie Shepard finds out how BP and Unipart are combining forces to get ahead of the competition
Like generals marshalling their forces for a ‘big push’ campaign, Eddie Thorning and Chris Pomfret pore over a map of Eastern Europe.
Thorning is European sales manager for Unipart International, the company that manufactures spare parts for cars and other vehicles across the world.
Pomfret is manager of development and analysis with the International Lubricants Marketing division of BP Oil.
The joint campaign is becoming a reality for the two companies, which first joined forces to explore the potential of the East European market some 18 months ago.
The proposition is simple — one-stop shopping for both lubricants and vehicle parts.
In countries such as the former Czechoslovakia (now two separate nations), two-thirds of motor lubricants are bought from petrol stations.
But few of those stations were geared to supply materials for the DIY motorist, and deliveries were unreliable or non-existent.
Distributors would travel perhaps a 1,500-kilometre round trip to collect stocks of vehicle accessories.
The scope for an entrepreneur to get in on the ground floor and turn petrol stations into shops supplying parts and oils was obvious — to those with an eye for  business .
For BP, involvement in the region goes back a long way.
Unlike Unipart, BP already had a presence in most of the Eastern European countries and the former Soviet Union (FSU) and was well placed to open up new markets previously restricted behind an iron curtain.
The Moscow connection: It was in Moscow that BP and Unipart first got together, at the end of 1991.
The ExpoCenter shop in the Russian capital, run by InterMTD, needed stocks of lubricants, which the BP office in Moscow agreed to supply.
It also wanted parts — for which it went to Unipart.
The introduction was made, and the joint presence in the Moscow shop led to a joint stand at an exhibition.
From that beginning, the idea of a strategic alliance that could take BP and Unipart together into a range of new opportunities took shape.
Thorning recalls: ‘BP had all the resources in place — a dedicated team at Bromley and specialist people on the ground in most countries within Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
It was a natural marriage.’
Trust: But the happy couple didn't rush to the altar to formalize their alliance.
For 12 months, BP and Unipart worked together on a basis of trust, getting together the right people from both sides, brainstorming and exploring the many opportunities for collaborative activity — not just in Eastern Europe.
‘Negotiating with customers took time too; it's a very long haul in the Eastern European market,’ comments Pomfret.
Dealers in Moscow were so enthusiastic about the chance to get their lubes and parts from a single supplier that BP and Unipart agreed to do a show together in May 1992 to introduce their joint service to a wider range of potential customers.
They were not disappointed with the response.
‘Between 150 and 200 prospective customers visited our stand on the first morning,’ says Patrick Fitz-Gibbon, public affairs manager with Unipart, who organized the event.
‘We're still following up contacts made at that show, and quite a number have already turned into customers.’
The deal in Russia is that BP's Moscow office will now be Unipart's importer for the country, ensuring that reliable stocks are always available of a limited range of the fastest-moving of Unipart's products.
Thorning adds: ‘Of course, this arrangement doesn't stop either of us from getting other contacts within the CIS.
It's completely flexible.’
What's likely to limit the scope for progress in Russia is its general political and economic instability, says Thorning.
Until this improves, it's likely that Russia will take a back seat for Western investment.
Instead, countries such as the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary and Poland, where conditions are more conducive to good business strategies, are likely to scoop up the funds on offer.
Springing to life: Indeed, the first real market where the joint strategy sprang to life has been Czechoslovakia, now operating as two separate nations — the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
This is a relatively prosperous area, attracting around 30 million tourists a year, explains BP's Pomfret.
Since the fall of communism, imports of second-hand Western cars have grown.
Volkswagen has seized an investment opportunity by buying Skoda, and other Western car manufacturers are setting up Western-style dealerships.
Demand for spares — particularly for those like Unipart's which fit all makes of car — is increasing.
The market for automobile lubricants is also rising.
‘BP had a local business based in Prague,’ says Pomfret, ‘supplying lubes to petrol stations, workshops and part shops for the ordinary motorist to buy.
But very few of those outlets could offer the consistent availability of parts which is necessary to improve service to customers.
Eddie Thorning and I saw a great opportunity to get in on the ground floor, and make money by gaining competitive advantage through an oil-and-parts offer to workshops and petrol stations.’
Thorning takes up the story.
‘As part of the privatization process within the former Czechoslovakia, the state oil companies are being sold off.
Benzinol, the state company based in Bratislava, is about to sign a deal that will give the BP-Unipart alliance access to about 200 petrol stations — two-thirds of the entire petrol station market in Slovakia — and access to a market of well-organized motor workshops.
The sites are being redeveloped with Western-style shops stocked with fully branded BP and Unipart merchandise.’
The deal gives both parties the chance to build on their strengths.
Thorning continues: ‘The big prize is that we're going to help the company to get into wholesaling — a much bigger opportunity for both lubricants and parts than what could be sold through petrol stations alone.
Unipart is particularly strong in wholesaling and factoring, and Slovakia is almost an untouched area for this service.’
Philanthropy?
Thorning is quick to scotch any suggestion that the BP-Unipart arrangement with Benzinol is based on philanthropy.
‘We've driven a hard bargain — it's not a question of charity!
By getting in early, we hope to get an edge on the competition.’
Pomfret gives the detail.
‘We needed to get the BP and Unipart brands on to the petrol stations so they would be highly visible.
At the same time, we saw the workshops as strategically important for the future.
We approached Ford, Honda and BMW dealers in Slovakia, and explained the oil-plus-parts concept to them.’
The results exceeded expectations.
All the Honda dealers, two of the main Ford ones and three of the five BMW dealers decided to come on board.
‘All these customers were gained from, or won in competition with, Castrol, who have been in Czechoslovakia for 30 years,’ says Pomfret with delight.
Training: Training is a hugely important part of the deal.
Thorning readily acknowledges the technical expertise of the local workshops, but they need to become familiar not only with the product range but also with Western ways of doing business.
So far, this has been handled by visits to Unipart's headquarters in Oxford to understand the wholesaling operation from start to finish and to see the ‘parts superstores’ that are typical of the UK retail market.
There are plans to put this programme on to videotape, so it can be shown to customers locally without the need for lengthy and expensive trips to the UK.
In the Czech Republic, a local company named Cesopot that recently became a BP distributor is about to sign with Unipart as its distributor too.
Pomfret sees this development as an important spin-off of the alliance.
‘We in BP and Unipart have also been introducing each other to potential customers in the Ukraine and Russia.’
In Poland, where BP already had a well-established network of 12 distributors selling to the state petrol network, Unipart has agreed that BP Poland should become the importer for its parts.
BP Poland is now researching the market and developing the ‘alliance offer’ to customers, ready for launch in July.
The Baku shop: One of the most visible signs of the co-operation between BP and Unipart is the shop in Baku, capital of Azerbaijan, opened by BP Exploration's chief executive John Browne on 6 March 1993.
BP Exploration is a major partner with Statoil in a feasibility study of a major offshore field and exploration of adjacent acreage in the Azeri sector of the Caspian Sea.
It's all part of the normal job for Erik Kleine, BP Oil's sales manager for the Baltic States and Central Asian republics of the former Soviet Union, to appoint agents and distributors for the company's lubricants in those countries.
But this was a slightly different project.
On behalf of BP and Unipart, he appointed a distributor to run the shop in Baku and agree the range of products it would stock, together with prices and credit terms for both lubricants and parts.
Actually getting the shop together was very much a team effort.
Jim Bateson, trading group manager with BP's International Lubricants Marketing division, led the project team, while Unipart drew on its expertise in designing shops on computer.
Andy Gearty of BP took charge of providing all the advertising and merchandizing materials for the shop, built the displays and trained the staff.
‘All this was achieved in just seven weeks from start to finish,’ adds Pomfret.
The result has been a PR triumph for BP, and a commercial success for the partners.
On its first day of trading, the shop took 1.6 million roubles (about US $2,600).
Since that flying start, sales have been running at about $800 a day — unprecedented in Azerbaijan.
For the BP Exploration effort locally, there is security of supply of parts and oil for their vehicles.
For the two-million population of Baku, whose option for obtaining vehicles parts is a nine-hour train journey to Moscow, the shop is a very welcome innovation.
Common philosophy: What is becoming clear as the partnership progresses is that BP and Unipart share a common philosophy — based on quality products, a focus on giving customers the best possible service, and a commercial drive to get more bang for fewer bucks.
And, of course, their products are complementary.
‘We haven't even scratched the surface yet,’ predicts Eddie Thorning.
‘This kind of partnership can't happen overnight.
But there's a lot of general support and enthusiasm about, and I'm very optimistic.’
Chris Pomfret agrees.
‘It's good to see how the partnership approach is spreading.
We're looking at maximizing the benefits of the alliance in other parts of the world and not just Eastern Europe.
BP Oil UK's lubricants and special products division has just started to blend lubes to be sold in Britain under the Unipart label, and the first batch was supplied in May.
This is another new and exciting prospect for both of us.’
The generals may be needing some new maps for their next campaign…
EDITING BY DESIGN
David Taylor examines how words and pictures combine to tell a story
‘The Swiss railway timetable is a masterpiece of typographical design, if not what you could call a rattling good read.
A fashion magazine is ablaze with visually striking images, but its fashionable look won't last long.
And an artfully crafted series of graphical devices, dotted across a corporate review, may be of no informational consequence just ‘designer confetti’.’
Lawrence Edwards, highly experienced in the design of all sorts of publications, is getting into his stride, brandishing examples of the good, the bad, and the typographically ugly.
Rows of bookshelves in his Brighton studio buckle under the weight of back numbers, collected ephemera and bound volumes of imagery, lettering and print of every description.
For an authoritative insight into the myriad techniques of design for publication, Edwards is undoubtedly the man.
He is also designer of the pages you are reading now.
The alchemy of Shield's design is first contrived with paper and pencil, repeatedly cut and pasted, tried this way and that, fine-tuned, then finally executed on computer.
Meanwhile, in a studio in north London, Geoffrey Winston of Thumb Design Partnership, seems to be doing much the same.
He, too, is impassioned in his discussion of what does or doesn't cut the typographical mustard, and is retained by BP to design its award-winning annual Statistical Review of World Energy.
The process is one of envisioning on paper and then transferring the result to an Apple Macintosh computer system.
Detailed type specifications, meticulous arrangement of tabular information and craftily co-ordinated use of colour help the reader to assimilate rapidly what data is to be found where: for this publication, these considerations are of paramount concern.
The design of BP's annual report and accounts is in the hands of Nigel Forsyth at Bamber Forsyth Design in central London.
There we find an equally spirited expression of what well-executed design can bring to the presentation of corporate information, from the formal reporting of a company's performance to the promoting of a wider understanding of its aims and personality.
Three well-seasoned designers, then, their talents variously deployed on printed material for BP.
Hitting the target: ‘The way information is presented can make all the difference to whether your publication hits its target or is consigned, unread, to the waste-bin,’ says Peter Brigg, head of BP's Employee Communications & services team (ECS), which produces many of the company's corporate publications.
‘The design also helps shape the image the reader has of the company.
‘If you take as much trouble as we do in BP to get the words and information right, it would be silly to dish them up in an unattractive package,’ Brigg adds.
‘Not only that, good design can actually help the reader understand complicated information more easily.’
Brigg emphasizes that graphic design or typography should be the servant of the communication process, not its master.
‘Its role must depend on the nature of the information to be conveyed.
The design brief for an employee magazine is quite different from that for an annual report, or a newspaper from a statistical review.
What they have in common is that the design must be ‘fit for purpose’.’
Annual report: The annual report, according to Nigel Forsyth, is the single most demanding publication for most companies.
It typically presents the graphic designer with the formidable task of squeezing quarts into pint pots: a lengthy, formal statement that can't be edited down; legally required fine-print detail and tables of crucial figures that may or may not be felicitously depicted as graphs, pie-charts or bar-charts of one sort or another.
Then there's the requirement for plenty of pictures and detailed coverage of this or that aspect of corporate activity.
And, yes, there has to be some eye-catching, nifty typography with lots of ‘creative white space’ so that it doesn't all seem too indigestible.
It goes without saying that all the material needs to be checked repeatedly and authorized by various departmental heads, and that it will be changed right up until the last minute.
‘Apart from all that,’ sighs Forsyth, ‘it's pretty straightforward.’
Peter Boon of ECS, who edits BP's annual report, points out that it's a uniquely demanding publication because of the varied nature of its readership.
‘The designer has to allow for both those who'll do no more than flick through and those who'll go through it line-by-line.
‘The whole document must look suitably smart in all respects — the sort of paper on which it's printed, the use of colour and so on— but at the same time it has to avoid being gratuitously slick,’ Boon warns.
‘It has to look open and attractive, yet incorporate a mass of authoritative detail.
And it certainly mustn't mislead, for example, with injudicious presentation of diagrams that imply a brighter picture than their core data may justify.
That doesn't happen in any respectable report, of course, but it's the sort of ever-present risk that those of us who are responsible for production need to beware of.’
Three central concerns are at the heart of the annual report, says designer Nigel Forsyth: ‘creating an understanding of the company, communicating its performance, and — the magic bit — reflecting its personality’.
Design is both the practical business of fitting the type and illustrations to editorial imperatives ‘making it work on the page’ and the subtler business of giving the report the right feel and character.
Computer is no design panacea: Computers, now universally used in design work, have facilitated the process, but are no substitute for creative hard graft.
‘What computers can easily do is to enable unskilled people to produce rubbish twice as quickly as they did before,’ Forsyth remarks.
This thought is echoed by Lawrence Edwards.
‘It's too easy to be seduced by a computer's apparent ease of use in desktop publishing,’ he declares.
Computers, he believes, are far from ideal as conceptual tools in the early design process, but their dazzling versatility has become a design force in its own right.
‘All kinds of typographical fireworks are now made possible by computers and that has generated its own trend: if this or that trick can be done, then it soon becomes fashionable to go ahead and do it.
For a highly fashion-conscious teenage magazine, perhaps, it becomes the norm to have the type dancing about all over the place, with grotesque or perversely distorted images perceived as ‘up-to-date’ and a more sober or considered treatment considered as old-fashioned as flared trousers and kipper ties.’
Here Edwards pauses momentarily.
‘Or are those back ‘in’ now?’he asks.
A corporate publication produced on behalf of a distinguished client won't want to appear flash, but nor will it want to risk seeming stuffy and behind the times.
Judgement: Edwards adds: ‘Paradoxically, the widespread use of computers in graphic design makes more, rather than fewer, demands on the designer's judgement.
The Mac may be indispensable for the process of design work, but there is a dangerous temptation to think that desktop publishing makes designing on screen a piece of cake.
‘Look!
We can move this over here and paste that over there.
We can have it upside down, or turned inside out .
There's a bit of open space over there, let's whack in a colourful what-not’.’
The result, all too often, is what Edwards calls ‘designer confetti’.
‘The disciplined use of decorative devices demands proper consideration of their function,’ he emphasizes, ‘even if or perhaps especially if that function is just to be eye-catching.
Design trends: BP is keenly aware of such dangers.
‘The magazine side of our publishing is perhaps the most flexible in design terms,’ says Peter Brigg, ‘but we don't set out to be at the cutting edge of fancy design.
BP is not in the fashion business.
We do take note of trends in graphic design, though, and we're approached two or three times a week by would-be BP designers.
We're precise in our requirements and we commission our design work from some of the best practitioners in their particular field.’
Statistical review: The particular task for Geoffrey Winston and his team at Thumb Design was to bring easily grasped clarity to the precision of the data contained in BP's highly respected Statistical Review of World Energy.
They needed to find balance and relationships in the context of detailed tabular information.
Decisions had to be taken about which information was best presented in the form of bar-charts, and which was more suited to pie-charts or line graphs.
A design solution was needed that would impart information quickly and easily, while at the same time projecting an ‘appropriate corporate ethos’ for BP.
In other words, it had to be accurate in every tiny detail and to look as if it was at first glance.
In its co-ordinated typography, pertinent use of colour-coding and subtlety of complex chartwork, BP's Statistical Review is widely regarded as a model of its kind.
‘It stands or falls on the quality of its detail,’ says Winston.
‘A huge amount of effort goes into detailing every element on the page — figures, typefaces, rules, significance of colours, running headings, backgrounds, style of charts and graphs.
Everything has to be styled, displayed and positioned with pinpoint accuracy and given sensible cohesion.’
All this could not have been achieved without Macintosh computers, but again, they were only the means to an end.
The original creative concept didn't depend on the use of computers, but its execution did.
‘Technology has changed the way we work,’ Winston says, ‘but not the way we think.’
The information comes first: Common threads are visible in the way all three designers handle the raw material supplied to them by BP.
For example, it's apparent that each has a detailed grasp of the content and purpose of the information he is being asked to package for the page.
It might seem obvious that all good design has to be ‘editorially led’ by a full understanding of the relative importance of different sections of the data, and by a full appreciation of the needs of the readers — but a critical look at some companies' material makes it woefully apparent that things by no means always work like that.
Brigg has a drawerful of ill-designed print that he calls his ‘chamber of horrors’.
It is obvious, too, that all three designers are exceptionally choosy in their selection and commissioning of both photographs and drawn illustrations, habitually going to extraordinary lengths to secure the right image.
All are quick to praise the photographic library resources of BP and to acknowledge that being able to lay hands on particular images of BP activity makes their work considerably easier.
But finding other, more generalized, illustrations is a time-consuming task.
Beyond the brief: All three are prepared, indeed eager, to go beyond what might be thought to be the narrow design brief and comment on the nature and selection of the material they are asked to make attractive and intelligible on the page.
It's a measure of their commitment to the cause of good design that their paramount concern is to make a page whose information can be readily absorbed, rather than to devise one for which the reader might need sunglasses.
‘Envisioning information’ is what Professor Edward Tufte called it: specifying body type of an appropriate style and scale; isolating and highlighting key phrases or quotations for larger, eye-catching treatment; choosing a picture or series of pictures to aid comprehension, or say something more succinctly than words ever can; choosing devices that draw the reader in, establish tone, reinforce the overall mood.
‘Graphic designers are often asked to do a great deal in a comparatively short space of time,’ acknowledges Peter Brigg, ‘but that's because there's often no substitute for the printed document.
Video or slide presentations undoubtedly have their place, but they have by no means supplanted the need for high quality publications.
Effective, well-designed information on the page is still a uniquely powerful communications tool.’
MANAGEMENT GURUS
saviours or super-egos?
by Carol Kennedy
They are not known as ‘gurus’ for nothing.
Tom Peters, Michael Porter and the venerable Peter Drucker — these and a handful of others, all American academics except for Britain's Charles Handy, are the spiritual leaders of the business world, the high priests of management.
Their writings and lectures offer a vision of salvation for troubled businesses, and their presence at seminars and conferences guarantees a rush for tickets at anything up to £800 a day.
Companies that secure the consultancy services of a top guru invest as much faith in their powers as did the hippies who hit the Maharishi trail to India 20 years ago, or the 17th-century crowds that mobbed Charles II, believing the British king's touch would cure them of scrofula.
The magic rubs off at many removes.
Look at the huge sales of every book by the Big Three (Drucker, at 84, is still turning out a book a year).
Tom Peters' latest hardback, Liberation Management, has sold more than 300,000 copies in the US alone since publication last November, while his reputation-making opus, In Search of Excellence, co-written with Robert Waterman, has sold more than five million and reprinted countless times since 1982.
And this in spite of the fact that two-thirds of the ‘excellent’ companies analysed had fallen from grace by 1987, when Peters himself brazenly opened his third book, Thriving on Chaos, with the statement: ‘There are no excellent companies’.
Peters, probably the highest paid and certainly the highest profile management guru in the world, is indeed more of an evangelist than a business adviser.
His performances on video and in the flesh at seminars are electrifying as he paces around, shirtsleeved and sweating, exhorting his audience to liberate themselves from old ways of thinking.
New ideas: Peters no longer acts as a consultant: his only involvement with individual companies now is to study their workings as research for his books and lectures.
His personal multinational, the Tom Peters group, organizes his crowded annual schedule of seminars.
Typically these are attended by 250 to 300 middle and senior management, sometimes more, and their companies will pay around £700 a head for the day.
A smaller, more senior group of 150–200 top executives paid £1,750 each for a two-day seminar in Germany last year.
Managers who have seen Peters in action come away on fire with new ideas.
How long those last back in the office, and how far they actually influence decision-making, is unquantifiable.
It's difficult to find companies willing to be specific about the changes or benefits that have resulted from the services of a consulting guru.
More likely, the advice will have reinforced change already recognized as necessary by senior management.
Influencing chief executives: The chairman or chief executive is often an enthusiast for the latest management thinking, but it's generally hard to find direct links with the way they run their companies.
Sir Peter Walters, a former chairman of BP who now heads Midland Bank and Blue Circle, kept a row of management books behind his desk in Britannic House, but says he read them ‘primarily for entertainment, rather as I would a novel’.
(He still possesses the tattered paperbacks that inspired him as a trainee BP manager in the 1950s — Dale Carnegie's How to Win Friends and Influence People and Lord  Beaverbrook's folksy handbook to success, Don't Trust to Luck.)
Chairman of Mitsubishi UK, Sir Peter Parker, separates the guru fraternity into ‘conference fodder’, who feed off more original thinkers; ‘thermometer’ gurus like Peters who take the temperature of new realities which busy managers have not yet articulated for themselves, and a few ‘genuinely prophetic’figures who he says have influenced him.
Among them he includes Drucker and the 1920s' Boston pioneer of human relations in industry, Mary Parker Follett.
Sir Graham Day, who runs Cadbury Schweppes and the automobile company Rover, has been admired for his hands-on style of management since his arrival in the UK from Canada more than 20 years ago.
He acknowledges he has learned from Porter's writing on competitive advantage, but probably speaks for most of his peers when he says: ‘I don't read business texts written by academics for the purpose of discovering a direct application that I can use.
I read them to broaden my own theoretical thinking, which is important if I'm to continue to develop as a manager and to increase my effectiveness.’
Philip Sadler, vice-president of Ashridge Management College, has followed the work of Peter Drucker ever since The Age of Discontinuity in 1969 predicted the great shift to a post-industrial society.
He believes that Drucker makes people ‘think a lot more deeply — in their bath, perhaps — but how to detect it in practice is difficult’.
Sadler adds, however, that an evangelist like Peters will have ‘shifted large numbers of CEOs from thinking to doing — people are energized by his ideas’.
A company-wide approach: One major European corporation that does acknowledge a guru's influence in reorganizing itself is Switzerland's largest chemical and pharmaceuticals group, Ciba-Geigy, now known as Ciba.
The group is just over halfway through a strategic overhaul known as Vision 2000, largely inspired, says chairman Heini Lippuner, by Robert Waterman's concept of ‘directed autonomy’.
It's based on a radical restructuring of the company into more independent business divisions, unified by common social, economic and environmental goals.
As explained in Waterman's 1989 book, The Renewal Factor, this apparent paradox consists of creating a structure and culture where ‘people in every nook and cranny of the company are empowered — encouraged in fact — to do things their way.
Suggestions are actively sought.
But all this takes place within a context of direction.
People know what the boundaries are; they know where they should act on their own and where not.
The boss knows that his or her job is to establish those boundaries, and then get out of the way.’
Ciba's top management hopes this will help break down the hierarchical system in which many of their middle management had become too passive, and encourage more individual initiative.
An internal survey to be carried out in 1994 will establish how far it has succeeded.
(The concept is reminiscent of the Project 1990 reforms that have revolutionized BP's management style in the last two years.)
Big ideas: Sometimes the ‘big ideas’ of management theory become so fissile that they break out all over the place apparently independently.
‘Business re-engineering’ or ‘process re-engineering’is the latest example; a concept whose paternity is claimed by at least two management consultants, chiefly an American called Michael Hammer, author of Re-engineering the Corporation.
But the essence of re-engineering — taking a strategic view of the component functions of a business, stripping some out and streamlining others with inter-disciplinary teams and more effective use of technology — has long been under way in a number of companies.
In each case the idea was generated internally and driven by a dynamic chief executive.
The practical impact of a guru's advice must sometimes be left to inference.
BBC television's first Troubleshooter series featured Sir John Harvey-Jones telling the chairman of Apricot Computers that his company ought to dispose of its manufacturing operations.
The advice was turned down.
Subsequently, Apricot did sell its manufacturing side to Mitsubishi, though it denied that the decision owed anything to Troubleshooter.
Some companies may be reluctant to comment on their experiences for internal reasons.
It's not unknown for a big-name guru to sail into a company, unsettle and antagonize middle management and then depart, leaving a serious morale problem for senior managers to mop up.
Super-egos: But what do they expect?
The world's top management gurus today are almost by definition super-egos.
To package and present their ideas, to perform as they do, they have to develop the belief that they have something unique to offer.
Michael Porter, whose Competitive Advantage of Nations has been studied as much by political leaders as businessmen, now talks of the Porter ‘brand’.
The striking exception among the super-egos is Professor Charles Handy, a modest and witty Irishman with a spiritual perspective which owes much to his four years as warden of St George's House in Windsor Castle, a private study and conference centre in the UK concerned with ethics and values in society.
Handy accepted the appointment in 1977 as an alternative to joining the church, and his management thinking has always been marked by a belief that companies ought to be about more than performance and profitability.
Now internationally recognized as a result of The Age of Unreason, a book that encapsulates most of his thinking on the future of work and organisations — for example, the concepts of ‘portfolio’ work for the over-50s, the ‘shamrock’company with a small permanent core and contracted-out services — Handy is Britain's only world-class guru and perhaps the closest thinker to Drucker in his range of predictive ideas on society.
Gurus as a marketable, bankable phenomenon are essentially a product of the early eighties, when Peters' and Waterman's In Search of Excellence fired a business generation with its upbeat exhortations.
Before World War II, as Drucker relates, ‘all the books on management filled no more than a modest shelf’.
In the 1950s and 1960s, American academics like Douglas McGregor of ‘Theory X and Theory Y’ fame built on the pre-war work of Elton Mayo in human motivation.
Before the 1930s, it was all ‘scientific management’ and the mechanistic s approach of Frederick W Taylor.
What Mayor began has now reached its apogee with ‘empowerment’, first explored in depth by Harvard's Rosabeth Moss Kanter, the only world-class woman guru, as a means of releasing the full creative potential of an organisation.
The latest thinking: A new version of the scientific management argument was recently aired in the UK between Professor John Kay of London Business School and The Economist magazine.
Kay's book, Foundations of Corporate Success, contends that management is still in the age of quack doctors, before the application of scientific method.
The Economist dismissed the parallel, saying that differences between companies are greater than those between humans, and that a better analogy for the management thinker is the coach of a sports team, who deploys a body of knowledge and skills in changing circumstances ‘as rival teams learn to outwit each other’.
To which Kay replied that knowledge was not be confused with prescription.
‘Gurus who offer universal prescriptions — raise quality, go global — are exact analogues of pre-scientific doctors who peddled all-purpose remedies because they knew no better.’
Prescription has been out of fashion with gurus since In Search of Excellence.
Broadly, they have tended to divide into two recognisable breeds; the ‘big idea’ exponents (Porter on competitive advantage, Warren Bennis and Britain's John Adair on leadership, Theodore Levitt on marketing, Edward de Bono on lateral thinking) and the protean thinkers who scan the horizons of work and society (Peter, Handy and Drucker, who thought of almost every management concept from ‘management by objectives’to privatization a generation before anyone else).
Managing change: Today, however, almost every guru is locked on to the theme of change management.
Peters' Thriving on Chaos, the first big success in the field, was closely followed by Waterman's The Renewal Factor and Richard Pascale's Managing on the Edge, which preached that successful organizations breed their own failure unless they encourage constant debate, even conflict, as a tool of change.
Certain dominant chords now sound from all the leading gurus — less hierarchy, smaller head offices, more flexible response to markets, greater empowerment.
Peters' Liberation Management emphasizes the hectic pressures of competition as product lifecycles shrink.
He holds up as models some of the new information-age businesses like the American TV company CNN, with a tiny core staff, entrepreneurial approach and day-to-day responsiveness to the market.
A few gurus have undoubtedly brought about measurable change in industry.
W Edwards Deming and Joseph Juran, both prophets originally without honour in their native USA, set the Japanese quality movement on its world-beating track.
Richard Schonberger, a Midwestern engineer by training, is credited with introducing the Japanese just-in-time system to US manufacturing.
And Alfred P Sloan, who pioneered decentralization at General Motors in the early 1920s, lived to see it become international corporate practice by the time he published his best-selling memoirs in 1964.
Saviours or super-egos?
It would be rash to assume the former; and realistic to accept that some gurus are the latter, especially those who have become ‘brands’ in their own right.
But ideas can move the world, and if a Peters or Handy seminar sends managers back to their desks with just one new insight into managing people or change processes, it is probably worth £700 of any company's money.