

The gene for serine tRNA having anticodon sequence CAG in a pathogenic yeast,Candida albicans 
It was demonstrated that codon CUG is assigned as serine instead of leucine in an asporgenic yeast,Candida cylindracea (1).
This non-universal serine codon is translated by a serine tRNA with anticodon sequence CAG that is complementary to codon CUG (2).
We have succeeded in isolating the homologous tRNA gene from Candida albicans by amplifying the genomic DNA by the polymerase chain reaction and sequenced.
This tRNA gene has anticodon sequence CAG which is able to base-pair with CUG codon (Figure 1).
The sequence showed a high homology to serine tRNA specific for codon CUG in Candida cylindracea .
The tRNA corresponding to this gene was also isolated.
This tRNA accepted serine to an appreciable extent, with scarcely any leucine acceptance, indicating that this tRNA having CAG anticodon functions as a serine tRNA.
These results clearly showed that Candida albicans possesses tRNA translating codon CUG as serine.
Nucleotide sequence of the 16S rRNA gene from thermoacidophilic archaea Sulfolobus acidocaldarius ATCC33909
Three species of genus Sulfolobus: S.acidocaldarius, S.solfataricus and S.shibatae are known.
The complete sequences of the 16S rRNA gene from S.solfataricus and S.shibatae were reported (1, 2).
We have sequenced the 16S rRNA gene of Sulfolobus acidocaldarius ATCC33909 for the identification of our thermoacidophilic archaeal isolates.
The complete nucleotide sequence of the 16S rRNA gene from S.acidocaldarius as well as its 5' and 3' flanking regions were determined by the dideoxynucleotide termination method with FITC-labelled primers using HITACHI SQ-3000 DNA sequencer.
The 16S rRNA gene encodes 1493 nucleotides and the G+C content is 62.8%.
Total chromosomal DNA from S.acidocaldarius ATCC33909 was cleaved with restriction enzymes (Sac I,Xba I,Eco RI,Xho l,Eco RI- Xho I,XbaI-Xho I,Sac I- Xba I) and the resulting restriction patterns were analyzed by Southern hybridization using 885 bp of the 16S rDNA fragment amplified by PCR as a probe.
A single band was found for each restriction enzymes and combinations mentioned above.
This result suggests that the 16S rRNA gene is present in one copy per genome.
To our surprise, the 16S rRNA gene of S.acidocaldarius showed 99.9% homology with the corresponding gene of S.solfataricus P1 (only one base is different).
These results indicate that the P1 strain which was previously identified as S.solfataricus should belong to S.acidocaldarius .
To confirm the above, we have also sequenced 884 bp of 16S rDNA fragment for S.solfataricus IF015331 (derived from DSM1616) amplified by PCR.
This sequence showed 92.3% homology with the corresponding sequence of S.acidocaldarius and P1.
This is also supported by Grogan's report (2) which describes the RNA polymerase component pattern of Sulfolobus species.
Comparison of those four sequences are summarized on the Table 1.
S.shibatae showed 98.4% homology with the corresponding gene of S.solfataricus IF015331 in the region sequenced.
These results altogether suggest that S.shibatae and S.solfataricus are closely related or may be the same species.
Sequences from flanking regions of the 16S rRNA gene, 259 bases upstream and 328 bases downstream, were searched for transcription signals, structural genes or other significant sequences based on the data available for eubacteria and other archaea.
The archaeal promoter consensus, TTTATATA (4, 5) was found in 175 nucleotides upstream from the 5' end of the 16S rRNA coding region.
In T.acidophilum , stretches of oligo-T preceded by a relatively stable stem and loop structure that may serve as a termination signal was found downstream from the 3' of the 16S rRNA coding region (3).
However 23S rRNA gene starts at about 200 bases downstream from the 3' end of the S.acidocaldarius 16S rRNA gene, and no tRNA gene was found in the spacer region between 16S and 23S sequences.
In E.coli or halophilic archaea Halobacterium cutirubrum , leader sequence before the 16S rRNA coding region can base-pair with sequence lying between 16S and the first spacer tRNA.
These regions come together in the precursor rRNA transcript to form long stem structures that serve as site for processing by RNase III (6, 7).
A stem structure of 30 bp with a small bulged loop was also found in S.acidocaldarius .
I -Sce III: a novel group I intron-encoded endonuclease from the yeast mitochondria
We recently discovered a new DNA endonuclease activity in the crude mitochondrial extracts of the wild-type yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae 777-3A (1).
This DNA endonuclease activity, called I- Sce III, is specific of the A3-A4 junction sequence of the COX 1 gene.
This is why it was suggested to be carried out by the putative protein encoded by the aI3 intron.
Previous works (2,3) have shown that such mitochondrial DNA endonucleolytic activities can be detected in E.coli when the corresponding mitochondrial intronic ORF was translated in the bacteria.
We followed a similar approach with the aI3 intronic of the strain 777-3A which is very similar to its equivalent from the strain D273-10B previously sequenced (4).
The three types of codons UGA, AUA, and CUN were modified to fit the E.coli genetic code and the corresponding ORF, cloned in the bacterial expression vector pDR540 (Pharmacia-PL), was expressed under the control of the tac promoter.
Bacterial extracts of the transformed bacteria (strain TG1) were chromatographed on phosphocellulose and the I- Sce III DNA endonuclease activity was eluted as a single peak at 0.8 M NaCl (Phospate buffer 10 mM, pH 7.2).
No such activity was found in the untransformed strain which proves that the DNA endonuclease activity I- Sce III is contained in the aI3 intronic product.
Moreover, the crude preparation obtained was devoid of exonuclease activities and could be used to accurately define the nature of the cleavage products.
The cut positions were determined by primer extension experiments using 5' phosphorylated M13 universal or reverse primer and a pBlueScript KS derivative containing an I- Sce III cleavage site.
Products of primer extension reactions were cleaved by I- Sce III and electrophoresed in parallel with enzymatic sequence reactions using the same radioactive primers and template.
From the mapping and sequencing data the cleavage site of the E.coli made I- Sce III is concluded as shown in Figure 1.
We have also checked that the mitochondrially synthesized I- Sce III protein exhibits the same specificity and cleaves the same sequence at identical positions.
Figure 1.
Determination of the cleavage site of the intronic DNA endonuclease I- Sce III.
I- Sce III target site (upper lines) was inserted in pBlueScript KS + and pBlueScript KS -.
Single stranded DNAs from these phagemids were subjected to primer extension with radioactive M13 universal and reverse primers respectively and cleaved with I- Sce III.
Elongation products were electrophoresed (lines ‘p’) in parallel with sequence reactions obtained from the same universal (left) and reverse (right) primers.
Modified glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins for simplified analysis of protein-protein interactions
Polypeptides expressed in E.coli as fusions with glutathione S-transferase (GST, 1) have proven useful for analysis of protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions.
Examples include GST fusions with GCN4 (2), a site-specific DNA binding protein, and with the retinoblastoma gene product (Rb, 3, 4), that has specific interactions with other proteins.
Recently, biotinylated GST-c-Ab1 fusions have been used to detect protein interactions on Western blots (5) and a protein that interacts with c-Myc was identified by screening a cDNA library with a radiolabelled GST fusion (6).
In order to simplify the use of GST fusion proteins in such applications, we developed a generalised detection system by producing tripartite fusion proteins that contain IgG binding domains from protein A of Staphylococcus aureus .
These proteins are therefore detectable using commercial antibody-enzyme conjugates.
DNA encoding the IgG binding domain B of S.aureus protein A (7) was amplified from the plasmid pRIT5 (8) and inserted into the BamHI site of pGEX2T (1).
Repeating these steps produced a plasmid containing two protein A domains, and then by another step to one with three domains.
Detection increases about 50-fold from one to two domains, and only about 2-fold from two to three domains (Figure 1).
We therefore routinely use the plasmid encoding two domains (pAGEX2T; Figure 2).
Both GST-protein A and GST are detected by a monoclonal antibody specific for GST (Figure 3; Anti-GST).
GST-protein A detection was more sensitive, presumably because antibody also binds to the IgG binding domains.
A similar sensitivity was observed for GST-protein A probed with enzyme-conjugated rabbit antibodies (AP-Conjugated Rabbit Ab), while GST alone was not detected.
Enhanced sensitivities of less than 1 ng were observed when GST-protein A was probed first with an unconjugated antibody (Rabbit Serum, rabbit Anti-Rb or MAb419, an Anti-TAg monoclonal antibody) followed by the appropriate enzyme-conjugated second antibody.
This enhancement may reflect polyvalent binding of enzyme-conjugated secondary antibodies to primary antibodies bound to the protein A.
One application is shown in Figure 4.
The NH 2 -terminal region of SV40 T antigen (amino acids 1–272) is known to interact with several different proteins (9–11).
A 67 kDa tripartite fusion protein consisting of GST-Protein A-TAg (1–272) was used as a probe on Western blots of a HeLa whole cell extract (12).
A number of distinct bands were recognised, and binding to some of these (110 kDa, 45 kDa) was salt concentration dependent.
Binding can be influenced by variables such as the type of membrane, the transfer conditions, and ionic conditions used during probing.
These fusion proteins could be used similarly to screen expression libraries.
It is difficult to predict whether the properties of the polypeptide of interest will be affected by the presence of GST and IgG binding domains in the fusion proteins.
The GST moiety can be removed by cleavage with thrombin.
Figure 1.
Detection of GST-protein A fusion proteins on Western blots.
Cells transformed with plasmids directing the expression of GST-protein A fusion proteins containing one (a), two (b, pAGEX2T) or three (c) IgG binding domains were grown in the presence of 0.1 mM isopropyl-β-SD-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), and proteins analysed by electrophoresis through 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels followed by transfer to nitrocellulose at 4°C in 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 192 mM glycine and 20% v/v methanol.
The membrane was blocked for 30 minutes at 20°C in PBS containing 5% non-fat dried milk powder.
Polypeptides containing IgG binding domains were visualised by probing with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated rabbit anti-chicken antibodies (Chemicon; 1:5,000 dilution in PBS), followed by detection of enzyme activity in situ according to manufacturer's instructions.
Figure 2.
Structure of cloning region of pAGEX2T.
Indicated in the drawing are the IPTG-inducible trp-lac hybrid promoter (Ptac), the regions encoding the Schistosoma japonicum glutathione S-transferase (GST), a thrombin cleavage site (Th) and two copies of the S.aureus protein A IgG binding domain B (PA) followed by unique BamHI, SmaI and EcoRI restriction sites.
The remainder of the plasmid is identical to pGEX2T (1).
Figure 3.
Sensitivity of detection of GST-protein A fusion proteins.
Equal quantities of purified GST or GST-protein A (GST-PA) were applied to nitrocellulose from left to right as 5 µl drops in four-fold dilutions (in NT buffer — 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) from 1 µg to 1 ng.
Air dried strips were probed with G53, a monoclonal antibody directed against GST followed by AP-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibodies (Anti-GST), with AP-conjugated rabbit antibodies (AP-Conjugated Rabbit Ab), with either R819, a rabbit antisera raised against Rb (Anti-Rb) or a non-specific rabbit serum (Sigma)(Rabbit Serum) followed by AP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibodies, or with Ab419, a monoclonal antibody specific for SV40 T antigen followed by AP-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibodies (Anti-TAg).
After washing, enzyme activity was detected in situ .
Figure 4.
GST-protein A-SV40 TAg as a probe for protein-protein interactions on Western blots.
A Western blot of a HeLa cell extract was probed with GST-protein A (a) or GST-protein A-SV40 TAg(1–272) (b) at a concentration of 25 µg/ml in NT buffer containing 3% BSA and either 150 mM, 500 mM or 1 M NaCl.
After washing in NT buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, bound protein was detected by probing with AP-conjugated rabbit antibodies followed by enzyme detection in situ .
A simplified and reliable protocol for plasmid DNA sequencing: fast miniprep and denaturation
Double-strand DNA sequencing is becoming an increasingly popular method by which the inserts of recombinant plasmids can be directly sequenced.
However, plasmid sequencing is largely dependent upon the quality of plasmid DNA to be sequenced and the alkaline denaturation of plasmid DNA to produce single-strand templates of high quality.
Several methods have been reported for isolating plasmid DNA for sequencing, for example alkaline lysis (1) and boiling (2).
Although these methods can produce sequencing-quality plasmid templates, the time-consuming protocols required to isolate and purify plasmid DNA have led many investigators to propose simplified and reliable methods.
The alkaline denaturation of plasmid DNA is an essential step in plasmid sequencing and it is commonly carried out with 0.2N NaOH at room temperature for 10 minutes (3).
However, it requires plasmid DNA of high quality and it is time-consuming.
We report here a simplified and reliable protocol for fast minipreparation and denaturation of plasmid DNA which takes only half an hour to produce single-stranded template DNA of high quality for sequencing.
(4).
In our method for isolating plasmids, a lot of steps are omitted.
After extracting with phenol-chloroform, it is not necessary to recover the plasmid by ethanol precipitation.
Meanwhile, in our protocol, the denaturation of plasmid DNA and degradation of the contaminating RNA is carried out at the same time in the alkaline solution at high temperature.
With this simplified protocol for preparation and denaturation of plasmid DNA, time can be saved and DNA templates of high quality can be produced.
1.
Place 1.5 ml of overnight bacterial culture into a 1.5 ml tube and centrifuge at top speed for 10 seconds.
2.
Remove the medium by aspiration, leaving the bacterial pellet as dry as possible.
3.
Resuspend the pellet by vortexing in 50 µl of TE buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mm EDTA).
Add 50 µl of phenol:chloroform mixture (1:1) and vortex for 10 seconds.
4.
Centrifuge at top speed for 3 minutes.
5.
Transfer 25 µl of supernatant to a fresh tube, then add 15 µl 2 N NaOH and 110 µl H 2 O.
6.
Place the tube in a boiling-water bath for 3 minutes.
7.
Place the tube in an ice-bath, add 20 µl 3 M NaAC (pH 5.2) and 2.5 volumes of ethanol, then place the tube in liquid N 2 for 5 minutes.
8.
Centrifuge at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes.
Rinse the pellet with 70% ethanol (prechilled) and dry the pellet under vacuum.
Annealing of the primers and sequencing reactions were done according to the protocol with the Pharmacia T7 sequencing kit (see Figure 1).
We can resolve about 500 bases by three runs in one direction.
This method has been successfully conducted by many researchers and is now a routine method in our laboratory.
Figure 1.
Comparison of sequencing with plasmid DNA templates generated by three different methods.
A: plasmid DNA template prepared by boiling lysis; B: plasmid DNA template prepared by alkaline lysis; C: plasmid DNA template prepared by the method outlined above.
To produce the single-strand template DNA, time used in each method was: a) at least one and a half hours; b) at least two hours; c) only half an hour.
Cloning, production and characterisation of wild type and mutant forms of the R· Eco K endonucleases
ABSTRACT
The hsdR ,hsdM and hsdS genes coding for R· Eco K restriction endonuclease, both with and without a temperature sensitive mutation (ts-1 ) in the hsdS gene, were cloned in pBR322 plasmid and introduced into E.coli C3-6.
The presence of the hsdS ts-1  mutation has no effect on the R-M phenotype of this construct in bacteria grown at 42°C.
However, DNA sequencing indicates that the mutation is still present on the pBR322- hsd ts-1  operon.
The putative temperature-sensitive endonuclease was purified from bacteria carrying this plasmid and the ability to cleave and methylate plasmid DNA was investigated.
The mutant endonuclease was found to show temperature-sensitivity for restriction.
Modification was dramatically reduced at both the permissive and non-permissive temperatures.
The wild type enzyme was found to cleave circular DNA in a manner which strongly suggests that only one endonuclease molecule is required per cleavage event.
Circular and linear DNA appear to be cleaved using different mechanisms, and cleavage of linear DNA may require a second endonuclease molecule.
The subunit composition of the purified endonucleases was investigated and compared to the level of subunit production in minicells.
There is no evidence that HsdR is prevented from assembling with HsdM and HsdS ts-1 to produce the mutant endonuclease.
The data also suggests that the level of HsdR subunit may be limiting within the cell.
We suggest that an excess of HsdM and HsdS may produce the methylase in vivo and that assembly of the endonuclease may be dependent upon the prior production of this methylase.
INTRODUCTION
The Escherichia coli enzyme R· Eco K is comprised of three subunits encoded by the genes hsdR ,hsdM and hsdS .
Eco K is a member of the K family of type I restriction and modification (R-M) enzymes, which includes enzymes of the related systems Eco B and Eco D from E.coli and StySP and StySB from Salmonella (for review see Ref. [1]).
Complementation tests have shown that the HsdM and HsdR subunits from related systems are interchangeable and the HsdS polypeptide dictates DNA sequence specificity [1, 2].
The products of all three genes are required for restriction [3], while for modification only the products of genes hsdS and hsdM are needed [4, 5].
The endonuclease requires ATP,S -adenosyl methionine (SAM) and Mg 2+ as cofactors.
ATP and SAM serve as both cofactors and as allosteric effectors and determine whether restrictase, or methylase, activity occurs, dependent upon the state of methylation of the DNA substrate [6].
The methylase requires only SAM as a cofactor.
The gene order is hsdR ,M, S , the hsdR gene has its own promoter and the hsdM and hsdS genes are transcribed from a single promoter situated between genes hsdR and hsdM [7].
The DNA target sequences recognised by type I R-M enzymes consist of two specific components, one of 3-bp and another of 4- or 5-bp, separated by a non-specific spacer, e.g. AAC(N) 6 GTGC for Eco K [8]
TGA(N) 8 TGCT for Eco B [9]
The DNA is cut at a random sites after translocation past the enzyme in an ATP dependent reaction.
DNA translocation and cleavage can occur in both directions from the host specificity site, at which R· Eco K remains bound [10].
In one model of the mechanism of cleavage, R· Eco K is believed to make a single-stranded cut in the DNA molecule; therefore, a complete double-stranded cleavage requires two endonuclease molecules [11].
The requirement for two enzyme molecules is also emphasised by another model which suggests that cleavage occurs only when two neighbouring, translocating enzymes meet.
In the case of a DNA molecule with only one recognition site the cut would require co-operation between the specifically bound enzyme and excess enzyme in the cytoplasm[12].
Sequence comparisons between the hsdS genes of the Eco K, B and D systems revealed two extensive variable regions of about 450-bp in length and two other regions, 100-bp in the centre and 250-bp at the distal end, which show high degrees of conservation.
It was suggested that the conserved regions are involved in protein-protein interactions and the variable regions in DNA recognition [7].
Recent studies have shown that the proximal variable region specifies the trinucleotide component of the DNA target sequence.
DNA recognition specificity lies not in the entire variable region but only in domains within the region [13].
One approach to the study of functional domains in the HsdS polypeptide is to use defined mutations in the hsdS gene and to test their function in combination with hsdM and hsdR genes.
Two temperature-sensitive mutations have been described [14, 15].
The results presented in this paper focus on a temperature-sensitive, trans-dominant hsdS mutation [15].
It was suggested that this mutation, where C 1245 is replaced by T and as a consequence of this transition Ser 340 is replaced by Phe in the distal variable region of the mutant HsdS polypeptide, influences the assembly of the HsdM, S methylase complex with the HsdR subunit [16].
We have cloned the hsdR ,M, S genes, active as both wild type and temperature-sensitive R· Eco K endonucleases, into the plasmid pBR322.
This has allowed us to purify the wild type and mutant endonuclease enzyme and to analyse the effect of the temperature-sensitive mutation in vitro .
This is the first isolation of the Eco K restriction endonuclease from genes cloned on a multicopy plasmid that results in over-production of the enzyme.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Bacterial strains, plasmids and bacteriophage
The E.coli strains and plasmids used in this study are described in Table 1.
Previously described recombinant plasmids used in this work are all derivatives of the vector pBR322 [17].
The virulent mutant of phage λ [18]was used for the in vivo testing of restriction and modification following previously described methods [3, 19].
pGEM-7Zf(+) phagemid was from Promega, Wisconsin, USA.
Media and microbial procedures
Phage buffer, complete LB medium, M9 medium, L-amino acids, vitamin supplements were as previously described [3].
The solid medium is LB or M9 with agar added at 1.5%.
Soft agar overlay is LB with agar added at 0.6%.
Ampicillin was used at a concentration of 50 mg/ml.
Transformations were carried out using the CaCl 2 /heat shock method [20].
The rec A derivative of E.coli C (E.coli C3-6) was prepared using the chromosomal linkage of thy and rec A genes.
Trimethoprim was used to select a thy -mutant of E.coli C. This mutant was conjugated with HfrH JC5088 and thy + recombinants were selected.
From these recombinants the transconjugant thy +  rec A -was selected by its sensitivity to ultraviolet light.
Nucleic acid methods
Plasmid DNA for ethidium bromide-CsCl equilibrium density gradient centrifugation and for rapid small scale isolation was prepared by the alkaline lysis method.
Restriction enzyme digests, ligations, gel electrophoresis and elution of DNA fragments from agarose gels by direct extraction were performed using standard techniques [20].
ssDNA from the phagemid pGEM-7Zf(+) was prepared following induction with KO7 helper phage [21]and sequenced using the universal primer [22].
Random heteroduplex DNA was prepared by denaturing a mixture of equal amounts (0.5 mg each) of unmodified and modified pBR322 plasmid DNA [23].
Protein production and analysis
Protein synthesis in minicells harbouring the appropriate plasmid(s) was detected with 35 S methionine [24]and analysed by 10% SDS-PAGE [25].
The protein bands were visualised by autoradiography.
The mutant and wild type endonucleases were both purified using the previously described method [23].
The mutant endonuclease was prepared from E.coli C3-6[pVM39] grown at 42°C to produce the enzyme Eco K ts-1  + and at 30°C to produce Eco K ts-1 .
Endonuclease assay:Digestion of the unmodified pBR322 DNA with wild type and temperature-sensitive Eco K was performed at 30°C and 42°C in a buffer containing 0.1M HEPES pH 8.0, 0.25mM EDTA, 12mM mercaptoethanol and 6.5mM MgCl 2 .
The endonuclease activity was assayed in a volume of 100ml that contained 8mg of DNA, 0.8mg of Eco K enzyme, 0.1mM SAM and 50mg/ml BSA.
After 3 minutes pre-incubation at the appropriate temperature, the reaction was started by the addition of ATP at a final concentration of 2mM.
Immediately before, and at appropriate intervals after the addition of ATP, 5ml aliquots were mixed with 1.5ml of stop solution (0.1M EDTA, 5% SDS) and placed at 65°C for 5 min.
The samples were subjected to electrophoresis in a 0.8% agarose gel in TBE buffer for 16 hr at 1.0 V/cm at 20°C.
The gels were photographed following staining with ethidium bromide (0.5mg/ml).
Methylase assay:The methylase activity at 30°C and 42°C was measured in the same buffer used for the endonuclease reactions.
The 370ml of reaction mixture contained 2.4mg of enzyme, 3.7mg heteroduplex DNA, 1mM [methyl 3 H]S -adenosyl methionine (85Ci/mmol).
After pre-incubation for 2 min at the appropriate temperature ATP was added to a final concentration of 5mM.
At appropriate intervals 50ml aliquots were mixed with 5ml 0.5M EDTA pH 8.0 and the samples were extracted with phenol-chloroform.
The aqueous phase was loaded on Whatman DE82 paper (4 cm 2 ) and dried.
The filters were washed two times in 50ml of 0.5 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.8 for 10 min to remove the unincorporated radioactivity.
After washing with ethanol and drying, the amount of incorporated label was determined by scintillation counting.
RESULTS
Construction and function of the endonuclease operon(s)
The source of the Hin dIII fragment carrying the intact hsdR and hsdM genes, and part of the hsdS gene, was pBg3 [26].
This fragment was isolated from an agarose gel, and inserted at the Hin dIII site in pVM11 [16], a plasmid carrying the mutant hsdS ts-1  gene.
This results in restoration of an intact hsdS gene.
This DNA was used to transform E.coli WA802 hsdR 2 [27].
Plasmid DNA was isolated from transformants and screened by size.
Several plasmids larger than pBg3 were analysed physically and one of them, named pVM39, complemented restriction in E.coli strains WA802 hsdR 2 and WA803 hsdS 3, and contained the Hin dIII fragment in the required orientation (Figure 1).
In the construction of the recombinant plasmid with the wild type hsd operon, a Hin dIII digest of the plasmid pVMD14 (the structural analogue of pVM11), prepared from plasmid pMS K 14 [28]by Hpa I- Eco RI deletion, was ligated to the Hin dIII fragment described above (Figure 1), again restoring an intact hsdS gene.
The resultant plasmid was named pVMC3.
Both plasmids were introduced into E.coli C, a strain that has been shown to be deleted for the chromosomal hsd genes [29], and tested for R-M function.
A number of transformants carrying the cloned hsd genes were found to display genetic instability resulting from deletion of the cloned fragment (data not shown).
To eliminate rec A-dependent recombination as one cause of this genetic instability a rec A derivative of E.coli C (E.coli C3-6) was used as a host for both recombinant plasmids.
The plasmid pVM39 was introduced into the rec A E coli strain C3-6.
It was found that the hsdS ts-1  gene, present on this plasmid, failed to produce the temperature-sensitive R-M phenotype; the efficiency of plating of bacteriophage lambda was reduced by approximately four orders of magnitude to give the same efficiency of plating observed with the wild type R-M system.
However, all transformants were stable.
This transformation was repeated several times and always produced a wild type phenotype.
Transformation of E.coli C3-6 with plasmid pVMC3 (wild type hsdS gene) produced the normal R + M + phenotype, and again the transformants were all stable.
The frequency of transformation with both pVM39 and pVMC3 plasmids was about three orders of magnitude lower than that obtained for pBR322 alone.
When plasmids coding for an endonuclease enter the E.coli C cells with an unmodified chromosome the K-modification is less effective on the unmethylated DNA [30]and the endonuclease can restrict the host chromosome [31].
This may explain the reduced frequency of transformation.
Sequence determination of pVM39
The plasmid pVM39 carries the following genes;hsdR, hsdM and hsdS ts-1  and should, therefore, have a temperature-sensitive phenotype in E.coli C3-6.
However, as described above, this plasmid was found to exhibit wild type R-M.
In order to confirm that the ts-1 mutation is still present on this plasmid the Bgl II- Xmn I fragment was purified from a preparative agarose gel and cloned into Bam HI+ Sma I digested pGEM-7Zf(+). ssDNA for sequencing was isolated from this recombinant phagemid and the sequence determined.
Presence of the base change associated with the temperature-sensitive phenotype [16]was confirmed.
Subunit production in vivo and stoichiometry of the Eco K endonuclease
Both pVM39 and pVMC3 plasmid were introduced into E.coli P678-54 and minicells isolated, newly synthesised proteins were labelled using 35 S-methionine.
The proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and analysed by autoradiography (Figure 2a).
The autoradiograph was analysed by densitometry, the area under each trace was calculated and the values corrected for the number of methionines in each protein.
This experiment was repeated several times and the average ratio of the subunits present in each band plotted (Figure 2b).
The wild type R· Eco K endonuclease was purified from a freshly transformed E.coli C3-6[pVMC3] strain as described in materials and methods.
The R· Eco K ts-1 and R· Eco K ts-1  + endonucleases were similarly purified from a freshly transformed E.coli C3-6[pVM39] strain grown at 30° and 42°C respectively.
The ratio of subunits in the endonuclease was  determined by separation on SDS-PAGE and staining with Coomassie blue.
It is known that Coomassie blue staining can vary from protein to protein [32]and consequently the ratios of subunits obtained here are not necessarily the absolute values for the stoichiometry, but serve as internal comparisons between wild type and mutant endonucleases.
The ratio between the integrated peak areas for each subunit was determined and corrected for the molecular mass of each subunit.
This gave a stoichiometry of R 2 M 2 S, which is in agreement with previous data for the wild type endonuclease [33].
The mutant enzymes were found to give the same ratio (data not shown).
This indicates that the ts-1 mutation does not prevent subunit assembly at the non-permissive temperature.
Figure 2b shows that the ratio of subunits present in the minicell extraction is significantly different from that present in the endonuclease.
The HsdR subunit appears to be the limiting component and may limit the production of the endonuclease.
In vitro endonuclease and methylase activities
Unmodified plasmid pBR322 DNA (containing both covalently closed, cccDNA, and open circular, ocDNA, forms) was used to estimate the endonuclease activity of the mutant and wild type endonucleases.
DNA and protein were mixed at an approximate ratio of 2:1.
ATP was used to start the reactions and the amount of linear DNA produced at various time intervals detected by separation of the products on agarose gels (Figures 3 & 4).
Photographic negatives of the gels were scanned by densitometry, the integrated peak areas for each form of DNA were measured, and the amounts of linear DNA produced were expressed as a percentage of the total amount of DNA.
The experiment was repeated at 30°C and 42°C for wild type Eco K,Eco K ts-1 + (data not shown) and Eco K ts-1 .
Figures 3b & 4b shows a plot of these percentage ratios of DNA against time.
As can be seen for wild-type Eco K approximately 50% of the DNA is cleaved after 30 min and no further reaction appears to take place after this time.
The mutant form of the endonuclease R· Eco K ts-1 produced only 20% linear DNA at 30°C and about 10% at 42°C.
Again after approximately 30 min no further reaction is observed.
Interestingly, the results obtained with enzyme Eco K + ts-1 shows that its activity is lower than the activity of Eco K ts-1 at the permissive temperature.
Only 10% of the total DNA is cleaved (data not shown).
Methylase activity of wild type and mutant endonucleases was monitored by transfer of a tritiated methyl group from S-adenosyl methionine to random heteroduplex linear pBR322 DNA.
A molar ratio of 1:4 (DNA:protein) was chosen to ensure one endonuclease molecule per available S K site.
The number of incorporated counts was plotted against time for both mutant (Eco K ts-1  ) and wild type endonuclease.
A high level of methylase activity was shown by the wild type enzyme at both 30° and 42°.
Little or no methylase activity was detectable with the temperature-sensitive enzyme at either 30° or 42° (Figure 5).
DISCUSSION
The inability of a multicopy plasmid, carrying the entire temperature-sensitive hsd operon from the chromosome, to express the temperature-sensitive phenotype was an unexpected result.
Sequence analysis of the hsdS gene showed that the ts-1 mutation was still present.
It would appear that the increased copy number of pBR322, and, therefore, the increased production of Eco K ts-1 ,influences the ts -phenotype.
The genetic instability of the cloned wild type hsd genes in pBR322 in a rec A + background suggests that the increased production of the Eco K endonuclease from pBR322 is detrimental to the cell and this leads to deletion of the genes from pBR322.
However, the temperature-sensitive mutation is sufficiently altered in function, at both permissive and non-permissive temperatures, that the cell is able to function with the levels of R-M activity produced, without excision of the cloned ts -hsd genes.
This suggests that the low level of enzyme activity observed in vitro is reflected in vivo.
The production of the three subunits in minicells should reflect the level of production within the cell.
It was found that the HsdM and HsdS subunits were present in an excess over the HsdR subunit for both the wild type and the temperature-sensitive systems.
This may reflect the pathway of assembly of the endonuclease; the HsdM, S methylase may be assembled in preference to the endonuclease and may function independently in the cytoplasm.
It seems likely that the availability of the HsdR subunit may govern the final assembly of the endonuclease.
The purified endonucleases from both the wild type and the temperature-sensitive systems were found to have an identical ratio of subunits (2:2:1-HsdR:HsdM:HsdS).
This shows that the temperature-sensitive mutation ts-1 does not affect the subunit assembly of the endonuclease by preventing binding to the HsdR subunit.
This stoichiometry of the endonuclease is in agreement with previous data [33].
The ability of the purified Eco K ts-1  endonuclease to cleave pBR322 DNA was compared to that of wild type Eco K. pBR322 has two recognition sites for Eco K in opposite orientation [10].
A model describing the cleavage of DNA by Eco K has been proposed [12]which suggests that this DNA should bind two endonuclease molecules which will translocate DNA until the endonuclease molecules meet and then the DNA should be cut.
However, this model was derived from experiments on linear DNA.
At a molar ratio of 2:1 (DNA:protein), where the ratio of recognition sites to protein is 4:1, all the endonuclease will be bound to available sites.
This was found to produce approximately 50% linear DNA after 30 min.
This supports the idea that the available single sites are occupied and cut by all the available endonuclease.
No further digestion appears to occur after this time suggesting that the Eco K enzyme has no turnover and remains bound to the substrate [5, 6, 34].
Studier and Bandyopadhyay suggest that DNA with only one enzyme bound can translocate the DNA and this process eventually might stall.
Under these circumstances nicking of the DNA has been observed [35–37].
Our observations suggest that the cutting of circular DNA is not dependent upon the presence of a second endonuclease molecule and that subsequent cutting of the linear DNA does not occur, therefore, this event may require a second endonuclease molecule and operate by a different mechanism.
These observations also suggest that a single endonuclease molecule is responsible for the 50% cleavage of the circular DNA.
It has been shown by electron microscopy that, even in the presence of excess enzyme, when one endonuclease molecule binds and translocates pBR322 DNA there is no evidence of a second endonuclease molecule binding to the same DNA [10].
Our data also supports this observation.
The Eco K ts-1 endonuclease was found to digest plasmid DNA at 30°C in an analogous manner to the wild type enzyme, but only 20% of the DNA is fully cleaved (at which point no further reaction occurs).
This indicates that the Eco K ts-1 enzyme is affected in its endonuclease activity even at the permissive temperature.
At 42°C this digestion was reduced to approximately 10% of the total DNA showing only a two-fold temperature-sensitivity of the activity.
However, methylation of plasmid DNA was at extremely low levels in vitro at both 30°C and 42°C.
Such activity that could be measured was higher at 30°C than that at 42°C.
Since the enzyme can function as a modification methylase at 30°C in vivo it must be assumed that this accomplished by the low level of in vitro activity that is observed.
Similar results have been observed with a ts -mutation in the bacteriophage Mu c repressor [38].
Figure 1.
Construction of the endonuclease operon.
The plasmid pVM39 carries the endonuclease operon with the mutant hsdS gene and its structural analogue with wild hsdS gene is pVMC3; pBR322 DNA, chromosomal fragments.
Figure 2.
Stoichiometry of the purified endonuclease and the ratio of subunits produced in minicells. 2a shows a SDS-PAGE analysis of the proteins produced in minicells from the following plasmids:Lane 1,pBR322;Lane 2,pVMC3;Lane 3,pVM39.
Size markers are drawn on the gel using radioactive ink.
The histograms (2b) represent the relative ratios of subunits present in either the purified endonuclease (A) or the minicells (B).
Both sets of data have been normalised such that the lowest value is equal to 1.
Figure 3.
Restriction assay of wild type endonuclease. 3a(i) and 3a(ii) show the agarose gels used to determine the restriction activity of the wild-type endonuclease at 30°C and 42°C respectively.
Lane 1 of each gel contains DNA only, the remaining lanes contain samples incubated for the following time intervals: 1,2,3,4,5,7,9,11,15,20,25,30, 40,50,60,90,120 min.
The bands are labelled: OC = open circular DNA, CCC = covalently closed circular DNA and linear DNA, DNA bands above the open circular are due to the presence of dimers and higher molecular weight multimers present in the preparation.
3b is a plot of the amount of linear DNA produced as a percentage of the total DNA present.
Figure 4.
Restriction assay of the temperature-sensitive endonuclease.
The gels were loaded as described for the wild-type endonuclease (figure 3).
The DNA bands are labelled as described in figure 3.
Figure 5.
Methylase activity of wild-type and temperature-sensitive endonucleases at permissive and non-permissive temperatures.
The methylase assay was performed as described in materials and methods.
The amount of incorporated label was measured by scintillation counting.
A control of no enzyme was used to determine the background level of tritium present in each sample, and this value was deducted from the total count obtained.
Reversion of a transcriptionally defective MHC class II-negative human B-cell mutant
ABSTRACT
RJ2.2.5, a mutant derived from the human B-lymphoma cell, Raji, is unable to express the MHC class II genes because of a recessive transcriptional defect attributed to the lack of an activator function.
We report the isolation of a RJ2.2.5 revertant, namely AR, in which the expression of the mRNAs encoded by these genes is restored.
Comparison of the binding of nuclear extracts or of partially purified nuclear preparations from the wild-type, the mutant and the revertant cells to a conserved MHC class II promoter element, the X-box, showed no alteration in the mobility of the complexes thus formed.
However, in extracts from RJ2.2.5, and other MHC class II negative cell lines, such as HeLa, the amount of complex observed was significantly higher than in wild-type Raji cells.
Furthermore, the binding activity exhibited by the AR revertant was lower than that of the RJ2.2.5 and higher than that of Raji.
The use of specific monoclonal antibodies indicated that in all cases c-Jun and c-Fos or antigenically related proteins were required for binding.
An inverse correlation between the level of DNA-protein complex formed and the level of MHC class II gene mRNA expressed in the three cell lines was apparent, suggesting that overexpression of a DNA binding factor forming complexes with class II promoter elements may cause repression of MHC class II transcription.
A model which reconciles the previously ascertained recessivity of the phenotype of the mutation carried by RJ2.2.5 with the findings reported here is discussed.
INTRODUCTION
The major histocompatibility (MHC) class II antigens are surface heterodimers required for presentation of antigenic peptides to the receptor of T-helper cells; quantitative variation in the expression of these antigens play a central role in immune response (1).
The regulatory mechanisms which control the activity of the MHC class II genes at the transcriptional level has therefore received much attention (2,3).
In particular, an important contribution to the study of this system was provided by the characterization of mutant cell lines isolated from wild-type B-cell lines (4–6) or from patients carrying the bare lymphocyte syndrome (BLS)(7).
In all cases reported, the lesions consisted in a defect resulting in lack of transcription of the mRNA encoded by these genes (8–10).
Genetic studies have established that the mutations so far characterized belong to probably four different complementation groups and that some of them are recessive (8–15).
Molecular alterations correlating with the phenotype of these mutants have been sought by several laboratories.
A defect in RF-X, a regulatory factor binding to the MHC class II promoter-specific X-box, has been reported in EBV-immortalized cells derived from a BLS patient (16,17), while a defect in a X-box binding protein or in a factor required for its binding, may underlie the phenotype of the in vitro selected mutant 6.1.6 (10).
In other cases, however, no biochemical difference between the parental cell and the mutant could be pointed out, suggesting that alterations causing lack of transcription do not necessarily involve a defect in the DNA recognition of a transcriptional factor.
We have now studied a revertant of RJ2.2.5, a MHC class II negative mutant which is prototypic of one of the four complementation groups so far identified (15).
Genetic analysis demonstrated that the lesion of RJ2.2.5 is recessive and correlates with an autosomic locus, namely AIR-1 (8,13).
A corresponding gene, air-1, was localized on chromosome 16 in the mouse (14).
The defect carried by RJ2.2.5 does not correspond to the absence of any specific binding activity, although CAT-assays indicated that the mutant lacks both promoter and enhancer activity (18–20).
Furthermore,in vivo footprinting analysis has shown that MHC class II promoter occupancy is the same in class II-positive Raji and in class II-negative RJ2.2.5 cells (21).
In this paper, we show that there exists an inverse correlation between the amount of mRNA produced by isogenic wild-type, mutant and revertant cells and the amount of a nuclear DNA binding factor containing Jun and Fos.
On this basis, we would like to propose that the lack of transcriptional activity in RJ2.2.5 is caused by the accumulation of a DNA binding factor recognizing cis-acting regulatory elements of the MHC class II promoter and that the underlying defect consists in the lack of a determinant which prevents such an accumulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and antibody staining.
The B-lymphoma cell Raji and its isogenic derivatives RJ2.2.5 (5) and TXII (22) have been described previously; the AR derivative is described in this paper.
All cell lines were grown in RPMI1640 medium supplemented with 5% fetal calf serum at 37°C in 5% CO 2 .
Cell were stained with anti-class I and anti-class II antibodies as previously reported (8); the fluorescence intensity of stained cells was determined cytofluorimetrically (8).
Preparation of nuclei and gel retardation assays.
Nuclei were prepared according to a procedure which gives transcriptionally active, intact nuclei (23).
Briefly, 3 10 7 cells grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 5% FCS were harvested, washed twice in 1 PBS and resuspended in 2 ml of buffer B (60 mM KCl, 15 mM NaCl, 0.15 mM spermine, 0.5 mM spermidine, 15 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 14 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.3 M sucrose, 0.5 mM EGTA and 2mM EDTA); 2 ml of buffer B containing 0.1% NP40 were added (final NP40 concentration: 0.05%) and the mixture was gently pipetted for 1 min on ice.
The suspension was then layered onto 5 ml of buffer C (equivalent to buffer B, but containing 30% sucrose) and centrifuged at 2500 rpm at 4°C for 30 min.
Nuclear extracts were then obtained by incubating the nuclei in 0.4 ml of buffer E (0.4 M NaCl, 0.5 mM Mg Cl 2 , 0.2 mM EDTA, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 25% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF, 5ng/µl pepstain) at 4°C for 30 min.
The lysed nuclei were then centrifuged for 30 min at 4°C and 14,000 rpm.
The supernatant was subdivided in small aliquots and stored frozen (-80°C).
The total amount of protein extracted by this procedure was equivalent to that observed when the procedure of Dignam et al (24) was applied (4–12 µg/10 6 cells), but the amount of AP-1 activity measured by band-shift was 3–5 fold higher than in the standard procedure.
Band-shift experiments were performed in the presence of 600–900 ng of sonicated E.coli DNA as previously reported; 2–3 µg of nuclear protein and 0.03–0.06 ng labelled probe (specific activity = 0.5–1.0 10 5 cpm/ng DNA) were used for each assay.
For competition experiments a 200 excess of unlabelled competitor was added.
RNAse protection experiments.
Total RNA was prepared by lysis with SDS, while cytoplasmic RNA was prepared by lysis in NP-40.
The pDR5αβ plasmid, encoding the 3' most end of HLA-DRA mRNA was used to prepare an in vitro transcribed probe in order to assess the level of mRNA present.
Transcription reactions were performed with 1 µg of linearized plasmid in the presence of 100 µCi of [α-32P]UTP (Amersham, 800 µCi/mM), 2.5 mM unlabelled ribotriphosphates and 15 U of T7 RNA polymerase or SP6 polymerase (Promega), in a final volume of 20 µl.
Samples were incubated for 1 hr at 38.5°C.
For unlabelled RNAs, all ribotriphosphates were used at a concentration of 2.5 mM.
The amount of RNA extracted from the cells was standardized by determining the amount of endogenous β-actin RNA.
The amount of RNA was measured by using a RNase protection kit produced by AMBION (Austin, TX) according to the manufacturer's specifications; 25 µg of RNA were hybridized to an aliquot of 3 10 5 cpm of labelled probe.
Competition of DNA binding by antibodies.
Rabbit anti-Jun and anti-Fos antisera, raised against the DNA binding domain of Jun and Fos, respectively, were obtained from commercial sources (CALTAG Laboratories, USA).
Inhibition of binding by antibodies (1–6 µg per assay) was determined as previously reported (25); nuclear extracts were preadsorbed for 1–2 hrs with the antibodies before binding.
Antisera from non-immune animals, chicken antisera and irrelevant mAbs were used as controls.
Heparin Sepharose chromatography.
A nuclear extract (6 ml, 0.6 µg/µl) from 5 10 8 cells were loaded at 4°C onto a Heparin-Sepharose column (bed volume = 6 ml) equilibrated with 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 20% glycerol, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 100 mM KCl, 0.5 mM PMSF.
After extensive washing with equilibration buffer, the proteins retained were eluted by adding 10 ml a 0.1–1 M KCl gradient in Tris-HCl pH7.4.
An aliquot of each fraction was tested in band-shift assay.
RESULTS
Expression of MHC class II antigens in wild type, mutant and revertant cell lines.
Raji and RJ2.2.5 cells were grown at 37°C in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 5% FCS.
Aliquots of the cultures were withdrawn at different time intervals in order to determine the cell counts.
In these conditions, the doubling time of Raji was about 17 hrs, whereas RJ2.2.5 doubled every 48 hrs.
TXII, a RJ2.2.5 derivative which recovered ability to express MHC class II genes upon transfection with mouse genomic DNA (22), was grown in the same conditions and the growth rate was measured for comparison: the doubling time of this transfectant was similar to that exhibited by Raji (24 hrs).
These results suggested that either expression of MHC class II antigens onto the cell surface per se is required for optimal growth rate, or the regulatory defect in the AIR-1 locus carried by RJ2.2.5 has pleiotropic effects onto the ability of the cells to grow.
To further understand this apparent correlation, a faster grower variant of RJ2.2.5 was studied.
This variant appeared spontaneously in the population and was selected by its ability to overgrow the RJ2.2.5 cells in culture.
Briefly, frozen RJ2.2.5 cells exhibited upon thawing a reduced viability and a longer lag before resuming growth as compared to Raji cells.
A faster grower clone, which appeared at a frequency estimated to be between 1 10 -8 and 1 10 -9 , was subcloned; the growth rate of a subclone, namely AR, was determined in comparison with Raji and RJ2.2.5.
This measurement showed that AR grows considerably faster than RJ2.2.5 (doubling time = 26 hrs).
Analysis of MHC class II DNA polymorphisms (not shown) using HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DRB as probes confirmed the derivation of these cells from RJ2.2.5 (see also below).
The ability of AR to express MHC class II genes was then established.
Figure 1 reports a cytofluorimetric analysis of HLA-DR and HLA class I antigen expression onto the surface of Raji, RJ2.2.5 and AR cells.
While RJ2.2.5 expressed, as expected, a DR-negative phenotype (mean of fluorescence = 4.35), AR was instead positive (mean = 184.82).
Although DR expression was significantly higher in AR then in RJ2.2.5, it was still about 60% lower than in Raji (mean = 482.52), thus suggesting that the wild-type phenotype had been partially restored.
The amount of class I antigens present in AR was similar to that exhibited by RJ2.2.5; the latter expresses a reduced amount of class I antigens onto the cell surface compared to Raji.
This unexplained characteristic of RJ2.2.5 was previously reported (5,8,13,14); in this case it further confirms the derivation of AR from RJ2.2.5.
RNAse mapping experiments confirmed that MHC class II mRNAs are produced by Raji and AR, but not by RJ2.2.5 cells.
Figure 2 shows that the relative amount of HLA-DRA mRNA, normalized to the β-actin mRNA content, is much higher in AR cells than in RJ2.2.5, although significantly lower than in Raji.
The presence of HLA-DRB and of HLA-DQA1 mRNA in AR was also determined by Northern blot experiments (data not shown).
Characterization of DNA binding activities in nuclear extracts from Raji, RJ2.2.5 and AR.
Nuclear extracts from all three cell lines were used for band shift experiments to investigate whether any correlation between transcriptional activities and DNA binding patterns could be established.
The X-box element (26,27), a conserved sequence necessary for MHC class II promoter activity, was used as a probe.
Figure 3 indicates that complexes exhibiting the same electrophoretic mobility were generated with all three extracts.
The intensity of the band obtained when a RJ2.2.5 extract was used was much higher than that observed for Raji extracts, provided that the same protein concentrations were used; interestingly AR exhibited a binding activity lower than RJ.2.5 and higher than Raji.
In addition, extracts from another MHC class II negative cell line, HeLa, behaved like RJ2.2.5 extracts, thus suggesting that inability to express MHC class II genes parallels the presence of an excess of a promoter binding factor.
To ascertain whether the DNA binding activities exhibited by Raji, RJ2.2.5 and AR share other properties besides a similar electrophoretic mobility, we further analyzed the characteristics of the factor(s) involved.
As previously shown by others (26–30), the X-box is the target of the AP-1 factor and of other Jun and Fos containing heterodimers; accordingly we analyzed the effect of an anti-Jun antiserum onto the formation of the complex between nuclear proteins and the labelled X-box.
Figure 3A shows, for example, that, both in Raji and RJ2.2.5 extracts, the formation of the complex is inhibited by titration with increasing concentrations of anti-Jun antibodies; notably the presence of a larger amount (4–10 fold) of non immune antiserum had little effect onto the binding.
A similar inhibition was also observed when AR extracts were used (not shown).
Furthermore, inhibition of the X-box binding activities of Raji, AR and RJ2.2.5 extracts by anti-Fos was demonstrated (Fig. 3B).
Thus, the pattern of inhibition suggested that all the X-box binding complexes formed by these nuclear extracts contained Jun and Fos or antigenically related proteins.
We also showed that all three X-box binding activities exhibited the same chromatographic mobility when  analyzed by heparin-Sepharose chromatography; in fact, overlapping elution profile were obtained in the three cases (Fig. 4A).
When the corresponding fraction of two different eluates, containing the same protein concentrations (see Fig. 4A), were compared, the quantitative differences noticed in crude extracts were confirmed.
For example, the intensity of the band observed when RJ2.2.5 was the source of the partially purified X-box binding activity was much higher than that found when Raji was used instead (Fig. 4B).
The X-box binding activities expressed by Raji, RJ2.2.5 and AR were further characterized.
For example, the effect of incubating the extracts at 26, 37 and 45°C or in the presence of 0.1–1.0 mM sodiu deoxycholate at room temperature or with 0.01–1 units of alkaline phosphatase was determined; no difference in the resistance to these treatments of the binding activity of any cell line was observed (data not shown).
These data suggest that the same factor, present in different amounts, is responsible for the binding of Raji, RJ2.2.5 and AR extracts to the X-box.
DISCUSSION
Studies concerning the characterization of the regulatory defect carried by the MHC class II negative B-cell lymphoma RJ2.2.5 mutant were previously presented and the segregation pattern of somatic cell hybrids obtained by fusion of the mutant cells with mouse spleen B-cells was reported (13,14).
These experiments led to the conclusion that a recessive defect in the AIR-1 locus of RJ2.2.5 prevents expression of MHC class II genes by abrogating a transcriptional activator (10,13).
Further studies have shown that RJ2.2.5 may lack a factor required for the activity of a MHC class II specific enhancer function (18,19); in particular, it was reported that a conserved cis-acting regulatory signal of the MHC class II promoters, the X-box, enhances MHC class II expression in Raji, but not in RJ2.2.5 (19).
However, absence of a specific DNA binding activity could not be demonstrated using nuclear extracts of RJ2.2.5 (2,3,18).
In addition, it was reported that MHC class II promoter occupancy in vivo is the same in the class II-positive Raji and in class II-negative RJ2.2.5 cells (21).
The defect of this mutant may thus reside in a factor that modulates transcription without directly interacting with the promoter elements of the MHC class II genes.
As, in comparison with Raji, the RJ2.2.5 mutant exhibits a slower growth rate, it was possible to isolate a revertant cell line in which the ability to express the MHC class II genes is partially restored (Fig. 1).
Notably, suppression of the AIR-1 phenotype by transfection with heterologous DNA (22) also caused a reduction of the doubling time, suggesting that either class II antigen expression affects the growth of the cell or that the AIR-1 mutations has pleiotropic effects.
As lack of MHC class II antigens on the cell surface does not adversely affect the ability of cells to grow (35), it is possible that pleiotropism is implicated.
Characterization of the binding activities present in the nucleus of the wild-type, the mutant and the revertant cells has shown that there is an inverse correlation between the amount of class II mRNA expressed and the level of a nuclear complex formed with the X-box.
The accumulation of a nuclear factor having a negative effect onto transcription, rather than loss of an activator, may thus cause the lack of gene expression observed in RJ2.2.5.
The recessivity of the RJ2.2.5 phenotype, however, contrasts with the possibility that lack of MHC class II expression may be due to de novo synthesis of a repressor.
We propose that in Raji cells the accumulation of a repressor is prevented, thus allowing gene expression.
RJ2.2.5 cells would carry a mutation affecting this prevention mechanism.
Such a model is compatible with the results of the segregation analysis of RJ2.2.5 proving the recessivity of the AIR-1 defect (13,14).
The hypothesis that MHC class II gene expression in RJ2.2.5 cells is suppressed because of the presence of a repressor, does not exclude that activation is also required.
The requirement for a transcriptional activator has in fact been documented in several instances (see Ref. 2 and 3 for a review).
We have shown, for example, that treatment of Raji with a protein synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide, blocks class II mRNA transcription, thus indicating that a positive factor is required for MHC class II gene expression in these cells (23).
We found that the X-box binding activities exhibited by Raji, RJ2.2.5 and AR have the same electrophoretic and chromatographic properties and all contain Jun/Fos or antigenically related proteins (Fig. 3–4); therefore they seem to differ only quantitatively, although differences in their composition, not detectable by our approach, cannot be excluded.
Most experimental evidence suggests that Jun or Fos containing factors that bind to the X-box are required for the activation of MHC class II promoters (26,28–30), although a negative role was suggested for the Jun/Fos heterodimer (27).
Accordingly besides being implicated in activation, a negative role has been reported for the X-box (31,32).
It is thus tempting to suggest that the same X-box binding complex may act both as an activator and as a repressor.
In other cases too, the ability of Jun/Fos containing factors to act both in a negative and in a positive fashion has been proposed (33).
In several circumstances it has been reported that the ability of a DNA binding factor to modulate transcriptional activity can be controlled by the interaction with other factors.
For example, blocking of activator factors by specific inhibitors, such as the I-χB inhibitor of NF-χB (33) and the IP-1 inhibitor of AP-1 (25) has been reported.
These inhibitions are relieved by a number of treatments which interfere with the inhibitor functions.
In the case of I-χB, the inhibition of NF-χB can be sedated by selectively inactivating the inhibitor at high temperature.
In other cases, treatment with non-ionic detergents, phosphatase or DTT interferes with the interaction of DNA binding proteins with their cognate modulating factors.
We have therefore examined the possibility that the amount of DNA binding complex formed by Raji extracts with MHC class II promoter elements be increased by removal of an inhibitor by any of these treatments.
In no case significant effects onto the amount of DNA binding activity were observed.
Another mechanism by which the amount of repressor can be kept low in the nucleus involves the possibility that the repressor be confined in the cytoplasm; we were thus prompted to test the nucleo-cytoplasmic  ripartition of the X binding activity in Raji and RJ2.2.5.
Again the ratio of DNA binding activity found in the nucleus to that found in the cytoplasm was constant in the two cell lines (M. N. Ombra, unpublished results).
Furthermore mixing experiments based on combinations of extracts from Raji and RJ2.2.5 excluded the presence of an inhibitor of binding in Raji nuclear extracts (M. N. Ombra, unpublished results).
We conclude that it is unlikely that the increase of X-box binding factor observed in RJ2.2.5 is due to any of the mechanisms discussed above.
Figure 1.
MHC class II gene expression in AR cells.
A:Cytofluorimetric analysis of fluorescent antibody staining of Raji, RJ2.2.5 and AR cells with an anti HLA-A, B, C mAb (B9.12.1) and with an anti HLA-DRA mAb (D1.12) or with in the presence of the second antibody only (control).
B:RNAse protection assay of RNA extracted from Raji, RJ2.2.5 (RJ) and AR.
A cDNA fragment encompassing ca. 500 nts of the 3' portion of DRA was used to prepare the in vitro transcribed RNA probe.
A cDNA probe encompassing ca 140 nts of the 5' end of β-actin was used to standardize the amounts of RNA used.
Numbers on the left refer to the molecular weight standards (MW st).
c = cytoplasmic RNA; t = total RNA.
Figure 2.
Band shift of a X-box oligonucleotide in the presence of nuclear extracts from Raji, RJ2.2.5, HeLa and AR.
Figure 3.
Inhibition of binding by anti-Jun and anti-Fos.
A:Inhibition of binding of Raji and RJ2.2.5 nuclear extracts to the X-box by the indicated amounts of anti-Jun or pre-immune antiserum.
B:Inhibition of the binding of AR, RJ2.2.5 and Raji nuclear extracts to the X-box by anti-Fos antiserum; binding reactions which did not contain anti-Fos (— in lanes 3, 6 and 9) were supplemented with 1 µg of non-immune antiserum.
Mitochondrial genome expression in a mutant strain of D.subobscura , an animal model for large scale mtDNA deletion
ABSTRACT
A mitochondrial mutant strain of D.subobscura has two mitochondrial genome populations (heteroplasmy): the first (20–30% of the population, 15.9 kb) is the same as could be found in the wild type; the second (70–80% of the population, 11 kb) has lost by deletion several genes coding for complex I and III subunits, and four tRNAs.
In human pathology, this kind of mutation has been correlated with severe diseases such as the Kearns-Sayre syndrome, but the mutant strain, does not seem to be affected by the mutation (1).
Studies reported here show that: a) Transcripts from genes not concerned by the mutation are present at the same level in both strains.
b) In contrast, transcript concentrations from genes involved in the deletion are significantly decreased (30–50%) in the mutant.
c) Deleted DNA was expressed as shown by the detection of the fusion transcript.
d) The mtDNA/nuc.DNA ratio is 1.5 times higher in the mutant strain than in the wild type.
The mutation leads to change in the transcript level equilibrium.
The apparent innocuousness of the mutation may suggest some post-transcriptional compensation mechanisms.
This drosophila strain is an interesting model to study the consequence of this type of mitochondrial genome deletion.
INTRODUCTION
Certain types of myopathies and encephalomyopathies are correlated with mitochondria and mitochondrial genome alterations (2–4).
These may be of several kinds: point mutations involving protein coding genes or tRNA (5–9), or more substantial deletion (10–12) or duplication type mutations (13), localized by most studies in a highly specific single-strand zone during replication (14–16).
According to their localization, these deletions or duplications frequently provoke major respiratory chain function defects, with consequent cellular energy supply deficiencies.
They may thus account for observable clinical manifestations.
Studies in this field present a number of inherent drawbacks: they deal with isolated manifestations and random clinical signs, in an area where experimental possibilities are limited (human mutation).
An animal model should allow the development of a different approach to the problem.
A Drosophila subobscura strain discovered in the natural environment (1) possesses a heterogeneous population of mitochondrial genomes (heteroplasmy).
One fraction of this population (20 to 30%) is of the wild type, and the remaining fraction (70 to 80%) contains a substantial deletion in the coding part.
The mutation is similar to those encountered in human pathologies such as the Kearns-Sayre syndrome.
Yet despite the handicap ensuing from the mutation, and contrary to observations in human pathology, the strain appears to be unaffected.
Our first studies of this mutant strain analyzed mitochondrial DNA transcription, and assessed relative concentrations of the various mitochondrial transcripts.
These concentrations were compared with levels measured in mitochondria of the wild-type strain, bearing 100% intact mitochondrial genomes.
Our results showed concentrations to be identical for transcripts of mitochondrial genes unaffected by mutation, but lower for transcripts of affected mitochondrial genes in the mutant.
Detection in the heteroplasmic strain of a new transcript whose size matched that expected of the fusion transcript indicated that the deleted genomes were indeed transcribed.
The possible implications of these results on the mutant strain phenotype are discussed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Isolation of mitochondria
Mitochondria from adults flies (1 to 8 days) were isolated as previously described (17).
Mitoplasts were obtained by incubation of mitochondria with digitonin 100µg/mg protein (17).
Total DNA preparation from whole flies
Whole flies (100 to 200 mg) were crushed in 1 ml of extraction buffer (Tris 10mM pH 7.8, NaCl 60 mM, EDTA 10mM) at 0–5°C to which was added 1 volume of lyse buffer (Tris 300 mM, pH 9, EDTA 100 mM, DEPC 0.8%), SDS 1%, Proteinase K 100µg/ml and incubated 1 h at 65°C.
K acetate 8M ( vol.) was then added and mixture was incubated for 45 min. at 0–5°C and centrifuged at 10Kg for 15 min. 1 volume of 2-propanol was added to the supernatant which was left at room temperature for 30 min. and centrifuged 10 Kg, for 10 min.
The pellet was dissolved in 0,5 ml buffer Tris 10mM pH 7.4, EDTA 1mM (TE 1), treated with RNAse A 200µg/ml 30 min. at 37°C, and extracted twice with phenol-chloroform.
DNA was precipitated from the aqueous phase by 2.5 volume ethanol.
DNA pellet was washed with ethanol 70% and dissolved with 200 to 500µl TE 1.
RNA extraction from mitoplasts
Mitoplasts were incubated 30 min at 37°C. with the lysis buffer (NaCl 0.1M, Tris 10mM pH 7.4, EDTA 1 mM, Proteinase K 100 µg/ml, Sodium dodecyl sulfate 1%, RNAsine (Boehringer) 100 u/ml).
The mixture was extracted twice with phenol-chloroform and precipitated with ethanol.
The pellet was dissolved in 100 µl DEPC 0.8% water and treated with 200 U HPLC grade DNAse 1 (Pharmacia) in buffer Tris 50 mM (pH 8), MgCl 2 10mM, NaCl 50 mM with 200 U/ml RNAsine at 37°C, 30 min, then extracted with phenol-chloroform.
After ethanol precipitation, the RNA pellet was dissolved with TE 1.
Electrophoresis of nucleic acids and hybridization
RNA and DNA electrophoresis, blotting and hybridization were done as described previously (18).
In some case (slot-blot), DNA was applied directly to nylon membrane (Gene-screen DUPONT) with a slot apparatus and then hybridised as described for Southern blot.
Quantification of hybridization
Northern or Southern blot hybridization signals were analysed by densitometry with an Ultroscan laser system (LKB).
In order to compare signals hybridization in Northern experiments, srRNA was used as an internal control.
The same membrane was used for all hybridizations and the ratio (studied transcript H /studied transcript W)versus (srRNA H /srRNA W) were calculated.
In slot-blot experiments with total DNA, the ratios (signal obtained with mitochondrial probe/signal obtained with nuclear probe) were calculated for the two strains and compared.
Probes used
All probes were obtained from D.melanogaster DNA.
They were cloned in pGEM7 Zf or pGEM3 Zf.
Nucleotide positions are referred as described by CLARY and WOLSTHENHOLME (19) for the probes srRNA, HE 143 and CO III and by GARESSE (20) for the probes SE 162, Cyto b and ND4.
srRNA: A 349 bp fragment obtained by Cla I and Hind III digestion (14490-14141).
This clone revealed the srRNA transcripts (750 n).
HE 143: A 1450bp fragment obtained by Hind III and Eco R1 digestion (5696-7146).
Transcription of this clone with T7 polymerase in vitro yields an antisens riboprobe of ND5 transcripts (1800n.).
COIII: A 711 bp fragment obtained by AccI and PvuII digestion (5454-4743).
This clone revealed CO III transcripts (825n.)
SE 162: A 1617 bp fragment obtained by Sna B1 and Eco R1 1 digestion (7244-5627).
It revealed transcripts from ND1 (1000n.) and Cyto b (1200n.)
Cyto b: A 851 bp fragment obtained by Pvu II and Sst I digestion (10674-11525).
This probe revealed Cyto b transcripts.
ND4: A 915 bp fragment obtained by XmnI digestion (8430-9345).
This clone revealed the ND4-ND4L transcripts (1700n.).
Probes are labelled with 32 P dATP by nick translation or with 32 P UTP by in vitro transcription with T7 polymerase (HE 143).
RESULTS
Measurement of the heteroplasmy
As described by A.Volz et al.(1), the deleted zone (Figure 1) extended from nucleotide 6943 (in the ND1 gene) to nucleotide 11874 (in the ND5 gene), with reference to the D.yakuba mtDNA sequence (19).
Five coding genes for complex I subunits were thus either truncated (ND1, ND5) or lost completely (ND4, ND4L, ND6).
The coding gene for the single complex III subunit of mitochondrial origin, cytochrome b, was also implicated in the deletion, together with four tRNAs (Ser, Threo, His, Pro).
The extent of heteroplasmy was evaluated by Southern blotting on total DNA obtained from adult flies (1–7 days) after cutting with the Msp1 enzyme and hybridization with the CO III probe (Figure 2).
The probe recognized two specific fragments as either intact mitochondrial genomes (4.3 kb) or deleted genomes (3.3 kb).
Densitometric measurements indicated 70 to 80% heteroplasmy corresponding to deleted DNA.
Other measurement methods (not shown), such as analyzing electrophoresis gels obtained by staining mitochondrial DNA of both strains with ethidium bromide after cleavage with a restriction enzyme (Hind III), or radioactive labelling by filling in the end of the molecule, showed 70–80% of the deleted mtDNA population in the mutant strain.
STUDY OF MITOCHONDRIAL TRANSCRIPTION
The equilibrium transcript level was estimated after RNA extraction from isolated adult flies mitochondria, or from total RNAs.
The transcripts were analyzed by Northern blotting with various probes.
Transcripts of genes out the deletion.
Two probes situated on each side of the deletion zone were used: the srRNA probe and the CO III probe (Figure 1).
Northern blot results are showed in Figure 3.
Same amounts of mtRNAs (in µg) derived from heteroplasmic (H) or wild-type (W) strains were used.
RNAs extracted from the D.melanogaster strain (M) was also used as control.
The srRNA and CO III transcripts of this strain have already been identified (18).
Signals obtained after hybridization of the RNA extracted from the two strains (RNAs H/RNAs W ratios) were compared as described in Material and Methods.
Results of densitometric analysis performed for different extractions (four experiments) indicated that these ratios were identical for CO III and srRNA.
To confirm these results, whole RNA fractions extracted from both strains and treated with 100 µg of DNAse 1 (to eliminate DNA contamination) were directly hybridized (slot-blot) with srRNA or CO III mitochondrial probes and with the nuclear probe DNA 45S (21)(not shown).
The srRNA/45S RNA hydridization signal ratios were identical for both strains.
These results confirm that transcripts of genes not implicated in deletion attained identical steady-state levels in the two strains.
Transcripts of the genes implicated in mutation.
Transcript concentrations for genes in that deleted DNA were assessed by hybridization with various probes (Figure 1), which either overlapped the deleted zone (SE 162, HE 143) or were completely included thereby (ND4, cytochrome b).
Transfer filters of mtRNAs extracted from both strains were hybridized with these probes, but also with the srRNA probe (internal control).
Results are presented in Figures 4 and 5.
Relative percentages of each transcript were estimated with reference to srRNA.
Transcript/srRNA hybridization signal ratios were compared for the wild-type and mutant strains.
The same filter underwent successive hybridization with the SE162 and srRNA probes (Figure 4A), prior to dehybridization then rehybridization with the cytochrome b probe alone (Figure 4B).
Figure 4A shows four visible bands in the lane containing isolated H strain transcripts: 750n. corresponding to srRNA (18), 950 n.
(ND1), 1200 n.
(Cyto b) and 1350 n.
Hybridization with the cytochrome b probe alone (Figure 4B) confirmed that the 1200 n. band corresponds to the transcript of this gene.
Only three bands were detected in the lane containing isolated W strain transcripts (srRNA, ND1, Cyto b), the 1350 n. was not detected.
The same filter was used for hybridization with the riboprobe transcribed from HE 143 probe by T7 polymerase (Figure 5A) or for hybridization with the ND4 probe (Figure 5B).
Figure 5A shows two bands for RNA isolated from the H strain: one at 1800 n. corresponding to ND5 transcription, and one at 1350 n.
Only the 1800 n. band was visible in the W transcript lane.
In Figure 5B, only one band was detected in each of the two lanes: 1700 n., corresponding to the single transcript of the ND4 and ND4L genes.
Five experiments identical to those described above were performed.
R H /R W ratios were calculated as described in Material and methods.
The lowest ratio was 0.35(+/-0.13)for ND5.
These ratios were 0.45(+/-0.15)for ND1 and 0.55(+/-0.11) for ND4-ND4L).
The highest ratio (0.66 (+/-0.11)) was obtained for the cytochrome b transcript.
Fusion transcript.
Autoradiographies of hybridized H strain transcripts with probes overlapping the deleted zone (SE162 and HE143) showed a new band at 1350 n.
(Figures 4A and 5A).
This was not observable with transcripts isolated from the wild-type strain, nor with the cytochrome b or ND4 probes hybridized with transcripts from the mutant strain (Figures 4B and 5B).
The size of this band corresponds to the predicted size of the transcript resulting from ND1-ND5 gene fusion, i.e. 1328 nucleotides (1).
Measurement of the fusion transcript hybridization signal showed it to be identical to that of the ND1 transcript.
Estimation of relative mitochondrial genome levels in the mutant strain
The quantity of mitochondrial DNA isolated from the H and W strains was estimated with reference to nuclear DNA.
The extracted nucleic acids from whole flies were treated with RNAse A for RNA elimination, then directly deposited on a membrane (slot-blot) before hybridization with either a nuclear probe (DNA 45S) or an mtDNA probe (srRNA).
Results are shown in Figure 6.
Ratios for the srRNA/DNA 45S hybridization signals obtained with the H and W strains were then compared.
This ratio was 1.5 (+/-0.31) times higher in the mutant than in the wild type strain.
Other nuclear probes (histone, β tubulin and actin probes) yielded identical results (not shown).
Hence, there was an increase in the number of mitochondrial genomes per nuclear genome in the mutant strain.
DISCUSSION
According to the various measurements performed, 70 to 80% of the mitochondrial genomes showed deletion involving more than 30% of their coding fraction.
Apart from the four tRNAs, which constitute unique entities on the mitochondrial genome, deletion bore on two respiratory complexes: complex III with cytochrome b, and complex I. This latter was particularly affected, 5 subunits being either totally absent (ND6, ND4 and ND4L) or severely truncated (ND1 and ND5).
Cytochrome b plays a key role in electron transfer from ubiquinone to cytochrome c (22).
Although their roles are less well known, complex I subunits also appear to be involved in the functioning of this complex.
For example, ND1 is implicated in the rotenone bond and ubiquinone interactions (23), and ND4 may play a very important role in exchanges of reducing power with the mitochondrial matrix (25).
The deletion also involved four essential tRNAs, possibly blocking all mitochondrial  translation .
Extensive, massive deletion of this kind would necessarily cause major perturbations to cellular function and energetic equilibrium.
Such mitochondrial genome alterations have been correlated with extremely severe human pathologies such as the Kearns-Sayre or Pearson syndromes (10–13).
One of the most remarkable observations concerning the mutant strain was the fact that it appeared very little affected by this mutation.
The strain was encountered in the natural environment (1), and its fertility rate (number of eggs) and number of offspring (larvae or imago) were apparently unaffected.
Moreover, the selective value of the mutation was showed to be non-significant (1).
One of the hypothesis which could be proposed, attributes the lack of modification in mitochondrial genome expression to over expression of the intact genome population, or to a substantial increase in the overall concentration of mitochondrial genomes per nuclear genome (therefore in the intact mitochondrial genome concentration).
These two possibilities may allow deletion-prone gene transcript concentrations to be kept at equivalent levels in both strains.
Other hypotheses can also be postulated, such as over translation of transcripts of the involved genes.
The first step in genome expression, i.e. transcription, was studied in order to test these hypotheses.
Results showed that:
a)
For genes not involved in deletion, equilibrium transcript concentrations were identical in the mutant and wild-type strains.
b)
Conversely, equilibrium transcript concentrations were affected for genes involved in deletion: there was a 45 to 65% decrease for genes coding for NADH-dehydrogenase subunits, and a 35% decrease for the cytochrome b gene.
c)
The presence of a new 1350 n. transcript, identified in the mutant strain by probes in borderline deletion areas, indicated transcription of the deleted genomes.
d)
Relative concentrations of mitochondrial genomes with reference to the nuclear genome increased about 50% in the mutant strain.
Hence, deletion clearly led to a modification in equilibrium transcript levels in the heteroplasmic strain for genes involved in deletion.
There was no compensation by intact genomes, but the decreases in concentration were less than expected based on heteroplasmic levels.
Indeed, had these two phenomena been directly proportional, the decreases should have amounted to 80% for the transcripts of all involved genes.
These differences may be due to the relative increase in mitochondrial genomes in the mutant strain (mtDNA/nuclear DNA 1.5 compared with the wild-type strain).
Since the number of intact genomes per nuclear genome increased, the relative concentration of genes involved in deletion (per nuclear genome, thus per cell) likewise increased.
As this increase amounted to 50%, the relative concentration of involved genes rose from 20 to 30%.
The theoretical decrease in the concentration of involved gene transcripts (70%) was nevertheless lower than the measured concentration: 45–55% for ND1 and ND4-ND4L transcripts, and 35% for the cytochrome b gene transcript.
There was thus no direct relation (perhaps except for ND5) between the quantity of mitochondrial genes and the equilibrium concentration of their transcripts.
This implies partial transcriptional or post-transcriptional compensation for these genes.
The presence of the fusion transcript of the ND1 and ND5 genes indicated that deleted genomes indeed underwent transcription.
Therefore, the transcripts of genes not involved in the deletion are presumably derived from both genomes.
If mtDNA per nuclear genome was increased by 50% in the mutant strain, the concentration of these transcripts should have increased by 50% as well.
In fact they occurred in equal concentrations in the two strains.
This implies a regulatory mechanism which maintains transcript concentrations of these genes at a constant level (constant number of transcripts per cell or per mitochondria?).
This mechanism apparently exerts a lesser action on transcripts of the deleted genes possibly because they are present in lower concentrations.
Such a mechanism may directly control the actual transcription process,(initiation of transcription in the drosophila, as suggested by Berthier et al(18), may occurred by a mechanism different from that described in mammals (25)), or ensure post-transcriptional regulation of the concentration of the various transcripts (turnover)(26).
Control of this kind may account for the observed differences between transcript concentrations of complex I and complex III genes.
The relative concentration of the fusion transcript was low (comparable to that of ND1).
Once more, this finding does not correlate with the relative deleted genome concentration.
Either these genomes have a low level of expression, in contrast with observations in human muscle fibbers or cell studies (27–29), or this transcript is characterized by a very short half-life.
Sequencing of the deletion breakpoint (1) indicates that a frame shift occurs between ND1 and ND5, and that this generates a stop codon on the first nucleotides of the conserved ND5 fragment.
The stability of such a transcript may be jeopardized, hence its faster subsequent degradation.
Such partially compensatory mechanisms (increase in the mitochondrial genome amount, and possible modulation of transcript half-life) perhaps account for the discrepancy between heteroplasmy levels and equilibrium transcript concentrations.
These concentrations always present a clear decrease however and seem to contradict the apparent lack of a mutant phenotype.
Other post-transcriptional or post-translational compensatory mechanisms may be involved.
Mitochondrial biochemistry and bioenergetics studies in the mutant strain should elucidate this question.
Preliminary results (manuscript underway) indicate that activity of the implicated respiratory complexes may also be affected.
The compensatory mechanisms, allowing the mutant strain to withstand deletion and restore balanced cellular energetic may implicated other metabolic pathways and other compartments than the mitochondrial alone.
We are currently investigating different ways.
Figure 1.
Wild type and deleted mitochondrial genome maps.
Arrows indicate the location of the different probes used.
() Msp1 sites.
The deletion leads to the fusion of the 5' region of ND1 and the 3' region of ND5.
A+T: A+T rich region.
Figure 2.
Southern blot analysis of the mitochondrial genome. 15 µg of DNA fraction extracted from wild type (W) or mutant (H) adult flies were digested by Msp1, electrophorezed on 1% agarose gel, blotted on membrane and hybridized with COIII probes.
C: size marker.
Figure 3.
Northern blot analysis of mtRNA hybridized with probes srRNA and CO III.
RNA fraction extracted from wild type (W), mutant strain (H) or from D.melanogaster (M) were fractionated on 1,3% agarose gel, blotted, and hybridized with srRNA probe (A), or COIII probe (B).
C: size marker.
Figure 4.
Northern blot analysis of mtRNA hybridized with probes SE 162 and srRNA or CytoB.
RNA fraction extracted from wild type (W), mutant strain (H) or D.melanogaster (D) were fractionated on agarose gel, blotted, and hybridised with probes SE 162 and srRNA (A).
The membrane was then dehybridized and rehybridized with the probe CytoB (B).
C: size marker.
Figure 5.
Northern blot analysis of mtRNA hybridized with probes HE143 (A) or ND4 (B).
The same membrane described in Figure 4 is hybridized with (A) riboprobe of HE 143 probe (ND5 antisens) or with ND4 probe.
W: wild type RNA, H: mutant strain RNA.
C: size marker.
Figure 6.
Slot blot analysis of DNA extracted from both strains and hybridized with nuclear and mitochondrial probes.
Increasing amounts (a:0,25, b:0,5 c:1, d: 2 µg) of DNA extracted from wild type (W) or mutant strain (H) were loaded on a membrane and hybridized with the nuclear probe rDNA 45S (Nuc.), or with the mitochondrial probe, srRNA,(Mit).
Hybridization signals were analyzed by densitometry.
The use of bidirectional transcription footprinting to detect platinum-DNA crosslinks by acridine-tethered platinum diamine complexes and cisplatin
ABSTRACT
Bidirectional transcription footprinting has been used to probe the platination of DNA by cisplatin, and to examine the modulation of these interactions by (a) cyclisation of the non-reactive amino group by either ethyl or propyl groups, and (b) the further addition of a pendant intercalator (9-amino acridine) linked by either phenylethyl or phenylpentyl groups.
Intrastrand crosslinking was detected for all derivatives at all 5'-GG and 5'-AG sequences on the template strand, but the same sites did not result in transcriptional blockages when on the non-template strand.
There was little effect of cyclysation of the amino groups, but the further addition of an intercalator resulted in three responses: a time-dependent increase of the blocked transcript by one and three nucleotides; a reduction of the sequence selectivity of platination; a decrease of apparent interstrand crosslinking for these derivatives with a pendant intercalator tethered to the amino moiety of cisplatin.
INTRODUCTION
The biological effects of the important clinical antitumor agent cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) cisplatin 7 (Figure 1) are due to its formation of coordination complexes with DNA.
The majority of these adducts are intrastrand crosslinks with a smaller proportion of interstrand crosslinking (1).
Estimates of the frequency of formation of interstrand crosslinks range from 1–7% (1).
Intrastrand crosslinks are considered to be relatively difficult to repair (2) and this may be the reason for their marked effectiveness of cisplatin against tumours of germ cell origin (e.g. testicular and ovarian tumors).
Although widely used in cancer chemotherapy, cisplatin and its analogues suffer from the drawback that tumour cells develop resistance to these drugs.
This can occur by a number of mechanisms, among them deactivation of platinum by over expression of thiols and thiol transferring enzymes, by alterations to transport mechanisms and by enhancement of DNA repair mechanisms that excise DNA platinum adducts (1).
One focus of our work on the development of platinum complexes with improved activity against cisplatin resistant cell lines has been to target platinum to DNA by its attachment to suitable DNA —affinic carrier ligands.
In this way, mechanisms of resistance may be circumvented by minimizing exposure of platinum to other cellular components such as thiols and by the formation of platinum DNA adducts which are sufficiently novel to escape repair by the normal mechanisms.
Examples of such DNA-targeted platinum complexes include the series of 9-anilinoacridine complexes 2, 3, 5 and 6 (3).
Measurements of DNA unwinding of supercoiled plasmid pBR322 DNA by these complexes show that in binding to DNA the platinum atom is covalently bound with the acridine chromophores intercalated adjacent to the metal binding site, or in the case of the longer chain homologues, one base pair removed from this site (4).
Experiments with linearized pBR322 fragments indicate that the complexes form DNA interstrand crosslinks although no more effectively than the monomers PtenCl 2 , 1, or PtpropCl 2 , 4,(4).
Although these measurements reveal the gross features of DNA interaction they provide no information on the sequence preferences of drug binding.
The sequence selectivity of the platination of DNA by cisplatin and its analogues has been investigated through a number of approaches, all of which indicate a preference for binding to GG sequences.
A polymerase stop assay, using Taq DNA polymerase has been used by Ponti et al .
(5) to reveal blockages almost exclusively at G n (n>2) sequences.
Lemaire et al .
(6) have demonstrated that interstrand crosslinks are preferentially formed at 5'-GC sites —these sites were mapped from the ability of cisplatin adducts with DNA to terminate transcription of the T7 and SP6 RNA polymerases on double-stranded DNA.
The binding site preference of complex 8 has been mapped by exonuclease III digestion of restriction fragments from pBR322 DNA (7).
Again, oligo (dG) sequences are the most prevalent sites but the presence of the tethered intercalator leads to secondary binding, mainly at AG sites.
The in vitro sequence selectivity of DNA adducts formed by the complexes 9 and 10 has also been probed (8).
Utilizing plasmid DNA and the Taq polymerase amplification system it was found that runs of two or more consecutive G's were the major site of adduct formation with lesser damage at GA AG and GC sites (8).
This method has also shown that a similar pattern of damage was caused to the DNA in human cells for the complex 9 whereas damage to intracellular DNA was not detected for the complex 10 (9).
An in vitro transcription assay has been used previously to probe a variety of drug-DNA interactions (10) and has been utilised for bidirectional transcription footprinting of drug sites on DNA (11,12).
These procedures offer advantages over other footprinting methods in that relative affinity for individual sites is readily apparent, as is the kinetics of drug-DNA interaction at each site.
We report here the application of bidirectional transcription footprinting to detect sites of platination by the complexes 2, 3, 5, and 6, their selectivity, absolute size of the blockage unit, relative occupancy at preferred sites as well as the irreversibility of each complex with DNA.
The effects of the intercalating chromophore on platinum binding are probed by including cisplatin, 7, PtenCl 2 , 1 and PtpropCl 2 , 4, as monomeric comparators.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Established methods were used to prepare cisplatin, 7 (13) and PtenCl 2 , 4 (14).
The complexes 2, 3, 5, and 6 were synthesised in our laboratories and have been described previously (3).
All drugs were dissolved in dimethylformamide to 2 mM solutions and stored in the dark at -20°C.
Urea, TEMED and ‘Instapage’(40% solution of 19:1 acrylamide:bisacrylamide) were supplied by IBI (Connecticut, USA) as ultrapure reagents.
Nucleotides (including 3'-O-methylnucleotides, primers; ApU and GpA and ribonucleotides),E.coli RNA polymerase (nuclease free), BSA (nuclease free) and ribonuclease inhibitor (human placenta) were purchased from Pharmacia. [α- 32 P]UTP (specific activity 3000 Ci/mmol) and X-ray film (Hyperfilm-β-Max) were obtained from Amersham while restriction enzymes were from New England Biolabs.
NA45 membranes were purchased from Schleider and Schuell and heparin was obtained from Sigma.
All other reagents were of analytical grade and all solutions were prepared using water purified through a Milli-Q four stage system (Millipore, MA).
Methods
Isolation of pRW2 and subsequent restriction digestion with Xho I and Pvu II to yield the 315 bp fragment containing the N25 and UV5 counter directed promoters was as previously described (12,15).
Inactivation of the N25 or UV5 promoters was carried out by restriction digestion with Dra 1 or BstN 1 respectively, as previously described (12,15).
Drug reactions
100 µM bp of the appropriate promoter-containing DNA fragment was incubated for 18 hours with platinum compounds at 20 µM for compounds 1, 4 and 7 and 50 µM for compounds 2, 3, 5 and 6 in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.0.
Drug reactions were performed in the dark at 37°C for 18 hours.
Control reactions, in the absence of drug, were performed identically in buffer containing 2.5% DMF.
Transcription
Transcription conditions employed were as previously described (12).
Briefly, drug treated promoter was incubated with E.coli RNA polymerase at 37°C in a transcription buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM DTT, 0.125 µg/ml BSA, 2 u/µl RNAse inhibitor) to form an open ternary complex.
Non-specifically bound polymerase was removed by the addition of heparin to a final concentration of 400 µg/ml.
A labelled initiated complex was formed in the presence of 200 µM of GpA (for the UV promoter) or ApU (for the N25 promoter) together with 5 µM ATP, GTP and UTP and [α- 32 P]ATP.
Elongation of the transcript was carried out for 1,5 or 15 min, and was initiated by adjusting conditions to 2 mM of all four nucleotides and 400 mM KCl.
Reactions were terminated by the addition of an equal volume of loading dye (8 M urea, 10% sucrose, 40 mM EDTA, 0.1% bromophenol blue, 0.1% xylene cyanol).
Electrophoresis and autoradiography
Reactions were electrophoresed through a 10% denaturing gel and the gel was subsequently dried and autoradiographed using standard procedures (12).
Quantitation was performed using a 300A Computing Densitometer (Molecular Dynamics, CA, USA).
RESULTS
Transcriptional blockages
The effect of cisplatin in inducing transcriptional blockages is shown in Figure 2.
In this assay the initiated transcription complex contains nascent RNA synchronised to a length of mainly 10 nucleotides (10).
When elongated in the presence of all four ribonucleotides, the full-length transcript is obtained within one minute, with no variation observed if elongation is continued for longer times.
However, with DNA treated with cisplatin major transcriptional blockages are apparent at RNA lengths of 37, 43, etc. following transcription from the UV5 promoter (Fig. 2a), as are blocked transcripts with lengths of 55, 63, 64, etc. from the N25 promoter (Fig. 2b).
The blockages are largely independent of elongation time, since only minor changes of the blocked transcripts are apparent after a 15-fold increase of elongation time (i.e. 15 min compared to 1 min) for transcription from either promoter.
Additional low intensity bands after major blockages, such as at 43 (Fig. 2A), probably represents the ability of RNA polymerase to transcribe weakly for 3 or 4 nucleotides past stereochemically small blockages by a partial polymerase dissociation mechanism, and has been observed with other small DNA adducts (16).
Such long-lived transcriptional blockages are characteristic of covalent or essentially irreversible complexes such as adducts with nitrogen mustard (17) and are as expected for cisplatin which has been extensively documented to form coordination complexes with DNA.
The control lanes show mainly full-length transcripts arising from elongation of the initiated transcription complex which had not been subjected to drug treatment.
The background is minimal, with only minor natural pausing apparent using the UV5 promoter (e.g. 38-mer in Fig. 2a).
Similar sequence dependent blockages are also apparent for the platinum complexes 1–6 for transcription from the UV5 promoter (Figure 3) and from the N25 promoter (Figure 4).
The intensity of transcriptional blockages is proportional to the number of RNA molecules comprising each band on the sequencing gel.
This results from the nature of the elongation conditions which ensures that each transcript contains the same amount of radiolabel incorporated into the nascent RNA during initiation of the ternary transcription complex, and no further label is incorporated during the elongation phase.
The autoradiograms were scanned by laser densitometry to quantitate the fractional number of moles of RNA of each length in a lane.
The mole-fraction of each RNA band in the 15 min elongation time lanes has been shown in Figure 5 in terms of a histogram which summarises all transcriptional blockages shown in Figures 2–4 up to transcript lengths of approximately 110.
Simple platinum complexes
Transcription from the UV5 promoter revealed eight well-resolved regions (up to 110 nucleotides) of blockage induced by cisplatin (7)(Fig. 2), with the strongest (43, 68 and 106) occurring one nucleotide prior to 5'-CC sequences and two blockages at G of 5'-GC sequences (37 and 72).
Other lower intensity blockages were prior to 5'-CT sequences at 61, 94 and 98.
Seven discrete blockages were seen (up to 120 nucleotides) with the N25 promoter (Fig. 2), of which six were one nucleotide prior to 5'-CC sequences, with the other at G of 5'-GC.
All sequences refer to the non-template strand, with the numbering referring to the transcript length from the -1 site of each promoter (since initiation of transcription was forced to commence from the -1 position by high levels of GpA and ApU for the UV5 and N25 promoters, respectively).
Overall, fourteen high intensity blockage sites (mole fraction greater than 0.025) were identified in the regions probed from the UV5 and N25 promoters and twelve of these are summarised in Fig. 5 in the form of a bidirectional transcription footprint (note that sites at 106 and 110 from the UV5 promoter are not represented on this summation since they are outside of the region probed by the N25 promoter).
Of these fourteen high intensity sites, ten are prior to 5'-CC sequences of the non-template strand, and none of these were detected as blockages from both promoters.
The only site which yielded an unambiguous, isolated footprint (i.e. blocked transcripts from both promoters) was the 5'-GC sequence at 37 from the UV5 promoter.
Moving from cisplatin, 7, to PtenCl 2 , 1 and PtpropCl 2 , 4, where the coordinated nitrogens are linked by two and three carbons respectively in a chelate ring, produces essentially the same UV5 or N25 transcriptional blockage patterns (Fig. 3 compared to cisplatin Fig. 2).
The blockages have been summarized in Fig. 5.
The same six high intensity sites are apparent from both the UV5 and N25 promoters for both chelates, as compared to cisplatin.
One difference to emerge among these complexes was the observation that the isolated footprint (37 from the UV5 promoter) was absent in PtpropCl 2 , 4.
Intercalator-tethered complexes
For the complexes 2 and 3 (which are formally derived from PtenCl 2 , 1) the pattern of transcriptional blockages is broadly similar to that observed for PtenCl 2 , 1.
However, some notable differences are apparent.
For the complex 2, in which the anilino ring is tethered to the platinum moiety by a -(CH 2 )2 -chain, some 5'-CC blockages occurred one nucleotide downstream of those observed for PtenCl 2 , 1 (e.g. 44 and 69 for the UV5 promoter (Fig. 3) and at 56, 64 and 76 for the N25  promoter (Fig. 4)).
Additional blockages were also observed at 34/35 for the UV5 promoter (Fig. 3) and at 49 and 97 from the N25 promoter.
The homologue, 3, which contains the longer -(CH 2 )2 -linker also shows additional blockages at 47 for the UV5 promoter and 91 and 97 from the N25 promoter.
For both complexes the additional blockages all occur at, or one nucleotide prior to isolated G residues on the template strand.
It is also significant that the appearance of blockages from both directions at 5'-GC (37 of UV5) observed for 1 is missing (102 of N25) in the tethered complexes.
When compared with PtpropCl 2 , 4, the complex 5 shows additional blockages at 25 and 27 for the UV5 promoter and 75, 77, 88, 102, 108 and 116 for the N25 promoter with almost total loss of the UV5 blockage at 93.
Likewise, this blockage is lost in 6 and several new blockages emerge at 25 and 27 for the UV5 promoter and 49, 88 and 102 for N25.
It is noteworthy that PtpropCl 2 , 4, shows no evidence of the blockage on both strands (at 37 of UV5) but that this is observed in the tethered complexes 5 and 6.
Permanence of blockages
The majority of all blockages detected were independent of elongation time up to 15 min.
This indicates that the cause of the blockage is essentially irreversible with time, as expected for coordination complexes, compared to drugs which interact reversibly with DNA (10).
The only sites where some time dependence of the blockages was apparent was for those derivatives with a pendant intercalator (2, 3, 5 and 6; Figures 2 and 3).
In these cases a one nucleotide ‘creep’ of the blocked transcript was observed over the 15 min elongation time studied, as has been noted previously with other intercalators (11).
DISCUSSION
Intrastrand crosslinks
For both the tethered and simple complexes, transcriptional blockages were detected at all 5'-CC sequences on the non-template strand.
This phenomena is consistent with the formation of intrastrand crosslinks between adjacent guanine residues on the template strand.
Such intrastrand crosslinks have been well documented for cisplatin (1).
These blockages only induce transcriptional blockages when on the template strand and this has also been noted recently (18).
This selectivity must therefore reflect the nature of the stereochemistry of the appendage in perturbing movement of the RNA polymerase which tracks in the major groove (15).
Presumably any G-Pt-G intrastrand crosslinks on the non-template strand do not provide a sufficient protrusion to affect the rate of movement of RNA polymerase, and are therefore not detected as transcriptional blockages.
This strand dependence is a completely reproducible phenomena, with all 9 adjacent guanine residues resulting in transcriptional blockages when on the template strand, and none resulting in blockages when on the non-template strand (Figure 5).
Interstrand crosslinks
Although low levels (1–7%) of interstrand crosslinking have been reported for cisplatin (1) it is not possible from the present data to define the sequence specificity of such crosslinks.
One apparent interstrand crosslink is defined by blockages from both directions at 5'-GC (37 of UV5) but could also derive in principle from two 5'-AG sequences, one on each strand flanking the central 5'-GC sequence.
Relative occupancy
Since the intensity of each band in the autoradiograms is directly proportional to the mole-fraction of RNA of each length, the intensity is therefore a direct measure of the relative drug occupancy at that site.
This proportionality holds strictly only at low levels of total occupancy because at high levels of blockage less of the RNA polymerase probe is able to reach the more downstream sites.
For this reason, the band intensity should be considered as a good approximation of relative occupancy as long as the accumulative mole fraction of blocked transcripts is less than approximately 50%, otherwise sites further downstream are underestimated (10).
Quantitation of relative blockages is therefore completely valid for compounds 7 (Fig. 2), 4–6 (Fig. 3), 3, 5 and 6 (Fig 4) but leads to progressive underestimation of downstream sites for compounds 1–3 (Fig. 3) and 1, 2 and 4 (Fig. 4).
The single highest affinity, isolated, intrastrand blockage sites for cisplatin are immediately prior to 5'-CC (nontemplate strand) and are at 43 of UV5 and 54 and 108 of N25 (Fig. 5).
Although the flanking sequence common to two of these sites is 5'-CCAT, there are insufficient isolated sites with this motif to establish the significance of this sequence.
Only six 5'-AG sequences were present in the sequence probed, and all six exhibited significant transcriptional blockages at (or one nucleotide prior to) G of 5'-AG sites of the template strand (blockages at 37, 60, 93 and 97 from UV5, and 103 and 110 from N25).
For the purpose of a quantitative comparison of relative occupancy at different sites, only those binding sites which are clearly isolated from neighbouring sites were utilised.
By this means, the relative occupancy of the blockage at 42 (prior to 5'-GG of the template strand of UV5) compared to the blockage at 60/61 (i.e., the total blockage prior to 5'-AG of the template strand of UV5) is 2.9:1, consistent with the ratio of 2.6:1 reported previously for GG compared to AG intrastrand crosslinking (19).
Modulation of transcription by tethered complexes
Several major points are evident in comparison of the tethered complexes with the simple platinum compounds.
The first was an increase of the length of the blocked transcript by one and two nucleotides for many of the blockages exhibited by derivatives 2, 3 and 6 (eg. 44 and 45 for the UV5 derived transcripts) accompanied by a time-dependent extension to the longer transcript over 5–15 min.
Since there is no net escape of RNA polymerase past the identifiable platination site, the most likely explanation of this effect is that the intercalator perturbs the geometry of the coordination complex sufficiently to enable the catalytic site of the RNA polymerase to move slowly an additional one or two bp along the DNA.
This suggests that the overall effect of the intercalator is to alter the stereochemistry of the intrastrand coordination crosslink to permit the RNA polymerase to track more freely in the major groove for an additional one or two bp prior to some part of the polymerase being terminally blocked.
In the second instance, in spite of the presence of the intercalating chromophore and linker chain, both of which lead to an increase in binding site size, the blockages induced by the tethered complexes are broadly similar to those caused by cisplatin, 7, PtenCl 2 , 1, and PtpropCl 2 , 4 as most high intensity blockages occurred at runs of two or more G's on the template strand.
The presence of the intercalator has also caused a larger number of blockages compared with the more discrete damage caused by the simple complexes.
This reduction in the selectivity of platination can be ascribed to the presence of the highly DNA-affinic acridine chromophore which enhances overall levels of background binding on the DNA helix.
Studies with the related complexes 9 and 10 reveal a similar pattern of behaviour (8).
The behaviour of the platinum complexes stands in contrast to DNA-targeting of alkylating groups by intercalating chromophores.
The normal preference for alkylation at runs of G's is significantly modified in acridine-tethered aniline mustards (20) and phenanthridinium alkyl bromides (21) where greatly enhanced reaction occurs at isolated guanines located in 5'-GT sequences.
Differences also emerge between the two sets of acridine-tethered complexes.
If the presence of a blockage from both directions at 5'-GC (37 of UV5) can be ascribed to an interstrand crosslink, then the absence of a dual blockage with both 2 and 3, which is present for 5 and 6 suggests that the complexes derived from PtpropCl 2 , 4, have much greater crosslinking efficiency than their ethylenediamine counterparts.
CONCLUSIONS
Bidirectional transcription footprinting has revealed that the DNA sequence selectivity of platinum diamine complexes is modulated by a pendant intercalating acridine group.
The apparent decrease of interstrand crosslinking when the intercalator is tethered to the amino moiety of cisplatin offers the prospect of a new series of derivatives with constant potential for platination, but varying hydrophilicity and varying capacity to induce interstrand crosslinking.
Figure 1 .
Structures of cisplatin and derivatives referred to in this work.
Figure 2 .
Bidirectional footprinting of cisplatin (7).
100 µM bp of the 315 bp fragment (restriction digested to inactivate one of the two counter-directed promoters) CT01 was incubated in the absence () or presence of 7 for 18 hours.
Transcription of treated DNA was initiated from the UV5 (panel A) and N25 (panel B) promotersCT01 and subsequently elongated for 1,5 and 15 min.
‘INIT’ lanes show initiation products prior to elongation while C and G represent sequencing lanes obtained using 3-O-methyl CTP and 3-O-methyl GTP respectively.
The length of transcript relative to the -1 site of transcription is indicated at the side of each autoradiogram.
Figure 3 .
UV5 transcription detection of platinum derivatives.
The autoradiogram shows transcriptional blockages detected by RNA polymerase, initiated from the UV5 promoter of DNA previously treated with 20 µM 1 and 4 and 50 µM 2, 3, 5 and 6.
Figure 4 .
N25 transcription detection of platinum derivatives.
The autoradiogram shows transcriptional blockages detected by RNA polymerase initiated from the N25 promoter of DNA previously treated with 20 µM 1 and 4 and 50 µM 2, 3, 5 and 6.
Figure 5 .
Quantitation of platinum-induced blocked transcripts.
The mole-fraction of blocked transcript from each promoter was quantitated by densitometry and is shown with respect to the sequence and transcript length of the non-template strand.
Pleiotrophic effects of point mutations in yeast tRNA Asp on the base modification pattern
ABSTRACT
The base-modification pattern has been studied in several synthetic variants of yeast tRNA Asp injected into Xenopus laevis oocytes.
Certain point mutations in the D-stem and the variable loop of the tRNA led to considerably decreased levels of m 1 G37, Ψ40 and Q34/manQ34 in the anticodon stem or loop and an increased rate of synthesis for m 5 C49 in the T-stem.
The formation of m 2 G6 in the aminoacyl-stem was not affected in any of the tRNA-variants.
Thus, mutations in one part of the tRNA-molecule can have long-range effects on the interactions between another part of the tRNA and the tRNA modifying enzymes.
INTRODUCTION
The presence of modified nucleosides is one of the most distinctive structural features of tRNA molecules.
The formation of base modifications is a post-transcriptional event, and thus a part of the maturation of the precursor tRNAs.
More than 75 modified nucleosides have been isolated (1).
The structure of most of them is known (2) and their biological functions are now successively being revealed (3).
The interactions between modifying enzymes and tRNAs have not yet been characterized as extensively as those between tRNA and aminoacyl-tRNA-synthetases (4).
One reason for this lack of information is that it has been difficult to obtain pure enzymes that are sufficiently active under in vitro conditions.
Moreover, the enzymatic cofactors that need to be added in vitro are in many cases not known and tRNA-substrates that specifically lack the nucleoside modification of interest are scarce (5–8).
One way to circumvent these problems is to microinject synthetic or semi-synthetic tRNAs into Xenopus laevis oocytes (9, 10), a system that is inherently optimized for all kinds of tRNA modifications, also those requiring cofactors.
Due to its efficiency this in vivo test system has been widely used, e.g. to clarify the step-wise maturation of the transcription product from an injected yeast tRNA gene (11).
It was also used to show the effects of anticodon point mutations on the potential of the nucleotides at position 34 and 37 in the anticodon loop of yeast tRNAs to be modified.
These experiments resulted in that some modification enzymes (12–15) were suggested to have identity elements in close vicinity of the position to be modified, while others (15–17) are less sensitive to the neighbouring nucleotide sequences and recognize identity elements distal from the site of the modification.
However, since the anticodon point mutations used in these cases were not affecting the three-dimensional structure of the tRNA-molecule nothing could then be said if the tRNA conformation was important to the recognition by the anticodon modifying enzymes.
The completeness of the oocyte test system led us to utilize this system when we started our studies on the requirements for formation of N 2 , N 2 -dimethylguanosine in position 26 (m 2 G26) in yeast tRNAs.
Completely unmodified tRNA Asp , chosen as model tRNA because its 3D-structure is very well characterized (18, 19), was microinjected into X.laevis oocytes.
By this method we demonstrated that specific sequences neighbouring position 26 and also certain structural parameters in the tRNA were needed for efficient enzymatic formation of m 2 2G26 (20).
The long-range effects of mutations in the variable loop we then found for the synthesis of m 2 2G26 prompted us to investigate if also the formation of modifications in the anticodon loop were sensitive to point mutations situated far away in the tRNA.
Indeed, the data presented here show that the formation of many tRNA-modifications were altered when certain mutations were introduced into the tRNA at a distance from the site of the modification.
Mutations in the D-stem and/or the variable loop in tRNA Asp caused drastically decreased levels of m 1 G37, Q34, manQ34 and Ψ40 in the anticodon loop/stem, while the m 2 2G6 formation was unaffected and the rate of m 5 C49-formation was enhanced.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Bacteria used for plasmid propagation, plasmids (pTFMa, pTFMa200, pTFMa204, pTFMa207, pTFMa209, pTFMa210, pTFMa214 and pTFMa215) carrying variants of synthetic yeast tRNA Asp -genes (a, a200, a204, a207, a209, a210, a214, a215) and the preparation of 32 P-G labelled tRNA transcripts with T7 RNA polymerase have been previously described (20).
In all the tRNA Asp variants used in this study the basepair U1-A72 has been exchanged for G1-C72 as U1 is known to be an unfavourable start for the T7 RNA polymerase (21).
This change does not influence the cognate aminoacylation (21).
Furthermore, all normally occurring modifications in yeast tRNA Asp were found in almost stochiometric amounts after injection of the wt-like tRNA Asp a into X.laevis oocytes (Table 1).
The exchange of U1-A72 for G1-C72 is therefore not considered to disturb the global structure of the tRNA or the interactions between the tRNA and the tRNA modifying enzymes.
The 32 P-G labelled tRNA Asp variants were microinjected into the cytoplasm of X.laevis oocytes (10, 20).
Modification of tRNAs normally occur in the nucleus on pre-tRNAs that are trimmed before passage out to the cytoplasm (11).
We injected synthetic, completely unmodified, mature sized tRNA molecules into the cytoplasm, since it has been shown that all the different modifying activities are present also in the cytoplasm (10).
Although pre-tRNAs are the biologically normal substrate for modifications in the cell, endtrimmed unmodified tRNAs are known to function equally well and sometimes better than pre-tRNAs as substrates in modification reactions (22).
After incubation in the X.laevis oocytes for 3–48 hours the radiolabelled tRNA was reisolated, hydrolyzed completely with P1 nuclease or RNase T2 and the presence of modified nucleotides were analysed by 2D-TLC (10, 20).
Complete hydrolysis with P1 nuclease degrades the tRNA into 5'-nucleotides, while RNase T2 degrades it into 3'-nucleotides.
Thus, degradation of the 32 P-G labelled tRNA with P1 yields information of all G-modifications, and degradation with T2 gives information about the modifications 5'-adjacent to all Gs in yeast tRNA Asp (cf.
Fig. 1).
RESULTS
Mutations in the D-stem and variable loop in tRNA Asp affect the formation of m 1 G37 in the anticodon loop
Earlier results demonstrated that the enzymatic formation of m 1 G at position 37 in the anticodon loop of yeast tRNA microinjected into X.laevis oocytes was rather insensitive to changes in the anticodon sequence (15).
The present work show that mutations at other sites but the anticodon loop had more variable effects on the m 1 G37 formation (Fig. 2A and Table 1).
Conversion of G10-U25 and U11-A24 to G-C basepairs (mutants a200, a207) hardly affected the final level of m 1 G37.
However, the rate of m 1 G-formation was faster in the tRNA with two G-C basepairs in the D-stem (a207), suggesting that strong basepairing in the D-stem would favour m 1 G-formation in the anticodon loop.
The formation of m 1 G37 was completely abolished when an A10-U25 Watson-Crick base pair was created by substituting G10 for A10 (a204).
The increase of the variable loop to 5 bases by insertion of a U at position 47 (a210 and a214) drastically lowered the levels of m 1 G37 although the modification still could be detected, while no m 1 G37 was formed when a C47 was inserted (a209 and a215).
The exchange of G34 for Q34/mannosyl Q34 is also sensitive to changes in the D-stem and the variable loop
In most eubacteria and eukaryotes, except in yeast, queuosine (Q) is present at position 34 of the anticodons in tRNA Asp , tRNA Asn , tRNA His and tRNA Tyr (23).
This tRNA-modification occurs via an enzymatic exchange of guanine for queuine (24).
In tRNA Tyr and tRNA Asp from some eukaryotes, including Xenopus laevis oocytes, Q34 is further hypermodified to a glycosylated derivative, either galactosylQ (galQ) or mannosylQ (manQ).
When yeast tRNA Asp is microinjected into X.laevis oocytes manQ34 is formed (12).
The sequence U33-G34-U35 has been shown to be one main determinant for Q34-formation (12), while the nucleosides 36, 37 and 38 mainly affect the mannosylation step (13).
Fig. 2B and Table 1 show that the formation of manQ34 via Q34 was very efficient in wild-type like tRNA Asp (mutant a), as well as in mutants a200, a207 and a210.
The substitution of G10 to A10 (a204) completely abolished the formation of Q34 and the same was observed for the insertion of C47 in the variable loop (a209 and a215).
U40 is modified into Ψ40 when yeast tRNA Asp is micro-injected into X.laevis oocytes
In tRNA Asp from yeast and X.laevis pseudouridine (Ψ) is formed at positions 13, 32 and 55 (23).
These sites are not labelled in the experimental system we have used here.
However, when yeast tRNA Asp was microinjected into X.laevis oocytes an additional Y  occurred at position 40 (Fig. 1).
Ψ40 was formed at relatively low levels when the wt-like tRNA Asp (mutant a) was used as substrate (Fig. 2C and Table I).
Interestingly, base substitutions made to obtain two G-C basepairs at positions 10–25 and 11–24 in the D-stem (a207) increased the yield of Ψ40 with more than 3 times compared to the situation in wt-like tRNA Asp (mutant a).
As the introduction of the two G-C base pairs in the D-stem of mutant a207 is required for the synthesis of m 2 2G26 (20), it is tempting to speculate that m 2 2G26-formation might be a prerequisite for efficient formation of Ψ40.
This suggestion is supported by the fact that the Ψ40-synthesis in mutant a207 was delayed by about 24 hours (Fig. 2C), a time required for almost complete modification of G26 to m 2 2G26.
Synthesis of m 2 G6 is insensitive to all tested point mutations in tRNA Asp 
In eukaryotic tRNAs m 2 G is often found in positions 6, 10 and 26, except for in yeast tRNAs where m 2 G6 is never formed.
In rat liver (25) and yeast (26) different enzymes catalyse the formation of this modification at position 10 and 26.
In yeast, tRNA Asp lacks m 2 G at all these sites, but when yeast tRNA Asp is injected into X.laevis oocytes, G6 and G26 became modified to m 2 G. Although G10 was not modified in microinjected wt-like tRNA Asp (mutant a), an m 2 G10-site seems to have been created in some of the other tRNA variants (20).
From our results, it is clear that none of the mutations introduced in the different tRNA Asp variants considerably affected the synthesis of m 2 G at positions in the aminoacyl-stem and D-stem (Table 1).
On the other hand, modifications of G26 (Table 1 and (20)) were drastically reduced when an extra base was inserted in the variable loop (a209, a210, a214, a215) or when G10 was exchanged for A10 (a204).
Thus, the tRNA (m 2 G6)-and the tRNA (m 2 G26) methyltransferases clearly have different structural requirements as shown by the difference in sensitivity to the mutations in tRNA Asp .
The rate of m 5 C-formation is stimulated in some tRNA Asp variants
The only two putative m 5 C sites in yeast tRNA Asp that are followed by a G are positions 38 and 49 (Fig. 1).
However, the kinetics of m 5 C-formation (Fig. 2D), as well as the fact that only 1 mole of m 5 C was formed per mole of tRNA favour that only one of the two putative sites in yeast tRNA Asp becomes modified in X.laevis oocytes.
In yeast, tRNA Asp contains only m 5 C49, while C38 is unmodified.
Furthermore, in 79% of the eukaryotic tRNA species having C49 this base is modified to m 5 C, while only 27% of the C38 containing tRNAs have m 5 C38 (23).
Thus, it is reasonable to suggest that C49 was the only m 5 C-site which was labelled in our experiments.
All the tested tRNA Asp variants gave relatively high levels of m 5 C (Table 1).
It is obvious that all point mutations affecting the D-stem or the size of the extra arm did not cause any discriminatory effects on the identity elements for the tRNA (m 5 C49) methyltransferase.
Furthermore, the rate of formation of this modification was significantly faster (Fig. 2D; a209, a210, a214 and a215) in mutants with five bases in the variable loop.
DISCUSSION
The results presented in this paper on the formation of base modifications in yeast tRNA Asp variants microinjected into X.laevis oocytes are summarized in Fig. 3.
Clearly point mutations in the D-stem and/or the variable loop have long-range effects on the potential of the tRNA to function as a substrate for various modifying enzymes.
The synthesis of modifications in the anticodon stem and loop were shown to be the most sensitive ones.
We conclude that the obtained variations in the base modification pattern in the different tRNA variants are due to changes in the normal 3D-structure of tRNA Asp caused by the introduced mutations.
Indeed, substitution of G10 to A10 in yeast tRNA Asp (mutant a204) has been demonstrated to change the conformation of the tRNA (27) probably by disturbing the interaction between position 10 in the D-stem and position 45 in the variable loop (19).
Other bases in the variable loop of tRNA Asp are also involved in tertiary interactions, such as A46 hydrogen bonded to G22 in the D-stem and U48 hydrogen bonded to A15 in the D-loop of the tRNA (19).
As a consequence, insertion of an extra base between A46 and U48 in tRNA Asp (mutants a209, a210, a214 and a215) affects the structure of the tRNA (28), either by changing the distance between the interacting bases or by forming new interactions.
Our results demonstrate the importance of an intact tRNA-structure for its recognition by the tRNA modifying enzymes tRNA (m 1 G37) methyltransferase, Q34insertase, tRNA(Ψ40)-pseudouridylate synthase and tRNA (m 2 G26/m 2 2G26) methyltransferase(s).
These data are in line with the recent findings on two other enzymes acting in the anticodon loop, namely tRNA (m 1 G37) methyltransferase (5) from E.coli and tRNA(Ψ35)pseudouridylate synthase from wheat germ (6) where both of them require that the tRNA-substrates have an intact 3D-structure.
The presented data on methylation of G6 and C49 imply that determinants in the tRNA-structure of importance for the methylation of these positions were unaffected or that the corresponding tRNA-modification enzymes, tRNA (m 2 G6)-and tRNA (m 5 C49) methyltransferases, are less sensitive to changes in the 3D-structure of the tRNA.
This last suggestion is in agreement with earlier results demonstrating that cadaverine, a polyamine that destabilizes the tertiary structure of the tRNA in the presence of  magnesium ions, also stimulates the enzymatic formation of m 5 C49 in E.coli tRNA fMet incubated in rat liver extracts (29).
Fragments of tRNA, that evidently have lost their intact tertiary tRNA-structure, may also function as substrates for some modifying enzymes, as shown for tRNA (m 5 U54) methyltransferase from E.coli (7) and tRNA(Gm18)methyltransferase from Thermus thermophilus (8).
Thus, the different tRNA-modification enzymes vary considerably in their sensitivity to perturbations of the tertiary structure of their tRNA substrates.
Obviously not only the sequence neighbouring the position for a modification but also other determinants in the tRNA influence the interactions between the tRNAs and most tRNA-modifying enzymes.
A more systematic investigation on the structural determinants for different tRNA modifying enzymes is now in progress by using several other tRNA variants with mutations causing well characterized changes of the tertiary structures.
In this study we have taken advantage of using a complete modification system, the X.laevis oocyte, being aware of the fact that yeast tRNA in this heterologous system will get a modification pattern that reflects the properties of the X.laevis modification enzymes.
The conclusions drawn on the sensitivity of the enzymes towards different structural changes in the tRNA is presumably valid also in the homologous situation and opens the possibility for more specific tests in yeast, for which no complete system yet is available.
The data presented here also imply that before any conclusions are drawn on biological effects obtained through point mutations in tRNAs, it should be investigated if the base-modification pattern was altered and if such alterations might have been the primary cause of the biological observed effect.
Figure 1.
Clover-leaf structure of in vitro transcribed yeast tRNA Asp (mutant a).
The numbering of bases are according to(23).
Modified nucleotides analysed in our experiments are indicated by arrows.
In all tested tRNA Asp variants the wt U1-A72 base pair is exchanged for G1-C72 (bold face).
Figure 2.
Kinetics of the formation of m 1 G37 (A), Q34 and manQ34 (B), Y40 (C)and m 5 C (D)in several tRNA Asp -variants when injected into X.laevis oocytes.
The previously published (20) kinetics of m 2 2G26 formation in tRNA Asp a207 (C) is included for comparison.
Zebrafish pou [c]: a divergent POU family gene ubiquitously expressed during embryogenesis
+ Present address: ICRF, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OXI 3PS, UK
ABSTRACT
We report the isolation and characterization of cDNA for a novel zebrafish (Brachyodanio rerio ) POU domain gene,pou [c], which is ubiquitously expressed during embryonic development.
This gene encodes a 610 amino acids long protein with a 149 amino acid POU domain ending only 8 residues before the C terminus.
The 453 amino acids long region N-terminal to the POU domain contains several features typical of transcriptional activation domains such as an acidic region with a putative amphipathic alpha-helix, a glutamine-rich region, and short threonine- and/or serine-rich regions.
Comparison of the POU domain of pou[c] to other known POU sequences clearly show that pou[c] has the most divergent POU domain sequence reported to date.
Thus, we suggest that pou[c] should be placed as the presently sole member of a new, sixth class of POU proteins.
DNA-binding studies revealed that pou[c] is not an octamer-binding transcription factor like the Oct proteins described from mammals, chicken and Xenopus .
Rather, pou[c] binds with high affinity to the TAATGARAT motif found in the promoters of the herpes simplex virus immediate early genes and to degenerate octamer-TAATGA motifs.
Circular permutation analyses also show that pou[c] induces DNA bending upon sequence-specific binding.
INTRODUCTION
The highly conserved 150–160 amino acids long POU domain was originally discovered following the cloning of the three mammalian transcription factors Pit-1, Oct-2 and Oct-1 (1–7) and the Caenorhabditis elegans developmental regulator Unc-86 (8).
Since then, a number of genes belonging to the POU family have been described in mammals (reviewed in 9), chicken (10),Xenopus (11–13),C.elegans (14) and Drosophila (15–18).
The POU domain contains two highly conserved motifs: the POU-specific (POU S ) domain and the POU homeo domain (POU HD ) separated by a poorly conserved linker region.
The POU S domain is unique to the POU protein family while the POU HD is distantly related to the classic homeo domain.
Based on sequence homology throughout the POU domain including the linker region, POU domain proteins have been grouped into five different classes (9,19).
In a variety of homeo domain-containing proteins the homeo domain is necessary and sufficient for specific DNA-binding (5,20–22).
In contrast, the POU domain is a bipartite DNA-binding motif.
The POU HD alone is capable of low-affinity binding with relaxed specificity.
The POU S alone is unable to bind DNA but in context with the POU HD it makes contact with DNA and is necessary for high-affinity, specific binding (23–28).
Many of the POU domain proteins bind to the octamer motif ATGCAAAT (hence the designation Oct) found in the promoters and enhancers of immunoglobulin heavy and light chain genes, histone H2B and small nuclear RNA genes (29–31).
However, POU domain proteins have also been found to bind to sequences clearly different from the octamer motif (28,32–34).
Hence, Oct-1, Oct-2, Pit-1 and Tst-1 (SCIP/Oct-6) can also bind to the TAATGARAT (R= purine) motif necessary for stimulation of transcription of herpes simplex virus (HSV) immediate early genes.
All POU domain proteins are thought to function as transcription factors.
Some have been shown to act as activators others as repressors of specific genes (2,5,35–38).
The multifunctional POU domain is capable of protein-protein interactions, both with POU proteins (homo- and heterodimer formation) and with other transcription factors (16,23,24,39–42).
There is also evidence for involvement of POU family proteins in DNA replication.
For example, both Oct-1 and Oct-2 stimulate initiation of adenovirus DNA replication in vitro via the POU domain (27,43).
Also, Verrijzer et al .
(44) have recently shown that Oct-1, Oct2A, Oct-6 and Pit-1 induce DNA bending upon binding to the octamer motif.
In mammals, several members of the POU gene family including pit-1 ,oct-2 ,brn-1 ,brn-2 ,tst-1 ,brn-3 and oct-6 (1–3,5,6,35,45) are expressed widely in the developing central nervous system (CNS) and in some cases in a limited number of other organs.
They also show distinct patterns of expression in the adult mammalian brain (35).
In the case of Pit-1, an involvement in specifying a pituitary phenotype by activating the transcription of prolactin and growth hormone genes has been demonstrated (2,46) whereas Oct-2 is capable of activating lymphoid specific promoters (5,6).
Oct-3/4 is expressed in primordial germ cells, unfertilized oocytes and in the inner cell mass and may play a role in early developmental decisions (47).
In contrast, Oct-1 is believed to be ubiquitously expressed (7).
In C.elegans ,unc-86 is expressed in a number of distinct neuroblasts and neurons shortly after neuroblast divisions, and although no clear correlation to neural functions can be made, a direct coupling to cell lineage has been shown (48).
In Drosophila the spatial expression of dpou-19 ,(pdm-2 ),dpou-28 (pdm-1 ), and cfla is predominantly confined to restricted areas at the cellular blastoderm stage and, later in development, to the embryonic nervous system and the hindgut (17,18).
In this paper we report for the first time the isolation of cDNA for a zebrafish POU family gene which is ubiquitously expressed during embryogenesis.
The POU domain of this protein is unusually divergent in its sequence suggesting that it belongs to a novel class of POU family proteins.
This protein binds very poorly to the canonical octamer sequence but binds with high affinity to the TAATGARAT motif and degenerate octamer-TAATGA motifs and also induces DNA bending upon binding to these motifs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cloning and sequencing
A cDNA clone encoding pou[c] was isolated by screening of approximately 1.5 10 6 plaques of a 33 h zebrafish embryonic lambda gt11 cDNA library (provided by K.Zinn) by plaque hybridization at low stringency (49) using a 380 bp Hind III fragment from the salmon pit-1 POU domain (provided by R.Aasland) as a probe.
The cDNA insert was subcloned into the EcoRI site of pGEM-3Zf(+) (Promega Biotec) yielding pcZF20.
Following restriction mapping and subcloning in M13mp18 and -19 both strands of overlapping fragments from the cDNA insert were sequenced using Sequenase (U.S. Biochemicals).
Subcloning of specific restriction fragments were performed as described by Johansen (50).
DNA sequences and derived amino acid sequences were analyzed on a DEC/UNIX computer using the GCG software package (version 7.1; 51).
Construction and purification of a GST-pou[c] fusion protein
To construct a fusion between glutathione S-transferase (GST) and pou[c] a 1110 bp StuI- Xmn I fragment (nucleotide positions 1317–2427 in Fig. 1A) from pcZF20 encoding the C-terminal 267 amino acids of pou[c] was inserted into the Sma I site of pGEX-2T (52) yielding pZEX20.
The GST-pou[c] fusion protein was purified from 100 ml culture of E.coli MV1190 harbouring pZEX20 essentially as described by Smith and Johnson (52).
The  integrity and purity of the 55 kD fusion protein was assessed by sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by both coomassie blue and  silver-staining .
The purified fusion protein was adjusted to 0.4 µg/µl and stored in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM PMSF, 0.05% Tween 20 and 20% glycerol at -20°C.
Gel mobility shift assays (GMSA)
DNA binding reactions were performed at room temperature in a 20 µl reaction mixture containing 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM N -2-hydroxyethylpiperazine- N' -ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) -KOH (pH 7.5), 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.025% Nonidet P-40, 4% Ficoll, 5 ng/µl poly(dI-dC), 100 ng/µl bovine serum albumin, 1–2 µl of 1:20 diluted fusion protein (see above) and 0.25 ng of labelled binding-site probe (10.000–20.000 cpm).
Following a 20 min incubation at room temperature, protein-DNA complexes and free DNA were resolved by electrophoresis for 2.5 h (200–250 V, 30–35 mA) on polyacrylamide gels run in 1 Tris-borate-EDTA (53) at 10°C.
Gels were prerun for 2 h before application of samples.
After the run, the gel was dried and exposed to Cronex-4 (DuPont) x-ray film.
For the oligonucleotide binding-site probes 5% gels (29:1 w/w acrylamide/ N, N' -methylene-bisacrylamide) were used while 4% gels (39:1 w/w acrylamide/ N, N' -methylene-bisacrylamide) were used for the circularly permutated 143 bp restriction fragments.
Oligonucleotides and restriction fragments used as binding-site probes were end labelled using polynuleotide kinase and [γ- 32 P]ATP (53).
For the DNA bending assays 143 bp fragments were generated from the circular permutation vectors pICP4Bend and pAd2Bend (44) by digestion with the appropriate restriction enzymes (Fig. 5A), dephosphorylated with calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (50) and purified following agarose gel electrophoresis in 0.7% gels using Geneclean (Bio 101, La Jolla, Ca.).
The plasmids pICP4Bend and pAd2Bend and the double-stranded oligonucleotides ICP4, Ad2 and Ad4 were obtained from C.P.Verrijzer and P.C.van der Vliet (44).
The double-stranded oligonucleotides A, B, C, D and M were obtained from C.Dent and D.Latchman (34).
Northern blot and in situ hybridization analyses
Isolation of total RNA, purification of poly (A)+ RNA from zebrafish embryos at different developmental stages, gel electrophoresis and Northern blot analysis were carried out as described previously (54).
In situ hybridizations on tissue sections of zebrafish embryos after 6-, 12-, 24- and 36 hours of development were performed exactly as previously described (54) using both the entire cDNA insert and a 994 bp Eco RI- Sal I from the 3' untranslated sequence of pou [c]as probes.
RESULTS
Structure of the pou[c] cDNA and the derived protein sequence
As part of a study aimed at elucidating the function of POU domain genes in embryonic development a cDNA clone containing the entire coding region of pou[c] was isolated by low-stringency plaque hybridization of a cDNA library derived from 33h zebrafish embryos using a 380 bp Hind III fragment spanning the salmon pit-1 POU domain (R.Aasland, unpublished) as a probe.
The complete nucleotide sequence and the derived amino acid sequence of the pou[c] cDNA are shown in Fig. 1A.
The cDNA clone is 3056 bp long and contains an open reading frame (ORF) encoding a putative protein of 610 amino acids with a theoretical molecular weight of 63123 daltons.
The ORF, starting at nucleotide 289 and ending with an UAG stop codon at position 2119, contains the POU domain.
The putative start codon has only one mismatch (a T at position -2) to the Kozak core consensus (PuCCAUGG) for efficient translational initiation sites (55,56) and is  preceded by a 288 nucleotide long 5' untranslated leader sequence containing two in frame stop codons.
The 3' untranslated trailer sequence is 937 nucleotides long and no poly A tail is present indicating internal priming during cDNA synthesis.
However, Northern blot analysis (Fig. 2) show a transcript of about 3.2 kb suggesting that the cDNA clone is close to full length, probably missing only part of the 3' untranslated sequence and the poly A tail.
The 69 amino acids POU-specific domain (POU S ) is located at positions 454 to 522 in the derived protein sequence and is separated from the 60 amino acids POU homeo domain (POU HD )(positions 542 to 600, defined according to Laughton (22)) by a 20 amino acids linker sequence.
Interestingly, the C terminus of the protein is located only 8 amino acids downstream of the end of the POU HD .
The homeo domain is therefore located closer to the C terminus than in any other known POU protein.
The 453 amino acids N-terminal portion upstream of the POU domain show no extensive regions of significant homology neither to other POU family proteins nor to any other protein sequences present in the Swissprot (version 21) or NBRF (version 31) databases.
TFASTA searches (57) of GenBank and EMBL databases (Release 71 and 30, respectively) also failed to reveal any similar sequences.
As indicated in Fig. 1B, there is an acidic stretch of 82 amino acids extending from the N terminus (21% aspartate and glutamate residues; theoretical isoelectric point of 3.4).
At position 62 there is also a very good candidate casein kinase II  phosphorylation site (58).
If this site is phosphorylated the N terminal region would become even more acidic.
An amphipathic alpha helix with one hydrophobic and one acidic face is also predicted between positions 40 and 57 by both Garnier-Robson and Chou-Fasman structure prediction algorithms.
The 453 amino acids region upstream of the POU domain is relatively alanine-rich (15%) with short stretches of local overrepresentation of threonine and/or serine residues.
Altogether, alanine, serine and threonine constitute 35% of the amino acid residues in this part of the protein.
Also, there is a 14 amino acids long putative alpha helical region at positions 328 to 341 containing 8 alanine residues, 6 of which would be located on one side of the putative alpha helix.
A glutamine-rich stretch (10 out of 26 residues) is found from position 214 to 239.
Surprisingly, the complete protein sequence is completely devoid of histidine residues and the aromatic amino acids tryptophan and tyrosine are only found in the POU domain.
The POU S contains a putative protein kinase C phosphorylation site whereas the POU HD contains putative phosphorylation sites for both protein kinase C and -A (see Fig. 1A and B).
The N terminus of the POU HD contains five contiguous basic residues, which together with one upstream basic residue, probably forms a nuclear localization signal (59,60).
Zebrafish pou[c] defines a new class of POU family proteins
In Fig. 3 the POU domain of pou[c] is compared to representative members of the five known classes of POU domain proteins.
Adopting the arbitrary assignment of the N-terminal end of the POU domain introduced by Rosenfeld (9), the conserved POU S domain is 69 amino acids long except for class IV which contains a three amino acids insertion between the A and B subdomains.
The variable linker region is 15 (Pit-1) to 30 amino acids long (Dpou28), while the POU HD , as defined by Laughton (22), is 60 amino acids long except for the inhibitory POU protein I-pou from Drosophila which is unable to bind DNA due to a deletion of amino acids 2 and 3 in the basic N-termins of the POU HD (16).
In the POU S domain, 18 amino acids are absolutely conserved while 16 amino acids in the POU HD are absolutely conserved.
It is evident from the sequence alignments displayed in Fig. 3A and the dendrogram shown in Fig. 3B that pou[c] contains a novel, unusually divergent POU domain.
Pairwise alignment analyses show that the POU domain of pou[c] displays 39% (to Unc-86) to 49% (to Pit-1) amino acid sequence identity to members of the five established classes of POU proteins.
By comparison, Pit-1, the sole member of class I, shows 48% (to Unc-86) to 63% (to Brn-1) amino acid sequence identity to the other POU domains aligned in Fig. 3A.
For Unc-86, a class IV member from the nematode C.elegans , the range is from 39% (to pou[c]) to 74% (I-pou).
It is noteworthy that pou[c] is the only sequence differing at four positions in the POU S domain (Oct-3/4 differs in two and Pit-1, Oct-60 and Oct-91 differ in one position) and two positions in POU HD which are absolutely conserved in all the other POU proteins.
Furthermore, no other sequence besides pou[c] contains as much as 21 and 14 unique residues in the POU S and POU HD , respectively.
On the basis of the unusual sequence divergence displayed by pou[c] throughout the POU domain, we suggest that pou[c] should be placed as the sole member of a new, sixth class of POU family proteins (see Fig. 3).
Pou[c] binds with high affinity to degenerate octamer-TAATGA motifs and the TAATGARAT motif but with very low affinity to the canonical octamer motif
To characterize the DNA-binding specificity of the divergent pou[c] protein we expressed pou[c] cDNA in E.coli as a fusion to glutathione S-transferase (GST) and performed gel mobility shift assays (GMSA) with the affinity purified fusion protein (52).
The fusion protein contains the entire POU domain and 110 amino acids N-terminal to the POU domain (see MATERIALS AND METHODS).
Analysis by sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) revealed the expected 55 kD GST-pou[c] fusion protein (data not shown).
For GMSA we used a set of double stranded oligonucleotides (see Fig. 4A) containing the canonical octamer motif found in e.g. the adenovirus 4 origin of replication, the human histone H2B promoter, and the immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer (oligonucleotides Ad4 and D), the degenerate octamer-TAATGAR motif from the Ad2 origin of replication (oligonucleotide Ad2), the TAATGARAT motif from the HSV immediate early gene ICP4 (oligonucleotides ICP4 and B), the degenerate octamer-TAATGATAT motif found upstream of the HSV ICP0 gene (oligonucleotide C) and a motif differing by a change from T to G converting the HSV ICP0 site to a perfect TAATGARAT motif (oligonucleotide A).
Finally, a mutant octamer oligonucleotide which does not bind Oct-1 or Oct-2 was used (oligonucleotide M).
These oligonucleotides have all previously been used by others in GMSA of POU domain proteins (27,34).
The results of GMSA performed to monitor the DNA-binding specificity of the GST-pou[c] fusion protein are shown in Fig. 4B and C. Control experiments showed no binding of the GST protein alone to the oligonucleotides used.
Also, sequence-specific cleavage with thrombin between the GST and pou[c] portions of the fusion protein showed that only the pou[c] proteolytic fragment was capable of sequence-specific DNA binding.
Furthermore, the proteolytic pou[c] fragment showed the same binding characteristics as the complete GST-pou[c] fusion protein (data not shown).
It is evident from the results shown in lanes 1–3 in Fig. 4B that pou[c] binds with high affinity to the HSV ICP4 TAATGARAT and the Ad2 degenerate octamer-TAATGAR motifs whereas binding to the canonical octamer sequence (Ad4) was barely detectable even after overexposure of the GMSA signals.
The binding to the ICP4 and Ad2 sequences were quantitatively competed using increasing amounts of homologous unlabelled oligonucleotides (lanes 4–8).
From Fig. 4C it can also be seen that pou[c] binds to the oligonucleotides A, B and C which all contain the motif TAATGAG/TAT, but no binding to the octamer oligonucleotide D and the mutant octamer oligonucleotide M is seen (lanes 11–15).
Cross-competition experiments using a 50-fold molar excess of the oligonucleotides A, B, C and D revealed that A, B and C compete very well with the ICP4 and Ad2 sequences while the consensus octamer sequence of oligonucleotide D does not compete at all(Fig. 4C, lanes 1–10).
Oligonucleotide B contains the ICP4 core sequence and is therefore expected to compete well with the longer ICP4 oligonucleotide.
The degenerate octamer-TAATGANAT oligonucleotides A and C differ only at position 11 (see Fig. 4A) and compete equally well for binding to the labelled ICP4 sequence as the completely homologous TAATGARAT sequence B. The Ad2 degenerate octamer-TAATGAR motif oligonucleotide A, which contains the first four bases of the octamer fused to a perfect TAATGARAT motif, seems to be a stronger competitor than oligonucleotides B and C. In summary, the results displayed in Fig. 4B and C clearly show that the POU domain of pou[c] binds with high affinity to the TAATGARAT and degenerate octamer-TAATGAR motifs and with very low affinity (only detectable after overexposure of GMSA signals) to the canonical octamer motif.
Thus, pou[c] is not an octamer-binding transcription factors like the previously described Oct proteins.
Comparison of the oligonucleotides used in this study (Fig. 4A) suggests that a change from G to A at position 9 may abolish high-affinity binding and a change from T to A at position 5 could also be detrimental to binding of the pou[c] POU domain.
Mutations in the RAT part of the TAATGARAT motif (oligonucleotides C and Ad2) seem not to influence pou[c] binding significantly.
This has also been found for the Oct-1 POU domain (26).
The GST-pou[c] fusion protein always gave two specific bands in GMSA.
Presently, we do not know the reason for this, but it may be due to different conformations of the fusion protein or to dimerization.
Pou[c] induces DNA bending upon binding to the TAATGARAT and degenerate octamer-TAATGAR motifs
Bent DNA can be detected due to anomalous migration in polyacrylamide gels since bent DNA fragments migrate more slowly than linear fragments of the same size.
This is also the case for bends induced by proteins binding to specific sequence motifs (61).
The position of the bend influences the electrophoretic mobility of the protein-DNA complex with maximal retardation occurring when the bend is located at the middle of the fragment and a gradual reduction in retardation is seen for bends positioned at incremental positions towards the ends of the fragment (44,62).
Recently, Verrijzer et al .
(44) showed that the POU domains of Oct-1, Oct-2A, Oct-6/SCIP/Tst-1 and Pit-1 induce DNA bending and that this effect was due to the POU S domain.
We therefore asked whether pou[c], being a rather divergent POU protein (46%, 42%, 42% and 49% amino acid sequence identity to the POU domains of the abovementioned proteins, respectively), could cause bending upon binding to the ICP4 TAATGARAT and Ad2 degenerate octamer-TAATGAR motifs.
To analyze this, the circular permutation vectors pICP4Bend and pAd2Bend described by Verrijzer et al .
(44) were used to generate restriction fragments of identical size (143 bp) and base composition harbouring the respective binding sites at variant positions (Fig. 5A).
These restriction fragments were end-labelled and used in GMSA to study DNA bending induced by binding of the GST-pou[c] fusion protein to the abovementioned motifs.
As seen from Fig. 5B, binding of pou[c] to both the ICP4 and Ad2 motifs induce position dependent changes in mobility of the DNA-protein complex indicative of DNA bending.
No anomalous migration is seen for the unbound fragments confirming the absence of intrinsic curvature or bends in the GMSA probes used.
An empirical relationship between the relative electrophoretic mobility  retardation caused by bending and the bending angle α, defined as the angle the DNA fragment is bent from linearity, has been developed (63).
Using this relation (µ M /µ E = cos α/2; where µ M is the electrophoretic mobility of the DNA-protein complex with the protein bound at the middle of the DNA fragment, µ E is the mobility of the complex with protein bound at an end) we determined bending angles of 47°±5° for the ICP4 motif and 44°±5° for the Ad2 motif from several experiments using 4% gels.
Verrijzer et al .
(44) calculated an average bending angle of 37°±8° induced by binding of the Oct-1 POU domain to these motifs.
This corresponds relatively well with our results for the pou[c] POU domain.
Expression of pou[c] during embryogenesis
As seen from the Northern blot in Fig. 2,pou [c]is expressed as an approximately 3.2 kb long transcript as early as 3 hours (h) of development.
The gene is expressed throughout embryogenesis with an increase in the expression level between 3 and 10 h and a further increase at the hatching stage.
To assay the spatial distribution of pou [c]transcripts,in situ hybridisations on zebrafish embryos at different stages (6-, 12-, 24- and 36 h) of development were performed.
Surprisingly,pou [c]transcripts were found ubiquitously without any marked tissue specificity, although variant levels of signal intensity were detectable.
This variation in signal intensity may reflect the differences in the cell density of tissues that express the gene.
At 24 h of development, a strong signal is seen along the entire neural tube including its most anterior portions (Fig. 6A and B) while a less intense signal is detected in mesodermal derived tissues e.g. in myotomes.
In conclusion,pou [c]seems to be ubiquitously expressed during embryogenesis, but with the highest expression level in the CNS.
DISCUSSION
In this report we describe the isolation and characterization of cDNA for a novel zebrafish POU domain gene,pou [c], as well as analyses of DNA-binding specificity and embryonic expression.
Pou [c]encodes a putative protein of 610 amino acids with a 149 residue long POU domain located in the C-terminal portion with only 8 amino acids extending C-terminally from the end of the POU HD .
Comparative sequence analysis including representative members of the five classes of POU domain sequences show that pou[c] is the hitherto most divergent member of the POU family justifying placing pou[c] into a novel sixth class of POU proteins.
It will be interesting to determine whether direct homologues of pou [c]exist in other species and if the class defined by this divergent zebrafish POU protein also contains other members.
Since the C-terminal region downstream of the POU HD is very short the N-terminal region upstream of the POU domain should harbour major transcriptional activating elements.
Such elements are relatively poorly characterized, but different structural features such as acidic regions with amphipathic helices, glutamine-rich, proline-rich, and serine/threonine-rich domains have been shown to be involved in activation of transcription (36,64–66).
Interestingly, pou[c] contains an acidic stretch of 82 amino acids extending from the N terminus including a putative amphipathic alpha helix with one hydrophobic and one acidic face.
A glutamine-rich region as well as short stretches of local overrepresentation of threonine and/or serine residues are also found in the 453 amino acids long region upstream of the POU domain.
All these are features typical for transcriptional activating elements.
It is also possible that the POU S domain may contribute to transcriptional activation (23,67).
Our DNA-binding studies show that pou[c] is not an octamer-binding protein like the previously described mammalian, chicken and Xenopus Oct proteins.
Instead, pou[c] binds with high affinity to degenerate octamer-TAATGA- and TAATGARAT motifs.
Although we do not presently know the functional in vivo sites for pou[c] binding, the results reported here strongly suggest that these sites should be related to the TAATGARAT- and/or degenerate octamer-TAATGA motifs rather than the canonical octamer motif.
In this context, it may very well be that several of the mammalian Oct proteins described, except for Oct-1 and -2, may not be true octamer-binding proteins.
In a detailed study of the contacts made between the isolated POU domain and POU HD of Oct-1 on the Ad2 sequence, Verrijzer et al .
(26) showed that the POU HD contacts the ATAATGA sequence whereas the complete POU domain also makes additional contacts 5' to this sequence.
TAAT is the core consensus for binding of a variety of homeo domain-containing proteins (22) and Oct-1 binding to the ICP4 TAATGARAT motif is mainly due to the POU HD .
Deletion of POU S has only a limited effect on binding to this motif.
It may thus be possible that binding of pou[c] to this motif is mostly directed by the POU HD and perhaps further stabilized by the POU S .
For Oct-1 it has clearly been shown that the contribution of POU S to DNA binding depends on the target sequence (26).
This may also be the case for the zebrafish POU protein studied here.
The POU domain is clearly a dynamic DNA-binding structure allowing sequence-specific binding to rather different motifs (see e.g. 28).
In future work it will be important to determine the functional in vivo sites and exact sequence requirements for specific binding of pou[c].
DNA bending may be important in positioning bound proteins for functional protein-protein interactions both in transcription and DNA replication.
DNA-bending proteins may, by changing the orientation and direction of the bend, be able to select among different protein-protein interactions in regions where many factors are bound to DNA (68).
DNA bending does not seem to be a general feature of eukaryotic transcription factors and has hitherto only been demonstrated for little more than a handful of such proteins (see e.g. 44,69 and references therein).
However, the fact that Oct-1, Oct-2A, Oct-6, Pit-1 (44) as well as the divergent pou[c], together representing four classes of POU family proteins, all induce DNA bending strongly suggests that this is a general feature of this protein family.
Also, the relatively moderate degree of bending observed does not seem to vary greatly neither between different POU proteins nor between different binding sites.
It is also quite possible that the differences in bend angles seen reflect differences in shape of the proteins analysed due to regions outside the POU domain since bending is induced solely by the POU S domain (44).
Bending angles of the magnitude seen for the POU proteins have been determined for lambda cI (46°) and Cro (30°) repressors binding to the O R 1 operator using 8% gels (62), the Xenopus estrogen receptor (34°; 69) and from the crystal structure of a Cro-operator complex (40°)(70).
POU family proteins may not only function as transcription factors.
They may also be involved in stimulation of initiation of DNA replication (27).
Interestingly, pou[c] is able to stimulate initiation of adenovirus DNA replication in vitro (C.P.Verrijzer and P.C.van der Vliet, personal communication) suggesting that this ability may also be a general feature of POU domain proteins.
Of the previously described POU genes only oct-1 seems to be expressed in most tissues.
It is therefore intriguing that our in situ hybridization analyses strongly suggest that pou[c] is ubiquitously expressed during embryonic development although the highest level of expression is seen in the CNS.
Thus, our results on pou [c]expression indicate that there may be additional ubiquitously expressed POU genes also in mammals and other vertebrates that have not been isolated yet.
In view of the ubiquitous expression of the divergent pou[c] transcription factor, it will be of great interest for future studies to elucidate the function(s) of pou[c] in transcription and/or replication and to determine whether pou[c] is involved in the regulation of a distinct set of target genes.
Figure 1.
Sequence of the zebrafish pou [c]cDNA.
(A ) The nucleotide and derived amino acid sequence of pou [c]cDNA.
The locations of the POU S domain and POU HD are indicated by single and double underlining, respectively.
Stars are used to indicate in frame stop codons upstream of the putative start codon.
Potential acceptor residues for phosphorylation by casein kinase II, protein kinase A or protein kinase C (58) are shown in bold.
(B ) Schematic representation of the putative pou[c] protein showing the location of the POU S domain and POU HD , an acidic N-terminal region with a predicted amphipathic alpha-helix, a glutamine-rich region, serine/threonine-rich or threonine-rich regions, an alanine-rich presumptive alpha-helical region (A) and the location of predicted candidate sites for phosphorylation by casein kinase II (CK-II), protein kinase A (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC).
The sequence has been deposited in the EMBL/GenBank database with the accession number X68432.
Figure 2.
Northern blot analysis of pou [c]expression at 3, 10, 16, 24 and 33 hours of development and at the hatching stage (lanes 1–6).
2 µg of poly (A)+ RNA was loaded in each well and the blot was hybridized with a 1.6 kb Ppu MI- Eco RI fragment of pou [c]cDNA containing the POU domain and the 3' untranslated sequence.
Exposure to x-ray film was for 66 hours.
The arrowheads indicate the location of 28S- and 18S rRNA bands in total RNA run on the same gel.
Figure 3.
(A ) Comparison of the pou[c] POU domain sequence to representative POU domain sequences from rat (r), humans (h),Drosophila (d),Xenopus (x),C.elegans (n) and mouse (m; see text for references).
Amino acids identical to those at corresponding positions of the Pit-1 sequence are indicated by dots.
Gaps introduced are represented by dashes.
Residues unique to a particular sequence are indicated in bold.
Underlined, bold letters are used to display residues where only one sequence deviates from the consensus.
In the consensus line positions varying by more than three amino acids are indicated by dashes whereas small letters are used to show amino acids found in only one sequence.
The extent of the POU S , the POU S subdomains A and B, the linker region and the POU HD is shown above the sequence alignment.
The location of a predicted, putative alpha-helix in POU S essential for DNA-binding (23) and the alpha-helices determined from the structure of the Antennapedia homeo domain (71) are indicated by black bars below the consensus line.
Percentage identity to pou[c] is shown to the right of each sequence.
The arbitrary assignment of the N-terminal boundary of the POU domain of Rosenfeld (9) has been adopted.
However, seven additional residues are shown to indicate class-specific homologies extending N-terminally to the POU domain.
The extent of POU HD is as defined by Laughton (22).
(B ) Dendrogram of the POU domain sequences created by the multiple sequence alignment program PileUp of the GCG software package confirming the presence of six different classes of POU domain sequences.
Figure 4.
DNA-binding specificity of pou[c].
(A ) Double-stranded oligonucleotides used for gel mobility shift assays.
The regions contacted by the POU S and POU HD upon binding of Oct-1 to the Ad2 motif (24,26) are indicated.
Identities to the TAATGARAT motif are shown in bold.
(B ) Binding of GST-pou[c] to ICP4, Ad2 and Ad4 32 P-end labelled oligonucleotides.
In lanes 4–6, 10-, 50- and 100-fold molar excess of unlabelled oligonucleotide B was used for homologous competition of GST-pou[c]-binding to the labelled ICP4 sequence.
Lanes 7–9 show binding to the Ad2 motif in the presence of 10-, 50- and 100-fold molar excess unlabelled homologous competitor.
(C ) Cross-competition experiment where 50-fold molar excess of unlabelled oligonucleotides A, B, C and D (0; no competitor added) was added together with 32 P-end labelled ICP4- (lanes 2–5) or Ad2 oligonucleotides (lanes 7–10).
Lanes 11–15; binding of GST-pou[c] to 32 P-end labelled A-, B-, C-, D- and M oligonucleotides.
The open triangle indicates an unspecific band.
DNA-protein complexes were analysed on 5% polyacrylamide gels.
Figure 5.
Circular permutation assays of DNA bending induced by binding of GST-pou[c] to target sequences.
(A ) 143 bp restriction fragments (A-H) generated by digestion of the circular permutation vectors pICP4Bend (ICP4) and pAd2Bend (Ad2)(44) with Mlu I (A),Nhe I (B),Xho I (C),Eco RV (D),Nru I (F),Kpn I (G) or Bam HI (H).
The black boxes indicate the locations of the binding sites in the vectors and restriction fragments used for bending assays.
(B ) Gel shift analysis of circularly permutated GST-pou[c]-DNA complexes.
GST-pou[c] was bound to 32 P-end labelled 143 bp fragments containing either the ICP4 motif (lanes 1–7) or the Ad2 motif (lanes 8–13) at different positions from the ends of the fragments and the complexes formed were analysed by gel electrophoresis.
Figure 6.
Localization of pou [c]transcripts by in situ hybridization on a sagittal tissue section of a zebrafish embryo at 24 hours of development.
Brightfield (A ) and dark-field (B ) images are shown side by side.
The embryo is oriented with the anterior to the left.
Abbreviations: d, diencephalon; h, hindbrain; m, midbrain; t, telencephalon; y, yolk.
Scale bar, 50 µm.
An alternative approach to 32 P radiation protection: source shielding
ABSTRACT
32 P is the most widely used isotope in molecular biology laboratories and a high-energy beta-emitter.
Local doses are often underestimated and plexiglass shielding converts some energy into penetrating gamma radiation.
We describe a series of equipment that reduces local doses and gamma radiation more efficiently than traditional equipment and at the same time facilitates the handling of the isotopes.
INTRODUCTION
32 P isotopes are widely used in molecular biology laboratories and emit high energy beta particles (E max = 1.71 MeV), reaching 6.1 m in air 1 without significant attenuation 2 .
Shielding of 32 P is usually performed with plexiglass (Perspex), which stops the emitted electrons very efficiently.
However, during the absorption, interaction of emitted electrons with the nuclei of the shielding material generates secondary gamma radiation (Bremsstrahlung).
The fraction of incident beta energy converted into photons (f) is approximated by:
Bremsstrahlung, which, although much weaker than the beta radiation, is penetrating.
Due to its low intensity most investigators ignore it, but there are several important factors to consider.
First, the somatic effects of low level radiation doses are unclear; in humans, with respect to germinal effects, probably no safe dose exists 4 .
Also, radiation doses are cumulative 5 and over the years the International Commission on Radiation Protection (ICRP) has steadily lowered its maximum permissible whole-body doses recommended for occupational exposure.
ICRP recently lowered the maximal permissible dose from 50 mSv/year to 20 mSv/year 6 , keeping the dose for skin and hands at 500 mSv/year.
The dose rate is 2.5 µSv/hour at 1 m and 210 mSv/hour at the surface of a vial containing 1 MBq 32 P in 1 ml volume 7 .
For operations involving 3.7 MBq 32 P (100 µCi), which is typical for DNA labelling reactions, the whole-body dose will be reached after 194 hours at 30 cm distance 7 .
However, the maximal permissible dose for the hands is reached after just 2.4 hours or even less, as the volume is usually much less than 1 ml and the quenching therefore smaller.
Measures are usually taken to shield the investigator from environmental radiation rather than to prevent the radiation escaping from the source.
This generally results in large radiation shields, which are unpractical to work with as they reduce the operator's movements.
Apart from increasing the risk of contaminating the work bench, this also slows the work down, leading to longer exposure to the radiation.
Finally, traditional shields do not reduce the radiation doses received by the investigator's hands, and this is highly unsatisfactory, due to the close contact to the radionuclides in Eppendorf tubes.
In this study we present a series of equipment that facilitates the handling of 32 P and at the same time protects the hands of the operator.
The main principle applied is prevention of radiation escape from the source, which greatly reduces the size of the equipment.
We furthermore demonstrate that plexiglass in combination with lead shields 32 P induced Bremsstrahlung more efficiently than plexiglass alone.
METHODS
Radiation was measured using a Bicron Labtech Scaler with an EWGM (end-window-Geiger-Müller) probe (Bicron, Newbury, Ohio, USA) and a type 44B NaI scintillation probe (Mini-Instruments, Essex, England).
The probes were compared using unshielded 32 P and 125 I sources.
The EWGM probe was almost insensitive to gamma radiation (only about 0.3% of the radiation detected by the scintillation probe was detected by the EWGM probe), whereas the scintillation probe also picked up beta radiation (about 20% of the counts detected by the EWGM probe).
In each experiment the radiation from a 32 P source was determined as counts per minute (cpm) from 5 individual 1-minute countings.
The following types of shielding were used (from source to probe): 1) 1 cm plexiglass, 2) 2 cm plexiglass, 3) 1 cm plexiglass + 1 mm lead, 4) 1 mm lead + 1 cm plexiglass, 5) 1 cm plexiglass + 0.5 mm lead, and 6) 0.5 mm lead + 1 cm plexiglass.
After subtraction of background cpm values, the percentage of shielding was calculated as the ratio between the shielded cpm and total counts without shielding.
Student's t test was used for statistical evaluation.
Results are indicated as mean ± SEM.
RESULTS
Using the primarily beta-sensitive probe more than 99.7% of the radiation was eliminated by all of the shielding methods (Fig. 2, hatched columns).
However, using the gamma-sensitive scintillation probe it was shown that lead could considerably reduce the amount of gamma radiation detected from the plexiglass.
With 2 cm plexiglass the shielding was slightly better than with 1 cm (95.57±0.08% vs 94.07±0.06%, p<10 -6 , shielding 1 vs 2), but efficient shielding was only obtained using lead (shielding 3–6).
1 mm lead was more efficient than 0.5 mm (99.70±0.02% vs 99.08±0.03%, p<10 -7 , shielding 3 vs 5).
The lead should not, however, be facing the source, as this leads to increased Bremsstrahlung (99.70±0.02% vs 99.23±0.02%, p<10 -6 , shielding 3 vs 4).
Even though marginal improvements could be obtained by increasing plexiglass thickness, satisfactory shielding was obtained using 1 cm plexiglass with 1 mm lead on the outside.
We furthermore constructed a number of devices for easy handling of 32 P (Fig. 1):
Single Eppendorf tube protector
This part is manufactured from a New England Nuclear safe-seal vial.
After it has been emptied of radioactivity, the cone-shaped plastic insert is removed from the bottle.
The lower part of the bottle is covered on its exterior with a thin layer of lead (obtained from deliveries of, for example,125 I).
The back of the bottle is left uncovered to allow inspection of the inserted tube.
This part is usually turned away from the investigator.
The small size of the protector means that it is practical to leave radioactive tubes in it at all times, even during vortexing or addition of reagents.
As the radiation decreases by the square of the distance to the source, the highest radiation doses are received by the hands of the investigator.
It is difficult and hazardous to manipulate radioactivity using tweezers to increase the distance from the source, and we have therefore evaluated the shielding effect of the Eppendorf tube protector for this purpose.
Using a small amount of 32 P in an Eppendorf tube we found beta-count rates of 253.010±496 and 83.4±2.6 (n= 5, p<0.001) without and with the Eppendorf protector, a more than 3000-fold reduction.
Spin column cylinder
The tube has an inner diameter that fits the most commonly used centrifuge tube containing the spin columns.
A similar device recently became commercially available.
Pipette shield
Most pipetting can be performed in the Eppendorf tube protector.
However, when transferring radioactive liquid from one tube to another, radioactive material is no longer shielded.
The pipette shield, that is quickly placed on the pipette, blocks such radiation and in particular the radiation usually received by the operator's hand.
The pipette shield furthermore enables the operator to view the pipetting operation at eye height, which is usually not possible using conventional shields.
Pipette disposal box
Even if benchtop pipette disposal boxes are emptied daily, they often contribute significantly to laboratory radiation.
They should be replaced by a plexiglass box containing a disposable plastic bag.
The exterior of the container is covered with lead.
Column strip
This part is made from a piece of plexiglass slightly longer and wider than the column.
It is easily attached to the column by two clips mounted on the back of the plexiglass strip.
More than one strip may be attached to the column if the shielding needs to be extended in directions other than anteriorly of the column.
DISCUSSION
Plexiglass is in widespread use as shielding material for 32 P radiation for several reasons: first, it efficiently stops beta radiation, as demonstrated in this study where > 99.7% was absorbed by 1 cm plexiglass; second, plexiglass largely consists of hydrogen atoms, which have a low atomic number, and therefore minimizes the amount of Bremsstrahlung generated; and finally, it is transparent.
More efficient shielding could, however, be obtained by combining plexiglass and lead.
The described series of devices, which can be manufactured from inexpensive materials, most of which are probably already present in the laboratory, yields better shielding than traditional plexiglass screens.
The devices are particularly suited for almost eliminating the very high beta-radiation doses normally received by the operator's hands, but also for reducing the amount of diffuse gamma-radiation which is otherwise disseminated through the laboratory environment.
It is furthermore of great importance that the devices interfere less with working procedures than traditional shielding equipment does, and it is experienced that investigators use them more frequently than the traditional large shields.
Thorough revision of laboratory routines could substantially reduce radiation doses received.
However, considering the large number of persons working in molecular biology laboratories, even minor reductions in radiation doses would be significant at the population level.
We would therefore encourage the use of the described radiation protection devices, whilst pointing out at the same time that the usual high standards for prevention of ingestion, inhalation or skin absorption of radioactive compounds should still, of course, be maintained.
Figure 1.
Series of devices for safe and easy handling of 32 P radionuclides.
A)Single Eppendorf tube protector allowing vortexing and addition of reagents without removal of the radioactive vial.
B)Spin column cylinder.
C)Pipette screen shielding both the investigator's hands and body.
D)Pipette disposal box, the exterior of which is covered with 1 mm lead to eliminate Bremsstrahlung from the plexiglass.
E)Column strip shielding radiation from chromatography columns.
Figure 2.
The efficiency of various combinations of plexiglass and lead in shielding beta radiation (hatched bars) and gamma radiation (open bars).
The shields were (in source to probe orientation): 1) 1 cm plexiglass, 2) 2 cm plexiglass, 3) 1 cm plexiglass + 1 mm lead, 4) 1 mm lead + 1 cm plexiglass, 5) 1 cm plexiglass + 0.5 mm lead, and 6) 0.5 mm lead + 1 cm plexiglass.
Error bars indicate ± SEM.