

The Background
It is virtually impossible for a hearing person to imagine what it is like to be born into silence.
The challenge which this fate represents to a child, born deaf or deafened before learning language, is equally difficult to grasp.
Such a child, left to himself, grows up not only unable to express himself but unable to reason.
He is unable to communicate with others and even with himself, as he has no language with which to think about with what he sees and experiences.
The acquisition of language —an incredibly daunting task to one who has never heard it and never will—is therefore of crucial importance to a prelingually deaf child without an education which teaches him language his potential capacity and intelligence are forever wasted and he is destined to lead a primitive life appearing mentally defective to a hearing world.
This was the fate of deaf and dumb adults and children until towards the end of the sixteenth century, when Pedro Ponce de Leon, a Benedictine monk of the monastery of San Salvador near Burgos in Northern Spain, succeeded in teaching language to some deaf and dumb children, who had been entrusted to him for schooling by wealthy families, as deaf and dumb minors were legally incapable of inheriting their parents estates.
The turning point in the history of deaf and dumb people had arrived, although many more years were to pass before Ponce's achievement would benefit them.
Progress was inevitably slow.
The revolutionary had to spread, methods of teaching had to be discovered — Ponce left no record of his technique — and teachers found.
There was nobody to take immediate advantage of the  breakthrough because it had until then been universally believed that the learning of language and the understanding of ideas depended on the ability to hear words.
Without hearing, it was thought, neither language or intellect could be acquired, which explains why the deaf and dumb were ignored by educators and shunned by hearing people generally until the miracle of San Salvador.
The first deaf school in Britain opened its doors only in 1764.
Its Headmaster was Thomas Braidwood (1715 — 1806).
This school, which began with one pupil, was known as the Braidwood Academy and was located in Edinburgh.
The existence of such an educational establishment aroused widespread interest amongst the intelligentsia, causing Dr Samuel Johnson to inspect it at the end of his tour of the Hebrides in 1773.
He describes his visit in his book A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland.
It is evident that only 200 years ago the possibility of educating the deaf and dumb was still regarded by one of the most enlightened representatives of his age as bordering on the miraculous:
There is one subject of philosophical curiosity to be found in Edinburgh, which no other city has to shew; a college of the deaf and dumb, who are taught to speak, to read, to write and to practice arithmetick by a gentleman, whose name is Braidwood.
The number which attends him is, I think, about twelve, which he brings together into a little school and instructs accordingly to their several degrees of proficiency…
It was pleasing to see one of the most desperate of human calamities capable of so much help: whatever enlarges hope, will exalt courage; after having seen the deaf taught arithmetick, who would be afraid to cultivate the Hebrides.
In 1703 Braidwood moved his school south and reopened it in Hackney, East London.
Fees were payable to attend his school and only well-to-do families could afford to send their children to it.
The first deaf school in Britain which admitted children regardless of social background and without payment of fees opened in Bermondsey, a London suburb, in 1792.
The name by which it became known — "The Asylum for the Support and Education of Deaf and Dumb Children of the Poor" — describes its character and the founders' intentions.
This new kind of educational institute was to be not merely a school but also a shelter from a harsh world.
It was therefore conceived as a residential "asylum" and, as such, established the pattern of deaf education in Britain during the Victorian era now known as "the asylum system" .
Those who gained admittance were fortunate.
If by our standards their lot was a hard one, what they suffered inside was nothing to what they would have had to endure outside from a still brutalised populace.
And if much that was done in those early days shocks us, we have to remember what had gone before was worse.
Certainly the children admitted to the first asylums were those most in need.
Deaf and dumb children who could manage by self-teaching alone through their eyes to make themselves useful and a source of income to their parents did not often find their way into the asylums.
The children who were pushed in were the ones useless to their families, the backward and the troublesome, just the poor little wretches to provoke barbaric jokes and kicks and blows.
The Bermondsey Asylum, which was coeducational, though strictly segregated, began with six pupils.
Within a short time it had a waiting list and larger premises were acquired in the Old Kent Road.
There the teaching of various trades was added to the curriculum and the number of pupils  housed and taught in the school soon rose to some two hundred.
Raising money for the running of the school and its expansion was a major preoccupation for the governors, but private charity did not fail them.
As soon as deaf and dumb children were recognised as capable of benefiting from secular and religious teaching, their rescue from degradation and the saving of their souls became objects ranking high in the scale of Victorian values.
The first Headmaster of the Bermondsey Asylum was Joseph Watson, a nephew of Thomas Braidwood, who had shown him his personal technique of teaching deaf and dumb children.
Watson did not, however, teach the "charity intake" himself; instead he taught private fee-paying pupils in his own home in order to augment the minimal salary which he drew as headmaster.
The task of teaching"the charity pupils' was entrusted to assistant teachers, whose teaching skills were mostly rudimentary and whose lot was hard and underpaid.
Although Watson himself was not, therefore, personally responsible for the teaching of pupils inside the school, he was nevertheless a dedicated headmaster who, by making a success of the first educational asylum, firmly established the provision of deaf education in Britain.
Watson also deserves credit for lifting the veil from Braidwood's secret teaching methods by publishing after Braidwood's death in 1806 a book entitled The Instruction of the Deaf and Dumb: or a theoretical and practical view of the means by which they are taught to speak and understand a language, which made the early technique of such teaching in this country public knowledge.
Joseph Watson is commemorated in Bermondsey Parish Church by a plaque recording that he:
For more than thirty-seven years held the important situation of teacher to the first public institution in this country for the education of the deaf and dumb; which was established in this parish, A.D. 1792…
To the future instructions of the deaf and dumb, he has afforded a convincing proof that gentleness will create The Background  teachableness, and that firmness will supply the place of severity.
He died 23 November 1829, aged 63.
The Bermondsey Asylum was a start and an inspiration, but a hundred years later when the BDDA was founded in 1890, still only approximately two-thirds of all deaf and dumb children of school age in the United Kingdom were at school.
These were taught in a number of schools which had sprung up mainly in large cities throughout the nineteenth century.
All of them owed their existence to the efforts and generosity of private citizens and clergy; most of them were similar to Joseph Watson's asylum.
Their inmates were, therefore, throughout their school life totally cut off from normality and ordinary life, which was one of the worst drawbacks of the asylum system.
Its end came only at the end of the century as a result of the Elementary Education (Blind and Deaf Children) Act which became law in 1903.
It made the education of deaf children compulsory between the ages of seven to sixteen and imposed an obligation upon local school boards to build schools as necessary.
The state thus assumed responsibility for deaf education but, as we shall see, its advance had a chequered history.
Before following it up, another development needs to be explained, namely, the emergence of voluntary societies and missions to the deaf.
This new kind of organisation was formed from about 1820 onwards mainly in towns with a substantial number of deaf and dumb people.
The spread was partly due to the initiative of former pupils of deaf schools who wanted to continue the friendships which school life had forged and to help one another in adulthood, and partly to the evangelistic zeal and charitable urge of hearing people associated with deaf schools, who realised that deaf and dumb children needed support also in adult life.
From the outset they had a bewildering variety of names: e.g.The London Institution for the Employment, Relief and Religious Instruction of the Adult Deaf and Dumb, The Manchester and Salford Deaf and Dumb Benevolent Association, The Yorkshire  Institution for the Aid of the Adult Deaf and Dumb and The Mission to the Deaf and Dumb of the Diocese of Carlisle.
Gradually all these societies came to be known as missions, their premises as deaf club or institute and their heads as superintendents, missioners or, if ordained by the Church of England, chaplains.
The local mission became the focal point of the deaf community which it served.
Mutual aid, the practice of religion and social intercourse were the principal activities.
Some of the missioners were deaf themselves, but most of them were hearing people who were either related to someone deaf or with some other chance connection with deafness.
Their role and importance within the deaf community, particularly in the early days, are difficult to exaggerate.
They were friend, social worker and spiritual adviser to the deaf community and inevitably became champions of its causes, which explains how a deaf missioner became the founder of the BDDA and other missioners played leading parts in its history.
Communication was vital to the success of a missioner's work.
Not only between himself and those in his charge, but as interpreter between them and the hearing world.
Thus, missioners knew from daily experience the fundamental importance to deaf and dumb people of fingerspelling and signing, and they agreed with the deaf community that the language of signs and gestures was their own natural language which they should be allowed to learn as children and to practise as adults.
Accordingly, when the development of deaf education gave rise to controversy, missioners were on the side of the deaf and dumb, supported their aspirations and helped to argue their case.
The tragic feature of deaf education, which has bedeviled it from the beginning, is the disagreement among educators about the best method of teaching the deaf and dumb.
The contestants are, on the one hand, the so-called "oralists" , and, on the other, the so-called "manualists" .
Oralists believe that every deaf child of normal intelligence can learn lipreading and speech, and that signing and  fingerspelling are harmful to a child's learning process.
Pure oralists therefore do not tolerate any form of manual communication and do their teaching in an exclusively oral environment.
Manualists, by contrast, believe that signing and fingerspelling are essential tools in the learning process and that lipreading and speech are, in any case, beyond the capacity of the majority of deaf and dumb children.
Manualists, nevertheless, do not generally advocate exclusive reliance on manual communication, but favour the "combined system" , known in modern times as "total communication" .
This system of teaching advocates the flexible use, singly or in combination according to the need of the child, of a variety of additional methods of communication like reading, writing, mime, gesture and amplification of sound.
The "war of methods" between these rival schools of thought developed from the different convictions of the early teachers.
For example, the Abbe de l'Epee, founder of the  first public school for the deaf in Paris in 1755, was a manualist, while Samuel Heinicke, founder in 1778 of the first school in Germany of a similar type, was an oralist.
In the early days both methods co-existed for some time in Great Britain, but the adherents of each method campaigned against one another here and elsewhere in Europe until towards the close of the nineteenth century, when oralism for the time being triumphed in all European countries.
This victory over manualism was the outcome of an International Congress on the Education of the Deaf, which took place in Milan, Italy, in 1880 and adopted, among others, the following resolutions:
1.
The convention considering the incontestable superiority of speech over signs, a) for restoring deaf-mutes to social life, and b) for giving them greater facility of language, declares that the method of articulation should have the preference over that of signs in instruction in education of the deaf and dumb.
2.
Considering that the simultaneous use of signs and speech has the disadvantage of ignoring speech and lipreading and precision of ideas, the Convention declares that the oral method ought to be preferred.
It is a much debated question whether those who voted for these resolutions were truly representative of their countries' educators and whether the debate preceding them was fairly conducted.
The fact remains that only the American delegation of five members and one of the eight English representatives voted against them.
All other delegates representing altogether eight countries voted for them.
The American dissent was strong and unanimous.
The United States had been introduced to the combined system by Laurent Clerc, a deaf and dumb immigrant and former pupil of the Abbe de l'Epee.
America has ever since remained a staunch bastion of manualism.
The English dissenter was Richard Elliott, Headmaster of a branch of Joseph Watson's Academy at  Margate, Kent.
Elliott's school, together with one or two other notable exceptions, continued to teach by the combined system but, after 1880, the bulk of British schools and teachers adopted the oral method in accordance with the resolutions of the Milan Conference, which had received worldwide publicity.
In England The Times reported its proceedings daily and on 28 September 1880 summed up with an editorial which included the following sentences:
No more representative body could be collected than that which at Milan has declared for oral teaching of the deaf — and nothing but oral teaching…
The resolution was the act of representatives of countries which hereto have countenanced the language of signs.
There is virtual unanimity of preference for oral teaching which might seem to overbear the possibility of opposition.
So it is no surprise that the Milan Conference had a profound long-ranging effect on deaf education.
To opponents of "oralism" the effect has been disastrous.
The founder members of the BDDA, who were manualists, predicted this outcome.
And, in one sense, the history of the formation of the BDDA and of the first hundred years is the history of a struggle to remedy the mistake of Milan.
In the short term, however, the Milan Conference had the beneficial result of placing deaf education on the political agenda.
Its provision could no longer be ignored by government and left wholly to private charity, particularly as legislation had made public funds available for the education of hearing children from 1832, and their education had been made compulsory by law in 1876.
It so happened that in 1885 a Royal Commission had been set up "to investigate and report upon, the condition of the blind in the United Kingdom, the various systems of education of the blind…the employments open to and suitable for the blind and the means by which education may be extended so as to increase  the number of blind persons qualified for such employments." 
This was too good an opportunity to miss.
The Commission had hardly begun its deliberations when public concern and political pressure ensured that it was asked "to investigate and report similarly upon the condition and education of the Deaf and Dumb." 
The Commission's Report was published in July 1889.
It made the following educational recommendations: 1.
That the provision of the Education Acts be extended to the deaf and dumb and that such children should receive compulsory education between the ages of seven and sixteen.
2.
That state schools should teach by the oral method, but that a child found incapable of learning lipreading and speech after being taught these subjects for at least the initial year should, with the consent of the parents, be removed from the oral department of the school and, subject to strict segregation, be taught on the sign and manual system elsewhere.
3.
That technical instruction should be provided during the compulsory school years.
The first of the Commission's recommendations concerning the compulsory education of deaf and dumb children was naturally welcomed by deaf and dumb people, but the Commission's preference for oralism and its failure to make any recommendation for higher education caused deep disappointment.
Missioners sided with the deaf and dumb population, being aware from personal experience that at least some degree of manualism was essential for communication with, and between, deaf and dumb people and that a proportion was capable of benefiting from higher education.
The Commission provoked not only disappointment but anger and resentment by another recommendation to the effect "that the intermarriage of the congenital deaf should be strongly discouraged, as well as the intermarriage of blood  relations, especially where any hereditary tendency to deaf mutism prevails in the family." 
This added insult to injury.
The recommendation was not only outside the terms of reference of the Commission, but, on the scientific and medical evidence by then available, without foundation.
Unfavourable reaction to the Commission's Report led to the first ever national conference in Great Britain of Adult Deaf and Dumb Missions and Associations, which at that time numbered upwards of thirty-six.
Francis Maginn, the missioner for Northern Ireland, was the driving force behind this meeting, which met at St Saviour's Church, Oxford Street, London in January 1890.
St. Saviour's was the first church in this country to be specially dedicated to use by deaf people and was the crowning achievement of the Rev. Samuel Smith, the first clergyman ordained to minister entirely to the deaf.
It was consecrated in 1873 in the presence of Queen Victoria, and, sadly, demolished in 1922 in order to make room for redevelopment.
As we shall see in the next chapter, the conference on the third day passed a resolution, which led to the formation of the BDDA, but on the preceding days it was concerned with the Report of the Royal Commission and its recommendations in so far as they affected deaf and dumb people.
Francis Maginn dominated the proceedings and proposed a resolution in the following terms: That this Conference is of the opinion that the combined system, as advocated by Dr E M Gallaudet before the Royal Commission, is calculated to confer the greatest benefit upon the greatest number of the deaf and dumb.
As a former student of the National Deaf Mute College in Washington, of which Dr Edward Miner Gallaudet was founder and first president, Maginn had personal knowledge of the excellence of the American system of deaf education.
His speech was delivered by means of fingerspelling (the mode adopted by all speakers who were each limited to ten  minutes): Before I went to America I was rather one-sided, and opposed the teaching of speech too much; but after entering the celebrated college at Washington, I saw that not only could speech be taught with much success, but that those educated on the combined system spoke better than those educated on the so-called pure oral method.
I have come across deaf mutes educated by all systems, and as I have met and conversed with the deaf in various parts of Great Britain and Ireland, France, and the United States, I have not the least hesitation in saying that the combined method as advocated by Dr. E. M. Gallaudet before the recent Royal Commission certainly confers the greatest benefit upon the greatest number.
I do not deny that some very good results have been reached by the oral method, and especially so in cases of those children possessing the natural quickness of observation and retentiveness of memory which this method requires.
I wish to correct a wrong impression that has gained some credence amongst the ignorant and unreasoning public, that sign language — the agency through which we inter.exchange thought and opinion — is calculated to do injury to the intelligence of the deaf and dumb.
This language is to the deaf-mute what the German language is to the German, or French to the French.
I contend that the best evidence of the efficacy of the combined system are the attainments of the deaf-mutes who have profited by it, and that the deaf-mutes of America are far better educated than those of any other country.
I defy the conclusions of the Milan conference and of similar packed conventions.
As to the advantage of the American combined system, let results speak for themselves.
Sixty years ago there was not an educated mute in America, but now there are four who are principals  of schools, three are editors of newspapers circulating among the hearing community, two are professors in the deaf-mute college, three are chemists, six are ordained ministers, two have entered the civil service of the government; one of these, who had risen rapidly to a high and responsible position, resigned to enter upon the practice of law in patent cases in Chicago and Cincinnati, and has been admitted to practise in the Supreme Court of the United States.
The number of those employed as teachers, artists, etc., is too great even to mention.
Maginn's speech was received with applause.
In the following debate one speaker opposed the resolution and eight supported him.
When the motion was put to the vote it was Carried by a majority of twenty-one to three.
Maginn also took part in the debate concerning the intermarriage of deaf and dumb people.
His contribution, which earned "loud applause" , was forceful and dismissive of the Commission's recommendation.
 "In Belfast" , he said,"I know of eighteen deaf couples who live together happily, and only one couple has deaf children…
Should the government dare to interfere with our private domestic life, let us rise to a man and protest and also let us get up a monster demonstration and march four deep to Trafalgar Square."
In due course a motion "That it is satisfactorily proved to this Conference that the intermarriage of deaf and dumb is conducive to their happiness and there is no reason to fear injurious results there from" , was carried by a majority of twenty-four to two.
No uprising of deaf and dumb people ever took place, as the government wisely ignored this particular proposal of the Royal Commission.
Instead the BDDA was founded later in the same year to advance and protect their interests in the United Kingdom.
The history of its formation and of the first hundred years fills the following pages.
The Beginning
The formation of the BDDA was the idea of Francis Maginn, an Irishman, who was born near Cork on 21 April 1861.
His father was a clergyman.
Francis was a very bright boy, but when five years old he fell ill with scarlet fever and lost his hearing.
Instead of being educated at Christ's Hospital in London, where his father had secured a nomination for him, he was admitted to the Asylum for deaf and dumb children in the Old Kent Road, London.
As he was an outstanding pupil.
Richard Elliott, the Headmaster, chose Francis as one of the first pupil teachers, and in due course promoted him to the position of junior teacher at the Margate branch of the Asylum.
At the age of twenty-two he returned to Ireland and on his father's advice sought admission to the National Deaf Mute College in America for a degree course.
This institution for the higher education of deaf students in Washington DC was at that time unique in the world and has remained so since its inauguration in 1864.
It was renamed Gallaudet College in 1894 in honour of Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet, founder in 1817 of the first American school for the deaf at Hartford, Connecticut, and became Gallaudet University, on being granted university status in 1987.
Unfortunately, Maginn's father died in 1887 and he felt obliged to return home without finishing his course.
It so happened that there was a vacancy in the mission field in Ireland at that time.
Maginn applied and was appointed missioner to the "Missions to the Adult Deaf and Dumb of Ireland" , with special responsibility for Belfast and Cork.
In this capacity he soon got to know the leaders of the deaf community and other missioners throughout the United Kingdom, and attended the International Congress of the Deaf and Dumb in Paris in 1889.
This Congress was convened to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the death of the Abbe de l'Epee a foremost pioneer in the history of deaf education, and was intended "to prove the progress which had been accomplished during the last century in the moral, material and social condition of the adult deaf and dumb; therefore this Congress will not have anything to do with, or to remark on the methods of teaching which is not in its province" .
Controversy was thus avoided and the tone set for a glittering festival of commemorative events, congratulatory speeches, and social gatherings spread over nine days.
On most days the official programme occupied only the evenings so that day time was available for sightseeing.
British delegates were offered by the  organisers a package of "rail and boat fare there and back by the Dover-Calais route plus hotel accommodation with two meals for seven complete days: £3 95 3d for third class and £3 16s 3d for second class travel" , which in the circumstances was almost irresistible.
Francis Maginn, who was one of the speakers on the second evening, which was devoted to the subject"The Deaf in Society, was impressed by the organisation of the Congress and by the quality of some of the delegations.
The Americans, in particular, were self-confident and well educated, and their solidarity was in stark contrast with the disunity of the United Kingdom representatives, who were attending as individuals and had no national body to back them up or to formulate a national policy.
Maginn canvassed other British delegates and found support for his idea of creating a representative body in the United Kingdom and Ireland.
On his return he continued his discussions with leaders of the deaf community and other missioners.
Out of these emerged a plan for holding a national conference to discuss the recent recommendations of the Royal Commission and also his own proposal to form a National Deaf Association.
In Charles Gorham, the deaf editor of The Deaf and Dumb Times (a monthly magazine "intended for the Welfare of the Deaf and Dumb" ) Maginn found a keen supporter and willing organiser.
Within a short time a National Deaf Conference was arranged to be held in the Lecture Hall of St Saviour's Church, Oxford Street, London on 16–18 January, 1890, and invitations were sent to all deaf societies and missions, requesting them to appoint representatives.
It was made clear that all missioners, superintendents and hearing clergymen interested in deaf people were cordially invited to attend.
The programme provided for the discussion of various topics on the first two days, as told in the preceding chapter, and for Saturday, January 18, it read: Proposal to form the National Deaf Association, on  the American lines, the objects of which will be the protection, and the educational and social elevation of the deaf of the United Kingdom.
On this day, deaf representatives and missionaries only can be present, the subject being of a purely private character.
The publication of the programme in The Deaf and Dumb Times of January 1890 was accompanied by a brief article by Francis Maginn entitled "The Proposed National Association of the Deaf." 
It was an important stepping stone towards the formation of the BDDA and is therefore reproduced unabridged: Certainly no class of persons knows better than the deaf the after effects of their education.
Their judgement is of necessity based not upon hypothetical conditions, but upon the evidence of incontrovertible facts.
Those who saw the American delegates to the Paris Congress, must have been struck with the excellence and superiority of their education.
The readiness with which the American delegates impressed their character and energy upon the Congress, leading its deliberations, influencing its thought, and even in some instances correcting its faults, is a quiet but signally effective illustration of their better preparation for a more thorough practical acquaintance with the work of deliberative assemblies.
We should make a strenuous and united attempt to incorporate in the management of our own institutions some of the features which have given the American schools the high character they enjoy.
In order to accomplish this, and to place the deaf before the public in their true light and proper position, as useful members of the community at large, the formation of an Association on American lines is most desirable.
The want felt for such an organization for the promotion of their intellectual, social, moral, temporal and spiritual welfare is very great; there is a wide field of usefulness for the proposed union.
It should be recognised as the only organisation that the deaf mutes of the whole United Kingdom can look to as the protector of their interests, and they should have something they can depend upon.
The strife of local societies should have no place in its councils where all meet upon common ground, with the common end of mutual betterment.
A periodical reunion of the deaf of Great Britain and Ireland should always occur, and there is everything to be said in its favour.
It should meet biannually in some great centre.
The Deaf and Dumb Times to be the exponent of the cause of the Association.
The interests of the deaf in various towns should be watched by the local agents, and grievances if fully substantiated be published in the organ of the Association.
Appended to the article was a proposed constitution.
It is noteworthy that neither the article nor the constitution uses the expression "deaf and dumb" .
In preferring "deaf mute" or simply "deaf" Maginn followed the recommendations of the Royal Commission and the lead of the American deaf and dumb.
They had by then abandoned the expression "deaf and dumb" and at the Paris Congress had strongly advised the British to do the same.
Another feature of interest is that Maginn's draft constitution provides that only deaf people were eligible for membership of the proposed Association.
Eventually neither proposal found favour, but they prove Francis Maginn to have been a man of vision and ahead of his times in his thinking.
The Conference was according to The Deaf and Dumb Times of the following month a brilliant success.
"Notwithstanding the refusals of one or two of the most prominent societies, the Conference was a very representative one, no fewer than twenty-one societies being represented, besides  delegates from places where no missionary agencies existed.
It was very unfortunate that owing to the prevalence of the influenza epidemic many other societies had to do without a representative, as well as a large number of unofficial delegates, much to their disappointment.
There is now no doubt that those societies who were not represented will deeply regret the step they adopted, for those would-be representatives have missed having had the honour of being at the best gathering ever held in the annals of the deaf and dumb."
The proceedings were chaired by the Rev W B Sleight and all speeches were conducted entirely "in finger language, no signs whatever being permitted" .
The proposal for the formation of a National Deaf Association was discussed on Saturday morning in the presence of nineteen delegates.
It was moved by Francis Maginn who told his audience that in almost every state of America, in addition to a National Society, there was an Association of deaf mutes organised and officered by the prominent deaf themselves, whereas in the United Kingdom, where there were about twenty thousand deaf, there was neither a regional nor a national organisation.
He asked: "What strength is there in union?
What is it all worth?
The mind that cannot conceive the benefits to accrue by a coming together and a binding by paternal ties of a people having common sympathy must be wayward indeed.
The very foundation of our education rests in meeting under a common roof, whether it be the education of the classroom, the church or citizenship.
An association of the deaf, powerful in its members and unity, has before it the greatness of things to be done.
He called for the formation of an Association "to keep a jealous eye over their interests, educational, moral and social," and concluded his speech by suggesting that a committee be formed to draft the constitution for submission to a convention later in the year.
He sat down to applause and was followed by H B Beale from Gloucestershire who  seconded the motion.
There were seven more speeches which were all in favour of the proposal, so that it was no surprise that the following resolution was passed unanimously: In the opinion of this Conference it is advisable that a National Society should be formed, the chief objects of which will be the elevation, education, and social status of the deaf and dumb in the United Kingdom.
This was followed by a second resolution, proposed by Dent (Newcastle upon Tyne) and seconded by J Paul (Ayrshire) to the effect: That the matter of this Association be referred to a special committee consisting of the President of this Conference (the Rev W B Sleight) as Chairman, and twelve gentlemen (six deaf and dumb and six hearing).
The Committee to have power to add to their number.
This resolution was also carried unanimously and, subject to the approval of those gentlemen who were not present, the following were appointed to form the Steering Committee, as recorded verbatim in the minute book: The Rev W B Blomefield Sleight, M.A., Chairman.
Deaf and Dumb Gentlemen Hearing Gentlemen Mr W Agnew The Rev Fanshaw Bingham Mr H B Beale The Rev C M Owen, M.A. Mr C Gorham Mr J W Dawson Mr F Maginn Mr J Dent Mr G F Healey Mr C H Knight Mr B H Payne Mr J W North Charles Gorham accepted nomination as Honorary Secretary.
As there was no other business the Conference concluded quickly after its momentous decision to set up a national  organisation of the deaf and dumb.
Its cost according to the balance sheet was £7 2s Od.
Rarely can so small a sum of money have been spent more fruitfully.
Such was the enthusiasm and unanimity of the delegates of the steering committee that it required only two meetings to complete their task.
They met for the first time at the Liverpool Adult Deaf and Dumb Society in Princes Avenue on the 25 April 1890.
Prior to this meeting, which lasted 8 hours, members had been sent a draft constitution, the handiwork of Charles Gorham, who had consulted and taken the advice of his solicitor, Mr R S Wigin of Leeds.
After lengthy discussion this was approved, subject to a number of points which required further consideration and were stood over to a further meeting.
Glasgow, Swansea and Leeds competed as venue of the Congress which was to ratify the constitution and to lead to the formation of a British organisation of the deaf and dumb.
Leeds was chosen unanimously.
Not only was it situated centrally, but it hosted at that time an international exhibition which was considered an attraction for delegates.
Finally, agreement was also reached on the proposed name of the new association: The British Deaf and Dumb Association (The BDDA).
The second and final meeting of the steering committee, which lasted seven hours, took place at Leeds on the eve of the Congress, on Wednesday 23 July.
On this occasion the members reached complete agreement on their previous differences and, in particular, on the clause of the draft/constitution dealing with admission to membership.
The original proposal for this clause, which had led to disagreement, read: Any deaf person, or any hearing missionary, or superintendent of a deaf and dumb mission and society, who is a resident of the United Kingdom shall be eligible to ordinary membership of the Association.
The clause on which they finally agreed and which was  adopted the next day as part of the constitution, read instead: Persons who can hear, taking an active interest in the welfare or education of the deaf and dumb, shall be eligible for admission to ordinary membership on the recommendation of five ordinary members of the Association.
In The Deaf and Dumb Times, of August 1890, the editorial written by Charles Gorham, explains the significance of the adopted clause and the intention behind it.
 "It being desirable and natural that the Association should be governed solely by bona fide deaf members, it was felt that it would be an act of selfishness to ignore those" hearing friends"who took real interest in the cause and welfare of the deaf; yet apprehensions were felt as to the wisdom of adopting such a course.
On the next day, July 24 1890, thirty-six intending members (including four ladies) assembled at 10 am. for a private meeting in the small Lecture Hall of the Church Institute in Albion Place.
There they were welcomed by the Rev W B  Sleight who, after prayers, in his capacity as chairman of the steering committee explained to all present the matters agreed by the committee and the detailed provisions of the proposed constitution.
The meeting was unanimous in adopting all the proposals, and in due course all present in turn paid their entrance fees and first annual subscriptions to the acting treasurer.
They then proceeded to the election of officers.
According to the editorial already quoted, "it was generally inferred, up to the time when the Congress assembled, that the honour of the Presidency would be conferred upon a deaf person." 
It is almost certain that the choice would have fallen on Francis Maginn, who deserved this distinction.
But under the revised membership clause of the constitution the Rev W. B. Sleight, who was not a missioner, was eligible for this honour and it was he, who, "in accordance with the general feeling" , was elected the first President of the BDDA.
His election was proposed by B H Payne, seconded by George Healey and approved "unanimously and with enthusiasm." 
William Blomefield Sleight, who was born in 1849, was the son of William Sleight, the much respected headmaster of the Brighton Institution for the Deaf and Dumb.
He therefore grew up in habitual contact with pupils of the Institution, and the use of fingerspelling and signing was a natural alternative mode of communication for him.
Sleight himself was educated at Brighton College and studied for his MA degree at Glare College, Cambridge.
Ordained in 1879 in Ripon Cathedral, he served his curacy at St Katherine's Parish Church, Northampton, before later becoming Vicar of Swadlincote in Derbyshire.
In 1889, the year before the Leeds Congress, he was offered the living of St Katherine's Church where he had been a very popular curate.
He accepted and was inducted on 10 October.
He was therefore vicar of St. Katherine's, when he became President of the BDDA.
Sleight was a genuine friend of deaf and dumb people.
Not only did he know their ways and problems but was committed to their advancement.
His service on the Royal Commission on the Blind and the Deaf and Dumb, of which he and the Rev Charles Macclesfield Owen were the only members with knowledge of deaf people, had given proof of this.
Without their counsel the recommendations of the majority on the Commission would have been even less favourable to the aspirations of the deaf and dumb, and their dissent on the two recommendations, which particularly disappointed and angered them, was admired widely.
If the first President of the BDDA had to be a hearing person, the choice was apt and inevitable in the circumstances.
The President having been duly elected, four regional Vice-presidents, all deaf and dumb, were elected next: B H Payne (Wales), G F Healey (England), F Maginn (Ireland) and W Agnew (Scotland).
Next came the election of James Paul (Ayr) as Hon.
Treasurer and of Charles Gorham as Hon.
Secretary, who stayed in office only a short time before handing over to James Muir, who served until 1905.
Finally the following were appointed to the executive committee: The Rev Fanshawe Bingham M A (Bristol) Robert Armour (Liverpool) H B Beale (Stroud)(deaf) C J Bromhead (Lincoln)(deaf) James Wallworth Dawson(Bradford) W P Harris (Belfast) Robert Semple (Paisley)(deaf) A M Sleight (Brighton)
These elections concluded the business of the first day of the Leeds Congress, on which, in the words of the preamble to the constitution of the BDDA: The Deaf and Dumb of Great Britain and Ireland agree[d] to form themselves into an Association for the advancement and protection of their interests in every possible way (in such a manner as will not interfere with the work of the existing societies).
The public session of the Congress, on its second day, took place on Friday the 25 July.
It began with prayers followed by the President's thanks for his "unexpected" election.
He explained that as vicar of a large parish he had many and constant duties to perform, but that his interest in the deaf was so great that he would find time to advance their interests as far as he could.
His statement was greeted with applause.
A number of papers, all limited to thirty minutes, were then read.
The first by A H Clarke (South Durham and Cleveland) was entitled "The Homes of the Aged and Infirm Deaf and Dumb." 
This subject was close to the hearts of all present as the provision of such homes was one of the agreed objectives of the BDDA.
The fact that more than five hundred deaf and dumb people, old and no longer able to work, were inmates of workhouses was keenly felt as a blot and the responsibility of the deaf community.
There was therefore general agreement that the provision of a home  should be one of the first tasks of the new organisation, and the matter was referred to the executive committee for urgent consideration.
Robert Armour (Liverpool) then read a paper on the "Capacities of the Deaf" .
He explained that the description "dumb" had been omitted from the title to enable him to embrace within the scope of his review all deaf persons of distinction, whether they had continued dumb or had been enabled to articulate with any degree of facility.
His paper gave many examples of high intellectual attainments by various deaf people.
The morning session ended with a paper by W E Harris, a teacher at the Belfast Deaf Institution, on "Junior Class Work" .
He explained his emphasis as follows: "The junior pupils today will be the senior pupils tomorrow.
It is life or death to them now.
Heavily handicapped already, shall they, in the first and most precious years of their course, be still further handicapped by the incompetence of the very persons on whom their whole dependence must be placed?"
He regretted that as teachers of the deaf they were inadequately trained, underpaid and overworked and therefore did not stay in the profession.
 "We have a constant succession of inexperienced teachers in the junior department," he declared, and attributed the bad standard of education of the deaf to this factor and the prevailing negative attitude to signing, which he believed to be "a good servant, but a bad master." 
He advocated the combined system and regretted that, at the very moment when state aid was going to be available for the education of the deaf and dumb for the first time, oral teaching was recommended by the Report of the Royal Commission.
"We may regret that the Commissioners did not pursue a more spirited foreign policy and visit the United States of America, where, beyond a doubt, they would have seen results which would have qualified their condemnation of the combined system.
This paper gave rise to a discussion, at the end of which a luncheon break was welcomed by all.
When the members  reassembled in the afternoon the President called attention to a speech by Earl Granville at a meeting of the School and Training College maintained by the Association for the Oral Instruction of the Deaf and Dumb in London.
In the course of his widely publicized speech the Earl, the Association's President, had apparently stated that the manual language, as used by the deaf, was a "barbarous" mode of teaching the deaf and dumb.
Sleight invited Congress to express its feeling about this remark, which the members duly did by resolving: That this Congress of the British Deaf and Dumb Association, held at Leeds, indignantly protests against the imputation of the Right Hon.
Earl Granville, in his recent speech in London, that the finger and sign language was barbarous.
We consider such a mode of exchanging our ideas as most natural and indispensable, and that the Combined System of education is by far preferable to the so-called Pure Oral.
We are confident that the Combined System is absolutely necessary for the welfare of the deaf and dumb.
Thus the BDDA in the only resolution passed at its first Congress strongly affirmed its faith in the combined system as the best method of deaf education.
It has never wavered and has consistently fought ever since for the adoption of this method.
Success in this campaign, begun one hundred years ago, is now nearer than ever before.
It is the most important single achievement of the BDDA, and would have filled the founder members, given foresight, with pride and satisfaction.
Following this resolution the delegates settled down to a paper by Professor Charles Kerney from Indiana (Vice-president of the American Association of the Deaf) which was read by A M Sleight (the President's son and headmaster of the Brighton Institute in succession to his grandfather) and interpreted to the deaf by J W Dawson.
The Professor's own American sign language would have been unintelligible to  those present.
His address was on the theme of "What to read — when to read — how to read." 
It was an ambitious and learned discourse in praise of the written word.
Before the session closed with the customary votes of thanks, W Agnew's invitation for the next Congress to take place in Glasgow in the summer of 1891 was welcomed and gratefully accepted.
The evening was given over to a "conversation" , which was held in the Church Institute and attracted an audience of one hundred and fifty people.
The Dean of York presided and addressed the gathering for nearly an hour on the subject of "The History of the Deaf and Facts about Them from the Earliest Era" .
Full of interest and packed with information and statistics, it was a great performance, but the Dean frankly acknowledged that credit for it was due to Charles Gorham who had prepared the paper and had given it to him to read.
For the benefit of the deaf members present the Dean's and all subsequent speeches were interpreted into sign language.
After this beginning some light relief must have been welcome.
Fortunately Professor Kerney obliged and "greatly delighted the company with a recitation in natural signs which was beautifully rendered" .
A number of songs accompanied on the piano also added variety to the evening.
The conversation ended the official programme of the Leeds Congress, but there was more to come for a party of about forty participants, including the President and Professor Kerney and his wife, for whom an excursion into Wensleydale by train and horse drawn wagonettes had been organised.
They left the North Eastern Railway Station in a reserved railway carriage by the early morning train, hoping to make Masham in time for breakfast at the vicarage by invitation of Charles Gorham's father, who was vicar of Masham.
Alas, the station master at Ripon spoiled the plan.
He forgot to decouple their carriage and to attach it to the Masham train as intended.
The party therefore never reached Masham, which caused disappointment and hunger.
It was, however, a lucky surprise for the residents of the Masham almshouse who were hurriedly summoned by the vicar to enjoy the breakfast instead.
Fortunately "an unlimited assortment of viands" awaited the party at the Bolton Arms, Leyburn, at midday.
By this time the wagonettes had caught up so that the rest of the day proceeded according to plan.
A tired party returned happily to Leeds at 11.00 p.m. — without the President, who had left them earlier to attend to his Sunday duties in his parish.
Everyone else finally dispersed on that Sunday, each having played a part in writing the Leeds Congress into the history book of the deaf of the United Kingdom.
The Early Years
The constitution adopted by the founder-members of the BDDA provided that the Association should meet at least biennially "in congress" , and that the members present should by a majority vote elect the President, four Vice-presidents, a Secretary, Treasurer and eight members of the executive committee to hold office and to conduct the business of the Association until the next Congress.
Congress was therefore from the outset a very important event in the calendar of the BDDA, and the elected President a vital figure as ex officio chairman of the executive committee.
Only one year elapsed before the new Association met again "in congress" — this time in Glasgow, where the pattern of the original Leeds Congress was repeated.
Business and elections were conducted on the first day, followed by speeches and discussion spread over the following two days and an evening conversazione where"everybody was in the best of spirits.
Sedate, sober men, that in the day time comported themselves in all seriousness and dignity, relaxed their staidness then and joined deliriously in the quadrilles or the waltz.
Altogether a very agreeable evening was spent."
On the last day an excursion was again arranged, but mist and rain somewhat spoiled the attractions of Loch and Ben Lomond.
Sleight, reelected President, chose as subject for his presidential address "The Educational Objectives of the BDDA" .
He deplored the prevailing state of education — "many deaf and dumb children are still allowed to grow up without receiving any education whatever" —, criticised such educational provision as existed and advocated universal state education, the training of specially qualified and adequately  remunerated teachers and the adoption of the combined system.
The principal other addresses were given by the eminent sons of Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet: the Rev Thomas Gallaudet (1822–1902), founder of the first American Church for the Deaf in New York and co-founder of the Gallaudet Homes for the Aged Deaf and Dumb; and Edward Miner Gallaudet (1837–1917), founder president and first head of Gallaudet College.
The invitation by the BDDA to these distinguished brothers to take part at the Glasgow Congress reflected the respect for the achievements of the American deaf-mutes felt by Francis Maginn and the Association's early leaders.
Their acceptance conferred distinction upon the occasion and lent fraternal support to the slow awakening of the British deaf community.
The business meeting disclosed that the BDDA had survived the first year successfully, but that its formation had not been greeted with enthusiasm by the deaf and dumb of the United Kingdom.
Only twenty-seven new members had been enrolled since the Leeds Congress, and the total membership still stood at less than one hundred.
According to the census of 1891 there were 14,192 deaf and dumb people in England and Wales, 2,125 in Scotland, and 2,570 in Ireland.
It is obvious from these figures that the BDDA in its early days did not represent the deaf and dumb population, but that the Association merely brought together the elite of educated deaf-mutes with some hearing people — mainly missioners and a few others with personal interest in the spiritual and social welfare of the deaf and dumb.
So that poverty should not be a bar to membership, the original subscriptions of 2s 6d p.a. "for gentlemen and honorary members and 1s for ladies" was reduced to a minimum of 1s in 1913.
The policy of keeping the membership subscriptions low has survived to the present time, despite the improvement in the economic circumstances of the deaf community as a whole.
As the principal original aims of the BDDA were the founding of missions in  neglected areas, the establishment of a pension fund for the benefit of the aged and infirm, and the co-operation of all who were concerned for the welfare of the deaf and dumb, it is, perhaps, surprising that the BDDA did not take off more successfully and that the great majority of deaf and dumb people stood aloof from it.
There are several explanations.
The majority of the deaf and dumb were still leading wretched and isolated lives, scattered all over the country singly or in small groups, untouched by change and ignorant of the world at large.
Few had any experience of moving about and getting together, and unless educated, which only a small minority was, had no expectation of improving their condition.
And, as already mentioned, their dawn was bedeviled with controversy so that the leaders as well as sympathetic hearing people found themselves in dispute about the best methods of helping and educating them.
These are some of the factors accounting for the apathy with which the deaf and dumb population welcomed the BDDA, but there was discontent also among members and sympathisers.
One of the most outspoken critics was Ernest J D Abraham, editor of The British Deaf Mute, a monthly journal then in circulation.
Through its columns he attacked the BDDA leadership as "slovenly, slow and cliquish" , and claimed that "properly managed, the BDDA should have a membership of at least one thousand deaf-mutes, not counting missionaries and other sympathisers" .
He attributed the Association's lack of appeal to its domination by Church of England clergy and lay churchmen, leaving no room for either non-conformists or uncommitted lay people.
 "Do you wonder" , he wrote, "that the Association is treated with contempt and indifference by the British Deaf?" .
In the next issue he asserted that his criticism had "met with almost unanimous approval" .
Ernest Josiah Douglas Abraham was a dynamic personality.
He had normal hearing all his life and would have been unaware of deaf people if he had not been "adopted" as a  young orphan by the Rev J Jennings, a deaf mute minister and founder of the South London Gospel Mission to the Deaf and Dumb.
His adoption led to his taking up work with the deaf.
Abraham was an early member of the BDDA, and at the time of his attack on the leadership he was Superintendent of the Bolton, Bury and Rochdale Society.
As appears from his writing, the British deaf scene was not to his liking.
So in 1901 he decided to emigrate with his wife and two children to Australia, where he became the first full-time missioner of the Adult Deaf Society of Victoria, which celebrated its centenary in 1984.
He died its principal in 1940.
The following is one of many references to him in the Society's centenary history: Undoubtedly the activity of Mr E J D Abraham, with his fund-raising ability and flair for promoting the organisation, has led to much of our present security.
Soon after his arrival in Melbourne in 1901, he instituted adventurous fund-raising schemes.
One of his ideas was to travel to different churches and town halls, providing all entertainment and giving an address about deafness.
Often included was a humorous presentation by a deaf man.
Frequently, the choir of the local church took part in the programme.
This built up finance, but, perhaps more importantly, built up in the community a knowledge of the organisation and about deafness.
It is fascinating to speculate on how the BDDA would have developed with Maginn as President and people like Ernest Abraham active within its ranks.
Abraham's attack was of sufficient weight to produce a preamble to the biennial report published by the BDDA in 1905.
Under the heading "The Association and its Objects" it reads: The executive committee, in submitting this report, desire to point out that the British Deaf and Dumb Association is National in character, and its work is entirely devoted to the deaf and dumb, irrespective of creed or denomination.
Its objects are to unite the deaf and dumb and all interested in them, advance and protect their interests, elevate their social status, secure better and higher education for them, afford to anyone information as to their condition, education, etc., establish missions in places where none exist, and last of all to assist by means of pensions the most deserving aged and infirm deaf and dumb, and so prevent them, in many instances, from drifting into the workhouse.
The Association was founded by the deaf themselves in 1890, on the appearance of the Report of the Royal Commission on the Deaf, Blind, etc., which published suggestions altogether unsuited to the social, moral, intellectual, and spiritual welfare of the deaf, and it is the only association of its kind in existence in the United Kingdom.
Since its foundation it has held nine biennial congresses and one special general meeting in various parts of the United Kingdom, at which papers on various subjects relating to the deaf and dumb have been read and discussed, and resolutions passed.
Notwithstanding occasional criticism and general apathy, the BDDA grew slowly, increasing its membership and number of branches.
By 1918, when the President retired, there were about fifteen hundred members and twenty-two branches.
Actual achievements during Sleight's presidency were few.
The income of the Association remained inadequate for the needs and the fulfilment of its objects, and support remained poor.
One reason for this was that all officers of the Associations were honorary and had other jobs which kept them busy.
They could devote only very little of their time to the affairs of the BDDA, and until 1922 even had to pay their own expenses.
Thus, for example, only two executive committees were held each year during 1899 and 1900.
The President was able to attend only one of these, which was actually better than three other committee members who attended no meetings.
Only the Treasurer and Secretary attended all four meetings.
Sleight apologised for this state of affairs at the Congress in Dublin in 1895: "It must be remembered that it is exceedingly difficult for the executive committee to meet together often, for every time they do so they have to bear their own travelling expenses, and sometimes hotel expenses; and to whatever centre they are summoned, it only means that some members of the committee have to travel a considerable distance.
Every time, therefore, they met  together their aggregate expenses amounted to at least £12 to £15, or even more".
Owing to lack of funds it was decided in 1902 that "the question of a National Home for the poor aged deaf must be left in abeyance until more funds became available" .
On the other hand, a pension fund was established in 1895 for the payment of pensions not exceeding 6s 10d pa. to the old and poor.
Applicants below the age of sixty were eligible only if they were "by reason of inferiority, totally incapable of earning a livelihood" .
References to the fund in the Association's annual reports show that "only the most deserving cases were helped and that" consideration of many deserving applications had to be deferred"owing to its low financial state.
In the circumstances the maximum number of pensioners in any one year was twelve, and there were only thirty-two pensioners altogether between 1895 — 1918.
The establishment of new missions also proceeded slowly, but eighteen new ones were formed during this period.
It was as a "voice" on behalf of the deaf and dumb that the BDDA excelled from its inception.
As there was at that time no one else to take up the cudgels nationally on their behalf this service was of great value to the deaf and dumb population, and is no doubt one explanation for the BDDA surviving its early difficult years.
In its capacity as spokesman the BDDA was particularly active in the educational field, where it never ceased to act as a pressure group in favour of the combined system.
An example of this activity was the petition which, pursuant to a resolution of the Liverpool Congress in 1899, the BDDA presented to King Edward VII in December 1901.
It requested him "to direct the Board of Education to set up an inquiry into the present state of the education of the deaf or to direct that a combined system of oral and manual instruction should be adopted in the schools for the deaf" .
This was signed by 2,671 members from all over England and Scotland, which proves that the BDDA was able to mobilise a sizeable population of the deaf community behind policies  with universal appeal.
The petition produced a negative reply from the Home Office in July 1903, but the episode is noteworthy as one of the innumerable steps taken by the BDDA in its campaign for the better education of deaf and dumb children.
To the same end from the beginning the BDDA also battled for the employment of deaf teachers.
This is shown, for example, by the following resolution passed at a special general meeting in 1896: That recognizing as we do the natural aptitude for teaching deaf children which characterizes the well educated deaf we urge, in the name of justice or fair play, that every facility should be provided for their employment as teachers in our deaf and dumb institutions and day schools, more especially in those in which the combined system is being followed.
In later correspondence with the Board of Education, stretching over several years, it was pointed out that"in 1899 there were 243 deaf principals and teachers in the USA, while there are about a dozen in the United Kingdom and Ireland.
The education of the deaf in the United States being higher than that in this country, it is a standing proof of the great need for more deaf teachers.
There are many well educated deaf ladies in the country who would be most happy to be thus employed."
The Board, however, remained unsympathetic and in another skirmish in 1910 rejected protests by the BDDA against new regulations for the employment of teachers in special schools for deaf children which discriminated against the use of deaf teachers.
On the other hand the BDDA scored a triumph, which it circulated "to every mission and school for the deaf and dumb in the United Kingdom" , when it successfully campaigned for the nondiscriminatory insurance of deaf and dumb people in employment under the Workmen's Compensation, Unemployment and Invalidity Acts which the Lloyd George Government passed early in the twentieth century.
This was an important success, as deaf and dumb people have always encountered difficulties in finding employment, and there was a considerable risk that these difficulties could have become aggravated by discriminatory insurance.
During the Liverpool Congress in 1899 an attempt was made to stimulate the "Lady members" of the BDDA into greater effectiveness by the inauguration of a "Ladies' Auxiliary" .
The driving force behind this venture was Ellen K Ware, wife of the Lord Bishop of Barrow-in-Furness, its President until her death in 1910.
Aimed at the special needs of adult women and girls, the principal objects of the Auxiliary, were, a) "the banding of our women workers in more effectual cooperation and spiritual union, b) the seeking out and befriending of isolated cases and, c) the general deepening of the interest of hearing persons in the cause of the deaf and dumb" .
While it lasted, the Auxiliary did good work, but after the President's death  it declined and eventually was wound up during the Glasgow Congress in 1920.
It was explained to the women's meeting which took this decision that "times had changed since the inauguration, that the cost of travel made meetings now almost impossible and that with the formation of local branches of the BDDA there was not the same need for the Auxiliary" .
The meeting expressed the hope that a women's meeting would be held during each Congress and that more women should be trained to work with the deaf.
The minutes of the meeting record that there was "a crying need" for them.
It was coincidence that the year 1918 witnessed the retirement of the BDDA's first President and the death of its founder.
The retirement of the Rev William Sleight was intended to be partial.
He was relieved of his duties as President, but elected "Honorary President" so that the benefit of his advice and service would not be lost entirely to the Association.
This change came about with his full consent and was necessitated by his personal circumstances — a wife who was very ill, and war injuries to his two sons, who both lost limbs.
Sleight's sorrows, however, took their toll.
His own health suffered, and he was forced to give up his living (latterly of Towcester).
He withdrew from active life and retired to Kenilworth where on the 4 January 1927 he died at the age of seventy-seven.
Sleight had been a friend and champion of the deaf and dumb all his life.
His finest hour was when, as a member of the Royal Commission, he stood up for their interests and dissented valiantly from the majority.
He was rewarded with the first Presidency of the BDDA and was reelected for a total period of twenty-eight years.
Throughout this time he retained the affections of members of the Association.
He was, however, a preacher and a man of goodwill rather than a leader and man of action so that a change of leadership had become desirable when he retired.
Francis Maginn did not take a prominent part in the affairs of the BDDA after its formation.
As one of the regional  Vice-presidents, he was an ex officio member of the executive committee, but his attendances were irregular.
He also showed his face at some of the later Congresses, but he does not appear to have made any active contribution to any of them.
Because of his withdrawal from active involvement, Maginn is the "forgotten" founder of the BDDA, but his memory deserves to be honoured by the Association.
After the Leeds Congress Maginn was plainly a disappointed man and probably did not altogether approve of the BDDA's leadership.
But he was not one to rock the boat, kept his feelings to himself and quietly followed his vocation.
His reputation, however, continued to rank high, particularly abroad.
Gallaudet College conferred on him the Honorary Degree of B.D. in recognition of his work for the deaf, and he was appointed an Officer of the French Academy.
Maginn spent the rest of his life as a dedicated missioner in Belfast, where in 1888 he had the pleasure of becoming the first superintendent of the Mission Hall for the Adult Deaf and Dumb which was opened that year by Miss Wilhelmina Frederick.
In 1898 he married a hearing lady from Dublin, who survived him.
He used to be fond of quoting this rhyme: There is so much bad in the best of us And so much good in the worst of us, That it ill becomes the rest of us, To think evil of any one of us.
It is an apt epitaph for him.
The Ayliffe Era
In 1906 William McDougall succeeded James Muir as Honorary Secretary of the BDDA.
He was to hold this position for twenty-nine years, combining it with the Treasurership from 1923 until his retirement in 1935.
A Scot by birth, McDougall was deafened through illness at the age of five.
He received his education at Donaldson's School for the Deaf in Edinburgh and stayed on in the capacity of pupil-teacher as the only deaf member of staff.
In 1904 he left the teaching profession to become missioner to the deaf in Carlisle for the next thirty-one years.
His Secretaryship of the BDDA, undertaken simultaneously, established the precedent that the two principal official positions of the BDDA were held by a hearing and a deaf man respectively.
When McDougall took over as Secretary the BDDA had some four hundred members and thirteen branches.
When he retired the membership stood at approximately fifteen hundred, and forty branches had become established.
This growth was largely attributable to his commitment to the BDDA and his unflagging efforts on its behalf.
On the occasion of his silver wedding in 1929 The Deaf Quarterly Hems recorded: "Mr. McDougall's connection with the BDDA needs no comments.
The BDDA IS Mr. McDougall".
And at the Leicester Congress in 1931, an illuminated address, signed by every member of the executive, bore witness to the respect in which he was held by his colleagues and the deaf community as a whole.
McDougall carried on for another three years, when he was succeeded by Leslie Edwards.
The BDDA's farewell gesture to him was his election as the first Honourary Vice-president.
He died in March 1950.
Meanwhile, in 1918, following the retirement of the Rev W B Sleight as President, the Rev F W Gilby M.A. agreed to occupy this position as a stop-gap until the election of a successor at the first Congress after the end of the First World War.
Frederick Gilby was a hearing son of deaf and dumb parents.
He therefore fingerspelled and signed from childhood, which made him an exceptionally able interpreter.
For thirty-four years he served as missioner and, finally, as Chaplain Superintendent with the Royal Association in Aid of the Deaf and Dumb, the London mission commonly known as RADD.
Illness forced his resignation, but having recovered his health, Cilby resumed work, founding missions in Birmingham, Somerset and Cornwall before going abroad to work for the deaf and dumb in South Africa and in the West Indies.
He died aged eighty-three having been awarded an OBE for his indefatigable labours in the service of the deaf.
This remarkable man was a loyal supporter of the BDDA all his life and none more worthy could have been chosen to hold the fort as President.
As acting President Frederick Gilby presided over the BDDA's first post-war Congress, held in Glasgow in 1920, where Ernest Ayliffe was elected as the next President of the Association.
He held office for twenty-seven years and became one of the most renowned figures who have ever served the BDDA, because of his devotion to the cause of deafness and the dominating position he came to hold in the deaf world.
Ayliffe was born on a Suffolk Farm on 12 January 1873.
He had normal hearing all his life and it has proved impossible to discover what aroused his interest in deafness.
He surfaced upon the deaf scene as a young teacher in Donaldson's School for the Deaf in Edinburgh.
It was there that he found not only his life's vocation, but his future wife who was also teaching at the school.
Together they devoted the remainder of their lives to the service of deaf people.
Whenever  possible, Mrs. Ayliffe accompanied her husband on his travels and acted as his interpreter, for he steadfastly refused to speak and simultaneously to interpret, maintaining that no-one can do one without detriment to the other.
From teaching they moved into mission work and in 1901 began their careers in this field as Superintendent and Matron respectively of the Institute for the Deaf at Bolton, Lancashire.
They remained there for thirteen years before taking up a similar position in Liverpool.
Ayliffe was therefore Superintendent Missioner of that city when he was elected President of the BDDA.
He chose for his presidential address at the Glasgow Congress the title "Divine Service for the Deaf: the Necessity, the Method, the Men" .
In an eloquent speech he dwelt on the reluctance of the adult deaf to attend divine service or to receive moral instruction and on the "appalling" lack of religious knowledge amongst the younger generation.
He deplored the materialistic trend of education: "Teach language, speech and trades" , and asked rhetorically, "What about religion?" 
In the teaching controversy he declared himself a strong advocate of at least fingerspelling and stressed the importance of training, knowledge of deaf people and experience of teaching in deaf schools as primary qualifications for teachers.
Ayliffe was thus first and foremost a Christian gentleman whose principal concerns were the spiritual and social welfare of the deaf and dumb.
Ernest Ayliffe exerted his influence not only by addressing innumerable meetings in the course of his lifetime, but by writing.
As Superintendent in Bolton he produced the first issue of The Deaf Quarterly News as a local news-sheet of four pages.
From this modest start in 1905 the publication developed into a highly respected and widely read quarterly magazine which Ayliffe edited and to which he contributed until 1947.
Other national platforms for his views and activities were the Council of Church Missioners to the Deaf and Dumb, of which he was chairman from 1927 for eighteen years; the   Central Advisory Council for the Spiritual Care of the Deaf and Dumb on which he served for forty-four years, and the Joint Examination Board (later renamed "The Deaf Welfare Examination Board" ) of which he was a founder member.
The BDDA, therefore, at the Glasgow Congress acquired a President who was and remained prominent in the deaf world until his gradual retirement, following the award of the MBE for "meritorious services to the deaf" , in 1945.
The Glasgow Congress also made its lasting mark by recommending a revised constitution for the BDDA.
Ayliffe chaired the committee which produced the draft of the new constitution which was adopted by the next Congress in Birmingham in 1922.
Its most important innovations were the provision of an annual conference of delegates, elected by the membership, and a rule that the executive committee, similarly elected, "was to carry out the business of the BDDA in accordance with the decisions of the delegates" conference".
These features ensured that the BDDA was henceforth democratically controlled by its deaf members, who constituted the overwhelming majority of the membership.
It made the BDDA a "grass-roots organisation" which it has remained ever since.
 "The grand old man" of the BDDA, George Frederick Healey, was in his eightieth year at the time of the Birmingham Congress.
He chose this occasion for announcing his retirement from the Treasurership which he had held for thirty years.
He was a founder member and first regional Vice-president for "England" .
Deafened at the age of three months as a result of a fall from his nurse's arms, he took full advantage of his independent means by devoting his life to the service of his fellow-deaf as an honourary missioner in his native city of Liverpool and as a licensed lay reader excelling in the conduct of religious services for the deaf.
He was the founder in 1864 of the Liverpool Adult Deaf and Dumb Benevolent Society and, with the aid of public subscriptions, responsible for the building of the Liverpool Institute for the Adult Deaf and Dumb, of which he was  Secretary for sixty years.
Healey's greatest achievement as Treasurer of the BDDA was the establishment of a pension fund.
This doubled in size when, by mutual agreement, the BDDA absorbed an old charity known as "The Charitable and Provident Society for the Granting of Pensions to Aged and Infirm Deaf and Dumb." 
On his retirement, George Healey was honoured by being made the Association's first deaf Patron, and at the Southampton Congress shortly before his death in 1925 he was presented with an illuminated testimonial and a cheque for his pension fund.
The BDDA also inaugurated in his memory an annual football competition for the Healey Football Shield.
Presumably he had been a football fan but it has not been possible to discover whether he supported Liverpool or Everton.
With a nice sense of history the first Delegates Conference was convened in September 1923 in Leeds, where the BDDA had been inaugurated.
Delegates from fifteen of the thirty-three branches attended, and they were joined by the officers and all members of the executive committee.
The group photo in The Deaf Quarterly News shows twenty-two men and three women, the latter representing Halifax, Swansea and Carlisle respectively.
The caption underneath the picture reads: "Is your Delegate with them?
If not, why not?"
Democracy was evidently not intended to be a dead letter within the BDDA, but participation was difficult to achieve.
The next conference, held in Newcastle in 1924, passed two resolutions.
The first drew attention to the position of deaf and dumb inmates of Poor Law Institutions and called for an enquiry into numbers involved and the best method of dealing with them.
The second related to the difficulties experienced by deaf and dumb school-leavers in finding suitable employment and particularly in entering skilled trades.
Again an enquiry was requested, to be followed by appropriate action.
These two resolutions are an important landmark in the history of the BDDA, as both request the Council of the National Institute for the Deaf, instead of the BDDA itself, to hold the enquiries and to take action upon their results.
They constitute an acknowledgment by the delegates, committee and officers that the Association was for the time being inadequately organised and funded for undertaking major tasks on the national scene.
This role was conceded to the National Institute for the Deaf which became The Royal National Institute for the Deaf,(RNID) in 1961.
This organisation had started in 1911 as "The National Bureau for Promoting the General Welfare of the Deaf" .
Founded and endowed by Leo Bonn, a deaf merchant banker and financier, the bureau had made a good start, but went into decline during the war.
In 1924, however, it was reconstituted under its new name, and virtually all organisations concerned with deaf people affiliated to it.
Not only was the BDDA among them, but it played a major part in the revival of the NID.
During its rebirth Ernest Ayliffe was joint Honourary Secretary with Arthur John Story, and, when the latter, a former Headmaster of the Mount Blind and Deaf School, Stoke-on-Trent, became the NID's first full-time salaried Secretary, Ayliffe became Chairman of the Finance and General Purposes Committee.
In addition, William McDougall served from the beginning on the executive committee of the NID, as in time did Leslie Edwards, his successor.
This close liaison with the NID was obviously liable to be misunderstood within the ranks of the BDDA so that is not surprising to find the BDDA's annual report for 1925 explaining that: The executive committee wish it to be clearly understood that the NID is not antagonistic but rather complementary to our own Association.
Nor does it encroach upon our objects.
Ours is a much older organisation, but we have always been handicapped in two essential points, namely,(1) the goodwill and help of people of influence, and (2) want of funds.
Granted harmonious co-operation between the NID and the BDDA the cause of the deaf is bound to prosper in all directions.
The BDDA MUST certainly always continue to exist if the deaf are to have any say in their own affairs.
Co-existence and co-operation between the two organisations were apparently accepted by members, but these were not easy matters to explain to them or to the hearing world, and met with at least some opposition.
Ten years later, in 1935, the year of McDougall's retirement another attempt at explanation was made in that year's annual report: In view of the fact that there appears to be a feeling in some quarters that the British Deaf and Dumb Association has outlived its usefulness the executive committee  desires to make the position clear by the following statement: The British Deaf and Dumb Association is the oldest National Organisation for the Deaf in the country.
It is in no sense a rival body to the National Institute for the Deaf but works in active co-operation with it and has direct representation there on.
The British Deaf and Dumb Association is the only body which directly represents the adult deaf and dumb and is controlled by them.
There are many local societies and missions provided for the benefit of the deaf and dumb which are controlled by hearing committees formed from the sub scribers thereto.
This is as it should be, so long as these societies and missions depend upon voluntary support.
The deaf and dumb are profoundly grateful for this provision made on their behalf for their general welfare.
At the same time the deaf and dumb should not be regarded as a class incapable of expressing opinions concerning their welfare or of safeguarding and promoting their own interests.
It is for this purpose that the British Deaf and Dumb Association exists.
No section of the community, and certainly not the deaf and dumb themselves, desires to be regarded as entirely dependent upon charity.
In so far, therefore, as the deaf and dumb desire to be independent and to have some say in all matters which directly concern themselves, educationally, spiritually and socially, ample opportunity is provided for them in this their own Association.
The deaf and dumb are anxious to help each other and this they do through the pension fund and their Association, through efforts made to arouse public interest and to initiate steps for the formation of local societies and missions in neglected areas.
A number of missions owe their existence to the initiative and financial support given in the first place by the Association.
In the intervening years, whatever the feelings were "in some quarters" , co-operation flourished at the top.
William McDougall strongly affirmed it in his speech on "The Educational, Social and Industrial Position of the Deaf of Great Britain" , which he delivered at the World Congress of the Deaf at Buffalo in the United States in 1930.
The invitation to address this Congress on behalf of "the deaf of Great Britain" had been sent to him as Secretary-Treasurer of the BDDA.
Doubtful whether to accept this honour, he was persuaded to do so when the NID asked him to represent them as well.
He therefore addressed the Congress as representative of both organisations; The National Institute for the Deaf, although it is a comparatively new body, is looked upon as the premier organisation in Great Britain…
Briefly, the Institute is the "Central Office" of all.
Centralization of the general work prevents wastage of effort, which arises from overlapping.
There were no warmer or more enthusiastic supporters than the BDDA in the reconstitution of the Institute, and there has always been harmonious co-operation between the two.
The BDDA has always had a weak link in that it never could command the necessary influential backing, financially and in personnel, to carry out its objects.
With the resources and powerful influence of the Institute behind it, this weakness no longer exists.
As an example of the combined power of both organisations he cited the success achieved by the NID following the BDDA's resolution concerning the difficulties of deaf school leavers in finding employment in industry.
The BDDA, as long ago as 1924, foresaw this unhappy industrial crisis, and recognising that it was a question it could not handle alone, the National Institute was requested to deal with it.
In June 1927, the matter was  brought before Mr Baldwin's Government in the House of Lords by Lord Charnwood, who is the President of the National Institute, and he was supported by the Duke of Montrose.
Lord Charnwood, in a very able speech, asked for an enquiry into the whole conditions governing the education, social and industrial position of the deaf.
The reply of the Government representative, Viscount Gage, was very unsatisfactory, in that it had been prepared beforehand, and did not at all deal with the points raised by Lord Charnwood.
Undaunted, the Institute again approached Mr Neville Chamberlain, the then Minister of Health, to appoint a Departmental Committee of Enquiry.
He declined on the ground that if such a service was set up, it would be difficult to resist similar demands from other classes of physically afflicted.
This answer reaches the height of absurdity.
Let me put it before you like this.
Supposing after enquiry the deaf were able to make out their case, would any Government, be it Conservative or Liberal or Labour, be justified in resisting any scheme of amelioration because similar demands might be made by other classes?
Still hammering away, the Institute has the satisfaction of knowing that it has at last brought home to the Ministry of Health, within whose purview this question comes, that things are not what they ought to be, and Dr Eichholz, who has just retired from the Chief Inspectorate of Special Schools, is at its request making a special enquiry.
The Report of this enquiry, entitled A Study of the Deaf in England and Wales, 1930–1932, was published in 1932.
It is a well-written document, sympathetic to the deaf and dumb in tenor, but recommendations involving the expenditure of substantial sums of money, or radical solutions of their plight, were hardly to be expected from an elderly retired civil servant, and they were not forthcoming.
Deaf and dumb  people were bitterly disappointed, and the BDDA's reaction is summed up in its annual report for the year 1932: No aid from the State was considered even in the most pressing of all problems, the vocational training of school leavers.
He only recommends that Public Assistance Committees might be approached, but makes it optional and not obligatory.
Higher education for the deaf receives the same lukewarm support.
Too long the deaf have depended upon VOLUNTARY effort.
The only ray of hope which the BDDA perceived in the report was Dr Eichholz's call for "a close study of all methods of communication including phonetics linguistics, fingerspelling, finger-reading and gesture" , coupled with a recommendation that "fingerspelling (the spelling and the reading of it) should be taught in schools at least in the final period of school life." 
This was seen as at least some progress in the continuing dispute in the educational field between oralists and manualists.
As lack of funds was one of the reasons for the BDDA's national ineffectiveness an experiment was begun in 1928 to augment its income by the appointment of "official collectors" .
Unemployed deaf men, who were not in short supply, were employed in that capacity.
The first two were Percy Revell and W H Williams.
They and their successors raised money by knocking at doors and distributing leaflets.
From the beginning it was appreciated that local deaf organisations would object to home-to-home visits as intrusions on their pitch, rivalling their own money-raising efforts.
For this reason the collectors were not allowed to remain in any town, other than large cities, for more than one week per year.
When these instructions failed to satisfy local societies and missions, a scheme of sharing the proceeds of the collectors' efforts was negotiated.
This compromise did not last and it became necessary to appoint Lord Charnwood, President of the NID, as mediator between the BDDA and  aggrieved local organisations.
He was successful, and collections continued for many years.
The last collector was Kenneth Duker, who was made redundant in 1981. photographs of collectors appeared in many annual reports, reflecting the importance attributed to their work.
One, G H Gilmartin of Liverpool, was awarded a medal of honour in 1955.
He died two years later having served as a collector for nearly twenty-seven years.
In reporting his death the annual report of 1957 states: "It would not be an exaggeration to say that his shoulders carried the burden of the BDDA income for the greater part of that period." 
The use of collectors did not cure the BDDA's shortage of funds, but the Association's effectiveness in dealing with specific problems confronting the deaf community was not affected by its financial anxieties.
An example is William  McDougal's correspondence with Friendly Societies which revealed their discrimination against deaf people, and eventually led to the acceptance of the deaf and dumb on equal terms with hearing people by the Church Benefit Society.
At the same time the Society agreed to consult the BDDA on all matters affecting deaf people.
Founded in 1878, the CBS was one of a network of societies which in those days provided not only private financial insurance against adversity but social fellowship in regional lodges, where members referred to themselves as "brothers" .
The Society in 1922 had some sixty thousand members belonging to about seven hundred and fifty lodges, including twenty-two for the deaf, who, it turned out, proved an exceptionally good risk.
McDougall and Ayliffe were keen "brothers" themselves, being respectively secretaries of the Ware Memorial Lodge of Carlisle and the Liverpool Deaf and Dumb Benevolent Association.
The BDDA again proved its usefulness when in 1931 insurance against third party risks was made by law compulsory for motorists.
With one or two exceptions deaf drivers were unable to obtain insurance and they were therefore in danger of becoming barred from driving.
The BDDA took up this matter on their behalf and succeeded in getting deaf motorists insured at normal rates with the Ocean Accident and Guaranteed Corporation.
Once again deaf people proved a good risk, as is shown by the 1933 Annual Report, which records that"during the past two years over fifty deaf men have been insured for motoring risks.
With two exceptions all have obtained no claim bonus rebates.
The two claims were made for damage to machines, and neither was serious or a Police Court case."
Prejudice against deaf drivers nevertheless persists and continues to require intervention by the BDA on their behalf at regular intervals.
One such occasion caused Leslie Edwards to write a letter to The Times which was published on 18 September, 1937.
Headed Deaf Motorists: Are They a Danger? it argues convincingly that they are not, and explains that"unlike motorists who can hear, the deaf motorist never  expects to receive any audible warning when on the road, and, therefore, never under any circumstances takes anything for granted.
The stone-deaf person relies entirely upon sight throughout every phase of life, and not upon hearing, and, therefore, this sense of sight is developed to an extraordinary degree of efficiency from sheer necessity.
In London alone there are between 5,000 and 6,000 totally deaf adults and children travelling about the roads daily.
They are among the safest of all sections of the community using the roads, simply because they rely entirely upon their sight at all times and under all circumstances."
The "Cinema Scheme" is another illustration of effective action by the BDDA.
It was conceived after the invention of "talkies" .
what was to become an exciting new world of entertainment for the hearing world was an unmitigated disaster for the deaf.
The "silent picture" had been one of their lifelines to enjoyment.
The BDDA determined to keep it alive.
Silent films, projectors and silver screens were purchased, and branches were encouraged to raise money and to apply for grants for the acquisition of necessary equipment.
The film lending library was an enormous success.
For years it continued to give pleasure at countless cinema shows in deaf institutes all over the country until demand for the available films gradually ceased.
In 1944 the scheme was wound up and, sadly, the stock of films sold.
Dealing with specific problems as they occurred, the BDDA also took advantage of all possible opportunities like its annual Conferences and triennial Congresses to advocate its principal policy objectives: The adoption of the combined system; the need for vocational training to improve the appalling industrial position of deaf people; improvement of the high degree of unemployment; the provision of higher education for those capable of benefiting from it, and higher standards of professionalism among welfare officers and missioners for the deaf.
The BDDA played an important part in the fulfilment of the last objective by subsidising the Deaf Welfare Examination  Board for many years.
Joseph Ellis, a future Chairman for fifteen years, was to write: "Without the BDDA the Board would have died of financial starvation." 
It was founded in 1928 as "Joint Examination Board" , for initially it consisted of representatives of the Council for the Spiritual Care of the Deaf and Dumb and of the Council of Church Missioners of the Deaf.
Its purpose was to train and examine the proficiency of candidates for work among the deaf.
They had to serve at least two years as trainees in one of the main deaf centres before sitting for examinations and, if successful, being awarded a diploma.
Standards were high, as it was appreciated from the outset that it was not enough for such workers "to have a heart as big as a football and to be able to fingerspell and sign." 
Accordingly successful candidates became highly qualified forerunners of later generations of social workers.
Over the years many leading members of the BDA were involved in the running of the Board before it wound up following the emergence of Social Services Departments, which took over responsibility for the welfare of the deaf.
As the years passed it became more and more obvious that the BDDA lacked a central office.
It could no longer be run efficiently by unpaid part-time officials, however dedicated to the cause of the deaf and dumb.
The time had come for at least one paid full-time executive officer to take charge.
This matter was discussed many times and, finally, at the Delegates Conference in 1938, it was agreed "to explore the possibilities of a full-time Secretary and the establishment of an office and report to a special meeting of the executive committee" .
The war intervened with the result that this urgent question was postponed for the time being.
On its fiftieth anniversary in 1940 the BDDA therefore still retained its traditional image of an organisation run by dedicated volunteers.
Change had to wait for the coming of the postwar years.
In the meantime the projected Jubilee Congress in Leeds had to be cancelled.
War is a particularly bitter experience for all disabled  people including those suffering from deafness as their handicaps disqualify them from participating fully in the defence of their country.
That the deaf community did not lac patriotism was shown by a special appeal, organised by the BDDA immediately following the outbreak of the war, which raised sufficient money for the purchase of a "motor mobile physiotherapy unit." 
It bore a plaque inscribed: "Presented to the British Red Cross Society by the Deaf and Dumb of Great Britain, under the auspices of the BDDA." 
The BDDA provided also for the needs of their own members by setting aside the sum of £500 for a War Emergency Relief Fund in order"to relieve hardship suffered by deaf and dumb people and their missions through enemy action.
As a protective measure it designed and distributed free to members a large luminous badge displaying the word "deaf" .
The availability of this badge to all at a cost of 6d was widely advertised and nearly ten thousand were sold.
It ensured that the deaf received help and understanding in the blackout and during air-raids.
Deaf people did not escape their share of war-time tragedy and hardship, but the war benefited them in one very important respect.
Their labour and such skills as they possessed were no longer scorned.
Suddenly there was work for everybody and the deaf community took full advantage of this change of climate, as reported in the 1944 annual report: The effect of the war on industry has given the deaf and dumb opportunities such as they had never enjoyed for many years and it is with great pleasure that the committee places on record the excellent work the deaf Have done.
They have played their part well in industry And in other directions and have also contributed largely on the National Savings Schemes.
It is to be hoped that this satisfactory industrial position will be maintained after the War, for, unfortunately, in the past the deaf and dumb have always been amongst the first to be pushed to the wall in periods of depression.
The  committee has been represented on and has played its part in post-war reconstruction schemes having this object in view.
On the whole the outlook is encouraging.
The committee was over-optimistic, as we shall see, particularly as the expectations of the post-war generation of the deaf were considerably higher than they had been pre-war.
Full employment and proof of their ability had given the new generation greater self-confidence.
They no longer regarded themselves as objects of charity and resented being so regarded by the hearing world.
From now on they demanded equality of treatment and opportunity as their right.
This change of mood was gradual, but the germs of militancy within the deaf community go back to the war years, although the BDDA leadership responded to it only slowly.
The last year of Ayliffe's Presidency witnessed the fulfilment of one of the BDDA's earliest dreams and objectives: the purchase of a fine house and grounds for conversion into a Home for the Aged and Infirm Deaf and Dumb.
The chosen premises were at Rawdon near Leeds and were named the "Ernest Ayliffe Home" , in recognition of his service to the BDDA.
At the time of Ayliffe's retirement the Association had grown to sixty-five branches.
His obituary, written by Allan Hayhurst for The British Deaf News of March 1955, says of him: In Ernest Ayliffe the Deaf instinctively recognised a champion.
They had faith in him, and I believe that this was because they knew he had faith in them.
He made a special point of seeking their opinion and their cooperation in everything he undertook on their behalf; he believed in giving his deaf friends every opportunity of sharing in the organisation of the social and religious life of the Institutes in his care.
He had no time for the over-solicitous kind of welfare service which consists  largely of unnecessarily doing for the deaf those things which, given a lead, they can well do for themselves.
It was due to his influence and suggestion that many able deaf men were appointed to do valuable missionary work amongst their fellows.
The Post War Years 1947–1961
The Cardiff Congress, held in July 1947 after a gap of ten years, was the first post-war gathering of the BDDA.
More than three hundred and fifty visitors from all parts of the British Isles attended and participated in a programme consisting of religious services, business meetings, lectures, receptions, entertainments, outings and a banquet, which was a grand occasion supported by two hundred and forty-seven guests.
It was presided over by Ernest Ayliffe who had retired as President at the beginning of Congress, but had accepted the honour of becoming one of the BDDA's first "Grand Councillors" .
This newly created honourary office carried with it ex officio membership of the executive committee so that, it was hoped Ayliffe's years of experience would not be wholly lost to the Association by his decision not to offer himself for reelection as President.
Two other Grand Councillors, appointed at the same time, were Leslie Edwards, who had been responsible for the organisation of the Cardiff gathering, and Alec Taylor, who had been a member of the BDDA since 1907, and a Vice-president since 1937.
By training a teacher of the deaf, the latter was celebrating his silver jubilee as superintendent missioner at Leeds during the year of the Cardiff Congress.
Although himself not a sportsman he was an enthusiastic supporter of sporting activities by deaf people and had been involved as an administrator in all prewar Deaf International Games.
Since joining the BDDA he had been to every one of its Congresses and his inclusion as third member of this select trio was extremely popular.
The choice of successor to Ayliffe fell upon Kenneth Payne McDougall.
As a son of William, the former secretary of the BDDA, he was familiar with the deaf world from childhood and, as frequently happens with hearing children of deaf parents, he chose for himself a career connected with deafness.
A graduate of Manchester University, he trained as a teacher of the deaf, and in 1935 succeeded his father as missioner in the Carlisle diocese.
Having been elected a member of the executive committee in 1937, he took Ayliffe's place as editor of The Deaf Quarterly News in 1944.
On taking over the leadership in 1947 he was designated "Chairman" instead of "President" .
Just as Ayliffe had been fortunate in having William McDougall as Secretary/Treasurer when he embarked on his Presidency, so Kenneth McDougall when he became Chairman, was exceedingly lucky to, have Leslie Edwards occupying these offices.
What is more, the BDDA was now firmly established.
It had sixty-three local branches and its pensioners numbered eighty-eight.
But the membership was still far short of what it should have been.
 "An increase is long overdue and would assist materially when the care for the deaf has to be presented at the top level," is a lament from the BDDA's annual report for the year 1954.
Similar expressions of disappointment and frustration have been uttered by leaders of the BDDA on numerous earlier and later occasions.
In order to stimulate local interest and to attract more members, a revision of the constitution allowed the formation of Regional Councils.
Scottish members were the first to take advantage of this development but others were not far behind.
The upshot was the establishment of four Councils: one for Scotland (1946); one for the North (1948); one for the Midlands formed in the same year; and one for the South founded in 1951.
These Councils, and another four formed later, continue to operate at the present time as autonomous bodies with their own presidents officers and delegates.
They are intended to advance the objects of the BDA within their regions and to provide regional forums for discussion and action.
Regional Councils are also social meeting-points through rallies, drama competitions and all kinds of similar activities.
Their coexistence with the annual Conference of delegates and triennial Congresses provides ample opportunity for the involvement of members in the government of the BDA.
Together they constitute a formidable framework of democratic expression and control which uniquely makes the BDA an organisation of deaf people.
Throughout its history this hallmark of the Association has been affirmed and strengthened again and again.
In the post-war world the national status of the Association received a welcome boost from the BBC, when, in 1948, it gave permission for the BDDA to make a charity broadcast appeal.
Lionel Gamlin, a popular newscaster at that time, was chosen to make the appeal which produced £2,545.
In gratitude for this service Gamlin was invited to become a  Vice-president, Regional Vice-presidents having in the meantime been abolished by a revision of the constitution.
Gamlin thus became the BDDA's first discretionary Vice-president.
In the same year the Ernest Ayliffe Home was ready to receive its first residents, but the official opening did not take place until June 1950.
By this time the home was filled to capacity and running smoothly under the superintendent and matron, Mr and Mrs E H Dujardin.
1948 also witnessed another step forward with the BDDA's "First Summer School for the Deaf" .
This was primarily intended for young people and was planned as an opportunity for combining further education and general stimulus with making friends and having a holiday.
The first school was held in Edinburgh and was so successful that the BDA summer school has been an annual event ever since.
The Rev B B Morgan acted for many years as Honorary Secretary to this venture and deserves a large share of the credit for its successful establishment.
In 1949 Leslie Edwards, the BDDA's outstanding personality from 1935 onwards, received his due reward for life-long work on behalf of deaf people with the award of the OBE.
Totally deafened at the age of seven, he has written: "My education, for what it is worth, was at Dr William Stainer's private school, first at Finsbury Park and afterwards at Highgate.
There were about twelve pupils whose ages ranged from eighteen down to seven years.
Dr Stainer died when I was fourteen-and-a half and for the next eighteen months I attended one of the LCC Day schools.
My schooldays are the one period of my life to which I do not care to refer and were anything but happy.
The only pleasant aspect of them was the fact that the chief method of communication was by finger-spelling."
Despite this inauspicious start he became an educated and articulate person who occasionally had to remind his company that he never heard a voice, not even his own.
He trained as a teacher and in 1915 became missioner to the Loughborough and District mission to the Deaf.
In 1935 he succeeded William McDougall as Honorary secretary/treasure "It has often been said," he wrote after fifteen years in office, "that the British Deaf and Dumb Association is to the deaf what a Trade Union is to the hearing workman, but it is more, it is a great BROTHERHOOD of mutual service, membership of which is open to the deaf and their hearing friends alike." 
He served the Association with corresponding commitment, and it was therefore a personal tragedy and a severe blow when Leslie Edwards, still in his prime died suddenly in  October 1951.
He had been one of the most respected and admired deaf men of his time, and he was missed not only within the ranks of the BDDA but also of the NID, on whose executive committee he had served since its reorganisation in 1924.
With his death the close cooperation between these two organisations, initiated by Ayliffe and William McDougall, came to an end.
Henceforth they went their different ways and gradually became friendly rivals in their respective spheres of activity on behalf of deaf people.
Leslie Edwards' memory is honoured in the Church of The Resurrection in Forest Road, Loughborough, where an oak memorial tablet is inscribed: To the glory of God and in memory of Leslie Edwards, OBE, Missioner to the Loughborough and District Mission to the Deaf, 1915–1951.
The Chancel Furnishings and Reredos have been installed by his deaf and other friends in recognition of the great happiness which he brought into their lives by his untold energy and also to commemorate the magnificent work he did on behalf of the Deaf throughout the country.
The report on the dedication of this memorial in the Loughborough Church for the Deaf by the Bishop of Leicester is printed in the first number of The British Deaf News, which made its debut as the BDDA's official organ in January 1955.
On its appearance as a bi-monthly journal The Deaf Quarterly News (latterly called The Deaf News) and The British Deaf Times ceased publication.
This gave the BDN, as it is commonly referred to, the chance of reaching a readership beyond the ranks of the BDDA, and the new paper under its editor Kenneth McDougall, the BDDA's Chairman, took full advantage of this opportunity.
The BDN has now, in 1990, been published for thirty-five years without interruption.
It was not an easy task to replace Leslie Edwards, but the BDDA has never lacked able and willing deaf people to fill its offices.
In Mark Frame, from Paisley in Scotland, the  first President of the Scottish Regional Council, a worthy successor was found; but he assumed responsibility only for the duties of Secretary.
The Treasurership became the responsibility of Allan Hayhurst from Middlesborough.
The work load had become too heavy for these two offices, still honorary, to remain combined.
The office of President had been left vacant since Ayliffe's retirement.
Like all his predecessors he had been ex officio Chairman, but this pattern of governance came to an end with him.
In future Presidents were purely honorary.
The first choice fell on Sir Richard Paget, who took office in 1953.
Sir Richard was a brilliant man of many talents, which found full scope in his membership of the Admiralty Board of Invention and Research.
His original mind and interests in music, linguistics and the human voice led him to study the problems of deaf education and to invent "The New Sign Language," in which every sign was a pantomimic version of the spoken word and in which signs were made in the same order and in the same sequel as the words of normal speech.
He was hoping that such a system of signs, reflecting English usage and grammar, might be acceptable as a tool for teaching to oralist teachers.
It was this invention, which the BDDA was prepared to see tried as an experiment, which represented Sir Richard's connection with deaf people.
Given his interest in their progress and his social position Sir Richard would without doubt have proved an outstanding success as President of the BDDA, but, within eighteen months of his, election, he died.
Before deciding on whom to invite to succeed Sir Richard the BDDA created other opportunities of honouring all who rendered outstanding service to the BDDA by the introduction of "medals of honour" .
The idea originated with a resolution at the 1952 annual conference of delegates, and the first two medals were awarded in the following year at the Coronation Congress Dinner and Ball at Brighton.
The recipients were Mary Ayliffe, Ernest's wife, who had been tireless in her activities on behalf of the BDDA in her own  right and as her husband's interpreter, and William Gregory Wright, a skilled bookbinder, who had been deafened and lost the use of one eye by a fall at the age of four.
He died in 1968 aged eighty-five.
During his life he led the deaf congregation of the Bristol Institute of the Deaf in Sunday worship for sixty-seven years and was one of the most popular members of the deaf community.
The Brighton Congress of 1953 was the occasion for another innovation: a "Drama Festival" .
It was held in the Dome before an audience of more than eight hundred people and was a huge success.
It proved that "deaf theatre" , a popular pastime of the deaf community, was capable of giving pleasure, not only to the performers but also to spectators.
Such a festival has been a feature of every subsequent Congress.
It consists of the finals of a drama competition between branches which fills the period between Congresses.
The winners of the first Festival at Brighton were the Paisley Branch.
Runners-up were the National Deaf Club of London and the Brighton Branch was adjudged third.
Awards for outstanding individual performances were won by Mrs Baillie of Edinburgh and A Denmark of Paisley.
In succeeding years amateur dramatics played a prominent part in the ever increasing social programme of the branches and Regional Councils of the BDDA.
The Association encouraged this trend with the sale from 1954 onwards of annual diaries, and of scarves, ties and badges in the BDDA colours of light blue, dark blue and gold.
On the political front education remained in the forefront of the BDDA's concerns.
The following resolution, passed by the Aberdeen Congress in 1950, is an example of repeated calls for change at other Congresses: That the members of the BDDA assembled in Congress at Aberdeen in August 1950, while appreciating the genuine desire and efforts of the teaching profession to furnish deaf children with a satisfactory education  by means of the Pure Oral Method, are nevertheless gravely perturbed at the general low standard of achievement under a system which ignores completely the value of manual means of communication.
It being their considered opinion, based on personal experience, that no one method is sufficient to meet their needs in adult life, they desire, therefore, that the Minister of Education shall with the utmost speed institute a Special Enquiry into the results of the present system and if necessary in the light of conclusions thus established, take such steps as he may think desirable to include the use of fingerspellng and signing, in conjunction with the oral teaching, in the curriculum of all Special Schools for the Deaf.
This resolution, together with a petition signed by more than four thousand members, was presented to the Ministry of Education, where the deputation was received "most courteously" and "much useful discussion ensued." 
Following this Congress the BDDA began to accompany its political activities with occasional publications on matters of "deaf interest" .
A sign book, The language of the Silent World, became a best seller and had to be reprinted several times before demand was satisfied.
It was compiled by the Rev Frank Goodridge, who was for some thirty years Chaplain Superintendent of the Royal Association of the Deaf (RAD), a regional charity operating in and around London and Oxford.
Goodridge was simultaneously an active member of the BDDA, which he served on the executive, as Treasurer of the pension fund and as a Vice-chairman before being awarded a medal of honour in 1977.
Having been deafened when thirteen years old, he died aged seventy-nine in 1882.
In 1959 the BDDA returned to Edinburgh for a successful Congress, which was notable for memorable weather, the election of Dr E S Greenaway, Headmaster of the Yorkshire School for the Deaf, as President in succession to the late Sir Richard Paget, and an address by Mrs Molly Sheavyn (nee  Miss Molly Sifton) on Why 1 changed my Mind.
This speaker, a deaf teacher of the deaf who had worked for many years in the Department of Education of the Deaf at Manchester University, had been a committed "oralist" .
She had recently changed her mind and in a moving and closely argued speech declared her support for the combined system.
This was naturally received with enthusiasm and she was warmly welcomed within the fold of the BDDA.
Her conversion helped to make the BDDA at long last take the plunge and appoint its first paid staff.
Two appointments were made: Molly Sheavyn, who became Further Education and Youth Officer", and Mark Frame, by then the Rev Mark Frame, who had been Honorary Secretary since 1951.
Frame as "Liaison Officer" was given the task of bringing members and branches into closer communication with the executive and of encouraging the work of Regional Councils.
There were insufficient funds for a third appointment so that Allan Hayhurst had to carry on in an honourary capacity combining once again the offices of Secretary and Treasurer.
Nevertheless, the year 1961, in which Molly Sheavyn and Mark Frame assumed office, is historically very significant for it marks the beginning of an era when the BDDA was no longer tun by part-time volunteers from their homes, but became an organisation with its own office and full-time paid staff.
Only an organisation of this kind was capable of doing justice to the cause of the deaf and dumb and of representing it properly at national level.
Under the quiet but firm leadership of Kenneth McDougall, ably seconded by Mark Frame, the BDDA was approaching the stage of development which made it fit for its task in the post-war world.
It was therefore bitterly disappointing when McDougall, aged only fifty, died in tragic circumstances in November 1961.
During his seventeen years as Chairman the BDDA progressed not only inside the United Kingdom, but, as the representative organisation of the deaf community of Great Britain, it also took its place within the international deaf community.
This event of historic importance had  occurred in 1957 when full membership of the World Federation of the Deaf was accorded to the BDDA.
The Association had applied to become a member following the presence of Kenneth McDougall and Mark Frame as observers at the World Federation s second Congress in Zagreb, Yugoslavia, in 1955.
These World Congresses are quadrennial events since the first in Rome, Italy, in 1951.
It was therefore at the next Congress in August 1959 in Wiesbaden, Germany, that the BDDA participated for the first time as a member country with an official delegation of ten: Dr Eric Greenaway.
Kenneth McDougall, the Rev Mark Frame, Allan Hayhurst, the Rev Frank Goodridge, the Rev T H Sutcliffe, A T Crellin, Alderman Stavers Olloman, Joseph Ellis and J F Hudson.
The Association has ever since this Congress played a prominent part in the affairs of the international deaf community through its membership of the World Federation, and it has itself greatly benefited from its international links.
The following report of the Wiesbaden Congress appears in the BDN: The international gathering behaved exactly like any other assembly of deaf people — there in the heart of Germany, the home of oralism, they conversed fluently and easily by the combined method.
In fact it would be even more true to say that they conversed largely by the sign method, overcoming any difficulties which might have arisen over differences m mother tongues.
The British participants were particularly interested in the brand of signs which seem to be generally understood by the deaf of most of the European countries.
In many lands the signs are identical with our own.
The World Federation presented a booklet at the Congress containing 323 signs dealing in the main with conference terminology, a most useful contribution towards unification.
There is no doubt that the BDDA's new sign book with its indices in English, French, German and Italian will he studied with an equal interest by those on the  continent.
One significant point was noticeable: very few of the European deaf have any knowledge of a manual alphabet and the spelling on the hands by the British and American representatives caused many to pause and gaze with an added interest.
The post-War Years 1961–1971
The decade following Kenneth McDougall's death was bedeviled by further premature deaths of leading members of the BDDA.
Continuity was nevertheless provided not only by Allan Hayhurst but by Dr Eric Stanley Greenaway, who was elected President at the Edinburgh Congress in 1959, having been a Vice-President of the Association since 1953.
Following McDougall's death in 1961 he agreed to become Chairman, but he was unable to find enough time for the demands of this office and resumed the less onerous duties of the Presidency in 1965.
This he held until 1983, when he asked to be allowed to retire after thirty years of continuous service to the BDDA.
Dr Greenaway, who died in 1984, aged seventy-nine, was Headmaster of the Yorkshire Residential School for the Deaf in Doncaster from 1941–1965 and an educationist of world repute.
Although his faith in the combined system was not shared during his lifetime by the majority of his fellow teachers in Great Britain, he was nevertheless held in great respect, and the editorship of the journal of the British Association of Teachers of the Deaf — The Teacher of the Deaf —was entrusted to him for many years.
The following passage summarises his views on the combined system, which he advocated in numerous speeches and articles.
It is selected from the pages of the BDN, to which he was a frequent contributor and on whose editorial board he served for a long period: A combined system is one which includes all useful  methods and techniques and adapts them and uses them according to the particular needs of the child.
It recognises the great value of oralism but it does not despise the natural language abilities of the deaf; it utilises the efficiency of fingerspelling and recognises the limitations of lipreading and the inevitable imperfections in speech for the deaf although it does not reject them.
The ingredients of a combined system are variable according to the needs of the child — it is essentially a method for the child according to his or her needs, aptitudes and abilities.
It is the only way which can bring success, happiness and freedom.
Dr Greenwood was honoured at home and abroad.
In 1962 he was awarded the OBE, and in 1971 Gallaudet College, Washington, which had previously conferred on him an Honourary Doctorate, gave him an Edward Miner Gallaudet Award, citing that: His persistent courageous, often lonely insistence in his land upon adapting educational practice with deaf children to individual characteristics preserved hope for the masses of deaf children throughout the world who were faced with the bleakness of no alternatives…
His firm commitment to flexibilIty in the education of deaf people contributed significantly to the surging emancipation of deaf children everywhere from the yoke of generations of denial.
Dr Greenaway was therefore not only a very distinguished President but he and his wife Marion, who predeceased him in 1981, were extremely popular with the deaf community.
This must have given him great satisfaction for he used to refer to himself "as one who has been admitted a member of the great family of the deaf" , and described this family as "my people" .
The BDDA expressed their pride in the President and their gratitude with a medal of honour in 1968.
The sudden death of the Rev. Mark Clydesdale Frame in 1965 was the first unexpected and damaging blow suffered by the BDDA during this period.
Frame had since 1961 been a dynamic and highly successful liaison officer, and could reasonably have been expected to serve the BDDA for several more years.
During his four years in office the Association'S branches numbered more than one hundred for the first time, and he was constantly visiting them and planning new ones.
Frame, a Scot by birth, was deafened when seven years old.
He trained as an engraver but took up work with deaf people and became their missioner in Paisley, Scotland.
Later he was ordained by the Church of Scotland as a minister to  the deaf.
His work for the BDDA stretched over nearly twenty years, during which time he served in an honourary capacity as Secretary, as Chairman of the Scottish Regional Council and as editor of the BDN in succession to Kenneth McDougall.
Frame's international standing was rewarded with a Vice-Presidency of the World Federation of the Deaf and a place on its elected Bureau.
When Frame, in 1961, ceased to be Secretary of the BDDA in order to become liaison officer, seventy-one years of uninterrupted succession of deaf secretaries came to an end.
His predecessors had been Charles Gorham, James Muir, William McDougall and Leslie Edwards.
Between them they had established the Association's "unwritten law" that the President/Chairman should be hearing and the Secretary deaf.
There followed a period when both these positions were held by hearing persons, which must be considered a backward development in the evolution of the BDDA.
The second unexpected blow which befell the Association was the death, in 1967, of Arthur Thomas Crellin, universally known as Tom.
He had been Chairman for less then two years in succession to Dr. Greenwood, when he collapsed and died during a Welsh Regional Rally.
Tom Crellin, a hearing son of deaf parents, had followed in his father's footsteps as a missioner.
Pontypridd and the surrounding Welsh valleys were the area where he served the deaf and dumb population with devotion for twenty-three years.
He was a keen supporter of the BDDA and before being elected Chairman had held office on the executive since 1951 and as Vice-chairman since 1960.
He was one of the most popular members and, though hearing, was accepted by the deaf community as "one of us" .
It was during the short period of Crellin's Chairmanship that the BDDA made a vital decision by appointing Allan Hayhurst full-time paid  secretary/treasurer Hayhurst had performed this dual role for the previous five years in an honourary part-time capacity, combining it with his full-time job as missioner of the Carlisle Diocese.
Two further appointments were made at the same time.
James F Hudson became the new Field Officer and also editor of the BDN, which had been edited by an editorial board since Frame's death, and Mrs C. Laidlow (Kitty), a Lady Welfare Officer at Carlisle, was put in charge of the new office as administrative Secretary.
As a happy augury to Allan Hayhurst's fresh start he was awarded the MBE in the Birthday Honours of 1966.
The Rev Alan Mackenzie, who was to guide the Association for thirteen years into modern times, succeeded Tom Crellin as Chairman.
Five years into his term, in 1972, the BDDA at long last established headquarters at 38 Victoria Place, Carlisle, so that for the first time in its history the Association was run from its own national office by full-time paid officers.
This development was an essential step forward, but the decision to establish a national office outside London, though convenient for Hayhurst, was controversial.
By this time the BDDA was one of four major national organisations concerned with deafness, and the others the Royal National Institute for the Deaf (RNID), the British Association for the Hard of Hearing (BAHOH) and the National Deaf Children's Society (NDCS)— were all based in London near "the corridors of power" .
By locating the office in the north the BDDA made a national role on behalf of the deaf community more difficult.
On the other hand, its members were scattered all over the United Kingdom, which made a northern town central.
Also, the BDDA's roots in the north were deep, particularly in Carlisle, whose missioners had played leading roles in the Association's advance from the days of William McDougall onwards.
An annual further education programme was one of the things which became possible thanks to the availability of full-time professional staff.
Thus, in 1962, Molly Sheavyn, the Further Education and Youth Officer, launched a programme of courses for all tastes and all ages.
Her first programme covered a period of fifty-four days, attracted one hundred and sixty-one students and involved the enrolment of thirty volunteers to act as auxiliary staff and course tutors.
It consisted of a week-long summer school, weekend courses devoted to pottery.
painting and gliding, one week of mountaineering, an Outward Bound course at the Youth Centre in Keswick, a Belgian Week "of special interest to art lovers, keen photographers and explorers of historical cities" and an Iberian cruise for schoolchildren.
During her six years with the BDDA Molly Sheavyn's "Further Education and Youth  Service" offered an increasing variety of courses to a growing number of students.
Her successor, Margaret Moore, successfully carried on the established pattern.
but provision for the higher education of eligible members of the deaf community has never been achieved.
The lack of an institution like the American Gallaudet University remains the most serious gap in the advance of deaf people in the United Kingdom.
Again and again Congress resolutions have called for facilities for higher education, but without adequate public subsidy or sponsorship this vital objective awaits fulfilment.
In the meantime the BDDA in 1966 initiated a scheme whereby deaf students from this country are helped financially to continue their education at Gallaudet.
The first two students who benefited from this scheme were Mary Jones of St. Helens and Leslie Anderson from Aberdeen.
The other perennial educational topic — the use of the combined method in deaf education — also received attention during this period when in 1964 the minister of Education and Science appointed a committee to investigate the desirability of manual communication in teaching.
The Chairman was Professor M Lewis, formerly Director of the Institute of Education of the University of Nottingham.
Molly Sheavyn was the only deaf member, and her views predictably did not prevail.
After three years of deliberation, the "Lewis Report" merely recommended more research, leaving it to the enterprise of individual head teachers and their staff to make progress in this field.
At least the report did not shut the door to wider acceptance of the combined system, and the BDDA continued the fight with the publication of a critical report by its own working party on the "Lewis recommendations" .
As the decade came to a close the BDDA had one hundred and thirty-nine branches spread across the country —one hundred and eighteen in England, thirteen in Scotland, six in Wales and two in Ireland — and, as we shall see in the next chapter, was poised to make one of the most important decisions of the first century.
The Change of Name
The Association's choice of name was from the outset controversial.
To the founder Francis Maginn the expression "deaf and dumb" was obsolete and objectionable already one hundred years ago.
He referred to the deaf and dumb including himself as "deaf mute" or simply "deaf" .
His own proposal of name had been the "National Society of the Deaf" , but, as we already know, he was overruled.
Charles Gorham, the deaf founder-secretary and editor of The Deaf and Dumb Times, within days of the foundation of the BDDA, registered his personal dissent in the issue of August 1890: The Congress, in deciding that the title should be "The British Deaf and Dumb Association" , would have done better had they omitted the objectionable word "dumb" , which is really unnecessary and has proved very misleading to the public.
The term "dumb" really implies that the person so called is incapable of making himself understood by his fellow creatures.
It is true that this word is mentioned in the Bible, but it was rightly applied then, for these unhappy creatures mentioned were not in a position to make themselves understood.
One of the members [almost certainly Francis Maginn]intended to urge the adoption of the word "deaf" only at the Congress, but seeing that it would only cause much loss of time to no purpose he allowed his motion to drop for the present.
We may be pardoned for reproducing a part of the opinion of The American Annals of the Deaf of this quarter on the subject: "The retention  of the word" Dumb "— which in America has been dropped from the titles of the Convention of Instructors, The National Association, and several State Associations of the Deaf, and many schools, as well as from the United States Census — is probably due to a vote to that effect by the conference held in London last January; but as our British friends who constitute the Association seem to favour American precedents, we trust that on further consideration they will follow our example in this respect alone, and omit the objectionable word from their title" .
B H Payne, Headmaster of the Cambrian Institution for the Deaf and Dumb in Swansea and one of the founder-members, replied with a long letter in the next issue.
He had been deafened at the age of ten and "spoke fairly well." 
Nevertheless, he regarded himself as "deaf and dumb" , declared his support for the retention of this phrase and tried to counter the arguments for its abandonment.
Further heated correspondence followed over a period of months, illustrating that strong views were held on both sides and that the time for agreement had not arrived.
The name of the Association remained a divisive issue within the deaf community and its hearing supporters, but the issue was allowed to smoulder for eighty years until the Delegates Conference in 1960 put the matter back on the agenda with a suggestion that the words "and dumb" should be omitted from the title of the Association.
The following year, after time for reflection, the issue was put to the vote.
Kenneth McDougall wrote about the outcome in the editorial of The British Deaf News of June 1961: The longer we live the oftener we find how wrong we can be.
Before the BDDA annual conference of delegates we would have been willing to risk a small wager that by far the greater number of the deaf in this country found the word "dumb" obsolete, misleading, offensive  and any other such adjective you care to mention.
For several years we have been leaning over backwards to avoid the use of the forbidden word, instructing the population at large that it is more dead than the dodo and deleting it from our titles with abandon.
Well, knock us down with a feather.
The delegates gave an overwhelming vote in favour of retaining the title "The British Deaf and Dumb Association" , not just on the spur of the moment but after the matter had been chewed over up and down the country.
It was not a unanimous vote but, my word, those who voted against must certainly have been feeling very lonely.
All of which gives one seriously to think that there must be many another way in which hearing folk are completely at sea in their ideas about what is right and proper for the deaf.
Despite this vote the matter of the BDDA's name was not allowed to be forgotten for long.
Only four years later, in 1965, at the Congress in Llandudno, Wales, the issue was revived by a motion which was debated at an extraordinary meeting.
But again the proposal to omit "and dumb" from the Association's name was not carried.
Stealth and persuasion were obviously required to achieve this change by democratic means.
The Delegates Conference during the Scarborough Congress in 1968 accordingly recommended "a long-term enquiry during which branches were to be encouraged to consider the question carefully and to invite speakers on the subject, followed by a postal vote by individual members for guidance on future policy." 
This recommendation ushered in a period of campaigning for and against the change.
Dr Greenaway used The British Deaf News for making his own views known: "We do not intend to repeat yet once again all the arguments for and against the retention of the word" dumb ", he wrote in February 1970;" what is important, however, is to emphasise the fact that in the mind of the general public and even more  completely in the minds of modem generations of deaf boys and girls the word "dumb" is out.
This is a cold, simple fact —the word "dumb" not only fails to attract youth but it positively repels them…
We are now in the seventies and our image must reflect our desire to serve the deaf of our times."
"The opponents of change were no less blunt and were also given space to express their views in the BDN.
Among them was George Donaldson, one of Scotland's leading deaf men, who had been totally deafened by injury during the First World War.
Although strongly opposed to the proposed change of name he remained a faithful member of the Association all his life and was awarded the BDA's medal of honour in 1975.
In the mean-time he took part in the debate with the following letter: The BDDA was founded by the Deaf and Dumb for the Deaf and Dumb.
Any attempt to alter the title would inevitably confuse and mislead the public who contribute to its funds…
Remember — the methods of communication employed at all BDDA Congresses, Council meetings, Conferences, and Church Services is the language of the Deaf and Dumb.
There is no substitute for the "Deaf and Dumb" .
The "British Association for the Hard of Hearing" was founded by the Deaf with speech.
Communication is by speech, lip-reading and writing.
The inestimable book deliberately prohibited and discouraged.
The erroneous impression, propagated by irresponsible people, that the Deaf and Dumb have in some mysterious fashion become extinct is merely the ravings of the ignorant.
Why should the Deaf and Dumb be expected to pretend to be what they are not?
The "modern" view prevailed eventually.
The BDN of August 1971 not only displayed the BDA's new emblem, but, records in large print: FOR "THE BRITISH DEAF AND DUMB ASSOCIATION" NOW READ "THE BRITISH DEAF ASSOCIATION." 
BY A LARGE MAJORITY THE CONFERENCE OF DELEGATES HELD AT BOURNEMOUTH DURING THE 1971 CONGRESS RESOLVED THAT THE TITLE OF THE ASSOCIATION BE CHANGED TO BRING IT INTO LINE WITH MORE MODERN USAGE.
In a later issue the magazine allowed its pages to be used once more for a final farewell to the controversy and an epilogue to it.
Perhaps the last word belongs to a letter written with panache and tongue in the cheek by Arthur Dimmock, the BDA's most distinguished and prolific deaf journalist and a future member of its executive: So the offensive word "dumb" has at length been dropped from the title of this country's major organisation.
In the past the word referred to helped to raise revenue and I am inclined to think that the word's appeal carried greater weight than "deaf" .
People tend to sympathise with those who cannot talk rather than those who cannot hear.
I wonder how the future of the BDA will be affected financially.
Despite having got rid of "dumb" , the deaf in general will remain the same…
The impediment in their speech will remain and their difficulties to make themselves understood by the man in the street will be with them for ever.
And the hearing public, finding it difficult to understand them, will always call them dumb.
In fact the mentality of the hearing is set to define dumbness as belonging to any vocal barrage of which one cannot make heads or tails.
I, for one, have been called the dumbest person in Britain.
Perhaps this reflects my rule that dumbness is the logical consequence of being deaf.
Anyway, I never had cause to feel ashamed of being dumb.
Yet, why do others writhe in fury when labelled dumb?
Surely it is better for them to strive to be literate than to engage themselves in the fruitless task of emulating the speech of the hearing.
I hope the new approach of the BDA does not mislead them into thinking that all is well with their speech.
Thus, for better or worse, the Association began another chapter in its history under a new name.
As the modem generation of "deaf and dumb" people undoubtedly rejects this expression the change of title was inevitable in the long run.
It laid the foundation for an organisation with greater appeal to the deaf themselves, particularly the young.
Nevertheless, it must be admitted that the terminology of deafness, as far as the general public is concerned, remains largely unchanged.
The BDA's change of name will therefore not be fully justified until the hearing world also accepts the obsoleteness of the expression "deaf and dumb" and adopts the usage recommended in the introduction to this history.
Until that day arrives the image of the BDA remains somewhat blurred although its paramount concern is and always will be the deaf community.
The historic debate which led to the adoption of the new name was presided over by the Rev Alan Mackenzie who had become Chairman in 1967.
He was the hearing son of one of the most remarkable deaf men of recent times —George Annand Mackenzie, who was born in 1868 as one of three deaf brothers.
Brought up at home by his mother by means of fingerspelling and signs until he was thirteen, George completed his education in an ordinary school without being able to hear what went on.
As a natural artist, he became a successful portrait painter a cartoonist for a Liverpool journal and art master at a number of Liverpool schools before embarking upon a career as missioner which he pursued for thirty years until his retirement in 1931.
Whilst missioner in Cambridgeshire — after a five years' spell in Oxford he began to —read seriously and painstakingly—and, though untutored and without the benefit of lectures, he  gained a degree in Classics at Cambridge University.
This earned George Mackenzie national fame as the first prelingually deaf person to achieve the distinction of MA Cantab.
Before his death in 1951 he derived great satisfaction from knowing that his son Alan had followed in his footsteps as a missioner to the deaf.
It was appropriate that the BDA should go forth from the Bournemouth Congress, which set it on its modern course, not only with a new name and emblem but a new Patron.
Lord Salisbury, then Viscount Cranbourne, accepted this office in 1971.
He had been invited on the recommendation of Alan Mackenzie who was at that time Chaplain Secretary to the Salisbury Diocesan Association for the Deaf, of which Viscount Cranbourne was an active member.
The new Patron and his wife attended Congress and were  enthusiastically received as the gain in the Association's status by the patronage of this distinguished Peer was appreciated by everybody present.
Lord Salisbury's active and generous support of the BDA and of the deaf community as a whole has been a significant factor in the development of the Association in recent years.
Changing Times 1970–1981
The Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act, which became law in 1970, revolutionised the public attitude to the disabled, including the deaf, by imposing statutory duties upon local authorities to provide for their welfare and to help them to overcome their disabilities.
The idealism which inspired this Act of Parliament was eloquently expressed in the House of Commons by Alfred Morris, MP for Manchester, Wythenshawe who had originally introduced this measure as a Private Member's Bill: If we could bequeath one precious gift to posterity, I would choose a society in which there is genuine compassion for the chronically sick and disabled; where understanding is unostentatious and sincere; where needs come before means; where if years cannot be added to their lives, at least life can be added to their years;…where the disabled have a fundamental right to participate in industry and society according to ability; where socially preventable distress is unknown; and where none has cause to be ill at ease because of disability.
Four years later Alfred Morris became Minister for the Disabled.
It was the first such appointment world-wide and increased the momentum of changing attitudes.
Six years on, the United Nations published its "Charter for the 1980's" , and designated 1981 as the "International Year of Disabled People" with the following aims: 1.
Increasing awareness of the needs, abilities and aspirations of disabled people.
2.
The participation equality and integration of disabled people.
3.
The prevention of disability and 4.
More positive attitudes towards disabled people.
A new era of greater awareness and understanding of the problems of the disabled accompanied by a willingness to do something about it had begun.
At the same time the disabled, growing in self-confidence, asserted themselves more forcefully than in the past.
Deaf people in particular aggrieved and angered by centuries of neglect and the slowness of their advance in more recent times, were beginning to demand changes in their conditions as their right and no longer as an act of grace.
One of their champions the prominent politician Jack Ashley, who remains an elected Member of Parliament after having been  deafened at the age of forty-five, expressed their feelings in a speech delivered in 1973: the deaf must adopt a very different attitude to society as a whole…
They have got to stop apologising and start being more assertive about their disability.
They have got to demand in the politest possible way, but in the most determined way, that they should be treated as responsible citizens whatever their walk of life People take others at their own evaluation.
If people accept themselves as second-class citizens they will be treated as such…
It is only when the friends of the deaf demand a better deal that the deaf will get it.
But ultimately, it is only when the deaf demand it courteously, politely but firmly, and demand a rightful place in society, that it will be accorded to them.
The following resolution passed by the Bournemouth Congress in 1971 also illustrates this new mood: This Congress demands according to the rights of citizenship in a democratic society: a) That whenever legislation is proposed concerning the deaf, the deaf themselves as represented by the British Deaf Association should have full consultation and adequate participation at all levels; b) That in the implementation of all such legislation the deaf should be given every opportunity for active participation; c) That there should be adequate representation by deaf persons on governing bodies of all Associations and schools concerned with the welfare, employment and education of the deaf.
So it was a happy coincidence that the Rev Alan Mackenzie at the same Congress was able to announce that he had recently attended a meeting between Sir Keith Joseph, then Secretary of State for Social Services, and representatives of other national voluntary organisations concerned with the  deaf and the hard of hearing, where the Minister's intention of setting up a permanent committee to help and advise him had been discussed.
The following year this admirable initiative of Sir Keith led to the establishment of the "Panel of Four" , consisting of the BDA, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf (RNID) the National Deaf Children's Society (NDCS) and the British Association for the Hard of Hearing (BAHOH).
As members of the Panel the Chief Executives of these organisations meet the appropriate mister at least once a year so that successive governments are aware of the problems and aspirations of the deaf and the hard of hearing.
At the same time the Panel, which has a permanent secretary and rotating chairmanship, represents machinery for coordinating the activities of these four principal charities concerned with loss of hearing.
The state's assumption during this decade of an active role in the care of disabled people resulted in the emergence of Social Services Departments and Social Workers.
This rendered obsolete one of the BDA's original objectives — the establishment of missions.
It also, in the words of an editorial of the BDN of December 1971, made missioners "a declining race" .
They had served deaf people faithfully and with devotion for more than a century and were correctly described in the same editorial as"dedicated men, universal guides philosopher, and friends who had been on call at every hour of the day.
It fell to the BDA to ensure that the new breed of social workers with the deaf were motivated and equipped for their specialist task, and, particularly—that they were able to communicate with members of the deaf community, for which knowledge of British Sign Language (BSL) is essential.
Interest in this language grew during this period for this and other reasons as never before, making its official acceptance as the language of deaf people and its use in education cornerstones in the BDA's diverse activities in modern times.
The Congress at Ayr in 1974, which had "Spotlight on Communication" as its theme, was the start of a new campaign.
Distinguished academics from America, where "total communication" is the norm in education, and the achievements of the deaf community far exceed the achievements of ours, gave the key lectures.
Dr. Edward Merrill, President of Gallaudet College, was one of the guest speakers; the other wad Dr. McMay Vernon, Professor of Psychology and Education of Eastern Maryland College, who delivered this message: Every deaf individual and every family having a deaf member deserves the right to communication…
It is this basic human right that has been denied deaf persons and their families for hundreds of years.
Until total communication becomes an integral part of the educational system of every deaf child in Britain an irreversible injustice will have been perpetuated upon deaf children, deaf adults and their families.
Their addresses were well received and the publicity they attracted was so beneficial that the BDA in 1976, by way of follow-up, paid for a lecture tour by Dr. David Denton, another American educationist, whose public meetings in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Carlisle, Newcastle, Doncaster and Oxford were a sell-out and an outstanding success.
The following year provided hard evidence for the case for total communication and recognition of BSL as the language of the deaf.
It came with a speech at the Eastbourne Congress by Dr. R. Conrad of the Medical Research Council and Department of Experimental Psychology, Oxford, about his research into the effectiveness of deaf education.
This showed that deaf school-leavers, educated orally, had an average reading age of eight and three quarters and that only about ten per cent of their speech was intelligible to a hearing person.
His concluding words were: I do not find it easy to stand here and tell those of you who are deaf that you have had a poor education, and  that your children are having the same poor education.
But you know that already.
It is not that there is fraud in this — only delusion.
The first thing is to expose the legends and fairy tales and to replace them with facts.
This is my role and the role of other researchers.
We can give you the facts.
The anger and action must come from you.
Dr Conrad later published "the facts" of his research in his book The Deaf School Child (1979) which is a devastating critique of pure oralism and total vindication of one of the BDA's chief objectives since its foundation.
However, another of the original aims had become obsolete by this time.
In the summer of 1978 the Ernest Ayliffe Home closed down and "Fulford Grange" was sold.
The closure was explained in the BDN by Alan Mackenzie: Social work policy has changed in recent years.
Local authorities now support elderly people in their own homes as far as possible, or in the local authority homes in the areas in which they live, so that they may be near to relatives and friends and their old associations.
This has meant a decline in the number of applications for admission to the Home in recent years, and with the certain reduction in the numbers at the Home in the future by death, it was obvious that the Home — to use a common words these days — was no longer "viable" .
So it had to be closed.
In the changed circumstances the sale of the property was understandable, but its loss, not unlike the sinking of a flag ship, was nevertheless a blow.
With hindsight, it is not difficult to imagine alternative uses for this fine estate which would have been of lasting benefit to the Association.
As it is, the sale of "Fulford Grange" left the BDA without real property other than "The Hudson Flats" (see page:120) and  three terrace houses, internally connected, at 38 Victoria Place, Carlisle, which, together with adjoining premises purchased at a later date, have been headquarters since 1972.
The cost of running this office and the employment of staff, inevitably generating an increase of activities, led tile BDA during this period to overreach itself financially.
At the end of the seventies, after annually spending substantially more than the yearly income, the price for this extravagance was a reduction in the number of staff.
The office of "Field Officer" remained vacant after Jimmy Hudson's retirement in 1978, and Margaret Moore, having been appointed Headmistress of the Hamilton Lodge School in Brighton, also left without being replaced immediately.
Happily her connection with the BDA is maintained through her Chairmanship of the education committee.
The decade ended with the retirement of the Chairman, by then Canon Mackenzie, after thirteen crucial years in office.
This event, which took place at the Scarborough Congress in 1980, epitomised the preceding years of change, as he spelt out in his farewell speech: The first BDA Congress I attended was nearly fifty years ago…
I ask you to think of that half century as a movement, like the flow of a river.
I would suggest that in the BDA and in the world of the adult deaf as a whole, there has been a movement from working for deaf people to working with them…
This is movement in the right direction; this is as it should be…
You have many friends, and a very great deal of goodwill around you.
Make good use of them.
This is where politics come in, and this is where I detect another basic difference between now and those far-off days of fifty years ago.
This difference is the coming of the political into the adult deaf world.
Of course, I do not mean Conservative, Liberal or Labour.
I mean, for example, the entry of the Welfare State into the deaf scene, and the formation of deaf pressure groups.
Canon Mackenzie by upbringing and temperament belonged to the paternal age, which was drawing to a close, and "politics" was alien to him.
He was therefore use to give up the leadership of the BDA at this juncture and to leave it to someone of the new generation to embrace politics in order to achieve a better deal for the deaf.
But Mackenzie was greatly missed as his devoted service to deaf people was universally acknowledged, and he was a man of great charm and Christian virtue who had many friends among the deaf community.
The Association honoured him on his retirement with the award of a medal of honour and elected him as a Vice-President The following year he was made an OBE for his lifelong work for the deaf.
His successor was Jimmy Hudson, who had been elected Vice-chairman after retiring as Field Officer in 1978.
He was the last missioner to the deaf to be Chairman of the BDA, and it is virtually certain that he was the last hearing person to hold this office.
The time had come for a deaf person to occupy it and Hudson's chairmanship therefore lasted only three years.
For the remainder of his until his death in June 1989 he nevertheless remained an active and devoted supporter.
The BDA at the end of"the decade stood at a critical juncture at home, but its place within the international deaf community was firmly established through membership of the World Federation of the Deaf (WFD).
This organisation has headquarters in Helsinki"Finland, and is governed by a Bureau consisting of a President, the Secretary-General for the time being, and nine deaf members, elected by national delegates to serve for four years from one Congress to the next.
Mark Frame had the honour of being the first British member of the Bureau.
After his death Canon T H Sutcliffe succeeded him and was re-elected three times before retiring in 1984.
Murray Holmes, the BDA's present Vice-Chairman took his place, and has since been elected Vice-President of an the World Federation.
Tom Sutcliffe, one of the outstanding deafened men of  recent times, was born with normal hearing and chose the church as his vocation.
Destined for a distinguished career in the Church of England he lost his hearing through illness within four years of his ordination.
This blighted his prospects but turned him into new paths.
His work for deaf people began with six years in London before becoming Bishop's Chaplain to the Deaf in the Diocese of Blackburn for the next ten.
In 1952 "Sutcliffe was appointed Secretary to the Church of England" Council for the Deaf in succession to Canon Vernon Jones and the Rev Humphrey Ainger, who died after less than three years in office.
He filled this post and served his fellow deaf with such distinction that Archbishop Ramsay appointed him an Honorary Canon of Canterbury Cathedral in 1966.
Eleven years later the World Federation of the Deaf at the  seventh Congress in Washington awarded him an International Solidarity Merit Award, and Gallaudet College, taking advantage of his presence made him the first recipient of a medallion for "outstanding international service to the deaf" , which he received at a special convention attended by the Vice-President of the United States.
At home he was a staunch supporter of the BDDA which he served as Chairman of the Further Education and Youth Committee for many years, before being elected a Grand Councillor and later awarded a medal of honour.
Tom Sutcliffe's wife not only acted as his Secretary and personal interpreter, but made her own contribution to the cause for which he worked as a teacher of sign language and an outstanding interpreter particularly in the educational field.
The BDA made full use of her skill for many years.
Brenda Sutcliffe should also be remembered as the organiser of the first British Deaf Choir.
Her enterprise"led to the first Deaf Choir Festival which was held in St. Barnabas Church, Oxford, in 1976.
Later Festivals have been staged in Canterbury, Durham, Coventry and Salisbury Cathedrals and in other venues.
Other members of the BDA were also honoured at the Washington WFD Congress in 1975.
International Solidarity Merit Awards "for international service" were received by Allan Hayhurst and Jimmy Hudson, and "for national service" by Alan Mackenzie and Dr John Denmark.
The latter, a son of a former Headmaster of The School for the Deaf in Liverpool was a world-famous consultant psychiatrist specialising in the diagnosis and treatment of deaf patients.
Doctor Denmark recently retired as head of the Psychiatric unit for the Deaf at Whittingham Hospital, Preston, which was partially funded by the BDA.
The Association awarded him a medal of honour in 1989.
In 1983 Sheila Keech became the first British woman to receive a WFD medal of honour for services to the deaf.
She had previously won the Oloman-Ellis Award (see page: 109) and been elected a Grand Councillor both for her work for  the BDA in her own branch — Leeds — and region — North Regional Council —, on the national executive, As editor of a Newsletter and of hundreds of "Congress Bulletins" , and as fund-raiser extraordinary for deaf sporting activities.
After more than thirty years of such varied service she decided in the Autumn of 1987 on partial retirement, retaining for two more years merely the editorship of the newsletter and membership of the committee organising the centenary celebrations.
Sheila Keech is an outstanding example of countless other members, who have rendered unstated honourary service at all levels and in all kinds of positions, thereby ensuring the triumphant survival of the BDA during its first century.
Modern Times
The decade preceding the BDA's centenary year began with the retirement of Allan Brindle Hayhurst as Secretary/treasurer on the 28 February 1981.
He retained the Treasurership, but died within a few weeks of his retirement thereby bringing to a sudden end a lifetime's service to deaf people.
As a hearing son of deaf parents, Hayhurst grew up communicating naturally by sign language and developed an early ambition to devote his life to the Service of deaf people.
This is why he celebrated his twenty-first birthday working As assistant missioner under Ernest Ayliffe in Liverpool.
In 1951 he was appointed missioner in the diocese of Carlisle, which dates the beginning of his connection with the BDA.
For the next fifteen years he combined his duties as missioner with honourary service to the BDA as part-time Secretary/treasurer before becoming full-time General Secretary in 1966 and one of the Association's most influential figures for the next fourteen years.
Hayhurst was awarded the MBE for his work for deaf people, and the BDA has paid fitting and lasting tribute to him with the establishment of an "Allan Hayhurst Research Fellowship" , which enables a prelingually deaf person to undertake research in his chosen field for up to three years at Durham University, where the admission of deaf students is encouraged and special support services are provided.
The international deaf community, for whom he had compiled a dictionary of international sign language (Gestuno), was also deeply affected by Hayhurst's sudden death.
The Board of Trustees of Gallaudet College expressed its sentiments by passing a special resolution acknowledging Hayhurst's international activities and, in particular, his service as a member of the Bureau of the World Federation of the Deaf and as Vice-Chairman of its Commission on communication.
His research into Sign Languages also laid the foundation for the compilation of a dictionary of signs of British Sign Language.
Thanks to generous sponsorship by British Petroleum plc this major reference book is due to be published during Centenary year.
The completion of this work was undertaken mainly by David Brien, a senior research fellow of Durham University, and Liz Scott-Gibson, the BDA's recently appointed Director of sign language services.
Her role consists of the provision of these services and, particularly, of sign language interpreters, who represent  a vital link between the deaf and hearing communities and are in short supply.
Allan Hayhurst's Successor in the office of General Secretary was Arthur Verney.
Like his predecessor, he was a hearing son of deaf parents, and therefore a fluent signer.
A social worker by training, his earlier career embraced social work for the deaf in Liverpool and Nottinghamshire and teaching at the North London Polytechnic, where he was tutor in charge of the course leading to a "Certificate in Deaf Studies" .
At the time of his appointment Verney was social work service officer in the Welsh Office with special responsibility for the deaf and blind in Wales.
His marriage to Ann, a social worker with the deaf in her own right and a sign language interpreter who had worked with the BDA in the past and would continue to do so, strengthened Verney's qualifications for his new task.
Before his reorganisation began, "Kitty" Laidlaw, who had  been Allan Hayhurst's right-hand support for twenty-nine years and had latterly served the BDA in the capacity of administrative Secretary in the office at Carlisle, decided to retire.
Her medal of honour was the first awarded to a member of the administrative staff.
She was followed soon afterwards by Dr Greenaway, the BDA's President who had rendered magnificent service to the Association over a period of thirty years.
His death in December 1981 was mourned by hundreds of former pupils and countless friends within the deaf community.
Lord Salisbury, hitherto Patron, succeeded him as President.
Many new "faces" were soon due to appear.
By the beginning of 1982 a team had been recruited to develop the BDA as a consumers' organisation and pressure group with the primary aim of eliminating discrimination against deaf people and of improving their quality of life.
These were old aims but the intention was to pursue them with greater vigour and effectiveness.
The principal members of the BDA's new team were Bob Peckford, development Officer (Director of Advocacy Services since 1989), Susanne Turfus, Education Officer, Peter Llewellyn Jones, Communication and Interpreting Services Officer and Roland Haythornthwaiter Sports and Leisure Officer.
One of the first initiatives of the new regime was British Deaf Awareness Week (BDA Week) which was first mounted in the autumn of 1982 and has been organised by Bob Peckford annually ever since.
This event, which has a different theme each year, is a concentrated effort by the BDA to bring to the notice of the public the needs and aspirations of deaf people.
A full-scale publicity exercise with money raising as a secondary object, BDA week aims to reach the hearing community through the distribution of publicity material, features on radio and television, newspaper coverage and various branch activities.
The first BDA Week began with the publication of The British Deaf Association Manifesto.
The headings of this document describe the areas where the BDA is active either   through its own efforts or by sponsoring, partially funding or otherwise assisting the work of other bodies.
Examples of these are: 1.
The Deaf Broadcasting Council (DBC), a standing committee, which since 1980 has with considerable success campaigned for a better service for hearing-impaired people from the broadcasting media.
Television, in particular, is potentially of the greatest possible benefit to deaf people, as sub-titles or sign language interpretation enable them fully to comprehend and to enjoy any programme.
The driving force and Secretary is Austin Reeves, a deaf member of the BDA's executive.
The Chairperson for a time was Maggie Woolley, the well known deaf television presenter, and is now Chris Jones, a pioneer of interactive video work.
2.
The Council for the Advancement of Communication with Deaf People (CACDP), which promotes the instruction of hearing people in sign language, conducts examinations for students taking such courses, and administers a register of qualified sign language interpreters.
This organisation operates from Durham and is headed by Stewart Simpson.
3.
The British Sign Language Training Agency (BSLTA), which was established at Durham University in 1985 with the object of training deaf people who are fluent in BSL as teachers of this language.
Successful students are awarded the University of Durham Certificate in British Sign Language Tutors' Training Course (Foundation Level).
In 1989 an additional Advanced Sign Language Training Programme, open to deaf and hearing students from all EC countries, was launched with a grant of roughly £400,000 from the European Social Fund.
This new venture aims over a period of three years to train up to ninety students not only as teachers of BSL but as BSL English interpreters.
BSLTA's head is Clark Denmark, who was born deaf.
He resigned his seat on the BDA's executive on accepting this challenging task, the  principal aim of which is to remedy the shortage of sign language tutors and interpreters.
Interest in BSL by hearing people, which has in recent years grown enormously reached a peak in 1988 with a broadcast by the of a television programme on this subject, consisting of ten weekly parts, each of fifteen minutes.
This series was so popular that it was repeated in the same year.
The BDA, which had co-operated with the BBC in making it, answered more than four thousand enquiries for information following the broadcast.
A book, British Sign language a beginners Guide, by Dorothy Miles, a deafened writer, poetess and actress with close links with the FDA, was published by the BBC contemporaneously and proved a great success.
4 The Sympathetic Hearing Scheme, which started as a joint effort by the Panel of Four and is now administered by the British Association for the Hard of Hearing (BAHOH).
The "car sticker" for display in shops symbol of the scheme is a and service industries wherever staff have been trained to communicate with people who are hard of hearing The BDA's particular contribution to the scheme was the production of an audio visual awareness programme for use in training.
5.
The London Deaf Video Project (LDVP), established in 1985 and initially funded by the former Greater London Council, exists to provide the deaf community with information through video tapes in BSL Subjects treated so far include AIDS, welfare benefits, the dangers of smoking solicitors and their services, and the need for retirement.
The videos are produced by a team of four, three of whom are deaf.
6.
AIDS AHEAD which was set up in 1987 to promote a health education programme and advice service for deaf people on the dangers of AIDS.
The first Congress for which the new leadership was responsible was held in Torquay in 1983.
The aim of its theme, "Deaf Pride" , was to boost the morale of the membership and to encourage self-confidence in the deaf community.
For the same reason three of the four principal addresses were delivered in sign language by deaf speakers, namely Mel Carter of America's National Association of the Deaf, Gloria Pullen of Bristol University and BSLTA's Clark Denmark.
Their achievements were intended to inspire, and they did so.
The Resolutions passed by this Congress reflected the new mood and strength of feeling of the delegates, as the following illustrations show: This Congress orders that the British Deaf Association takes a lead in pressurising for new government legislation which would absolutely guarantee the right of deaf people to sign language interpreting services as part of the statutory provision.
This Congress demands that deaf people should have access to all official information to the same extent as hearing people.
However the supreme manifestation of "deaf pride" was the election of a deaf man as Chairman of the BDA.
As the Vice-chairman, who was re-elected, was also deaf, the two elected leaders of the BDA were for the first time deaf.
The two men, who by their election made history and fulfilled the dreams of Francis Maginn, the founder of the BDA, were John McDonald Young and Murray Holmes.
Young, a Scot, who had been deafened by illness at the age of three, was fifty-seven years old when he became Chairman.
He had been earmarked as a potential leader, in 1979, by winning the Oloman-Ellis Award, which the National Council of Social Workers with the Deaf inaugurated in 1977 to commemorate the lives of two of their most distinguished members, Robert Stavers Oloman of York and Joseph  Ellis of Stoke-on-Trent.
The award is given annually to a deaf person of outstanding merit in leadership, citizenship and general achievement.
Young had proved himself such a person as assistant social worker with the deaf in Edinburgh.
In 1984 Young married Lilian Lawson, another prelingually deaf person of Scottish birth, who has held administrative posts since 1981 and has been Head of Administration since 1988.
Educated at Edinburgh's Donaldson's School for the Deaf and the Mary Hare Grammar School for the Deaf at Newbury Lilian's academic achievements include a BSC Honours Degree in Zoology (Edinburgh) and a postgraduate MBA in Business Studies (Strathclyde).
Since 1988 she has been in charge of organising the BDA's centenary celebrations  a task, which she has combined with bringing up her hearing daughter Nicola.
Murray Holmes, Vice-Chairman since 1981, is an engineer with IBM.
Deafened by meningitis at the age of five, he, like John Young, is a Scot, married to a deaf wife and father of a hearing daughter.
1983 was a year of historical significance in the development of the BDA not only for the above events but because, by a happy coincidence, it was the year when Her Royal Highness The Princess of Wales agreed to become the BDA's first Royal Patron.
Her acceptance of this role has not only given enormous pleasure to the membership but it has conferred upon the Association a status in society and an endorsement which only the seal of Royal Patronage can do.
The Princess's message to the Congress in Torquay which was read out by Dr Greenaway, the retiring President, was  received by the deaf equivalent of "loud applause" : the tumultuous waving of raised arms accompanied by happy smiles on all faces.
It read: I am so glad to have been asked to become Royal Patron of the British Deaf Association.
I much look forward to learning more about the Association and all your work.
I am already aware of some of your extremely worthwhile efforts and send my best regards to all those involved with the Association and wish you every success in the future.
It was not long before the Princess proved that her patronage was not intended as a sinecure.
Her visit to the Association's headquarters in Carlisle in November 1983 was the first of many engagements she has undertaken on behalf of the BDA in later years.
Her appearances have been singular for the genuine interest she has shown on all occasions and have been made with the avowed object of giving encouragement and, if possible raising money.
As lack of resources has been a perennial problem since the beginning the boost given to the financial status of the BDA by the patronage of The Princess of Wales has been of incalculable value.
A financial problem nevertheless persists as the Association, apart from statutory grants for special projects is entirely dependent on private generosity, and deafness has never been the most popular cause for charity.
It was therefore inevitable that the BDA would sooner or later enlist professional help to raise money.
The first moves in this respect began during Allan Hayhurst's stewardship and were primarily the responsibility of Alan Wilson, who for over thirty years served the BDA with devotion and exceptional skills until illness caused his retirement and death in 1985.
A medal of honour was his just reward.
Since this time a number of staff have been employed to organise appeals and to raise money.
In 1981 an office was opened in London   to facilitate the success of these efforts and to strengthen the BDA's presence nationally.
Occupied now mainly by Caroline Jacobs, the corporate fund-raising manager and her staff, it will also be used in future as the principal office of the Chief Executive.
Another money raiser is Ian Shepherd, who expressed his gratitude to members of his deaf community for their help in the upbringing of his partially deaf daughter by running in the London and New York marathons in 1981, collecting more than £7,000 through sponsorship.
Since then Shepherd has been employed as a freelance consultant and organiser of special events, particularly sponsored runs which have raised thousands of pounds for the BDA.
A significant contribution to the BDA's efficiency in financial matters was made also by Dennis West, who as Treasurer from 1983–1986 modernised the Association's accounting system and laid the foundation for its computerisation.
His successor was Dennis Hewitt FCA, formerly Secretary of the Wesleyan and General Assurance Society, who has a deaf son, and is the current Treasurer.
As there is never enough money to do all the BDA wants to do the Association was fortunate during the years 1982–1988 to be able to take advantage of the Manpower Services Commission's scheme of placing unemployed people in short-term work for the benefit of the community.
During this period the number of people working in the office in Carlisle virtually doubled at almost no cost to the BDA, and valuable contributions were made in all departments.
Outstanding were librarian Nigel Fletcher's achievement of creating order out of the chaos of the BDA's archives, the artwork of deaf David Fowler, who has since become resident artist and designer of BDA publications and the output of the video, design and print unit, which was accommodated in a newly acquired extension of the office.
This unit, consisting of a talented team of technicians and artists, produced a number of tapes for sale by the BDA's video service which had been started by Dorothy Miles, one of the most artistic  people within the deaf community.
The Torquay Congress foreshadowed that the deaf people of this country were no longer content to be a silent and docile minority.
Proof came within a short time when in November 1983 more than five hundred deaf people from all over the country joined other disabled groups at Westminster in an impressive lobby in support of a Private Member's Bill, introduced by Robert Wareing MP, which sought to make discrimination against all disabled people illegal.
The Bill failed at its first reading by a majority of forty-six, but legislation against deaf discrimination has remained high on the BDA's agenda.
This first ever lobby of Parliament by members of the deaf community was the beginning of a campaign which will end only with the enactment of appropriate legislation.
In the meantime the Association closely monitors all Bills relevant to deaf people and has made its influence felt in shaping the details of legislation.
This activity has resulted in some valuable amendments of Acts of Parliament.
The following year "Deaf Discrimination" was chosen as target for BDA Week, which commenced with the publication of a "public information report" giving facts and figures about the extent and character of such discrimination.
The following extract from the introduction summarises the prevailing situation: Deaf people are fairly certain to encounter deaf discrimination at some time: perhaps in the education they receive, in the career opportunities open to them, or during their day-to-day lives.
Nobody suggests that the broad social effect is comparable to the discrimination suffered by ethnic minorities.
But if you are deaf, you don't stop to make the comparison.
Of course deaf people accept that their deafness will  impose some restrictions.
People born profoundly deaf, or who become so in early childhood, may well not develop intelligible speech.
Communication — both ways — is going to be a problem and the implications of this can set the deaf person apart.
But this does not excuse the many artificial and unnecessary barriers put up by hearing people — barriers that often betray an ignorance and prejudice about deaf people's capabilities and needs.
Being deaf without speech does not mean being deaf-and-stupid.
Given appropriate communications support the deaf person can match the hearing person in most fields.
And yet young deaf students have great difficulty in getting a place at university.
Deaf postgraduates, who are few and far between, have little chance of taking a higher degree.
Deaf people are effectively discouraged by regulations from training as teachers of the deaf.
Deaf workers find their careers blocked by unimaginative employers.
Even unemployed deaf people have been discriminated against on training courses.
Equally worrying is the fact that deaf people are effectively disenfranchised because they can neither get access to nor take part in the political debate.
The BDA provides interpreters at party political conferences but the TV companies refuse to show them on screen.
In the last ten years the BDA has successfully taken up many individual cases of discrimination.
This service, which has been provided by Bob Peckford, is available not only to members but to all who have cause to complain about discrimination on account of deafness or hearing impairment.
Susanne Turfus, who was Education Officer between 1982–1988, provided as part of her duties a similar service for parents who sought advice and help to ensure that a deaf child would receive the best possible education.
Formerly a teacher in the junior school of Donaldsons's School for the Deaf in Edinburgh and a tutor to the support service for students in Further Education, her principal tasks were organising the BDA's own education programme making and maintaining contacts with the various educational establishments for deaf students and acting as spokesperson on all educational matters.
Susanne was highly respected, so.
that it came as no surprise that after six busy years with the Association she was appointed Deputy Head Teacher of the Doncaster School for the Deaf and Director of its Further Education Department.
During her time in Carlisle, the Association, as part of BDA Week 1985, which focused on deaf education, published a Declaration of the Educational Rights and Needs of Deaf Children and a report Raise the Standard — the case for improving deaf children's education.
The Declaration shows that some of the present educational issues are the unsolved controversies of the past: Total Communication is still not generally accepted; barriers against the employment of deaf teachers persist, and further and higher education remains closed to many suitable deaf students.
Other criticisms and suggestions for the improvement of the educational system set up by the Education Act 1981 are new, and so is the protest against the indiscriminate closure of existing schools for deaf children which has taken place in the wake of this legislation.
Both these documents constitute a passionate plea for IMPROVEMENT, as the average educational attainments of deaf students under the existing system remain shockingly low.
Research undertaken by Dr J G Kyle of Bristol University since the publication of Dr Conrad's book on The Deaf School Child has confirmed his appalling findings.
It is therefore not surprising that the deaf community remains frustrated about the quality of the education of deaf children and angrily  demands a change in method, greater influence in policy making and participation.
On the first day of BDA Week 1985 twelve deaf children, chosen from various schools for the deaf and accompanied by their teachers and Susanne Turfus, presented the Declaration and a copy of the Report to Sir Keith Joseph in his office at the Department of Education and Science.
Sir Keith gave them a very warm welcome, allowed the meeting to be televised and expressed appreciation of the case put to him by this unusual delegation which he engaged in talk, interpreted into English and BSL respectively, for almost an hour.
The BDA's own education programme has followed the traditional pattern established by Susanne Turfus's predecessors.
Her educational budget did not allow her to expand it or to make significant innovative changes.
But the United Nations International Year of Youth (1985) was celebrated with an International Rally at Atlantic College, Wales, where one hundred and twenty three deaf youngsters from thirteen countries gathered for a week's activities.
The climax was a visit by The Princess of Wales.
As adjunct to its education policy the BDA has recently embarked on a youth policy for reasons spelt out in a resolution passed by the Rothesay Congress in 1986: This Congress recognises that the future development of the deaf community requires the full participation of deaf children and young people.
Congress therefore urges BDA branches, regions and the Executive Council to consider initiatives which will create opportunities for the fuller involvement of deaf children and young people in the life of the community.
For the time being responsibility for the implementation of these ambitions rests on the shoulders of Peter Shaw, Assistant Education Officer from 1985 and Assistant Director of Youth Services since 1989.
Born deaf, and now aged 30, Shaw holds diplomas in chemical and electronic engineering  and is a person with many hobbies including computer programming, car maintenance, photography squash, travel and reading.
As preparation for his new appointment the BDA sponsored him on a two-year course at Bulmershe College, now Reading University, for a certificate in youth and community work, which he duly obtained.
It is hoped that the work of this new department will soon be supported by other deaf youth leaders so that a real impact can be made on improving the quality of life of young members of the deaf community.
A pilot course for the training of potential leaders, conducted entirely in BSL has already resulted from the recommendations of a working party, chaired by Bob Peckford.
This experiment was so successful that the European Social Fund and the Department of Education and Science have jointly made available £750,000 for a further three-year training course, which started in 1989.
With the qualification of students on this course as youth workers and trainers the youth policy promises fair for the future.
Concentration on the needs of the young has not meant that the elderly have been forgotten.
A variety of holidays in locations at home and abroad including guided tours have been arranged for them annually for many years.
Since the recent purchase of a block of furnished flatlets in Bridlington, Yorkshire, self-catering holidays have become an attractive alternative.
This accommodation, named "Hudson Flats" , bears witness not only to the enthusiasm with which the late Jimmy Hudson and his wife Mary worked for the provision of annual "Old Folks' Holidays" , but also to the sum of £72,000 which they raised themselves towards the purchase of this property.
There is no doubt that the very existence of the BDA and its various activities have played a vital part in fostering the deaf community's identity and cohesion as a social group.
The British Deaf News has been a cornerstone in this endeavour.
In 1981 the executive committee directed that the BDN, which had hitherto performed the dual role of addressing the  hearing public on behalf of deaf people at the same time as serving deaf readers, should in future primarily be a paper for BDA members and the deaf community as a whole.
The task of implementing this change of policy fell on Roger Brown, then editor in succession to Ralph Gee, who had been responsible for the printing of the paper for many years and edited it for a short period.
On the 1 February 1983 the new-style BDN appeared as a monthly instead of bimonthly paper with folio-sired pages and its contents targeted on the deaf community.
Not long afterwards another change in the editorship resulted in Bernard Quinn's assuming responsibility for five years starting with the April issue in 1984.
An artist with normal hearing, he acquired an understanding of deafness and of deaf people and the ambition to be involved on their behalf permanently as supervisor of a BDA project.
During his period of editorship the quality of all BDA publications reached a high standard, and the BDN grew into a tabloid-type newspaper, livelier, more pictorial and more hard-hitting than ever before.
The magazine is now typeset at the office in Carlisle and has a readership of some eighteen thousand.
Its current subsidised price is 45p.
Consistent with the purpose of the paper, one third of a typical number is made up of the perennial feature "Around the Country" , with reports from the branches about their activities and other local social news.
In addition, there are several pages of news of deaf sport edited by Arthur Dimmock, and a personal column registering births, engagements weddings, deaths, and so on .
The rest of the paper is full of news items, features and advertisements of interest to a predominantly deaf readership.
It is impossible to read the BDN without becoming aware of the existence of a busy, homogeneous community with a life-style similar to that of the surrounding hearing world.
In January 1989 Bernard Quinn ceased to be editor on being appointed Director of Information Services.
Irene Hall took his place and is the first deaf woman to occupy the editorial chair of The British Deaf News.
Educated, like Lilian  Lawson, at Donaldson's School and the Mary Hare Grammar School, Irene qualified as a teacher and taught for some years at the Northern Counties School for the Deaf in Newcastle-upon-Tyne before joining the staff of the BDA in 1981.
Fell walking and climbing are her hobbies, and she, Allan Hayhurst and Len Scarff were co-founders of the Deaf Mountaineering Club in 1970.
The BDA's involvement in Europe is from a historical point of view likely to be seen in years to come as the finest achievement of the last few years.
It began in 1985 when, invited by the BDA, nine of the then ten EC countries sent representatives of their deaf organisations to a meeting in London with the aim of forming a European organisation similar to the regional bodies already in existence in Asia and in America.
At this meeting the delegates agreed to set up a steering committee consisting of members from Germany, Holland, Italy and Great Britain, with John Young as Chairman.
By November 1985 the committee was ready to place proposals to a European conference convened in Brussels, where by a unanimous decision of the assembled representatives the European Community Regional Secretariat (ECRS) was duly created.
John Young was elected the first honorary Director, and the BDA agreed to provide the administration for the time being.
Within a year the policy of the ECRS focused on having the sign languages of the member states officially recognised as a minority language in each of the respective countries.
Sweden had done this in 1981 by legislation making Swedish Sign Language (SSL) the first language of deaf people and Swedish second.
Denmark had followed suit incorporating bilingualism as the law of the land.
This had been a great success in both countries not only for the deaf but for their hearing fellow citizens, who made "learning sign language" the second most popular study after English in adult education.
When Lars Ake Wilkstrom, Chairman of the Swedish Deaf Association, addressed the BDA Congress of 1986 at Rothesay, Scotland, and told his audience of the benefits to the Swedish deaf community from the official recognition of their own language they were astonished and excited.
Henceforth the examples of Sweden and Denmark dictated policy everywhere.
The ECRS argued the case for official recognition before the appropriate committee of the European Parliament at Strasbourg on the 23rd September 1987, when John Young as spokesman submitted to the committee a draft regulation for consideration by the European Parliament.
Others who gave evidence were the Chairman of the Spanish Association of the Deaf, the Director of the Danish Association of the Deaf and Clark Denmark.
They had a very friendly reception, particularly from Mrs Eileen Lemass, the Irish Chairwoman.
Mrs Lemass made it clear where she stood by using a press conference in London at the launch of the sixth BDA week in October 1987, for announcing that her committee would be calling on the European Parliament, the European Commission and the Council of Ministers to waive all opposition to the use of sign language and to demand official recognition within the EC.
Meanwhile the BDA provided ammunition for the coming debates by the publication of another well produced report entitled BSL — Brilsin's Fourth Language — The case for official recognition of British Sign Language.
Brilliantly presented and documented, the report argues that BSL, used by about fifty thousand deaf people, should be accorded the status of a minority language like Welsh, which is used by some five hundred thousand Welshmen, and Scots Gaelic, used by some eighty thousand Scots.
Less than a year was to pass before the European Parliament debated a motion recommending the recognition of sign languages of member states.
This historic debate took place in June 1988.
The motion was proposed by Mrs Lemass, who reported on her committee's deliberations.
Her speech was  warmly applauded by a full chamber.
Other speakers followed, but it soon became clear that she had spoken for ail present.
When the motion was put to the vote it was passed unanimously without abstention.
This sensational moment, when the European Parliament endorsed the recognition of BSL and the sign languages of other EC countries, was witnessed by Clark Denmark representing the BDA and the ECRS.
The speeches had been interpreted into sign language for his benefit and that of other deaf representatives who filled the public gallery of the chamber.
It was an emotional occasion for all deaf people privileged to be present.
By chance, the BDA's annual Delegates Conference took place at Newcastle-upon-Tyne on the following day.
John Young, in the circumstances, opened the proceedings with the announcement of the decision of the European Parliament.
When the news was fully appreciated the delegates according to The BDN, "were uncontrollable and a sea of hands raced through the air in deaf applause." 
Whether the recommendation of the European Parliament is adopted by the various governments remains to be seen.
There is no certainty that it will happen but it is possible that the deaf people of this country and of other EC countries stand on the threshold of a breakthrough in their fortunes.