

Well Mr .
Good morning.
What can I do for you today sir?
I was down last week  I had er from Saturday er my ear was all clogged up, terrible pain.
And I was taking a course of antibiotics.
And your your brains are still a bit dubious.
So
Let's have a look in and see what you've done to the poor old thing.
You're alright    Still  still not right, still not right.
awkward between your
And you, you're frightened with your dog all the time?
Yeah.
Are you frightened when you're on the phone?
That you can hear yourself
I can hear myself talking all the time.
Quite clearly?
What, on the phone?
Aye.
I haven't really noticed that.
No.
You didn't notice any
No.
What what about when you're lying in bed at night?
No, it's just a dullness all the time 
Just a dullness all the time .
Aye.
Right.
We're gonna get you some special drops to use er there there s is there's still a bit of the eardrum's a wee bit blocked 
Mhm.
looking.
And we've got to lift that off
Aha.
to get a look underneath the  er right.
I mean I'm finding that you know through it because I'm sort of straining all the time I'm getting terrible headaches and all of the 
That's right.
rest of it  cos obviously at work you're  straining every minute 
That's 
of the day.
Let's get , get some of the good old fashioned stuff.
Would it have came off a cold or something?
It's probably come off a cold , it's er, there there's a tube in there, and the other side.
If you could cut yourself down through the middle, there's you're ears on the outside there and there's a wee channel that goes in
Aha.
and at the bottom of that there's what's called the eardrum.
Aha.
Now in the inside of that it opens out, there's an opening in the bone and that leads down  among other things into a tube down here, now that is connected up further down to the sinuses across 
Aha.
here so if you get a a heavy cold, some of this gunge that runs down the back of your throat gets into this tube and 
Right.
blocks up this tube, comes right up into the back of your eardrum, blocks 
Yeah.
up that wee bit there, and I think this is what I'm seeing,
Yeah.
is this stuff lying in the bottom there.
You can see the level,
Aha.
across the bottom of your eardrum, and it's like standing and you're ,
Aha, that's exactly what it feels like, you keep sort of thinking  Aha, something like that to help.
If you could only stretch or you know turn your head a certain way it would run out.
But I'm almost certain that's what I'm seeing 
Aha.
in there.
That that was the initial feeling that I got, it was like a build up of pressure in it, but on the inside and not in the outside  
Mhm.
That's right,it's a similar to hat you get if you go flying when you've got a cold .
I was gonna say that.
Aha.
I'm almost certain that's what's doing it to you so let's see if we can get through to it with that,
Right.
get it broken up for you.
Aha.
Now it's a bottle, two drops in the morning, wee bit cotton wool, just to stop it running out, don't 
 
put it inside,
Aha.
right?
In the morning and then before you go go to bed at night.
Right.
Okay?
No bother.
Right  right .
Bye bye.
Cheerio now..