

A teacher needs a kid needs to have a teacher comment about its progress in some  specific area of literacy  such as a syntax
Mm.
or its spelling or its grammar  then  you as its subject teacher should make a 
Opportunity's there.
comment to that effect
Mm.
specifically  and tailored to that child.
I'm sorry I don't like the  the term literacy, I don't, I think it's too er    I think right, you need 
 
their spelling
Er, literacy is  it's one of the general skills, I'm sure it's down as literacy  numeracy's the other one 
It may be but, yeah.
but, but then we are con , if the argument on the one hand is we should conform to what the government's saying and I'm saying that's what the government says as one of the general areas we should address  I can't be wrong both ways if you follow my drift?
You can't have your cake 
Mm.
and eat it!
Well on the attainment targets for English they, what they've done is they put the spelling and punctuation underneath presentation
Mm.
they talk about surface features but I mean that's gonna be e even more  for people to understand.
Well jus just to lighten the mood for a moment and to go along with high-falooting words  here are some 
Ha!
high-falooting words for  weak, oh poor rather, poor  here we go, atrocious, abominable, execrable
Oh, execrable, yeah I like that !
there are better one's
That's crap!
there are better ones to come.
Unredeemable
flagrant, egregious
abysmal, lamentable, excruciating, deplorable, disreputable 
is nice.
unsavoury, louche, diabolic
Louche?
Listen,listen, listen, listen 
 
What's this?
flagitious!
God, that sounds rude!
That's  
heinous, illiquidous 
Ooh ah !
navarious, pernicious, and finally odious and obnoxious!
Oh well  !
Ah yeah !
Can we settle for odious stroke obnoxious and then move up the .
 
I'd love to  
Thank you for bringing a little bit of light in.
Execra 
Mm.
That's great that one !
Right  erm
That's disgusting !
To how we doing ?
 
Are you, are you seriously 
 
saying to me right, as a parent you choose a qualification, you like  pulling out your personal C V, and as a educationalist that literacy is a high-falooting word?
To  some people it might be, yes.
I I
Bloody hell!
Well I think, you know
That's  that's not very good English!
I I 
If  today, it is perfectly 
but 
appropriate  
with all due respect we will meet that 
 
more and more once we have to put descriptions of levels down, there will be words 
Mm.
there that they don't understand and it's 
But that 
going to be educational programme.
But I think this is this is something the kids will use as well.
The , they make it so obvious.
Yes, but the ki , if the kid's gonna say well  what's literacy?
And you say, you know 
That's right .
and you say well
Reading, writing and spelling.
You're a, you're a  it's all, you know
And all that stuff .
your English!
Yeah!
Yes.
Or or or language, not English 
Yeah.
but  language.
Language.
Yeah.
You see because if you start doing it like that  I mean, you could say  th th the mathematical skills, you could say well he's good on number, but his graph work is poor and  you know, he di , you know, you cannot  you can't 
Yeah.
you can't be that  
Alan me for me, mathematical  but I accept what you're saying that you mean  numerical for most of that alphabetical as as opposed to 
 
No, I said that.
Wi with with with all due respect  you know we we we're talking about the precision of the word and when you actually come to a ten point scale there will be some imprecision anyway in the  is it a six?
Is it a five?
Is, d'you know what I mean?
Mm.
So I I I think there's going to be some balancing anyway.
You you're discussing this and that instead of putting presentation 
 
I put  and neatness.
it's possible  then 
 
Pardon?
then 
instead of putting presentation I put  and neatness.
It's like you know,do we read them though  
Mm.
Mm.
She does.
Well it's a that's 
Right.
just a fact.
Mm.
Instead of presentation I put writing and neatness 
Ah, yeah !
to make it easy.
It's our duty anyway to get these words though  the last minutes of discussion have been possibly the most valuable  cos if we cannot  use language accurately 
It's about language, it's important!
Yes it is!
then we're not doing our job then are we?
Yes!
You're absolutely right!
That's right, but the trouble is using language accurately  with all due respect  is is to some degree 
That's a 
from where you're standing.
terrible expression with due respect!
With limited respect
Is it it depend on where you're where you're standing doesn't it?
When really it means with no respect !
Oh that's unkind!
Wouldn't be sitting here going through this process if I if I hadn't got no respect for your !
Could we have punctuality down there?
Well I was goi 
I would quite 
T 
like that.
Right.
Colour coded pencils for the classes!
Ca can we just go through
at the moment we've got effort and behaviour acceptable, we've got numeracy acceptable and we've got literacy acceptable  with reservations but, tough cookie!
We've got attendance  I was going to suggest that we made that attendance stroke punctuality
Mhm.
If you get that all in.
Be in on time.
Yes?
Yes
Mm.
I agree.
Yes.
So so ca can I  effort, what about this concentration bit, that was a query?
Er 
Mm.
what was on the orig , what did we have on the ori , I'm not saying the original list is like, is right Paul, I had something in there about homework, whether people wanted
No.
The the premise on this was  what  what do parents, and I know the words are wrong but at least it moved people along way  er er er what do parents want to know about their youngsters?
Er, very simple  and
It's hardly our authority 
that was my feeling?
is it?
Sorry?
Hardly .
No , well I'm I'm saying to you the same sort of things, in general skills and abilities there are certain things that we required to put in  the er  numeracy the literacy  er, to some degree attendance and punctuality, although we don't have to do it on a subject specific basis  erm  we, everybody wants  to know about he young ,ho whether their youngsters are trying i.e. effort  ha , whether they behave in lessons.
Erm  do we want  areas like working with others, do we want homework?
I mean, that's what you're saying 
Not on skills.
Not those two.
You don't 
You did.
want homework?
No 
Yeah.
I don't want homework.
No, I don't want homework.
No 
Nobody seems to want homework in.
No.
Why's that?
It's spontaneous  doing it off their own back.
Well how do you make a comment  on how the kids done a homework?
   
It's very difficult on a ten point scale 
   
wha what's ten for some kids 
Sorry?
may be three for another.
We have a homework policy that is accepted in the schools.
We don't need comments!
No , I'm just asking I'm not 
Yes.
I'm not trying to be  
Mm mm.
I'm just asking 
Testing us.
why?
Well I haven't, I haven't got an axe to grind !
Andrew, homework?
I think that it isn't a general skill it at needs to be commented on, I think that it needs to commented on I think that it ought to be commented on in the  comment box.
Yeah like  he never 
Right.
handed in a piece of homework 
Yes.
all year!
Yes.
Would yo would would 
Yes.
I, when I do the comment thing  put in  would we, I say I, that's conceited!
Would we put some guide lengths on on things
Yes.
that might be commented upon?
To give 
Yes.
people starters
Yes.
for five.
Mm.
Yes.
Mhm.
Homework, things that might be commented on in this 
Yes.
section, art, colour of your socks
Yes.
I have put on my er, general skills and abilities, working with others  I wanted some social
Could we not 
Is this 
summarise that 
is this
and put the collectively 
are they 
put a collective noun for that which 
I 
is what Paul was saying 
It's 
a minute ago isn't 
Mm.
it?
It's 
It's , what did you say?
Paul.
Pardon?
Horrible!
It's it's got to be ca often work sideways from working with this door open?
No
No, I just 
No.
opened the door  about a minute ago.
No, I think that  so social skills 
then.
perhaps
Yeah, some  some of it in.
Social skills.
We are required in the same way as we require numeracy and literally  literacy, literally!
 
to have something that indicates how the youngster gets on with others, I'm sure that's one of the general skills and ability.
Social skills, yeah  I think summarises the whole lot together.
Mhm.
How you get on with other people.
What about listening skills and  and speaking skills?
Well hang on, social skills.
Cos these'll have to be clarified to some degree.
You're gonna have a great deal of .
Body language!
But, but the words will be in, the clarification needs to be for 
 
as a as an addendum for for staff doesn't it?
Yes, a clarification is for the staff not for the parents!
Oh no!
Well, obviously not!
Ca can I
Or we'll be writing the whole books for them!
So concentration's there, okay.
Could I, can I say something about
Have faith in our prayers!
I think that we should be aware of what these levels 
mean.
I think that we must  whe when we're, we we must come to some sort of consensus in the staff as to what the levels mean  in inverted commas.
Can I  suggest belo , below average  rather than poor?
I'm afraid I don't like that average.
I know it isn't ideal
Ooh no.
but it's  er it's  a little bit better than poor.
I prefer poor 
I like poor.
I like poor.
Mm.
Let's have a vote on it.
Below average?
Execrable?
Poor?
Oh not poor, come on!
How, how can you possibly like poor?
The negative connotations of a word like that, come on!
But some of them 
Well 
are bloody poor!
well wo well one out of ten is indicating that they're poor!
I ye yes  and I agree with that, but we're supposed to be communicating with the little bastards right 
No, no I'm sorry!
in a sensitive way right, emphasising the positive
No, no we're supposed 
 
to be communicating with the parents!
Parents  
Exactly little bastards, that's what I said!
But we're not pandering  it's not pandering to the kids!
 
I agree with you  but you, I mean, if , well you might as well say shite!
Levels one, two and three are shite !
Can I  Can I 
I mean if you're going to take that to the ultimate lengths 
 
the way that you lot are going on
Why Shite, you know, the word is shit!
It's bloody John Wayne's version of educational terminology!
With all, with all, with all due respect
Oh  
 
Sold to Angela's er  mini outburst
I I  can we leave the word poor and below alone for the moment  so that 
Right sir.
Angela can reflect 
Yes sir.
upon it
and come up with other alternatives
What
we get what you're saying but at the moment  er  can, can we stick on skills and abilities and try and 
Right.
get in here.
Sorry!
I'm I'm stuck for a word I've I've asked  Angela, I can't explain to her what I mean  it's awful when you, when you got a word at the back of your mind  it's one of those words where  ki , a kid ham anybody, any person  can  er, realise that something needs doing and do it without  being told to do it.
Er, they have  er, a se se 
Independence?
Sense of responsibility.
Some sort of a level of independence.
Responsibility.
No.
None of those things.
More creative than that.
Er  you know, perhaps if  Baden Powell might have appr approved it, of it you know it's it's
Weird?
I'm being  !
Go on, carry on.
I don't know what you're getting at, what what
You don't do you, no?
Never mind, as an extra skill.
O okay.
Oh as an extra skill?
As an extra skill, yes.
Yeah.
Perhaps it's so rare amongst
At the moment
children that er, this  it seems unlikely that er 
Stickability?
That's a Brownie 
No!
term.
At the moment
Dib, dib, dib, that's a 
, no.
scout term !
I think, I think you're all getting a bit tired are you not?
 
Well the cab firm said we could .
I'm sorry to have brought this down to !
At the moment we have
What have we got?
i effort  behaviour 
Yeah.
literacy, numeracy, attendance, punctuality and social skills.
Right.
Well 
Is 
writing and neatness can just be called presentation.
Right.
Er
Give us again what you've got, I want  effort, behaviour
Effort, behaviour  literacy, numeracy  attendance, punctuality, social skills and  presentation.
And have we not gotta take care that we don't  we don't have such an enormous list 
Oh yeah !
that people are gonna be going  !
Well , all that, all we've got at the moment Alan is a list of things that we feel should be in there
But
it may well be that you'll say well, we want to put these in a specific order
Aha.
or or that we want to leave some of these out.
All I'm  trying to do at the moment  is to sort of get 
Is do like a shopping list.
ideas of er 
Aha.
a shopping list 
on there because I I I I, this following instructions I remembered why I put it now  we are, but one you were saying that 
Pardon?
we're obliged to report on social skills and so forth 
Mm.
one of the most important things that bias report on is problem solving, and that was my  attempt at  problem solving.
Is it !
The word that I'm looking for  is
Problem solving?
No?
No!
That's two words!
Ah shit!
One word which  includes problem solving
Can fo , can we for the moment you have a a specific task Andrew 
 
which is to come up with a word 
 
can we put  can we put problem solving in for the moment?
Mm.
Do we agree that we want something that that that that says
Well you see following instructions  isn't really problem solving  but it's sa partly a long line and the kid's would know  what it means  mm, that they know
I mean I would put that under  group work and social skills and no er  the way I would approach it but it may not apply .
I quite 
D'you see?
like problem solving.
We  I'll have to
Alright, well go and 
go bu 
do some then!
I'll have to back through my
Instead of 
general skills 
alright, problem solving, at last!
So at the moment we've got one, two, three, four, five six
There's only an extra  
so seven eight
Fine.
There's only an extra one there!
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven 
We could leave literacy, numeracy no?
there's only an extra one there.
Literacy, numeracy, we have nothing
Fo nothing for co , concentration's out  and literacy's in  following instructions is out, problem solving's in  er, mathematical's numeracy  er, social skills is extra.
And presentation I've got.
Presentation is writing 
Yeah.
and neatness.
Yeah instead of writing and neatness.
Any further comments?
Ah, isn't behaviour in, in social skill  and then we could drop that as a separate one?
No, I think the behaviour 
No.
is very important.
You want to, want to see that separate?
No I'm not saying ?
It may well be a social skill but I think it's 
aye 
worthwhile
It's a one that's 
You want it identified separately?
We  we would 
Yeah.
have to  er er I'll I'll try and come up with some talk of, some sort of definitions, guidelines of, I mean, effort's effort, I do , do you have to explain effort?
Not really cos 
No.
Cos I come back to what I said about five minutes ago?
Yep.
These levels erm  they've got to be in the context of the levels  of the national curriculum or fail to to be valuable.
We canna have everybody  putting  eights, nines and tens  and nobody putting ones, twos, and threes because then it it becomes meaningless  er, in relation to the section   it's got to bear some relation  to what sort of standard you expect from a child at at such 
What's this?
For what?
at such an a 
It's for
Well these, these are te , it's a ten point scale
Mm.
This effort thing?
Yes, the the the all these 
Oh I didn't know that.
have have to be at  that's why it's a ten point scale
Yeah but  I don't see how that might have to relate to national curriculum er
Well that was one of the reasons for doing 
 
it on the basis that there's a sort of uniformity and that we're trying to set a 
 
consistent standard.
Yeah, you've got a ten point scale but with effort we can hardly say  hey, there's a class there and you haven't, you haven't put anybody down as poor!
Oh no!
No no!
Ah, we don't have to 
I'm not saying 
apply that
I'm not saying that  what I'm saying is that  that we must all have  at the back of our minds a a sort of considered opinion of what's 
Aye consensus of what  
a consensus of opinion of of what levels 
Yeah.
are, yeah.
Right.
Well hopefully we already have.
Well I think i , I think it's, I think it's it something that should be
Emphasised.
emphasised at a whole staff meeting
Yes.
that we should 
Yes but the , that we needn't worry about at this stage I think.
What for these?
For these here?
Yeah, because invariably somebody's gonna put  erm, behaviour eight  and, everybody else is gonna put behaviour two and it's gonna become meaningless.
Well no!
It's gonna happen.
Well no, cos some classes  
Not necessarily  
But eight  no but eight  in terms of in terms of behaviour
Aha.
er, is  very very good and if you, it's it's level A at G C S E  in the area.
Well it shouldn't be like that!
Ah oh ha no come on Don!
no it shouldn't , no I disagree with that!
You can't quantify their 
You can't 
behaviour
no!
I can see, I can 
I me 
see the point of having 
Yeah.
coherence of, er 
Mhm.
like that, but not  not to that 
Mm.
fine point, it's classifying the kids too much!
No, I alright, I, yeah 
And in some class rooms the kids are gonna go down for a variety of reasons, they're gonna  they're gonna work their ticket  and in other class rooms they won't!
And the gi , that's gotta be reflected.
Oh yeah I I ca yeah, I I accept I'm I'm being  
What d'you mean?
finickety but I 
Well I tho though I I take what Don's saying in a general   .
In a general way , yes.
Actually I wouldn't mind it staying open cos I'm a bit hot.
Right, leave it open.
Yep, leave it open.
Is that alright?
Andrew could you come and hold this door?
Certainly.
It's still
I'll put head in  
Erm 
close it.
we we've gone over  er, I mean are we basically happy at that?
So we need to re-draft it  we  it needs to be sort of re-drafted in in a format
Yes, it's thanks very much 
that, that we've got 
for doing that.
and if I didn't say it strong enough, as Angela's done, it has given us a real basis to work on Don and it is appreciated.
Mm, it is.
Yep.
We , pupil, teacher, date  does that still apply?
Yes, it does doesn't it?
Yes.
I was just thinking about whether people sign but it does, no it still applies.
Oh Andrew it doesn't ma 
No I mean this guff  that was  you know, or stuff  erm, we've got more categories than we originally started with.
Well you would just need an extra space or two spaces on the bottom.
D'you want to look at whether  you put them in any particular order?
I think you should yeah.
Yes, I think or I, and things like effort and behaviour 
Behaviour.
are important.
Well we 
Individual  as opposed to things that are hard like.
We we we finish in five minutes I feel that 
Mm.
I asked Terry to come along because one of the things I tho I tho I hope we might get round to spending a few minutes on was about  Alan's raised it before about  records coming in  er, and what the state of the game is in records coming into us  and how we're transferring that information, or not transferring that information onto dep onto department's national curriculum  er  material 
Mm.
is starting to flow into us.
Yes.
Er er and there are i implications for you in as much that  my simplistic idea would be that  everything in terms of a subject would be on a separate sheet  so that 
Mhm.
maths information we had a, a child would go straight to the maths 
Yeah.
department etcetera etcetera.
But would it?
Yeah.
Whether 
Well 
you would
the point I'm making now is we've got Terry here
Yeah.
just to give you some background information cos  we do need to address that, I know it's a side issue from this  are we fairly happy with that?
Yes.
Other than 
Poor.
poor.
I'm strongly thinking that at 
What else 
some stage you've got to say  to a kid
Right, whilst 
you are not good!
you have that on disk 
 

how much  how onerous is it 
I agree.
for you to do 
No I can I can move it, I can , yeah.
Right, so would you do that for us so we 
Yeah.
can at some point get together and then 
I can't do it here!
Oh no!
No 
No.
no!
I haven't got a dictionary.
Well  you've got Friday night don't be so silly!
Mm.
Erm
All over your place on Saturday 
we can we can review that again.
Right okay.
Aye Saturday morning!
Is that okay?
So tha , thank you very much for that, a little bit heated on occasion but we've got there.
Good though wasn't it?
No, I get very offended and upset
and agitated cos I like  smoothness and light.
Go back to what I asked Terry  about, just so that you're in the picture really.
Yeah.
I think  one of the biggest problems we've got  or I've I've had in the last couple of years is that we've got so many primary schools that we get children from  Spring Gardens and  Western are now producing national curriculum information for which Marian has  got.
It's come in in different ways, maths, English and science  from Spring Gardens is separate  separate sheets which we can actually take out the files and give  to each department, there's no problem there   Saint John's  again, is separate sheets, Collingwood isn't, it's actually on  photocopiable sheets, we either cut them up and give them out separately  in some form or whatever, and what I've, what we hope to do over the next  maybe this year is to ask them for a  sheet each, for each subject that we can actually take out of the file and give to each department, so that is has arrived, it ha did arrive last year  but it arrived in such hotch botch that  we didn't actually give it out, but we certainly have it this year and Marian and I  certainly, Marian anyway will get that together and give it out to departments.
I know Paul's been down to  Percy Saint John's and they are quite far ahead  believe it or not they have got separate sheets for most subjects and we'll able to do that  English at pri Spring Gardens is good, so it maths because that was actually dealt with by erm  Barbara 
Barbara.
who is now left, but never the less it's been taken over by 
Yes well the the ne the new girl's very
Yeah and
very good as well.
Yeah to , yeah she's okay, Janice , but there is somebody specifically in charge of each of the areas within the primary schools, they keep changing because they keep leaving but I mean obviously the there is  it is going on.
The problem I have is putting them into forms and last was a was a specific example because we ended up with our seven G N, and I took the i , the information from each of the primary schools  and put them into form classes.
Now this year what I've done is actually going to see the form teacher  and look at the classes and they've actually given me a lot more information this year and hopefully, keep our fingers crossed, the classes are very varied and we have good, we have middling, and we have the not so good and we've tried to keep those like that.
Yeah we are, not so 
It is 
good !
it is 
 
well not saying tha , I mean I  and again I, I think what I need to do is get a sheet again, obviously working with yourselves and Rod  to get you more information to make sure the classes are not  and don't get same situation as last year
Are we in a position Terry then  for every child  t to for example with years, with with with seven or eight etcetera to say to Alan 
Yeah.
right  there's a sheet er, that indicates  er, what we are aware of the mathematical ability  sorry, the, aye, the mathematical ability o o of every child at  i.e. from Spring Gardens it will be a separate sheet
Yeah.
but from  wherever you said, if they're using one sheet for all three  we would need 
Yeah.
at the present time to photocopy a couple of extra ones so Angela can have one 
That's right.
and Don can have one.
That's right.
Yeah.
I don't I don't know that you need to do all this  I mean, we would like ac I mean as far as I'm concerned we would like access to this information  but I I don't particularly need some pieces of 
To keep it.
paper to keep.
I think that's very well sa 
  
I mean if they can be put in a room or
You know if the 
In the  
if there's somewhere that that we can 
secure room for the staff to just to 
look at.
look at and browse and take the information that they want rather than putting  what sounds to me a lot of work on some
Because in actual fact I would I would be interested
Mm.
in not just the maths you see.
Yeah, yes.
Mm.
I would I would want 
Mm.
to nick the whole , I want to know English as well.
Like English,as well!
Look what I'm saying 
 
What about the small staff room?
secretary that could be got that way 
Can all the tables
There is no need for you 
 
to do 
Right.
an enormous amount 
Yeah.
of work.
Right, so in other words, we just take it out of the files, keep the  children information in the tutor's office and just extract what you want to put in somewhere else?
But you would put it in alphabetical order 
Order.
not form order because 
Not form.
they'll obviously be moving about and tutors can't be faffing round every two minutes if something goes wrong.
Have to be secure?
It could go
Yeah.
mm 
With respect, will these  people not be getting SIMS soon?
They have, all our  have got SIMS.
So won't this information be on SIMS and can it ju not just be transferred?
I'm not sure Andrew.
Erm
I suppose it must be.
Wouldn't that be a better way of keeping anyway?
Well, possibly.
But what about the current situation?
Fair enough but  in the future so as not to have to  
Why can't just simply pass it round people?
These people won't be on si the the  some of these primary schools are on?
Well they are, yeah!
Spring Gardens and  have got SIMS.
Everybody's had SIMS training now!
Yeah, they've all got it,
Er 
all our primary schools have got it.
Bob  was down with his secretary at 
Last time I went in everyone got called!
Yep, they all that  
 
Yeah.
You're kidding me!
Extract it, but keep it in your room alphabetically  then if the maths department say, hey look, can we have a look at that during the  
 
 
 
Have it there for the first month or something.
Yeah go 
Well as if , I mean I've got a draw in my filing 
 
cabinet, so as Marian that says 
What er 
that
But filing cabinets tend to put people off.
No!
We we will ask, I mean it's not gonna be something that's vital 
I've used a filing cabinet and it's put me off!
Yeah.
but at the minute 
 
We no  it'll go 
We will just ask you can we have a look at it for a few days.
it'll go, it'll all go as it's individual sheets in a box file will it not?
Mm.
In a single box file with cap on.
Oh well a box, yes.
It can go in a box file.
I've got a box file.
Ah.
Can we have the box file, if you could bring that in?
That's saves me bringing it.
A box file yeah.
That could be kept in tutor's room with
Oh.
national curriculum  AT's on 
Mm.
it and it's 
Yeah.
there
Mhm, oh yeah!
sheet on the top so 
 
if somebody takes it away
Yeah.
they 
Oh 
sign and leave the sheet.
that's a good idea.
Yeah.
And
Here here!
Yeah.
But when you 
Jolly good!
when you did make the point about not having information I was concerned about that 
Oh yeah!
it was an oversight 
Yeah.
on my part  that didn't get passed down  and it is important that's .
But we 
Execrable!
Yeah!
I mean we were  
!
 
If we cheated about not having it back  you know, when parents came in June  but we don't need it immediately  you know, it doesn't have to be photocopied so that we all
But the
have it within the first term.
but for the from a tutor's 
It is!
point of view when the information's been com when so it's coming in and being sorted  it is better that it's done at that particular time 
Oh yes otherwise, yeah
rather than filing everything away then having 
Yeah.
to stop and go to files and taking it out.
It's one 
Yes 
of those jobs 
but 
you're better off doing  
but Terry has enough on his plate without having to  to separate them into maths and this that and the other and photocopy bits and pieces!
Because we don't ne , we don't 
Yeah.
them permanently, we 
Yeah.
just need to look at them!
That's right, yeah.
Yeah.
The be all and end all!
Right, mine is a 
Cos I will copy down anything that I think 
Yeah.
is important!
Angela?
Yes!
In the va , in the various schools that I've worked in I I've 
Right.
made a list of all
Is that two?
er, six  erm, I've made a list of all the different words that are used for crap on reports right?
Special needs, cause for concern  inadequate, unsatisfactory, below average and weak
Unsatisfactory?
and does , do any of them sort of leap out and you think yes, yes I love it?
No.
In a sense I like below average, I'm concerned about getting the two damn words in, isn't that pathetic really!
Below average is the best of 
Can't we just  back it along a bit so that Andrew can  you know
Certainly.
Could you call it beverage?
Yes certainly  tha that can start there, finish there 
I thought it was er?
and they'll be loads of room to fit in
Below average.
I shall leave poor in when I do it because I can't get it in!
That's fine.
Mm.
I I  I know a good doctor 
I take what you're saying.
by the way!
It's in the spirit of trying to be positive  I'm 
Aha 
Yeah.
it's important, all those sort of things add up.
Certain people missed that joke.
No, I didn't miss it!
Thank you very much 
 
I just ignored it!
just gone a couple of minutes over, let's go and .
 
Chose to ignore it !
What did you say ?
!
Angela would you like to put a couple of kisses down.
Thank you very much.
You tinkers!
I'm backing it, am I backing it?
I'm mi I'm not gonna stay here 
You're backing it, you're backing it!
listening to all this guff!
What the hell am I doing now?
God!
Ask Terry, what are we doing 
Er 
next?
we're doing controller 
Oh 
next, the programme 
 
Oh I see!
It's quite intense this isn't it?
What are doing?
Yes it is.
 
Well yes, you're doing something on your own aren't you?
I mean, I thoroughly enjoyed this morning 
Have you gotta stay SATS now?
well I was  not lost but  and then this afterno , it's quite dif 
Initiative.
mentally draining.
Initiative.
I quite enjoy myself doing these.
the word I'm trying to think of.
report.
Ah, but I get I get embarrassed because you people are so cruel!
 
So rude to each other!
You little li 