

Did I tell you what's on my desk downsta , I told you didn't I?
I didn't take  did I?
What's on my desk downstairs right at this moment?


You'll like this!


Is that sealed?
I bet you're right.
What is on my desk at this moment?
Two  Abel Barder's books.
Oh yeah.
Isn't that sad?
Isn't that sad?
And I'm actually admitting publicly that there are two  Abel Barder's books on my desk downstairs!
And I had a .
And you think  it's sad?
I'm a bit worried you!
You've gone over all quiet!
I don't think  .
Just not sure of .
I thought of Christine  .
making it !
Oh, I meant to bring that with me!
 
Which has a complication.
And .
We'll do the questions and answers today children!
Right!
Stuart !
Mister!
You're very quiet there Stuart!
Chris 
Yeah!
as long as your enthusiastic about being here!


That's why I like !
Actually that might spring better.
Tracey .
Oh!
Yeah.


Get it right!
Ann .
Yeah.
Hello!
Good!
Daniel!
Yeah.
Yeah.
Congratulations!
Sooner or later!
Jonathan!
Yeah.
He's scra you sa , you said that without moving your lips!
That was brilliant!
I know,.
And Jason.
Yep.
And Matthew.
Matthew without a voice!
Kenton    and Joe!
Yeah!


 
And Steven .
On holiday.
I'll fool them, I'll lock that door!
Oh!
He always comes in that way doesn't he?
Ha!!
Right people!
Two things to  do with you today mainly  one is to  whip through  at least part of the isomers work  and, I say part of it because  you'll be coming back to other parts of it a bit later on  when you've, for example,we'll coming back to erm,isomers work.
And at various stages during the organic you'll also be coming to  what we call optical isomers.
What I need to do is to go through them with you and make sure you fully understand what they  what their origins are etcetera  because isomers we base the questions are very very common  so I'll be able to talk about marks.
And what do marks make?
Prizes.
Prizes, yes  a prize of that little envelope says  whoopee you have passed!
It doesn't actually say that, it just gives a   but if you say whoopee I have passed.
Not me, cos I've already passed, but you.
Yes.
Are you  gonna do passing?


Right, I want to go through isomerism and then go straight onto the  erm  e , go strai glad you made , a bit late but er
I thought it was ?
Sorry.
You think it might be?
Actually, actually it's a good one!
Michael, now that is a superstar!
Mm.
Mm mm.
Er  some of you won't understand that.
Are you a superstar?
I don't think so but  .
He's fa , he's famous!
Fame , he's on the poster!
Quite genuine!
You are serious?
Absolutely ge , Stuart is that true?
That, Stuart never lies!
He's going to Cambridge so never lies!


Is that true?
No.


Sorry!
Right, so, let's go over isomers and then start on the hydro-carbons in some detail and pi the first mechanism, we're talking about mechanisms general as well.
As far as mechanistic  is concerned you haven't got to do an awful lot.
There are only about six mechanisms you actually need to know.
One of those  you've already met in detail in terms of kinetics as that was the idea of  reaction  wasn't it Chris?
Yep.
Yep!
The other one also came up in kinetics  and that's this business of  nucleus    nuclear filmic substitution.
That's .
Yeah.
Sorry?
.
That side you get the filleca take that's right,Yes !


More.
sume, assume.
Erm  alright, it's alright Chris  it's alright!
It's all beyond you Chris, I know!


It would be easier, be easier 
It's all beyond me at the moment as well!
Right, so, if I just start on  isomers across the board.
Now, you must remember, in the link sheet  make sure you back up whatever you're getting here.
Make sure you back it up with the exercises.
And, of course, you do have to log it, one of those various exercises and so on .
If you don't log it  I'll assume you haven't  and can I point out to you there's parent's evening coming up very soon, thank you very much!
And I'll have a chance yet again, to talk to your mummies and daddies before yo you actually take your final exams.
What happens if you kill your mummy and daddy?
Pardon?
What if you kill your mummy and daddy?
If you kill your mummy and daddy I'll have to talk to you Peter!


You better resuscitate them .
It's far better to erm  keep your mummies and daddies live  or at least, you know, do a psycho job!
With the stuff that we !


Ma already !
!
Right  children!
First of all  Tracey  you can have the first opportunity to show how little you know.
Sorry,this,it on here.
Sorry  .


Right yo 


Oh no, mustn't !
How your knowledge is in millimetres, no I mustn't use millimetres!
Makes up the usual thing !
She's had a lot to drink!
She's had a lot of  off me today.
That's, ah, she's she's took it well!
She's not talking to me mind, but she's took it well!
Right  if I put the word
Shit!


Erm  thank you!
The word  .
By the word I describe what does that suggest to you Trace?
Er  speak nicely cos 
Because 
you're being recorded!
It's a like er  using the same components but  put together in a different way.
Like different 
No!
different ways of  putting  it's hard to explain..
It's this 
Karma Sutra that is!
But no


that was a good try Tracey!


That's a good try!
Emma.
Let's get the other half of the female  vote.
Don't suck your thumb dear!
It's so !


Erm
What's an isomer?
It's something about 
Haven't got a clue!
No this is quite serious now!
No  I don't really know.
Erm
Choose somebody  Emma.
Daniel.
Oh shit!
 
Danny , I was right.
Your turn Daniel, what's an isomer?
It's  it's got the same nuclear format.
Right, first of all  they're compounds  make sure you take these down please.
Compounds with the same molecular formula.
And obviously therefore, cos they  obviously therefore, they've got the same improvements on here as well.
They're the same molecular formula  but  now what's the but, Chris?
Daniel's done the hard bit  for you  what's the but?
You've got imperfect ones  that doesn't match  erm 
I just said they had the same molecular formula 
Oh right.
Christopher!
Er  
The same molecular formula but
let's put a word in for you.
Different
Structures.
Er  yeah, okay.
Let's, let's say different structural formulae.
In other words, the atoms are actually arranged  in a different way.
They're bonded together in different ways.
Now, there's two main classes of isomerism  and don't just exclude  er, or don't just include  organic  isomers  cos we ge get organic isomers as well.
You get occurring in yo , in your organic .
Especially  actually.
And you'll meet some of them  when we actually do that area.
But generally there are two  main  classes of isomerism that we deal with  and very much like, like the classification on hydro-carbons that I did, there's a whole variety of ways they can be classified  that you've seen.
This is just one model.
Yeah.
This seems to work well  most seem to fit into it nicely.
First of all, we have  what we call  structural isomers, a whole group  of structural isomers.
And then we have a group of two  which are described as  stereo isomers.
Now, the thing about those two words  what do you think, stereo isomers is all about, without actually saying a specific type of isomer?
What does it tend to suggest?
What is it .
Nope!
Two forms at once.
More than one form of  isomer.
Well that's for the isomers anyway isn't it?
Yeah.
I know what you're saying.
You're getting close  cos you're concentrat , or you should be concentrating on the wo , on the part of the word, stereo.
Oh!
.
Simultaneously.
No, not really.
It's all about space.
If I stereo isomers
have a similarity  in that  they exist because of spatial  aspects.
And you'll come to understand exactly what I mean by that  it's all about three dimensional space.
Where structural isomers are literally what the word suggests  they have different structures  different ways of linking the atoms together.
.But the stereo isomers are all about  three dimensional space, that's how they tend to differ  as you'll see.
Let's start the structural isomers, and we can use this as an opportunity to  look at some aspects of the .
Now, you should all still be working through the   on a continuous basis.
I am aware  that, I am aware of actually two people in the second year who have never used it so far.
Now, those two people or others who haven't used it much  you really must get into this disc!
It's the easy way to learn  or it's easy, it's easy way to understand  and then learn the megiture.
You have to have a stu , a good familiarity with organic momegiture  if you don't, you could be throwing marks away  even before you get in that exam room!
Cos there will be aspects where you will have to use momegiture.
That they ask you specific questions of that naming  it's a multi-choice  more importantly in your written answers  you will have to  in , you are expected to include  and correct systematic ohms for any organics that you deal with.
Plus, of course, it means you're gonna go back in that direction  so if they say  something like erm  two chlorapropane  active with  you need to be able to get structural formula from that name.
So you really have got to get to grips with it!
They're something you should be using right the way up to the  to the actual exams.
And, there's at least eight discs available at the present time, and more could be made available.
Not for your own use I hasten to add!
They've set up, increased the numbers of discs in the library  in the workshop  er, there's no increasing them up here cos there's, we need to buy a computer, but certainly up  and in the workshop  and in the library.
You must hit it on a regular basis!
It's the easiest way to get to grips with it.
And those of yo you who've been doing it for some time  will now realise  how easy it has made the momegiture.
You learning without even realising you're learning it.
Right, so let's start the structural, now there's a whole range of different types of structural isomers.
Position  positional isomers  branch chain  functional group  and there's one other odd one which has a very peculiar name  and the name it normally goes by is a fairly old name, now I'm not sure at this stage if that name is still used  but what I'll do is to describe  the form of the isomerism first  and let you decide what you would  prefer to call it.
In fact,i it does suggest  one of these other types of these isomerism  depends how you view  a functional group.
But I'll tell you the name that is used, or was used afterwards, but I don't know if that name is still used  I certainly haven't seen it in a text book in years!
But it is a genuine form  of isomers  but you may like to include into one of the others.
Well  that's entirely up to you, but  we'll see how we go with that.
Right, let's start with position isomerism.
Now, position isomerism is all about the position of the groups  or the position of functional groups  so it's not just necessarily groups on their own  it could be functional groups.
Now, I've made a distinction between those, in other words  a group maybe a methile group  now, methile group is not a functional group  it's not something that dictates the properties of a compound, necessarily.
And the influences  that doesn't dictate  and a functional group does.
Where as a functional group might be, for example, a no age group  which does tend to dictate the properties of that compound.
So there is a difference between using the word group and functional group.
Also  now I tend, as you've  probably come to realise  I've tended to include  specific types of bonding arrangements  as a functional group  for example, I call  a carbon carbon double bond, I call that a functional group  for the simple reason that that arrangement of bonds dictates  the principle properties of those compounds  and in that context I'm then using the word group a bit more liberally  instead of saying it's a group of atoms  which dictate  the properties  I'll say it's a group of atoms or  it's a special grouping of electrons, which dictate the properties.
Yeah?
And so did yo , can you see the difference between those?
So there's all those sorts of possibilities.
Now, let's look at some examples and  get you to name some of them as well.
Positional isomerism is very obvious  the only thing you have to watch out for, if the give you structural formulae  especially multi-choice papers  they're buggers they are when they, when they do this sometimes!
They  they may draw the same compound  but making the same structural formula, but drawn slightly differently!
And I tend to draw, most o , most of us tend to draw them as straight lines with branches coming off  they may actually  show the chain as a twisted chain  or zig-zag chain or going in to form a square or something!
So, you really do need to understand the megditure in order to be able to say, oh yes, those two compounds are the same!
Just been drawn differently.
You really have to watch that!
So, let's start with  position isomers and some examples  and try and select examples using these.
What I'm gonna to , what I, what I intend to do is just show the  skeleton  in other words, most times I'll tend to do   right?
Just a quick and easy way of doing it.
Let's take this example here  I've got a carbon chain there and I'm going to put  a methile group there  and I'm going to put  a methile group there  two, three  that  .
Identical chain again  let's have a methile group there  and one there  let's do one more of those  a methile group there  and a methile group there.
Now, in terms of naming these  always you go for the longest  straight shape that you can, by straight  straight really is in inverted commas  what we should really say  the longest continuous chain that you can find  in other words, you'd have to go back on yourself.
Now, if you look at all of these and find the longest chain we  you can actually get in that respect  is a six chain, isn't it?
There's nothing longer than a six.
Do watch these examples I'm putting up, by the way cos I muck these up 
 
sometimes!
I find this a bit tedious to keep doing this, so I tend to  you know, slip up sometimes 
 
please check what I'm doing.
It's called thinking!
I've got this   I can't  that one!
Erm  let's just take that chain  in each case because it's  it is a  
 
chain  and we tend to read better, write horizontally   left, right, up a bit, down a bit  across, down a bit , up a bit  and so on.
Let's pick someone completely at random,, now we've had  Tracey  figuratively speaking!
And Emma.
So we've  done our  what we should do, now we're giving the ladies full consideration first with the gentlemen.
 
Haven't we Matthew?
Baa ah ah ah!
John  !
Would you like to name that compound for me there please?
I mean that's not that's not a request.
As long as you understand that's an instruction!
What would you call it?
Obviously it's gotta be based on hexane isn't it?
Two comma five di-methile hexate.
You want  two  comma  five
Dash.
dash
Yeah  I was gonna say that!
Yeah, you were just testing me to see if I
Ah well!
get it!
Dire methile probate, is that what you want?
No I said hexate.
Di-methile hectate?
X!
Dire methile hexate.
Er, let's see  Daniel  silver glinting  from his eyelids!
dash dire methile
We , I haven't asked you the question!


Let me ask you the question first!
Will you explain why that's correct?
If it is correct, do you agree with me?
Yeah.
Alright.


Why is it correct?
The two's there cos  the mephile groups
Mephile, what's mefile?
Mefalle!
Methile.


Well one of them's on the second one, and one's on 
 
the fifth one  it's  cos it's ta , it's .
What you should be starting from is the longest chain.
Yeah.
Longest chain is the sixth chain so it's gonna be based on a hexate.
Yeah.
There are two methile groups  one in position two, one in position five.
Does it matter which end you start Kieran?
Hello!


Kieran?
No.
Oh no I go sorry that's the answer?
Is that, that is your answer?
Yeah.


Is that your ar , no, you're answer was no?
Yeah.


It doesn't matter which end you start from cos either way it, it'll still be two, five.
Er, Chris you s suddenly become extremely interested in what he's writing!


Do his ostrich impression!
In other words, if I put my head down low enough  he can't see me!
No, I'm trying to write  my  down.
Yes Chris.
Was is he gonna  
We'll wait, yes we will wait, that's fine!
I'm writing.
I'm, I'm going to wait.
I think we've waited long enough!


Well that's alright we'll come back to Chris.
No, it's okay I've done that now.
Oh good!
You're, you're ready to
Well I'll try and do that.
oh that's  awfully good of Chris, thank you!
Erm, what would you call that one Chris?
Er


You don't need any help Christopher.
Okay.
This is not a difficult 
Two 
one!
and then a three dash  die
Three dash die?
Yeah, three  dash die methile 
sounds like a bush!
Er


Come on look, I'm listening!
These are not, but I am!
Erm  .
Oh ha!
No, no!
 
No, see I, see I, alright, alright, no!
Alright, okay, hold on, I know!
What?
Erm  Jason!
Er  I'd say four three  four comma three  no, that'll be
Fine, thank you Jason!


Jonathan!
Three, three die methile hexane.
In between 
Well let's 
the threes 
let's get the grammar in as well.
Three comma three
Yeah, dash  die methile 
dash 
hexane.
die methile hexane.
Yeah, you're longest chain  is a six  so it could of been clearly based on hexane.
And the two methile groups  so it's gonna be a die methile.
It's gonna be a, it's gonna be a die methile hexane  of some description  now, to indicate the positions  it's either three  or four, we take the lowest number  both are on  carbon number three
so it's three comma three dash  cos you have to indicate  because you've said die methile, you have to indicate where both of those groups are  not just one.
Alright?
That's good!
Which means I should have the last one doesn't it?
Emma, you were smiling  or grimacing one of the two!
Erm  three comma  four comma dash die methile


What?
Yeah 
And comma!
Yeah, you've got this right, yeah!
   
Three 
No!
comma
they're laughing at me!
four comma 
I ain't done nothing!
dash  Carry on Emma, you're alright!
die methile hexane.
die methile hexane.
Anybody agree with that?
Missed one out.
Missed the last one.
Anybody agree with that?
No comma.
The alternative could be  start from this end  is still three four  so it doesn't matter.
Now, these are examples of positional isomers just using ordinary groups  they only differ in the position of those functional groups, sorry, of those groups.
Now, in terms of functional group isomerism  I'm gonna take a slightly different example  right  let's take this one here first of all  I've now started to do what the examiners will do  now I'll make them identical structures there somewhere  and you really do need to be able to name them in order to see where they are  or if they are.
Matthew   no aliases today!
Would you like to name that one please Matthew?
And again, that wasn't a question!
Always start these off by considering what they would be if they were alkanes.
So if that was an alkane  that would be what?
Dunno .
Four carbons?
.
Yeah alright.
Read these propenes..
If that was an alkane  that would be a butane  four carbons.
.This is an alcohol  it has an O H group  so it is a  butanole  but you have to indicate where  the O H group actually is  it's either on four  or it's on one.
Oh yeah it is.
So you'd name this as  butane  in other words, you're saying it's a butane chain  you take off the E  you will add O L  and if there are positional isomers possible  you have to indicate the position  one O L  butane one L  one O L  butane one O L.
Butane one O L?
Chris!
What's that one?
Butane one O L.
Exactly the same, right!
Er  Kieran  that one there?
Butane two O L.
Butane two O L.
Stick with the question Mark!
It's an O L.


You say it as though you mean it!
Not
Butane two O L?
Not, Butane two O L, no  you see, you  yourself .
Why is it Butane three O L Kieran?
Because you have to take the last number off it.
Take the last number, right.
Erm  Tracey  that bottom one, can you 
Ooh er!
see it from there?
Sorry 
Sorry!
I'm not sure.
Sorry,a tha , that was ac , that was completely  !
Pick somebody else!
Stop picking on me!
Do you want your sticks?
And that was completely unintentional!
Pick on 
But can you?
Pick on somebody else!
Tracey, talk at me!
She is !


That
I am !
Where's the pu , let's put it up there.
No, I mean, quite seriously we're gonna have these things removed  cos lose er  a third of the    anyway.
Let's write it up here a bit.
I can see it really.
Oh we , I wasn't sure if yo , if you could.
Oh!
Shall I just look past Matthew instead of trying to look through him!
Oh  !


I just look past Matthew !
That wasn't called for was it?
What's Matthew done to you lately?
Right come on!


Right  longest chain  longest chain you can find.
Now with this 
 
little compound you've got to choose the chain that carries the functional group.
Three,.
Right, listening children?
No.
You've got to choose the chain that carries the functional group  in this case.
So 
And it 
you're looking at this chain here.
So, that's gonna be based on propane, three carbons.
Yeah I know.
Pro , is that propane one O L?
It's the one 
It would be 
next to the C.
propane wo , it would be propane one 
Yeah.
O L  but it's a substituted propane one O L  because  you're choosing this chain here  it means that you've got this group as  the substituant  and you've replaced one of the hydros with a methile group.
Oh!
So  we start off by saying it's based on propane  there's an O H group so it's a propanol  the O H is on carbon number one of that chain so it is a propane one O L.
Yeah?
But, you've also got a methile group on carbon two  of that chain.
Right?
So it's gonna be two methile  propane one O L  agreed?
Dash methile  is it three dash methile?
Mm.
Two dash methile.
Well  yeah, you're right, yes you're right, no I shouldn't say that!
Yeah.
Two dash methile  propane  dash   dash O L.


Dash dash dot dot.
do that get an SOS !
How do you join the erm  the methile and the propane together?
Is it a comma, is it a dash or what?
Or is it all one word?
One word.
Right.
Right  now what would you call this?
And clearly these  two here  let's get rid of  let's get rid of that.
These two here are clearly position isomers.
They only differ in the position of that O H group.
What would you call this?
Branched out.
I mean where would you put it 
Mm.
in terms of it's classification?
.
Would you call it positional?
Or  and can you call it positional?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Not really, can you?
Well


It is  if you had  the other compound where this O H group was on carbon number two as well then those two  would be positional isomers  cos their carbon skeleton would then be the same  and all they would differ is in the position of the O H functional group.
Yeah, so if you had  if I try and draw it much the same  if you had that  and let's choose  let's choose er, well le , let's keep the same  let's keep to the same carbon chain  if you had that  the carbon skeleton is exactly the same  the only way it differs is that the O H group here is on carbon one  of that chain that we've chosen  where as here, it's on carbon two of that chain.
So, those two would be positional isomers.
Yeah.
But  either one of these  and what we've already put up  you can't really call them positional isomers  cos the basic carbon skeleton is different.
Can you see the difference between those ?
What's this?


If I got these two  they are positional isomers  because the carbon chain is the same  and the only way they differ is in a position  of a functional group.
Yeah.
These two here are also positional isomers, there carbon chains are the same  the only way they differ is in the position  of the functional group.
Yo , but you can't say that  either one of these  and either one of these  are positional isomers  cos their carbon skeletons are different.
Yeah?
It's a bit subtle.
Right, finally  something like a carbon carbon   just do a simple one  they balance for the carbon skeleton  these are true positional isomers, no other problem with them at all er erm!
Kempson  what would you call this one?
Don't cry!
I'm sorry to ask you a question Kempson.
Can't you be nice for once?
I couldn't be nice if I, I've been an absolute swine today!
I really have been evil!
Then you confuse him  
I can have one of these now  I've been the worst I've been for about six months  I really !
Ain't I Trace?
If you think about this  it's based on the four carbon structure  so you've gotta have a few in the name  there is a carbon carbon double bond  so the basic structure we've got is the Butane  but as  there is more than one position you could have that  carbon carbon double bond  now, to indicate this position  and so this one would be called  futes  it would normally be a  butane  but to indicate it's position  bute one E  and again you're taking the lowest number  so instead of it being a bute three, it's a bute one E  you start at the appropriate .
So this one would be called bute  two E  and so again, these are true positional isomers  same carbon skeleton  they differ in the position of the principle  functional group, which in this case, has to be a special   electrons.
Yeah.
Right!
Branch chain isomerism  What do you think branch chain isomer ber la la isomerism is Tracey?
Why me?
I'm not picking on, I just  this is to help you!
I like to help you.
Don't be dirty Matthew!


It's where you got the  er  the branch chains coming off of different positions.
different branch even!
Oh!
Yeah, try to use the word position.
Try not to or try to?
Try to use the wo , try not to use the word position.
Oh alright.
Cos that takes you backwards.
It's things like this  er, five  my father's getting excited!


Right  they are typical alkane  branch chain isomers.
They're the same molecular formula  the only way they differ is in the way the basic chain is structured.
They're all pentate.
This one you would just call pentate.
This one, your longest chain is a four chain so it's based on butane  and you have a methile group  on carbon number two, taking the lowest number  of carbon number two of that butane chain.
So this would be a two  methile  because if that's  butane  the methile butane .
This one here, your longest chain  is a propane chain, a three  chain  we've now got two methile groups as substituants  what would you call that Matthew?
Oh.


Methile .
Oh God!
Robin?
What on your nose?
 
No!
Yo you were looking at me Matthew  how can you be writing something down!
that's the erm  .


What do you think Matthew?
Say it again cos I wasn't listening.


What do you think Matthew?


!
Let's ask somebody else shall we?
Yeah.
Do you think that's a good idea, let's ask somebody ask somebody else 
 
let's ask Kieran.


Why doesn't he ever ask ?
Right, Oh God!
Is it er 
Two 
two dash two methile
Two da , two comma
comma   methile
So, what do you say then?
Two comma, two  dash  methile
die
die methile 
 
Die methile


Right  you got it wrong!
 
Longest chain?
Methile 
die methile .
prop pan
melthane
You know you put an E under the first one, do you have to?
No  you don't!
You cannot put an E in front of this one!
That is not systematic momegliture  that has gone like that for ten years  universities still use it!
That is just called pentate  it is not called E M penta any more  equally you don't have sec  butile alcohol  turk  turt butile alcohol   they've been out for ten years!
It looks good!


Alright?
Right, now that is just pentate  these are all pentates that is specifically  pentate.
Phew!
Right, so that's an example of branch chain isomers.
Now, functional group isomers  what does this suggest Emma?
Don't you swallow that goldfish!
Finish that up!


Penny saw them first!
Then, when you've done that .
cruel!
Unless it's the golden wish!
Sorry!
Emma!
What was the question?
What is fu fu functional group?
Have a guess.
Well wha wha wha what do you think we mean by functional group isomerism?
Erm  it means  they have the same functional group.
Er they do not, they in fact, have different functional groups.
Okay,different functional groups.
Same molecular formula
Yeah.
different functional groups.
Yes.
So, for example this one here, very close to Keith and Trevor  this one here, the best possible thing we can give to  Matthew.
What do you think
 
  
Uncle John   what's that top compound  what type of compound is it?
Aunty Tracey  that bottom compound, what type of compound is that?
Tricky actually!
Mm.
It's neither one thing or the other.
Either one thing .
Yeah, it's me , methile.
It's methile  yes 
methile 
absolutely right!
It's a methile.


So here we have  this what's, this what Stevie  likes  it gives him his  his classic way of getting back at me!
 



This is an alcohol  this is an ether  now  while we've got the opportunity we'll talk about the naming of ethers  before we get onto this  this last form of structural isomerism.
This  if that O H group was not there  the ethile    it's an O H group so it's an alcohol, so you take off the E, add O L  and your positional number  is not required.
So, it would simply be  ethanol  for vodka, whisky, bacardi 
Ha !
meths  Matthew!


Generally  industrial meths  is ethanol
And it's got methanol in it as well.
Industrial meths is ethanol!


What you're thinking of the pink stuff  has the methanol in it!
Yeah.
That's why you go blind if you drink it
and that's where the term blind drunk comes from.
What is called industrial meths is  ethanol.
And .


Because that's the old term that's been used for  however many years, and it's still used by industry.
Cos I did say earlier  that universities are behind in terms of this momegliture and so is industry.
So you still  you still buy it  it's actually butile alcohol.
But they're now ca , they're now catching up  they're now putting on the label  its proper name.
But Customs and Excise still call this industrial meths  unless it's pure etha , completely pure ethanol  in other words, no water in it  and then they can call it absolute alcohol  but they don't specify which alcohol it is look!


Got some  they've got some old terminology still around the organics, still in use around organics, it should be.
And omit wherever you go.
Right, now  this thing here  what you have to e , do, have to do is to imagine  that it's an alkane  with  this oxygen containing group  butane.
Now, in this case, it doesn't matter which one I use because they're both exactly the same.
This  group here  the general group, if I put O R  and that R represents an alkyl  the general name is alkoxy.
If we specify what the R group is  in this case, it's a methile group  this would be called  methoxy  so there'll be methoxy group  is the substituant.
In this case  without it  this would be methane  so this would actually be called  methoxy  methane.
Some are chloro- methane is an  sort o , an analogy.
Methoxy methane.
That's where Stevie  gets his oxy oxy ethane bit from.
Those of you who do biology, who does biology here?
Yeah, there's always one or two.
Those of you who do biology and have Stevie  if you're ever ever bored  silly  right?


Like us 
When you're bored bored at other times, let's put it that way  if he starts doing any bio-chemistry at all start as , start asking him about the proper names of  the systematic names of things  and you watch him bristle!
He was talking about you yesterday.
Yeah he was 
He said he thought  had you behind him.


Really?
What  what did he say?, he says zappy!
He said dappy slappy!
No, I was trying to say was
 
Oh no!
I, I'll talk to you about that later Emma actually.
What I was trying to say was, if you're really bored with him  and he's doing is, any form of bio-chemistry start asking him about the correct names, what are they?
Say it, you say it like that, what's the correct name?
Cos straight away,yo , you're implying that he's wrong!


And he really bristles!
His hair always stands up on end!


It's brilliant!
And he starts going oh oxy oxy methane, and he stamps his feet!


It's ever so funny!
It really is comical!
So you should do it?
That's right.
You have to get him wound down a bit, you have to do it, you know  of a  about half an hour or so  ask him for the proper name!
It's absolutely brilliant!
He goes mad!


He's  you see,bu but after  about twenty minutes or so he loses touch with what's  what you're actually doing  and if, if you catch him just right  he goes berserk!
It's really funny!


Stamps his little feet!


stamping feet


Anyway  he's actually a good friend  he knows I say these sort of things about him  but erm  it's good!
I'm gonna tell him!


Right, so this'll be called
Yeah,.
this will be called methoxy methane.
Okay?
Now, that's and example of  functional group isomerism  what I'd like you to do now is to try and decide what these two things are called I'm gonna put on the board  and try and decide what you would call them in terms these general labels  under structural isomerism.
If I just draw the carbon skeleton.
Oh no, I, I'll put the hydros in for you as well because I'm  I'm helpful like that!
It says so in my C V!
Right, now they're both ethers  try and name them first  in naming them  take the biggest hydro-carbon chunk that you can find  and pretend that that was an alkane  so the smaller chunk then becomes the substituant.
So, for example, in that first one  the longest chain you've got is a three  so it's a derivative  it's an oxy derivative of propane.
Once you've got the names  then decide what you think  what type of isomerism you think it actually is.
It's really weird!
And I'll give you the old name for it.
Alright?
methoxy  pro propate.
Yeah  exactly right!
The first one is methoxy propate  in other words  you're saying, effectively, this group here wasn't   the longest chain you can get is a propate.
So  you got a methoxy group   so this one
Page six.
is methoxy  propate.
Now what about this one?
Mm.
Ethoxy ethate, exactly right!
Exactly right, well done!
These are some of the most difficult, well it is   compound that student's don't   are extremely difficult to name!
And the , they're effectively fairly easy, don't do much on them  you won't, oh yeah, you meet ethers very much at all.
There was a time, I can remember I was at school  Cor!


Yes I can think that far back !
So can Adam !
Yes!
No, I think I find it easiest, I remember when I was at school and you can't remember when you were last at college on time!
Ooh!


Exactly !
Erm  I can actually remember making ether as a practical  I mean it's something you wouldn't dare even think about doing now!
Cos the stuff's actually lethal!
You know what I mean, it's a narcotic  it'll send some of you  more asleep than you already are!
Also it's  
 
it's so inflammable  you go anywhere near a naked flame  sorry   flame
What?
you don't even use  you don't even need to use a naked flame, you just need a hot surface  like Matthew's kneecap !
 
And it ignites all on it's own!a terrible state!
Also  any of you go to university to do  , course you all will to some extent  cos you love chemistry so much!
It sits here.
We never ever distil ether without checking first that it doesn't contain incompoundable peroxides, organic peroxides which contain this  and single bond   cos things explode!
Yeah.
But yo , but luckily we had to check our bottles  to make sure there's no peroxides in them.
That's lethal stuff!
 
Anyway 
now, what would you call it  Jason?
I'd call it functional group isomers.
Justification?
Because erm  the actual functional group on the end  it's only just  it's only just been moved 
What is the fu ah, but what is, it's the wrong word!
What is the functional group?
I'm not having a go at you, don't be so sluggish!
What is the functional group in ether?
The functional group is a singly bonded option to two carbon atoms.
Mm.
Which you've got in both.
Yeah.
The methoxy and the ethoxy are not functional groups.
It's that arrangement of
saturated carbon  oxygen  saturated carbons  that's the functional group.
Irrespective of ho , how many more carbons are attached  to those two carbons.
It's tricky!
Erm  uncle Stuart, long time no .


What do you think Stuart?
What would you call it?
Well the only thing is
Speak up!
The only real thing that seems to be changing  in   is the compound in position of the oxy  
 
Is this how you spoke in your interview then  Stuart ?


Yes, I'm awfully glad to be here!
 
God I'm so excited at being able to come to study and 
That's right.
do my degree, I can hardly wait!


Oh my God!
That's not fair!


That's not fair!
Why, do you speak  and jog around  
It would help!
It would help!
Calm down!
Should have told him to his face.


Shut up!
Yes  go on what you were saying.
Er  well you've totally made me miss my train of thought!
Er 
That wasn't what you saying!
Well you made me 
You were saying, you were talking about positioning, about .
You are moving the position of the oxygen   and although it isn't a er  a er  well no,functional group ?
No.
The function group is the fact that it's simply bonded to two carbons.
And er
Which doesn't really help.
Would it, would it influence  the er   compound by the .
That's right Stuart.
The influence is the physical property but not the chemical one.
Ethers are ethers are ethers.
Would a methile influence in the same way?
No.
Yeah, as I've already said.
Well then  the carbons you get is 
What he's really saying is that he doesn't know the answer to the question!
Well I've eliminated it's impossible  
I know you're eliminating  yeah  and al and also eliminating half the brain cells in the room!
 
This is still   
Is that it?
Yes.
he did actually say that.
Yeah, it is over now!


Back to normality!
No, I know what you're saying  er
So it's not a positional isomer.
It's very difficult!
You can't really call it a positional isomer as such 
What about the bonding arrangement?
Is it an isomer because  sort of 
What?


Thank you.


He's doing A level maths right


there's three there!
Well there's four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten hydrogens  right  
Brian
No!
Daniel 
Do it on your own!
Daniel, alright  Daniel can't add up to ten!
Look I said 
Right wha 
Any of them could add up to ten!
Look, you see  there  ah  he's got two different numbers of hydrogens up there!
Yeah, well put me down!
Cos I'm in the right!


Well, there you are, that's it!


Who can count up to ten?
Me.
Without a calculator!
Without a calculator!
It told you!
Right then 
That's what  told me,
A level maths 
you could.
Oh I don't really !
A level sums!


Right, sums, the answer is 
 

The answer is  Matthew!
Do you wanna keep it?
Is that, you can't really 
 
call it any of what 
 
we've seen up to now  not with any with full sort of  real  erm
B F D it's called.
ain't the first diploma  B F D.
There is a word that's used, there's a term that's used for this sort of effect  this is the term it used to be called 
.
Metamerism.
It's a worm.
A worm.
 
What's a, what's funny?
It's a label that's all!
There's no joke there Chris!
Yeah, these people will laugh at anything today!
Well they're su , they're stupid boys that's why!
Say that again 
Can you slap 
then!
all of them!
Can I slap all of them?
Mm.
You only have to slap this end  and it passes along anyway!


Yeah, do it!
It won't do any damage cos Chris is in the middle!
You're like a buffer!


Buffer.
hair.
Well  .


Anyway, by the looks of it  there won't a , there ain't much longer  at least I kept mine 
 
for forty six years!


Mine's  
Jus jus just brush it back, let's have a look see if there  is anything in there !


Can't you brush it back together come on!
Good grief!


Cor!
It's like looking at the mirror innit?
A receding hair line is a sign of intelligence.
Thanks Al!
 

Obviously    obviously it's a genetic throwback with Chris, it's not worked with him!
Oh!
Ha ha!
Throw up, yeah!
Right


an  used to be called  metermarism  and I say, it's not a word  it's not a term I've seen on  for many many years  and you don't seen it many  erm  modern  organic texts.
I think it's still around  and they've gotta call it something  if erm  if you think
word.
Right now!
Stereo-isomerism next  exhausted  icuma
You ought to  !
Not a lot!
We've exhausted the structural side of isomerism, now we can look at the stereo isomerism.
Now the stereo isomerism  is all about spatial chemistry, much more than  just the way things are attached.
Yes?
It's not just the way the things are attached together, joined together  it's more about the actual space  how they're arranged in space but .
There are two  forms of stereo isomerisms that we recognise  and don't forget, these labels are purely arbitrary.
The first one  is called geometrical isomerism  in some books  not that you ever read, will read any chemistry books  but just in case you stumble over one day  and fall flat on your face  and there happens to be a chemistry text book open  and you ha , just happen to read one or two of the words as you  go unconscious  and in Matthew's case if you wake up!


Geometrical isomerism is sometimes, or has sometimes been called  cis trans-isomerism.
It's not the right term to use  not really.
cis trans  c i s  and t r a n s..
 
They're laughing again are they?
If go like this to Daniel  you can slap them  
Don't be like that!
actually!
You're not allowed to slap!
You're not allowed to slap them?
Why's that?
My mum told me it was nude!
You're mum told you  
 
Yeah that's  that's naughty!


Bet he's gonna take !
Your mum told you what?


Yo , your mum told you to do it in the nude?


I meant rude!
I was gonna say, when can I come round and see your mum?


Why is it rude to slap people Emma?
They deserve it!
 
They're boys!
slap you.


Maybe I should see behind!


Right  geometrical isomerisms results when  you have  rotation  about a bond axis  prevented.
If you draw a normal carbon carbon single bond  which is a sigma bond  what's a sigma bond Daniel?
It's where two
E T impression!
Yeah  like that.
Yeah  end on overlap, lookalike Daniel but  I I'll take  I could be quite insulting but there you are!
End on overlap of the.
Now there's free rotation about that carbon carbon axis.
Now, the other type of overlap is lateral overlap  where the is always o , overlapping that way  and you try and rotate about that bond axis  you'll break the overlap.
And any double bond  will consist of  a sigma bond  and pie bond  and because you've got the pie bond there  it then restricts  rotation about that carbon carbon bond axis  and providing  you have  different groups here  different groups of, at each end  or just one in there at both ends  you can get two different isomers.
When the groups are attached on the same side  of the double bond, that shows  we use prefix cis dash  in front of the name.
So you've named it systematically  and then looked to see where the, the various groups were  and put cis in front  if you had that arrangement.
If they're opposite to each other the same type of idea, you've named it just one in  If you draw is


it used to be a rom of  calcite  or or a prism of calcite  which will do the job.
Nowadays, they have, obviously sca synthetic polymers  which would be er much more easier  the same sort of thing as they have in sunglasses.
So the light that actually comes out  will be vibrating  in specific planes, but not all planes  every plane in .
It will then go through a container  now that container, ultimately, will contain  this is why it's called a container!
Will ultimately go through the solution that you're looking at, in terms of optical activity  it comes out t'other end, cos light tends to do that, you know  it'll come t'other end  and at this end, after going through a length system etcetera, will be a an eyeball.
Just one?
Just one.
Very difficult to look through to through a lens with two eyeballs at the same time!
Unless they are pre-mensile eyes you know, they sort of they come out, sort of go down together and be just above the  actual eyelid.
Thank you for that  philosophical thought .
It's alright.
Now, the way you use it, it varies  one way to use it  is to start with this empty  and you'll find that this  end here, the actual eyepiece  can be rotated, it has a scale  like as in fish, Stuart.


Sorry!
You know the lines.
Or as in weighing  you could have picked weighing scales as an example couldn't you?
Weighing scales.


Weighing scales!


Don't you  the balance Stuart?


Weighing scales  ah well that's sad!


That's really sad!
Can I just talk to you about them ones?
I'd  don't do that again!
After I've heard their conversation for God's sake  you know, have a bit of heart!
Yes, that's what it means, it means weighing scales.
What he meant was a balance.


Erm  right if this   you're enjoying this Mark aren't you?
Dunno why, they'll start me off now!
There are various ways of using them  one way, to look through   which yo , which you have to to see the light, you know, otherwise you won't see it !


Yes, Daniel it's true!
Don't gasp in surprise!
You do actually have to look through to see the light coming out!
You look through and you rotate that eyepiece until you've either got  maximum brightness  cos you got a second polaroid system in there as well you see  you either get maximum brightness or complete  darkness.
What you then do  make a note of that  all that, as I read it to you  what you then do is to put your solution into that container  you have to otherwise it comes out the ends!
Put your solution into that container, that solution  is of a known concentration  this path then  is also known  Matthew!
This path then is also known  and in terms of accurate work, they also know the temperature  now I'm not sure if there's a temperature effect  on rotation, but it wouldn't surprise me if there was.
Anyway  you then look through it with the solution in and you'll find that if, for example, you started off with it  completely dark  you'll find it's then grey  cos the plane of light's been rotated, now it's  where there was no light getting through  now some of it is actually getting through, cos it's been rotated.
And so you then rotate the eyepiece, Christopher!
You then rotate the eyepiece
I was trying!
Yes but Danny's talking!
It's Danny's turn!
Well shut up then!
Oh God!
You then rotate, oh look at this!
I really hate you Danny!
Listen to this!
 
He's totally  !
You then rotate the eyepiece so you get back to the condition that you had before.
So if you started off in complete darkness  you rotate until you get complete darkness  or the opposite.
And you measure the angle through which you've had to turn  to get to that position, and which direction you've had to turn it through  or rather, which direction  the light had been rotated  through.
Yeah?
And that gives you, something called, specific rotation  which will be a constant  for those conditions indicated and for that substance.
Now, one of them will rotate to the right, one will rotate to the left  what you need to be able to do is to identify the condition that will give  that give rise to optical isomers, in other words, to be able to say  yes, that molecule will have optical isomers.
Optical isomers are sometimes called  inentiamorse  if you have trouble with language  then we'll call them  inantipas  if you're a biologist you call them optical isomers.
Actually we was just saying that.
That was just malicious!
Slander!
Yep!
What does it mean?
What  slander?
No, inantiamorse or whatever it's called?
That's the name for optical isomers.
It's the posh name for  it's the one that chemist use!
You know, optical isomers, alright?


methane is punity  
Right now you must be able to recognise in, either a structural formula or a condensed formula  you must be able to recognise existence of what is called  and asymmetric centre  if you are a chemist  kiral centre  if you are a super chemist  if you are a biologist  an atom bonded to different ones.
That's assuming there's biologist and chemist!!
Ha ha ha ha ha ha!


I'm a bush.
Aye?
That is a bush.
 
Does look strange !
!
 
Right 


so  what you're looking for in any formula  shush daddy's talking Matthew!
What you're looking in any formula  say from  a carbon compound  you would be looking for that was bonded to four different groups, it doesn't matter what the groups are, it doesn't matter how big, how small they are
And that one as well?
but they're bonded  to different groupings  so, for example, if one had something like this  er, let's call that see three, page seven  if I had something like that  that central carbon there  and when they draw these things at an exam paper, don't expect it to be the central one.
I could've actually drawn this quite differently  and maybe one of the carbons of  on the side  yeah?
That carbon that I've got in the centre now  and the convention is to use a little star.
Ah!
That's definitely bent!


Put two in here  er, I get that sort of Christmassy spirit  building up
Brandy  vodka
Brandy?
On the Christmas pudding!
I thought it was a fairy!
Pardon?
Get the .
I never !


He said brandy .


little heart, bless her!
What's the, oh!
No I won't ask!


Don't  so we use a little star  on the atom, and it may not always be carbon, cos we don't get  this sort of isomerism, indeed, like compounds as well.
Use a little star to indicate which is the asymmetric centre  which kiral centre  and all it means is that  if you were to dra , if you had a  a kiral  molecule  in other words, it had four different groups attached to it  what it means is that  it  and it's mirror image, this is the way you actually draw it and answer the questions  you draw  you draw it as if there was a mirror image.
That's why it's damn tricky to do it!
You draw it  to show that  it has a mirror image  so what you find in practice is that it  and it's mirror image are not superimposable.
In other words  like your hands  and feet  etcetera  they're mirror 
 
images  you can't  thank you    they're mirror images that you can't superimpose.
You can't even superimpose to that extent  cos they're slightly different  can't even superimpose that  my fingers  can't superimpose  cos they're slightly different.
You actually make up a structure like this  tetraneedle carbon  we did have another one  but er, obviously there's some students  have erm  decided to do  something different with the er  things  that's all that's left!


Not funny Kieran!
Here I'm holding  hand, model, model hand!
Here I am holding  a model of a tetraneedle carbon  in four different groups of ten  and here is it's mirror image.


It's been a !
It was!
Honest!
That was it's mirror image!
So that's been changed out of that.
Pardon?


Right, and there's  not really enough!
I mean  gotta pretend there's another one of these there!
But there would of been!
There's it's mirror image  and what you will find is that you can superimpose  side by side  and two, any two of those atoms there  those groups  but then, straight away the other two are out of position  the other two have reversed.
So if I take this one and put this one  I can superimpose the red  straight away I've superimposed a group, but look  the blue and re , and the white  are out.
Ah!
Watch, see it goes.
Can you see that?
No.
It's sad innit?
Or I can superimpose the green one


Notice now that the white one  the two white ones are superimposed but now look  the two reds and the two blues are now  not superimposed any longer.
That's what we mean by non-superimposed .
Tracey's trying to work out how a , bless her!
I know I've only got one left, yeah.


But it would have been a .
Yeah, shut up!


Oh, I'm tired!


So  optical isomerism results  




Optical isomerism results  when a structure and it's mirror image are non-superimposable.
Right?
This takes us to four fifteen.
I know that cos it says so on here.
It might be wrong!
What I wanted to do today was to start to talk about  mechanisms  but I think I've exhausted my erm  what's the word I'm looking for?
 
Pardon?
Ooh!
 
What was that?
Pardon?
Gangrene.
I didn't hear you then!
What we'll do is we'll leave it at that, that doesn't mean your going anywhere!
Now, are there any aspects about the isomerism you want clarifying apart from the whole lot?
Do that one again.
That last one you just did  I didn't understand a word 
No.
of that!
Well the thing to do  maybe I should have a word with him.
Well I understand where you got that 
Now be subtle about it!


Your explanation was a load of crap mate!


No, Danny, I want to know about it right?
But I don't understand what you just said then.


Ooh, now you've made him mad!
Ooh ooh ooh!


I needed some !


Tones really with his shirt!


Can he turn greener than his shirt!


Can you specifically make a different erm  er  optical isomers.
You can  to some extent
What about 
When you
When the  chemical reactions very often the two that are produced  erm  well usually, when you ca , come into reactions and materials that are produced  are a mixture of both isomers.
In other words, usually the chemistry is non selective.
Yeah?
If both isomers are being formed.
Tha , that by the way, is called a racenate  or the 
Is this 
racemic mixture.
A what a  r racenate?
A racenate , r a c e n a t e or racemic mixture.
What about this  though?
Hang on!
That's, that's geometrical.
Said, yeah, but you can have  .
To some extent you can, yeah.
It's a mixture of the  
But with optical 
you try to produce a particular isomer, what you normally 
Have you ?
get is the 
 
racemic mixture  in other words, both are there  but it has no  ah!


Both are there  but it has no effect on plane polarised light, for instance, like, as if one of them is trying to rotate it to the left  by so many degrees  and the other one is rotating to the right by the said the amount.
So that they, they can only   twenty.
Yeah.
What we can do now  we can use systems to, once we've got the racemic mixture  we can use systems to  separate that racemic mixture.
We can also use biological systems  to separate them  because biological systems, like protein synthesis and things like that  are very selective  in terms of the one they  the, the isomer they will pick up.
If they do happen to pick up the wrong isomer  erm, these isomers by the way, you'll find things put in front of them like  you often find a little d  or a little l  in front of the name  it means dextarosatory  rotated to the right  and leverosatory
Lever?


Alright, I'll get out the way then !
leverosatory  rotating to the left  you find these  this prefix appearing in front of a name if it's  the compound is optically active.
If it's a racemic mixture  you sometimes find  saying that both are there.
Biological systems tend  to normally pick up a particular isomer  in most cases, if they pick up the wrong one  it will affect, for example the protein chain  it will affect, ultimately, its three dimensional structure  and therefore, it's function.
Now, it may or not me noticeable  if it's a minor alteration in the surface geometry  then  it may be so slight as to make no difference in the way it performs  so if, for example, it's an enzyme  it may not affect it at all .
But in some cases the  having a different isomer can affect the three dimensional properties in such a way  that it will no longer function efficiently  as an enzyme  as a catalyst  to the reaction it's supposed to catalyse  then you start to get problems.
So some genetic problems are a result  or a, shown to be the result of a wrong  amino acid being incorporated into the protein chain  and therefore repricated  and on and on and on.
But we can now use biological systems to actually separate them  and actually select  particular  isomers.
But normally  chemically speaking, when a particular reaction takes ta , careful of those Emma!
Emma!
Take the pen out of your nose  dear, thank you!


She's now sucking the end of the pen!


At least it wasn't stuck up the bum!


Erm  chemically speaking, if you carry out a reaction  which can produce an optically active compound, you would normally the recenate  and then you have to separate by either chemical method or the physical method  and it's usually not very easy.
If you're gonna separate chemically, say for example, you produced erm  an organic acid which is optically active  the things you would normally have to do  is to use a base  to make the salt  of, you know, you make the two optically salt  and then separate them by a thing such as fractional crystallisation  and then we generate the acid afterwards  very very tricky!
Not as tricky as the original one  this effect was discovered, I think, by Pasteur  in tartaric acid  and he happened to notice, he had a proper tartaric acid crystals.
That's the sort of question to ask Stevie , by the way  he says tartaric acid, ask him for it's proper chemical name.
What is it?
I dunno.


It loops  it goes down a bit.
Anyway  he happened to notice, God knows how, like, cos this cry , the crystals you used were quite small!
He happened to notice that there were crystals which appeared to be mirror images of each other.
And so, it goes beyond the actual molecular stage  if you can have this compound in crystallised form, as you can most  though you might have to reduce the temperature or whatever, but then  all is gone  gone crystalline eventually  you'll find their crystals are also mirror images  and what he actually did, he painstakingly picked out crystals  which were of one particular shape as opposed to the other, he actually separated all the crystals physically  by using tweezers  and then found that they ha , you know, the two  had a different affect on plane polarised light.
Incredible!
Now, in answer to your  question Christopher
Yeah.
I've now made  single handedly  cos I'm like that  single handed!
You didn't have one ready or anything?
I did, but some students  took it bits!
I now have   a molecule of this  there it was  there again, now it's back in again    and out  now they're gone  now they're back!
It's magic!


What I have here   is  are  mirror images  alright?
Complete mirror images, yes?
Yeah.
Now, you find that those mirror images are not superimposable  so I can  in order to superimpose the red and the white  if only I can  on doing that, straight away the blue and the green  are non-superimposable.
So those two things would be optical isomers  one would rotate the plane of polarised light  to the left  the other would rotate the plane of polarised light  to the right.


Cor,!


Trying to  up it.
Yeah?
Yeah  I think I got that.
Any other questions?
Price of fish, meaning of life?
When you've finished the class?
What is erm  erm, the meaning of life?
 

Can we do it?
Thirty eight and half.
Thirty eight point five.
The meaning of life?
Yeah!
No, it's forty two.
Forty two.
Thirty eight point five.
I have it on  good assurance   
It's thirty two.


He thinks your mad!


actually!
Any other  er, dunno where you're going, it's not time yet!
Let's spin this out to the last possible second.
It means, like thirty eight point five .
I know!


Right, any other questions about what we've done today?
Oh!
Nuclear cis trans  can you have, say, with two b's and one carbon?
Can what?
Can you have the two b  b's and one carbon?
No, because then you won't get  isomers.
That won't be ota , they won't be erm  geometrical isomers.
Now if you, and if you rotate one
oh yeah it's in 
you get the other one.
positional innit?
Yeah.
You keep changing the carbon.
Anything else?
I must just say to yo , you're dying to ask, like what he's doing over the corner?
Not a lot!
I, I feel sorry for you, you mis , obviously a second time being in contact with Daniel!
Yeah, he is quite a shock!
Kenton knows
Kenton's a real 
He still does nothing!
That's right!
He was talking about you before you came out actually.
Yeah.
He was!
You should have been here early Kenton I missed your presence!
Excuse me !


Right, anybody else at all?
What's that noise?


That's on B B C one.
What's that noise?
It sounds like a cat when it plays up!


I worry about you sometimes Emma!
I  I really do worry about you!
Who saw the Mary Whitehouse Experience ?
Yeah.
Who saw Kermit  vomiting in his pint glass!
 
I didn't !
Really  the only thing I was disappointed about is that he didn't drink it again!


If that had been a true man he'd have drunk it again afterwards!
But he's not a man!
Waste not want not!


That's very true!
But he thinks he's a man doesn't he?
Kermit's a transsexual.


Emma knows that!!
I think we leave now .
I think that's probably a very good place to leave!
Thank you for allowing me to ..