

Morning.
Morning.
There are some licensing applications Your Worships.
Application that, listed as number fifty three please Your Worships.
Mr  of the Cross Keys.
At Ribchester Your Worships.
Mr   at all?
Licensee of the Cross Keys Ribchester.
And you're making applications for an occasion licence  for Saturday the twenty ninth of October  to run a bar at Norbury village hall  on behalf of the  the village hall committee, is that right?
That's right Your Worships, yes.
And the hours you're asking for are seven thirty P M to eleven forty five P M?
That's right.
I think you did send this in  intending it to be a postal application  Mr ?
I did yes.
But er Your Worships the matter was adjourned by your colleagues until today because er  Mr  did  indicate on the application form that er he would not be  in fact operating the bar himself but that it would be somebody else.
So I think your colleagues wanted more information about that so
Yes.
Who will be operating the bar Mr ?
Well I  erm er er Mr Roger .
Actually I'll be  operating between the village hall and the Cross Keys and Mr Roger  has  the pub for the last sixteen years or so.
Well our concern is does this gentleman understand the licensing laws?
Oh yes.
Definitely.
I'll, I'll be going to the village hall but I might have to go back to the Cross Keys, that's why I put Roger , perhaps I put the wrong thing on you see?
I'll be in charge of the bar actually.
So physically you will be exercising some degree of supervision during the evening will you?
Oh yes, yes.
Will you be there er when it's time to close Mr ?
I will yes.
Oh yes definitely, that's right Your Worship yeah.
Then this application be granted.
Ah thank you very much.
Right thank you.
Thank you very much.
The application that's before Your Worships is a  a temporary authority in respect of Kwiksave Supermarket.
Jacqueline  is the applicant Your Worship.
Are you represented by a solicitor?
Alright so  Could you take the oath please.
Hold the bible up in your right hand and read the words from that card.
I swear to almighty god that the evidence I shall give in this court shall be the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth .
Yeah.
And tell the magistrates your full name and address could you?
Jacqueline   
And what is your date of birth
Thirteenth of  
 
sixty four.
And you're making the application for temporary authority to  operate the licence in respect of premises  known as Kwiksave Supermarket?
That's right.
At er  is that right?
That's right yes.
Is the outgoing licensee present?
Pardon?
Is the outgoing licensee present?
No.
Why?
I don't know.
You don't know?
 
Well somebody's handed these documents  
 
today.
Yeah.
And the present licence holder is Susan .
That's right.
But  sir there is a letter simply saying er she consents to the  er application but there's no indication as to why she's not here.
Is that lady down there from  Kwiksave?
Yes.
She doesn't work for the company at all?
What's your role in Kwiksave?
Supervisor.
In this depot in Clitheroe?
That's right.
Are you there permanently?
All 
Yeah.
day 
Yes.
premises are opening?
Yes.
What er experience have you got in er  the sale of intoxicating liquors  Miss ?
Well I've worked  for the past two year really  
Where?
I used to work at  and then  
And how long have you been in these particular premises?
Er  about a month.
Mr 
Sir?
 

Well no, it's just that she said 
And er Miss  do you intend to apply for the transfer of this licence?
Yeah.
Has an application been submitted  for that purpose?
Yes.
transfer  
Oh   
Well I'm not so sure this applicant knows very much about what's going on here anyway Your Worships.
It would appear to be most of this is  Kwiksave Supermarket.
?
For all practical purposes at this stage sir she may appear to you to be a fit and proper person  I've no doubt the Licensing Committee will want to know a lot more about  the situation sir.
If I recall rightly I think that it's not that long ago that the licence was transferred  to the present holder.
You are aware Miss  that any persons working in that department have got to be of age?
Yes.
And you undertake that that will apply?
Yes.
And you are aware of the restrictions on drink for young people?
Yeah
And the sort of concern about that aspect?
Yes.
Well we're going  to grant this protection order which is temporary permission to keep your premises open, but I must tell you that there will be a lot more investigation before the order is granted permanently  and the transfer stands.
And we're ordering that the other person if possible attends  
 
If she's not in the district that will be difficult  but if it is possible if she's in the district we order that she attends at transfer sessions  the outgoing licensee.
Have you got the licence for  Miss ?
No 
Well that it will not be effective until er you produce that licence to this court.
Erm I assume if that this er if the licensee has left those premises  w she's physically left has she now?
Yeah.
Er when did she go?
She left the company then?
Mm.
I see.
Well I would have expected those premises not to be selling intoxicating liquors  you've obviously not had a licence for a month.
That will also be er considered by the licensing committee at the next hearing.
You must produce that licence, otherwise it's not effective er Miss .
See as the licensee you have responsibilities.
It's all very well the company telling you as employee what to do, but you, you're the one who's going to be in difficulties if you don't comply with the licensing laws.
The whole application's not been very satisfactory  
 
and the fact that the licence is not here  puts you in, in, in difficulty.
We are aware now that you're operating without a licence and it's up to you to get that licence here as quickly as possible.
Er, she can go for now.
To deal with application listed number forty four Your Worships, please.
It's in respect of a  temporary authority  for the Edisford Bridge Inn Your Worships.
Your Worships please  I'd like to make application on behalf of Mr James Henry  for a protection order in respect of the Edisford Bridge Hotel.
Er Mr, Mr , Mr  .
your full name is James Henry ?
Yes sir.
And you have resided for the last six months at the Railway Hotel  and at er ?
Yes.
And are you this morning applying for the protection order in respect of the Edisford Bridge Hotel?
Yes.
Er would you, would you  tell the  Your Worships what experience you've had in the licence trade?
Er yes  current position er at the moment I'm the licence  training manager for   brewery and I've held that position for  five and a half years.
Er previous to that I held the licence at The Three Fishes at  er for three years.
Er previous to that I held the licence for The Mason's Arms at  for three years previous to that  and before that I've been connected with the  catering and licence trade from being fifteen.
And you're therefore quali qualified to have a justices licence  length of time?
I 
And are you applying to , are you proposing to apply for the permanent transfer of this licence?
Yes sir.
Thank you.
Er Mrs  please.
Mrs , your full name is Margaret ?
Yes.
And are you the current licensee?
I am yes.
And do you support and consent to this application this morning?
I do yes.
That is the application Your Worships.
protection order be granted?
Worships please.
Excuse me a moment Your Worships while I write the  out.
Case fifty seven please Your Worships, Robert James .
He is in the cells Your Worships  take an order for him to be brought up.
There are apparently further charges to be put to him Your Worships.
A charge of theft and a charge of handling stolen property.
He's only charged with one offence of criminal deception at the moment.
Mr ?
Fifty five sir.
Fifty six.
 

Are you Robert James ?
Yes sir.
And what is your home address Mr ?


Is your date of birth ?
That's correct.
Are you represented by a solicitor today?
Should be.
Is it Mr ?
I haven't a clue.
You have all the documents in front of you.
Well  I think Mr  represented you on a previous occasion, that's why I'm asking you now.
I don't know sir.
My solicitor's in Birmingham  
Mr  was duty solicitor on that day.
Ah.
I think he's represented you on more than one occasion in fact hasn't he?
But don't you know whether a solicitor's going to be here for the committal proceedings today?
I haven't a clue what's happening.
I don't know, I've no 
If, you're the defendant, one would have thought  
as, as far as I know I have a committal today.
That's right.
And I would have thought that your solicitor was  to be here to represent you.
As far as I'm aware my solicitor  has been in contact with prosecution to have the case  transferred to Birmingham Crown Court.
Well it hasn't even been committed for trial yet.
Do you know anything about this Miss ?
I'm afraid to say that I have no knowledge.
I haven't certainly myself spoken to anybody with regard to that.
I would have thought the normal procedure would be for him to be committed to Preston Crown Court and for the Crown Courts thereafter to sort out the final venue.
I certainly have no knowledge of any contact with regard to the ultimate venue and nothing has been marked on my file.
Your Worships legal aid was granted er  on the thirteenth of September to a firm called  of Birmingham.
Looks as if they're not here Your Worships.
All I can suggest sir is the case is adjourned  just have to arrange for a solicitor to be here.
Do you have anything to say about that Mr ?
I wish the committee to go along please sir.
I've been stuck up in this part 
In that case  put it back to later in the day sir because the statements have to be read out in court.
If he doesn't want to be represented, is that what you're saying ?
What I'm saying sir is to save any inconvenience to the court  is that if I can have my committal  cos I don't wanna be stuck up in this part of the country.
I have a Crown Court appearance in Birmingham  and as far as I'm aware my solicitors have been in contact with the prosecution in this part of the country to explain the procedure  and as far as I'm aware the committal this morning was to be committed to Birmingham Crown Court with other offences.
Well you've heard the senior prosecutor say that she knows  
Well I  
She knows nothing about that.
I don't sir.
Yeah
Well in that case sir can I take my  my committal to Preston Crown Court and when I go to Birmingham
If you're committed for trial from this court you will be committed to Preston.
Well I'll take it now then sir.
If  if it is to be arranged  
 
at another court
Crown Court that arranged that
Well in that case sir can you  give the committee the funds.
As of now.
As I say sir we need to put this matter back to later in the day.
The defendant would not appear to be represented, therefore the committal will have to be dealt with by the way of reading out all the statements .
It can't be done  
Therefore we'll put this case back till later in the day.
Do you see that Mr ?
Because you're not represented
Well I don't know what the situation is  
Well I'm telling, that's what I'm trying to tell you.
That because you're not represented the statements will have to be read out  which will then take quite some time .
And  they will if you  to court which is something you were concerned about.
  

I don't know if you can help that man or not.
I'll have  a word  with him Terry  
Because Mr  had represented him.
Mr  said before that he, he thought it was as duty solicitor.
He, he has represented him at some stage as duty solicitor.
But he is represented under a legal aid order, this defendant, by a firm of solicitors in Birmingham  and he's anxious to be committed for trial today.
If you would represent him we could it  section six two.
Otherwise 
solicitor present today?
Not a clue, but he doesn't know either.
Oh I see.
He's given certain information to the court which isn't correct anyway.
It might help everybody concerned if you could help him.
I'll have a word with him sir.
Yes.
Would you deal with cases fifty five and fifty six Your Worships, Sean David .
Mr  will represent him.
Are you Sean David ?
Yes.
What's your date of birth Mr ?
 

What is your address, Mr ?
 

You are charged with two offences, the first of which is that at Clitheroe on the twenty sixth of August nineteen eighty eight without lawful excuse you damaged two stained glass windows, a picture frame glass and twelve drinking glasses of varying descriptions belonging to  breweries, intending to damage that property, for being reckless as to whether that property would be damaged  contrary to section one of the Criminal Damage Act of nineteen seventy one.
I understand Miss  the value has been mentioned on a previous occasion of being three hundred and ninety five pounds.
Indeed sir yes.
Right.
To that charge Sean David  do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Worships if I may interrupt that though, there's some dispute about the  damage which was allegedly caused.
I have mentioned it to Miss  this morning and she has  undertaken to make further enquiries.
Er briefly the situation is that it's alleged that he broke two stained glass door panels and Mr  denies that he broke the second of the two.
The one at the front door he says was broken at some time earlier than the evening on which he was involved.
Unfortunately Miss  hasn't been able to conclude her enquiries  er to apportion the damage and to take instructions as to the veracity of what I have just said.
It is suggested er by both myself and er my colleague that the matter should be adjourned for one week.
Well it was adjourned last week but er   instructions Your Worships.
 

Yes we agree to adjourn this case for one week  enquiries can be made.
 

Sir he does answer on conditional bail today.
Well bail will be extended for one week.
So you know what that means Mr , you were told this last week.
You're  surrender yourself to bail  next Tuesday at ten o'clock.
Hopefully the matter will proceed next week.
Can he go Your Worships?
Yes he can leave the court  
Case number one Your Worships please.
Peter John .
Are you Peter John ?
That's right.
What's your date of birth?


What's your home address Mr ?


You are charged with an offence which is contrary to section six of the Road Traffic Act of nineteen seventy two  that you at Worley on the ninth of September drove a motor vehicle on the A six seven one Worley by- pass having consumed alcohol in such a quantity that the proportion of it in your breath exceeded the prescribed limit.
Do you understand?
Do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
Have you got your driving licence with your Mr ?
I haven't got it 
Why?
Because, well I told the police at the time that er I've misplaced it  and er  
What have you done about getting a, a replacement?
Well I haven't done anything at the moment because I didn't  I didn't think it was worth it actually.
Well it says on the bottom of er your copy of the charge sheet production of driving licence  you must produce it.
Failure to produce it will mean that it is automatically suspended and it also means you've committed yet another offence by not having a driving licence here to produce Mr .
Well I wa I wasn't sure whether to  whether it would come through in time for the case  That's why I didn't 
 
send off for it.
I wasn't sure what the situation was  
Unless the prosecutor is in the fortunate position of having  a computer printout of your driving  er record and your licence record  the case won't be able to proceed today anyway.
regrettably there isn't a printout of the driving licence.
Well the case can't go ahead today without  your driving licence.
Sorry, the case can't go ahead without your driving licence.
How many weeks do you want er Miss ?
Your Worships I would anticipate that it normally takes at least three weeks for a printout  from a computer to be obtained.
This case is adjourned for three weeks in order  get a printout can be obtained.
Do that mean I don't have to apply for another licence?
No, what er y er I suggest you don't apply for another licence now, now you've left it so late.
But er  I would urge you to try to find your driving licence because
Oh I, I don't think I will be able to but I'll have a look.
Right well  you know you're going to be disqualified eventually for this offence if you're convicted?
Yeah.
What the offence  er the drink driving offence?
Yes.
Yeah.
I realize that.
You pleaded guilty to the charge anyway Mr .
The point is that when you are disqualified you're  not just disqualified from driving, you are disqualified from holding or obtaining any driving licence.
So if you've got one at home, you're committing an offence by being in possession of it.
Do you understand?
Do you understand that?
Yeah.
Right, from now on you mean?
Yeah.
When you're disqualified.
Don't apply for a driving licence in the meantime.
But er you'll be in a far safer position if you actually produce your licence on the twenty fifth of October.
Can I go sir?
Yes you can leave the court now.
Right  Mrs ?
Er number twenty one sir.
John Graham 
Twenty, twenty one?
Yes sir.
Could you deal with that matter Your Worships?
John Graham  please.
Twenty one   Now are you John Graham ?
John Geoffrey .
John?
Geoffrey .
Geo with a G?
Yes.
What's your date of birth Mr ?


And what's your home address?


You're summoned for a number of offences the first of which is that on the twenty first of June nineteen eighty eight you, on the public road namely Acrington Road Worley, used a mechanically propelled vehicle when there was no excise licence in force.
That's an offence under the Vehicles Excise Act of nineteen seventy one.
Do you understand?
Yes.
Do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
Also that you  being the driver of the motor car, having been required to produce your driving licence for examination to a police officer, failed to do so.
To that do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
Also that you used the vehicle without insurance being in force in respect of third party risks  in contravention of section a hundred and forty three of the Road Traffic Act.
To that are you guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty.
Also that on the twenty first of June you used a motor vehicle at Worley on Acrington Road when there was no test certificate in force.
Are you guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty.
Also that you failed to produce an insurance certificate on being required to do so.
Are you guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
And finally that you failed to produce a test certificate.
Are you guilty or not guilty?
Guilty.
Has he produced these documents to you Miss ?
No sir.
Have you got the insurance with you?
Yes.
And test certificate with you?
I've given  solicitor 
What?
I've given them to that solicitor that  
Well who's your solicitor?
It was duty solicitor sir.
Oh.
Could you tell Mr  that he's wanted please, wherever he is.
 

I certainly have.
Would you like me to show them to the prosecuting solicitor?
Well if that will save time.
Nine present offences.
please Your Worships I am satisfied that those documents  do cover the defendant for the date in question and I would therefore offer no evidence in relation to the no insurance and no test certificate offences  those.
Right.
Did you hear that sir?
Mr   those three charges  driving a motor car without insurance and a  test certificate, those two charges are dismissed.
Er  now let's have the prosecution, have the facts for the other offences then Miss .
may please Your Worships it was the twenty first of June in the morning when the police officer was on duty  on the A six eight, the Acrington road to Worley.
He had occasion to stop the vehicle which was being driven by Mr  and he noted that the excise licence which was being displayed had in fact expired at the end of March.
Mr  was unable to produce his documents in relation to the vehicle which he indicated was his own, and he was therefore given an H R T one to produce his documents.
But you will appreciate that in the matters that he has pleaded, pleaded guilty to this morning, he in fact failed to produce his insurance, driving licence and test certificate within the required period.
Your Worships those are the brief facts.
I would ask you to consider back duty of eight pounds thirty three pence, that being for the month of  May.
This says June on here.
I beg your pardon.
it is in fact for the month of June.
Right.
I'd also ask you to consider costs of ten pounds.
You're able to help him now are you ?
Yes Your Worships in fact I wonder if I may 
Just a minute before we start  but er why are you  the back duty for  June when his licence finished at the end of March?
Sir I apologize.
I was going by a brief statement made by the officer which indicated that it expired on the thirty first of March.
I think in fact that is a  an error on the officer's part.
It would appear  from the licensing authorities in fact it expired at the end of May.
 

Your Worships er these offences arise out of er what was initially a road  traffic accident which occurred on the twenty first of June er when er Mr  's vehicle came into collision with er a vehicle that was erm stationary in the centre of the road waiting to turn right.
No er allegations of erm  concerning the correctness of his driving er are made by the pr prosecution er  as a result of the incident but er as a result of the officer's enquiries er it came to light that Mr  was er in breach of some of the  er other regulations regarding road users and  er so the summonses which you are to deal with this morning have er have been issued against him.
Erm and you will be aware that, er two of  three of the er summonses that are now left for you to de deal with, that's three of the four  er do in fact relate to failure to produce documents.
Er failure to produce his driving licence, failure to produce a  test certificate for the vehicle and failure to produce his insurance document.
And what Mr  says  in respect of er those three offences is that erm the officer, he accepts, did tell him that he was obliged to produce the documents to a police station  but he says that he was suffering some shock as a result of the road accident and er he didn't appreciate what the officer was saying to him at the time and, never having had to produce his documents at the police station before, er he had never er known that that was a procedure that had to be followed.
And in the circumstances, he didn't pay any attention to the print on the er H R T er one form that was issued to him and he didn't produce the documents.
It was completely ignorance on his part in that respect.
Er Your Worships the one remaining summons is the one relating to the fact that his vehicle er wasn't taxed at the time of the accident, and I think er you, you will be aware, his tax did run out at the end of May  and this accident happened on the twenty first of June.
I've asked him about that and what he said is that er he was saving up and he was going to tax the vehicle as soon as he was able to do so, but he didn't have the funds er to do so at, at that time.
Erm  he is obviously aware that er by not having the vehicle taxed, it's going to cost him considerably more than if he had er taxed the vehicle at the right, correct and proper time.
Your Worships Mr  works for  in Worley and he works for them as an engineer.
His vehicle was erm something that he did use for work but unfortunately as a result of the accident his has been written off and he hasn't yet been able to  er replace it and so he's having to be erm  er chauffeured by the company to do his er his work.
Erm  he was using at that time an R registered Ford Escort er which was er only insured third party fire and theft.
He receives for his employment a take home pay of seventy three pounds per week.
He lives with his parents and pays board of twenty pounds per week.
He's fortunate in that his employer takes him to work in the mornings but he has to catch the bus home in the evening and a at lunchtime on Saturdays which costs him seven pounds forty.
He hasn't any other commitments and he would ask that erm he'd be allowed to pay the fine at a rate of twenty pounds per week.
Your Worships those are the circumstances, I would ask you to bear in mind that this man ha has four summonses against him purely as a result of  really ignorance as far as production of documents is concerned.
They were in order and erm he would have produced them had he realized what the officer was saying to him and  er that he would have er realized had he not been suffering the shock that he was actually shuff suffering at the er at the time of the accident.
I don't think 
 

Now Mr  er  you pleaded guilty to these offences  and we've listened to what  the solicitor has said on your behalf.
The main offence  of having no excise licence you'll be fined seventy five pounds.
You'll be ordered to pay eight pounds thirty three back duty  and ten pounds costs.
the offences of failing to produce you've been fined ten pounds for each of those three offences.
We will order the fines and costs to be paid at the rate of twenty pounds a week.
So  I make that a hundred and thirteen  a hundred and twenty three pounds with the costs sir  thirty three pence.
No  a hundred and twenty six  thirty three.
Sorry, you're right.
One two three  
eight.
One two three three three sir.
Under do you understand that er Mr ?
Yes.
You'll pay that at twenty pounds a week.
The officer of the court is agreed  the address will be given to you by the court official before you leave.
It is your responsibility to make sure that money is paid each and every week.
The first payment is due by next Tuesday.
Erm I'm off sick at the moment from work so 
So what?
So I won't be able to pay the first payment cos you know I  ain't got no money.
Don't you get any sick pay at all?
Well erm I've just come off holiday and   so I won't be entitled to none for the first four days.
I see.
And when are you likely to be earning again?
Erm  perhaps the middle of next week.
give fourteen days for the first payment sir?
Yes.
You'll have fourteen days for the first payment and twenty pounds a week thereafter.
So by a fortnight today there's gotta be a payment in
Yes.
Mr .
Right?
Thank you.
Miss  apparently you represent Mr    I  I notice from the documents from the er summons it was adjourned  because erm their solicitor wrote to say that he would be pleading not guilty?
Yeah.
Is that the case?
Yeah Your Worships I understand that the er the prosecution have erm an application .
I don't know if you wish to deal with this  
So who's it for?
Is, if it's not going to be a trial 
Well Your Worship 
I'll do it now but if it  
I wonder if I can assist.
It is an  a matter where Miss  has spoken to me about this particular case and it 
Forty five.
Case forty five Your Worship.
It's the view of the prosecution that this is a matter that could be dealt with quite satisfactorily by the way of bind over if the court were minded to do that, if the court would accept that course of action.
I understand Mr  would be willing to be bound over.
Yes I confirm that that's correct.
Yes.
Well obviously Miss  the magistrates will need to be satisfied there are grounds  why they should bind him over.
They will also need to be satisfied that there is a fear for the future  otherwise they will not bind him over.
I appreciate that sir.
You may feel at the end of the day that you need to hear from the officer of the case and he is still present obviously in case the court wishes to  
I see.
Well in that case I, I will leave it till, I'll deal with this a little bit later on.
Obviously it could take 
 
possibly half an hour or so, so  who else is present Mrs ?
Er number forty one sir, Sylvia .
Could you deal with that Your Worships  please?
Yes.
Forty one.
Are you Sylvia ?
Yes.
What is your date of birth please?
Pardon?
What is your date of birth please?
Er 
And what is your home address?


Thank you.
Your summoned that at Worley on the twenty fifth of July nineteen eighty eight, you being the driver or a motor car  on King Street and an accident occurred where injury was caused to  you failed to stop in accordance with section twenty five of the Road Traffic Act of nineteen seventy two.
Do you understand that?
Yes.
Do you plead guilty or not guilty?
Well I did stop because I tried to avoid him.
Well  I'm sorry  are you Miss or Mrs ?
Pardon?
Are you Miss or Mrs ?
Mrs.
Mrs  the court cannot enquire into the circumstances at this stage.
All the court wants to know is are you pleading guilty or not guilty.
Mr  has handed me your driving licence.
Mr  as duty solicitor have you seen this lady?
Yes I have seen her sir.
Have you been able to  advise her?
Well I, I have advised her that erm  er implications of the erm  er of the offence.
Possibly I could just have another word with her  
Right it, it might help her.
Now I'll ask you again Mrs , to that offence of failing to stop in accordance with the requirements of the Road Traffic Act  do you plead guilty or not