

Words of wisdom.
What we need to do now is  make them look interesting  and we do that  using the  what is called formatting options.
And those are actually  listed on page eight.
So essentially, what we're going to be doing are going through er the lessons that are actually outlined in page eight  and page nine of your booklet.
Now one of the  features of Microsoft Word is that a only lets you work with text which is what is called selected  and if you actually move the cursor down a bit so that it's not at the beginning of a document  and then we'll follow our way through these various selecting text keys which are outlined in that paragraph, section three six one.
So we u , if we use function key F seven we move through the document one word at a time  backwards  and F eight is the complimentary key to that  we move  through the document one fa word at a time.
So, just try that.
So as we go through we're acc we er accepting one word at a time.
Now F nine doesn't do what it says here actually, that's a  an error on my part.
If you hit F nine  it selects the current sentence.
I've actually lost the middle bit of my book!
There it is!
Right!
So, F nine selects the current sentence that you're in.
F ten  takes you through the document one sentence at a time  so you can work your way through the document one sentence at a time.
So it's not actually a next paragraph, it's one sentence.
Unbelievable isn't it!
So you're okay so far?
Well mine doesn't seem to go through the .
Does it?
Yeah.
For F nine.
Yes, true!
It is one paragraph at a time, so it is correct.
I hope so.
I was having a job to recognise what was a pa er, a paragraph as far as Microsoft Word is concerned is the space between two  hits of the return key, okay?
Whereas a sentence  is is the space between er the beginning of er er between two full stops.
A new way of using the English language when you're word processing is absolutely another world!
Okay.
Erm  if you go shift F nine, or shift F eight  it goes through the document, I think, one sentence at a time.
Yep!
And shift F seven takes you back through the document one sentence at a time.
Shift F nine selects the current line, we've not er stated I think.
Yeah, shift F nine  er  accepts the current line where the cursor is, is located.
And probably the most useful key of all  when you're doing global formatting, is shift F ten and you select the whole document.
So if you wanna select all the text you've written,she shift F ten selects the whole document.
And essentially, you only will change the appearance of the text which is appearing in your vers video.
So if you actually want to italicize something, you want to make it bold, you le you have to select it first and then you can carry out the  tha , the function.
So, if everybody selects the text that they wan of their document and we'll just play around with it  show you what a mess you can actually create using these formatting keys!
So everybody have document and hit shift F ten  and they're on page nine now  if we go, hold down the alt key and type B  and you'll just see er a shimmer go down the screen  an then you don't actually see anything, but if you alt U, everything appears underlined  alt K  converts everything into small capitals  alt S, strikes through everything  and alt I  italicizes all the words.
If you don't press your arrow  you'll see what a mess you've created in your document!
You've made the text bold  capitalized, struck through, underlined, and totally illegible!
So you've now actually taken all that nice typing that you've done and rendered it totally illegible!
Fortunately, this is not permanent.
So if you select all the text again, shift F ten, and press the alt space bar, then all of that formatting is removed  and it takes you back to your text as it was.
So, from basically making it totally illegible you're back to where you started.
So what we've been doing is we've been taking words and we've been changing their appearance.
We've underlining them, italicizing them, whatever  this is what is called character formats  and these are eliminated or removed with the alt space bar.
The next set of features that are actually mentioned erm  relate to  the way in which paragraphs are laid out.
So, if we actually have everything highlighted again and we'll actually not follow the list as in the book we'll, if you type in alt C  all your text moves to the centre  go alt R  everything moves to the right  and alt L again it takes you back to left justified.
So now we're altering the space  the words actually placed on the page.
Go alt N  and you can see what's happening is your text is actually being indented one tab stop at a time  so it ends up as a narrow thin ribbon of text skating down the page  and if you do this really crazily you can end up with a document that is only just one word wide!
It's a great way for producing long banners or waste paper but  And if you wanna actually reverse this process alt M takes it back  the other way.
And if you get fed up of moving text one tab stop at a time  if you go alt P  you then actually remove all of the paragraph formatting that you add and it takes you back to your starting position.
So when you got paragraph formatting  you can


eliminate paragraph formatting with alt P.
Now has anybody actually got themselves in a total mess?


Few  few hoots of laughter from the back!


Let's try another one, is it, go in text highlighted  try alt T


do you know what happens there?
You wha , create what is called hanging indent.
Your text and your paragraphs are indented by one tab stop but accept the first line.


So we have, looked something like our in our conclusions, you'll find the alt T is actually quite useful


because you can go down  in your first line move to the  first letter o , after the number, hit the tab key and you've actually lined up the first line along with the rest of your paragraph.
So you produce nice numbered lists, looking very neat!
Okay?
Everything is lined up underneath the tab stop.
Now this kind of ordering text on a page if you're using a typewriter takes quite a lot of skill  but if you're a, with a word processor it's actually quite easy.
Honest!
Right!
Oh!
Have you got yourself into a total er 
 
Yes .
Right!
Okay.


Go shift F ten or select   now go alt P and cancel all paragraph formats.
If you will just wait it takes a bit of time to get back where you want.
Ah!
Yeah!


So however a big a mess you make of things  however big a mess you make of things everything is usually retrievable.


So rarely can you actually mess up a document in such a way that is totally irretrievable than the way in which things look.
It's not coming right over .
Yeah.
Right, fine!
Can't get  anyway.
Go alt space bar  should be it.
So this is fun learning to format!
If you got mice i , you can also make things easier by actually moving that arrow around until you get to the individual word that you actually want to find and actually then you stop your cursor there.
So, if you've got a mouse you could actually help speed up a lot of this editing but, I said, I've not written in the mouse commands into this schedule because we didn't actually have mice on all work stations when this was written.
So, as I go round I'll show you erm, how to use the mouse  er a as as and when it becomes er appropriate.
So what you'll have to do now is go back to erm  page  eighteen I guess, no haven't got page eighteen have we?
I keep on losing bits of my document!
Yeah, I should get one that  yeah page ten, it says return to your letter  and essentially i it tells you all the various formatting  options that you want to apply to your document to make it look neat and tidy.
So, just go through pa , the er  commands on page ten and follow the instructions.
And you should actually then produce a letter which is neat and tidy and worthy to send to  to Doctor   and not to your cat!
And just to prove that some students have got the hang of this  this is a letter that er  David   produced  and, it actually looks quite good!
So, he's only had the same length of time doing this as you have so, by the end of the afternoon you ought to be in the position to print out a really neat  final version of of of the letter.
One that you'll be proud, proud of.
Can I borrow a book, please?
Yeah sure.
Also, if anybody's not actually paid me for their book  that they actually purchased last week, I'm open to accept  payment today.
So is anybody in immediate problems at the moment or you're o Okay, so, I'll, it's your chance now to do some work then for the next  twenty minutes or so.
Can you accept payments next week?
Yes.
I'll go on accepting payment until the course finishes 
 
okay?
I'll keep reminding you.
Oh, is it possible to 
Sir!
Copy one disc onto another disc, how come I've done that?
And why is it ?
You want the file off?
No, why?
I seem to have gone into this  exactly the same somehow.
Well if you copied all the files over.
Well I haven't though.
I ju I jus I haven't been asked to.
But I wonder if I've done something  copied one to six.
I bet that has.
If you go into DOS  right!
So you go into A   cos we've got that disc in.
Yeah, that's the one that I keep .
Oh.
Then just ask it to list all the files on that disc.
Yeah.
Yeah?
And then  there's the next one.
Oh right!
And that  now will list the same files on that disc
Right.
and in fact  it  is more or less the same but you check if some of them are missing.
But then I've lost my .
I've lost
Well
all the other things that were on  this disc originally.
Ee!
Yeah, originally!
work.
That one is now on this one, there's nothing  on this.
And you just used all the  just did that?
Yeah I just did it as you said.
I did a few of them  .
Right.
Well that's alright 
 
I did that .
Yeah.
I mean  some of your letters are there aren't they?
Erm
There's some of there.
Yeah but  that's  and a couple of ones like that, and that one.
That one, but I actually got onto the  the server.
Yeah, but that's what's on the server isn't it?
Yeah.
But, then, that's all your files that are available now, I think you've lost
Some of them must have been on there.
Have you done your boot?
No, but that's  on that one.
This one here
Oh yeah!
Well  I think that's happened , it's not like they dis , totally disappeared.
Is there any way you can delete  like the whole the at once?
Yes.
Right.
I mean, if you want to say delete  a temporary file  press del for delete
Yeah.
then star  that stands for a wild card, that'll do  all files which have got the  back up.
Oh right!
You better go and get some tea Margaret I haven't had a chance yet!
Oh right!
Have you not done your bit yet?
I've done my bit.
Yeah.
Oh!
Right!
Come and have a cup of coffee then?