

12
Dealing with Social Security Benefit Claims
Introduction
Many disputes are dealt with by bodies other than courts.
These include tribunals, which are now a formal part of the system of adjudication.
In 1957, they were recognized as such (Franks Committee, 1957), and in 1968 they were described as a ‘more modern form of court’(Abel-Smith and Stevens, 1968).
Three factors have tended to make classification of tribunals difficult.
The first has been the link between the work of some tribunals and the development of a fully-fledged system of administrative law in England and Wales.
The second has been the sheer number of institutions calling themselves tribunals.
The third was the unfortunate linking of the work of tribunals and enquiries in the Report of the Franks Committee, which has led many writers to feel obliged to discuss tribunals and enquiries together.
There are three principal functions of tribunals and enquiries: adjudication, regulation and advice.
The function of adjudication is the determination of the rights and duties of the parties presenting their dispute to the tribunal.
The claimant takes issue with a decision made by a decision maker, for example, with an adjudication officer concerning entitlement to a social security benefit, or with an employer concerning a dismissal.
The issue is then referred to an independent tribunal for a binding decision as to whether the claimant is entitled to the benefit or has been unfairly dismissed.
The second function of tribunals is regulation.
Here the tribunal is the decision-making instrument chosen by government for the implementation of some scheme of government regulation.
A good example is the Civil Aviation Authority determining entitlement to an air transport licence in accordance with the general objectives laid down in the legislation.
The distinction between adjudicatory and regulatory tribunals is that the former are making a binding decision following a reference by a person aggrieved by a decision which has already been made, whereas the latter are directly applying a system of government regulation rather than supervising or reviewing the proper application of the system of government regulation.
It is a characteristic of both adjudicatory  and regulatory bodies that they produce a binding determination of the issue before them.
Binding does not necessarily mean final, because the determination may be subject to reconsideration by an appellate body.
But, unless and until the determination is successfully challenged, it will be binding.
The third function, which belongs principally to ministerial and public enquiries, is advice.
One example from a multitude of possible examples is the compulsory purchase order enquiry.
Local authorities have for many years enjoyed a power to purchase land compulsorily in order to carry out their statutory functions relating to highways or general development.
If agreement to purchase land needed for particular projects cannot be secured and a compulsory purchase order is made, persons affected may object.
If those objections are substantial, the relevant minister will order an enquiry into the proposals and the objections to them.
This will be conducted locally by an inspector appointed by the minister who will hear evidence and argument both from the local authority and the objectors.
The inspector will also visit the site.
Following the hearing and site visit, the inspector will prepare a report for the minister, who will then decide whether to affirm the compulsory purchase order which he may do with or without variations, or whether to decline to make the order.
The inspector's report is not binding on the minister; it is merely advisory.
The report will be sent to the parties together with the minister's letter of decision, which will set out the factors which have influenced the minister.
The exercise is principally an informational one: it ensures not only that the minister is informed of local views for and against a proposal but also that those views are tested in the inspector's enquiry, and fully considered in the subsequent report by the inspector to the minister.
Other types of enquiry are also advisory, but are more investigative in nature.
An example would be an ad hoe public enquiry into a serious railway accident.
The functions of such an enquiry would be to appraise ministers of the full facts surrounding the accident following an investigation of the causes of the accident.
Whereas the compulsory purchase order enquiry is fairly passive, relying on party initiative to inform the minister, the investigative enquiry is more active in that it seeks out information.
The characteristic of both informational and investigative enquiries is that the results are advisory and may be accepted or rejected by the minister, though they will be used as part of the process of ministerial decision making.
This and the following chapter describe the work of two of the main court-substitute or adjudicatory tribunals: the social security appeal tribunals and the industrial tribunals.
The Franks Committee
No discussion of tribunals can ignore the impact of the Report of the Franks Committee, which is still viewed as laying down the ground rules for the operation of tribunals.
Tribunals might well have continued to develop without any critical analysis of their impact on the administration of justice, had it not been for one of those incidents of poor administration whose wider implications  cannot be ignored.
The catalyst was the Crichel Down Enquiry in 1954 by the Minister of Agriculture into the sale and subsequent choosing of a tenant for Crichel Down in Dorset which had been purchased during the war as a bombing range (Griffith, 1955).
This incident, despite having nothing to do with the operation of tribunals led to the establishment in 1955 of the Committee on Administrative Tribunals and Enquiries under the chairmanship of Sir Oliver Franks (as he then was).
The Committee came to be known as the Franks Committee, and reported in 1957 (Franks Committee, 1957).
The Franks Report has had a major impact on critical analysis of tribunals.
The terms of reference were:
To consider and make recommendations on:
(a)
The constitution and working of tribunals other than the ordinary courts of law, constituted under any Act of Parliament by a minister of the Crown or for the purposes of a minister's functions.
(b)
The working of such administrative procedures as include the holding of an inquiry or hearing by or on behalf of a minister on an appeal or as a result of objections or representations, and in particular the procedure for the compulsory purchase of land.
The coupling of tribunals with ministerial enquiries has dominated the treatment of tribunals since the report of the Franks Committee.
The report also began the dangerous process of generalization about tribunals and enquiries by identifying ‘general and closely linked characteristics which should mark these special procedures’.
This general approach rather clouded the other important conclusion that tribunals are a new method for the independent adjudication of disputes.
The Committee distinguished tribunals from ‘ordinary courts’ but went on to say:
We consider that tribunals should properly be regarded as machinery provided by Parliament for adjudication rather than as part of the machinery for administration.
(Franks Committee, 1957, para.40)
Key recommendations made by the Franks Committee concern the impartiality of tribunals and their supervision.
Membership of tribunals should not be within the patronage of the Minister, the decisions of whose officials are under review.
The Committee suggested that the Lord Chancellor should appoint chairmen and clearly favoured an increase in the use of lawyer chairmen principally because lawyers were considered to have a good grasp of principles of procedural fairness.
As a general principle it was recommended that hearings should be in public and that reasons should be given for decisions.
Legal representation was not viewed as necessary, but rules prohibiting legal representation were considered undesirable.
A proper system of appeals from decisions of tribunals should also be introduced.
Finally the Committee proposed the creation of two Councils on Tribunals (one for England and Wales, and one for Scotland) to exercise general supervisory powers over the operation of tribunals.
Most of the Committee's recommendations were speedily implemented in the Tribunals and Inquiries Act  1958, which was amended by the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1966.
The legislation has been consolidated and the law can now be found in the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1971.
The declared characteristics of tribunals specified in the Franks Report were ‘cheapness, accessibility and freedom from technicality, expedition and expert knowledge of the particular subject’ and stated that the objectives of tribunal procedure are ‘openness, fairness and impartiality’.
Little need be said of the declared hallmarks of the proper procedures of tribunals of ‘openness, fairness and impartiality’.
These are the hallmarks of any system of decision making under any scheme of government regulation in a democratic society.
The qualities have even been described as ‘so vague as to be virtually meaningless, at least without being transposed into much more explicit features’(Farmer, 1974, p. 185).
How far can the characteristics suggested for tribunals be said to be true of tribunals to the exclusion of other forms of dispute resolution?
The answer is that they cannot.
Tribunals are only cheap in the sense that no fees are payable on filing claims and that allowances are generally paid for out of pocket expenses in attending the tribunal.
This is simply a transfer of spending from litigant to the State.
Indeed effective use of tribunals may be more expensive to a claimant.
There is little possibility of any recovery of the costs of using a lawyer from the losing party and legal aid will not finance representation.
Accessibility and freedom from technicality may be taken together.
In this respect post-Franks developments of tribunals have overtaken the Franks Report.
Tribunals tend to be geographically accessible, because they sit locally, like both magistrates' courts and the county courts.
On the other hand, the problems of direct access without assistance or representation are currently the subject of consideration within the Lord Chancellor's Department.
The problem of accessibility is linked to the technical nature of the legal rules applied by many tribunals.
The substantive law applied in many tribunals has become more complex since 1957, while procedural rules have developed which need to be fully understood and carefully observed to make the most effective use of the tribunal decision-making process.
By contrast, rules operating in some courts, particularly in the small claims jurisdiction of the county courts, have become less complex.
Even with the remaining difficulties, arbitration in the county court is certainly as accessible and free from technicality as pursuing an unfair dismissal claim before an industrial tribunal.
It has become clear over the years that a level of formality is required for fair and impartial decision making, though it is equally clear that proper decision making does not always require ritual conduct or observance of the formal rules of evidence.
The issue of delay depends upon a comparison of like with like.
The speed of decision making of some tribunals is broadly comparable with that of magistrates' courts and the county courts.
If compulsory purchase order enquiries were contrasted with inferior courts, the courts would be speedier.
Looking at the time lag between the filing of a claim and final disposition is in any event a crude measure.
What is more important is to discover the causes of delay, without which general conclusions are likely to be unhelpful.
To suggest that tribunals have greater expert knowledge of the subject matter of disputes before them, than judges, is rather insulting to the judges.
It is sitting  as chairman or lay member of a tribunal which gives tribunals expertise, just as the senior barrister appointed to the Bench will soon acquire expertise in those areas of law which did not form part of his or her practice before appointment.
The general qualities of those appointed as judges, chairmen or lay members of tribunals, are considered more important than a detailed knowledge of the law relating to the particular types of dispute likely to be considered by those persons.
The increasing incidence of the full-time lawyer chairman has narrowed the gap between judicial appointment as a judge and as a tribunal chairman.
It is probably fair to say that full-time tribunal chairmen are considered of roughly equal status to circuit judges, with Presidents, regional chairmen and lawyer members of appellate tribunals roughly equal to High Court judges.
The thrust of this argument is that tribunals which resolve disputes have matured beyond the framework envisaged by the Franks Report.
The aims of the modern tribunal are:
to reach the right decision in law;
to give the parties an impartial, fair and sufficient hearing;
to use the advantages of tribunal procedure to enable claimants to have greater participation in the resolution of their dispute.
Essential History
Early Days
Though it is possible to trace a system of remedies outside the court structure back a thousand years (Wraith and Hutchesson, 1973), it is unnecessary to go back beyond the National Insurance Act 1911 for an historical background to modern tribunals.
Following the scheme set up in Germany, Lloyd George introduced a new system for the settlement of disputes arising out of claims to the new unemployment benefit provided by the Act and administered by the Board of Trade.
Initial decisions on entitlement were made by employees of the Board of Trade known as insurance officers.
A claimant dissatisfied with the decision of the insurance officer could have the decision reviewed by a local Court of Referees consisting of a chairman appointed by the Minister of Trade, one member chosen from an employers' panel and one member chosen from a workmen's panel.
There was a further final appeal to a national appellate authority known as the Umpire, a lawyer appointed by the Crown.
The adoption of this system of dispute resolution was in part a borrowing of the German experience, but was also a reaction to the unsatisfactory operation of the resolution of disputes in the county courts concerning workmen's compensation for injuries suffered at work.
This had not been intended to be legalistic, but in practice the claimant had been put in the position of an ordinary plaintiff in a civil case arguing a case against a powerful insurance company or mutual insurance society (Potter and Stansfield, 1950).
The new idea introduced by local Courts of Referees was the free local non-legal forum for the settlement of particular disputes.
They were very successful and provided a model for review procedures connected with a variety of benefits under the burgeoning national insurance scheme.
Not everyone welcomed this new development.
Some judges and lawyers saw in the development a serious threat to the independent impartial adjudication of disputes by the courts.
The concern culminated in the publication in 1929 by the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Hewart, of his book The New Despotism in which these arguments and the theme that arbitrary power was being concentrated in the hands of the bureaucracy were elaborated.
By way of response the Government established the Committee on Ministers' Powers which reported in 1932 and has come to be known as the Donoughmore Committee (Donoughmore, 1932).
The terms of reference were narrowly drawn and the Committee's report did not include any grand plan for the future development of a tribunal system.
Nor did it agree with the fear expressed by Lord Hewart.
Effectively the seal of approval was given to the type of tribunal established under the National Insurance Act 1911.
The system set up by the National Insurance Act 1911 was continued under the subsequent amending legislation, but the benefits dealt with were insurance benefits and provided no help for the uninsured.
The Unemployment Act 1934 introduced a national assistance scheme for the unemployed to be managed by the Unemployment Assistance Board under the direction of the Minister of Labour under which allowances became payable to assist unemployed persons.
This replaced the system of public assistance, a locally administered means-tested benefit.
Under the scheme of public assistance, a person refused a payment had the right to make representations to a local Public Assistance Committee (PAC).
Because of the existence of PACs and of the Court of Referees for benefits under the insurance schemes, the new national scheme included an appeals system.
PACs were replaced by unemployment assistance tribunals to which a person aggrieved by a decision not to make a payment, or as to the amount of a payment, could appeal with leave of the chairman.
The tribunals consisted of a chairman appointed by the Minister of Labour, a workpeople's representative appointed by the Unemployment Assistance Board from a panel drawn up by the Minister and a third member representing the Unemployment Assistance Board (Lynes, 1976).
Not surprisingly these tribunals have been criticized as not being independent of the Ministry of Labour or of the Unemployment Assistance Board.
Their importance lies in the fact that they were the grandparents of supplementary benefit appeal tribunals, just as the Courts of Referees,(from 1936 known as unemployment insurance appeal tribunals) were the ancestors of the national insurance local tribunals.
The pattern of welfare benefits which had become established was that of social insurance covering the major causes of loss of income and paying flat-rate benefits at no more than survival level with a residual public assistance scheme for those in desperate need who were not covered by social insurance.
The Beveridge Plan
This coupling of social insurance with a safety net of means-tested benefits was taken up in the Beveridge Plan which settled the framework of the welfare state after the Second World War (Beveridge, 1942).
Having received official blessing  from the Donoughmore Committee, tribunals mushroomed, particularly in connection with the social security legislation introduced after the Second World War (Wraith and Hutchesson, 1973).
The Beveridge Plan was to raise the level of insurance benefits from survival level to subsistence level and to protect adults against loss of income through a comprehensive system of social insurance benefits to which legal entitlement would arise on payment of the requisite contributions.
This system of social insurance was coupled with a proposal for a system of non-contributory family allowances to meet the needs of families.
But the Beveridge Plan accepted the need for a safety net of means-tested benefits for those outside insurance, which it was envisaged would play very much a minor role in the new welfare state.
The Beveridge Plan inspired the post-war burst of legislation establishing the welfare state.
Under the National Insurance Act 1946 provision was made for tribunals to be established to consider questions of entitlement to, and amount of, contributory benefits, thus establishing the national insurance local tribunals.
Under the National Assistance Act 1948, a National Assistance Board and national assistance tribunals replaced the Unemployment Assistance Board and the unemployment appeal tribunals, and became the parents of supplementary benefits appeal tribunals.
Despite the grand hopes of the Beveridge Plan, it has not succeeded.
Following the introduction of the reforming legislation, successive governments have failed to keep the level of benefits payable under the system of social insurance in line with rising costs.
Payments soon fell below subsistence level.
Family allowances were never introduced at the level recommended by the Beveridge Plan, and the level of child benefit, which has replaced family allowances, remains less than is necessary to meet family needs.
The very small sums allowed for children under social insurance benefits have been kept deliberately low because of the presence of a separate system of payments for children.
Other groups were not covered by the Beveridge Plan, notably the disabled.
The result has been that the system of social insurance does not dominate the system of welfare benefits organized by the state.
The dominant benefit is the means-tested income support replacing supplementary benefit (formerly national assistance) in April 1988, whereas under the Beveridge Plan this was to be a minor benefit providing a safety net for those not otherwise covered.
With the replacement of national assistance by supplementary benefit in 1966, a major change took place in relation to the means-tested benefits.
Section 4 of the Ministry of Social Security Act 1966 gave entitled persons, that is those whose resources were not sufficient to meet their requirements, a legal right to supplementary benefit.
Prior to the 1966 Act there had been a duty imposed on the National Assistance Board to give assistance to those in need by the payment of national assistance, but no corresponding right for individuals to receive assistance.
The legacy of establishing need in order to trigger the duty to make payments still haunts the administration of means-tested benefits and has flavoured supplementary benefits appeal tribunals with Victorian notions of identifying those who are ‘the deserving poor’.
By contrast the insurance principle behind contributory benefits has always resulted in there being a more ready appreciation of a legal right to benefit as a result of the insurance contract, albeit a compulsory one.
This is one factor which explains the very different approaches taken historically by supplementary benefit appeal tribunals and national insurance local tribunals to their respective tasks.
A major change was made in 1980 when the policy of the Department of Health and Social Security in administering supplementary benefit was reduced to detailed secondary legislation, so that the supplementary benefit scheme is now as rooted in statutory provisions as the national insurance benefits.
In April 1988 supplementary benefit was replaced by income support and social fund payments.
National Insurance Local Tribunals (NILTs)
As we have seen, National Insurance Local Tribunals (NILTs) took over the administration of the insurance based benefits in 1948.
NILTs were composed of a chairman and two members.
The chairman was invariably a lawyer, though there was no formal requirement to this effect, appointed by the Secretary of State from a panel drawn up by the Lord Chancellor.
The other members were appointed by the Secretary of State, one from a panel of persons representing employers and the self-employed and one from a panel of persons representing employed earners.
The chairman was charged by regulations with the supervision of the overall conduct of cases before NILTs.
The two members were required to be impartial; they were not representatives of the interests of employers and employees.
The high incidence of unanimous decisions suggests one of two things.
Either the members were impartial in their approach or the chairman so dominated the proceedings that dissent was difficult.
Indeed the highest incidence of minority opinions was dissent by the chairman which could be said to lend weight to the second view, though a more probable explanation is that the lay members took a view on the merits which the chairman regarded as untenable in law.
Research published in 1962 showed that the lay members were likely to be active trades unionists and managerial workers (McCorquodale, 1962).
Later research showed that most chairmen and members were aged between 45 and 65, whereas most claimants were aged less than 45.
There was a serious underrepresentation of women.
All chairmen were social class I, the majority of employers' representatives were social class II and over 80 per cent of employees' representatives fell within social classes II and III (Bell et al., 1974).
The research concluded:
Our data on chairmen and members suggest that the people who serve on tribunals may come from a ‘local squirearchy’ involved in a wide range of community activities, including welfare, church, education and training organizations, local politics, trade unions and professional associations.
(Bell et al., 1974, p. 315)
A further interesting finding was that one in three chairmen, one in nine employers' representatives and one in seven employees' representatives were also justices of the peace or held similar ‘judicial or semi-judicial office’ such as that  of coroner.
These findings are also supported by other research (Frost and Howard, 1977).
The administrative arrangements for NILTs were made by a clerk to the tribunals, who was a civil servant in the employment of the DHSS (as it then was).
Every effort was made to ensure that tribunals normally sat in buildings other than the premises of the DHSS in order to emphasize their independence from the Department.
But a separation from government departments generally was not often secured.
It was common for sittings to take place in rooms contained in buildings whose primary purpose was to house other government departments.
Other common venues were local Town Halls.
The accommodation provided was often fairly spartan.
NILTs have always been regarded as representing the acceptable face of tribunals.
The influential Bell study gave them largely a clean bill of health as a model for determining disputes concerning entitlement to benefit.
But three key findings have set the scene for subsequent debate on the system.
First, there was a need for a broadly based and accessible advisory facility so that claimants could receive independent and impartial advice on their entitlement to state benefits.
Secondly, there was recognition that direct access to the tribunals by claimants was not apt to produce a fair result in every case.
There was overwhelming evidence of a different standard of treatment of represented and unrepresented claims, as well as marked differences between attended and non-attended appeals.
To combat some of these problems, there should, argued Bell, be increased opportunities for representation before the tribunal.
Thirdly, there was a need to upgrade the standard of adjudication with tribunals playing a ‘more positive enabling role in relation to appellants’(Bell et al., 1974).
Supplementary Benefit Appeal Tribunals (SBATs)
The Ministry of Social Security Act 1966 created the Supplementary Benefits Commission (SBC) to administer the supplementary benefit scheme and for the first time those whose resources did not meet their requirements had a legal entitlement to the payment of benefit.
But there was no change in the system of adjudication; national assistance tribunals simply became SBATs.
The implications for the tribunal system of the change to a system of benefit based on entitlement seems to have been overlooked.
Unlike national insurance benefits, the award of supplementary benefit depended in the bulk of cases on the exercise of discretionary powers, which have been described as ‘wide, problematic and in some cases ambiguous’.
(Bell, 1975).
The legal entitlement to benefit came to be governed by secret codes circulated within the Ministry and designed to ensure uniformity of decision making by benefit officers, who like their counterparts under the national insurance scheme, made decisions on claims to benefit.
All that was available to claimants was the Supplementary Benefits Handbook which set out the broad basis upon which the SBC exercised its discretion.
Over the ensuing years a battle was waged between those who saw the discretion present in supplementary benefit decision making as a necessary part of a flexible response to human need (Titmuss, 1971) and the burgeoning welfare rights  movement, which demanded genuine legal rights to income maintenance with equality of access to decision-making guides and judicial appellate procedures.
Prior to the changes made in 1980, SBATs were generally regarded as the slums of the tribunal system.
Research studies showed that the original SBATs were travesties of due process (Bell, 1975; Adler and Bradley, 1975).
They were composed of three members: a chairman and two members, one a representative of workers, the other drawn from a panel of persons appearing ‘to have knowledge or experience of conditions in the area to which the panel relates and of the problems of people living on low incomes’.
The chairman historically was a person who had served on the tribunal as an ordinary member for some time.
In 1973 it seems that only 6 per cent of SBAT chairmen were lawyers.
Research conclusions were that SBATs suffered a serious problem of non-attendance of claimants, that it ‘required telepathic powers to understand’ the reasoning in written decisions, that the informality with which proceedings were conducted led to inadequate enquiry into appeals and an imbalance between claimants and the SBC's presenting officers, which rendered SBATs partial in their decision making.
Presenting officers, far from being scrupulously fair to claimants took advantage of the informal procedure to introduce improperly, material prejudicial to claimants.
The tribunals tended to be ineffective in sifting and weighing evidence and all too often accepted the presenting officer's arguments on SBC policy as the law on entitlement.
There was also evidence that clerks took part in the tribunal's decision making (Lister, 1975).
Other studies confirmed this amateurish and ineffective system of appeal (Bell, 1975).
The Bell study proposed a three stage rescue programme.
Stages I and II were to be directed to the improvement of tribunals by the strengthening of their personnel, and in particular by appointing lawyer chairmen, with a senior chairman appointed for each region.
The system of adjudication was to be improved by setting out clearly the roles of presenting officer and tribunal clerk.
A guide to procedure should be produced so that everyone would have an outline of a desirable order of events and to ensure proper standards of fairness and impartiality.
Moves should be made to develop assistance for claimants to enable them to present their claims more effectively.
Better facilities for representation were also needed.
Stage III contained longer-term proposals that a second tier appellate tribunal should be created to provide rules of precedent value for the SBC and SBATs.
The response to the Bell proposals was positive.
From a figure of six per cent in 1973, the proportion of lawyer chairmen had increased to 36.4 per cent by October 1982.
Training programmes for both chairmen and members had been introduced.
The role of clerks became separated from the decision making of tribunals and presenting officers became much less adversarial in approach, both developments being the result of special training.
A guide to SBAT procedure was produced by the DHSS.
In 1978 an appeal to the High Court on a point of law was introduced, which was replaced by the appeal to the National Insurance Commissioners, renamed the Social Security Commissioners, in November 1980.
The 1980 changes, which had been canvassed by the DHSS discussion document Social Assistance (DHSS, 1978), included the abolition of the SBC and  the transfer of its functions to the DHSS.
The SBC's secret codes were replaced with detailed regulations spelling out entitlement to benefit.
The function of SBATs changed from review of the application of discretion by the SBC to interpretation of rules of law.
This paved the way for the merging of NILTs and SBATs as social security appeal tribunals (Harris, 1983).
Figures on representation for 1982 show that of 55,893 claims heard by SBATs, the claimant attended in 58 per cent of cases (DHSS, 1983).
Their success rate was about one in four cases.
For the 42 per cent who did not attend, the success rate was about one in thirteen.
Representation was most frequently by a friend or relative, or by a social worker, though there was a large unhelpful category labelled ‘other’, which might well include welfare rights advisers.
Solicitors represented less than two per cent of those represented.
Overall, representation increased the chances of success to about one in three, but if representation by a friend or relative is excluded, then the success rate for those with ‘expert’ representation rose to about two in five cases.
The situation was very similar to that obtaining in NILTs.
Representation increased the chances of success dramatically.
No amount of procedural fairness could compensate for lack of knowledge of the complexities of the law.
Unattended and unrepresented claimants' appeals did not appear to be tested as carefully as those of attended and represented claimants.
Yet there was no legal aid and the provision of a representative was the product of a chance linking of claimant with an agency providing representation.
Social Security Appeal Tribunals (SSATs)
On 23 April 1984, the Health and Social Services and Social Security Adjudication Act 1983 amalgamated NILTs and SBATs to form social security appeal tribunals (SSATs).
The Department of Health and Social Security handed over all its responsibilities for the new tribunals to a newly created statutory authority known as the Office of the President of Social Security Appeal Tribunals (OPSSAT).
The new central authority is headed by a Circuit judge assisted by seven regional chairmen, who are in turn assisted by a full-time chairman.
All are appointed by the Lord Chancellor.
OPSSAT still receives its funding resources from the Department of Social Security with whom it negotiates a finance budget and a staff allocation.
Staff of OPSSAT act to the instructions and priorities set by the President of SSATs.
There are 268 social security appeal tribunals throughout England and Wales, and Scotland, which hear appeals most days of the week.
At their busiest, the annual case load of tribunals exceeded 300,000 cases, though this has now stabilized at around 150,000 cases a year as a result of limitations placed on the rights of appeal under the income support and social fund scheme introduced in April 1988.
SSATs consist of a lawyer chairman sitting with two lay members.
Most cases are heard by part-time chairmen who must be solicitors, barristers or advocates of five years standing.
They are appointed by the Lord Chancellor for renewable three year terms of office.
Members are appointed by the President from those considered to ‘have knowledge or experience of conditions in the area and to be  representative of persons living or working in the area’(Social Security Act 1975, Sched. 10, para. (2)).
The President has the responsibility of supervising the overall operation of SSATs, as well as of organizing meetings, training courses and of preparing material for the guidance of SSATs.
The system of adjudication of social security benefits is now integrated, but the price has been the judicialization of the tribunal system without sweeping reforms in the provision of assistance and representation for persons wishing to claim.
The main arguments which have led to the creation of the new tribunals with their own appellate tribunal have centred around the complexity of social security law, and yet there is no increased provision of funding for assistance through legal aid, law centres or welfare rights services.
The Modern Social Security System
The present social security system is laid down mainly in the Social Security Acts 1975 to 1990.
Social security benefits can be divided into three groups.
First there are contributory benefits, which used to be called national insurance benefits.
They provide flat-rate payments for insured workers against loss of income resulting from sickness, unemployment for up to one year, maternity, becoming widowed, or from retirement.
Eligibility is conditioned upon satisfaction of the relevant contribution tests: basically, claimants must have made sufficient payments into the national insurance fund to entitle them to claim the benefit.
The contribution tests vary with the type of benefit claimed.
Secondly, there are non-contributory social security benefits payable without any means-test.
These are child benefits, industrial injuries and death benefits, certain invalidity benefits, and attendance and mobility allowances.
Thirdly, there are the means-tested benefits, which are non-contributory.
These are income support and family credit, housing benefits, help with the costs of educating children (for example, free school meals and transport) and help with health and welfare needs (for example , free prescriptions).
The Contribution System
Since the Beveridge Plan was predicated on a system of insurance, it is not surprising to find the concept of premiums reflected in the requirement that potential beneficiaries of the various social insurances should pay contributions.
There are four classes of contributions.
Class 1 contributions are paid by workers in employment and are deducted from their pay at the statutory rates.
Class 2 and Class 4 contributions are paid by self-employed persons who are entitled to all contributory benefits except unemployment benefits.
Class 2 contributions are payable at a flat rate while Class 4 contributions are payable as a percentage of profits.
Class 3 contributions are voluntary contributions paid by non-employed persons; the usual reason they are paid is to bring the number of contributions up to a level to entitle the person to a benefit.
It will be clear that contributions are usually paid out of income and that entitlement to benefits is dependent upon contributions having been paid.
The system of credited contributions covers the  situation where individuals are precluded through no fault of their own from making payments, because there is no income from which they can be paid.
A good example is the credit allowed to a person who is unemployed.
The system is complicated and credited contributions are for some purposes not as good as paid contributions.
Adjudication
Initial adjudication of claims to social security benefits will generally take place in a local office of the Department of Social Security or Department of Employment depending on the benefit claimed.
Claims to some benefits are, however, dealt with by centrally-located benefit offices.
All claims will require investigation of entitlement.
Decision making is split between adjudication officers and officers known as Secretary of State's representatives.
Adjudication officers are employees in the relevant Department but exercise independent judgment on claims in making decisions within their province.
They alone have authority to award benefit.
Certain decisions are taken by officers designated as Secretary of State's representatives.
Such decisions relate primarily to satisfaction of the contribution conditions, but the legislation gives them competence on specific questions at many points.
Where medical questions are involved, specific decision-making powers are given to medical adjudicating authorities.
SSATs only have jurisdiction to consider an appeal against a decision of an adjudication officer.
The proper remedy for dissatisfaction with a Secretary of State's decision is appeal on the question of law to the High Court.
The scale of decision making within the Department of Social Security and Department of Employment is vast; adjudication officers make decisions in more than 25 million claims each year.
They are expected so far as practicable to make decisions on benefit entitlement within 14 days, but this time limit is frequently exceeded.
In R v. 
Secretary of State for Social Services, ex parte CPAG ,([1989]1 All ER 1047) the Court of Appeal affirmed a decision of the High Court in which the trial judge had said that the practicability of such speedy decision making was not such that the Secretary of State was required to appoint sufficient adjudication officers to enable claims to be decided within 14 days, and recognized that workloads may lead to delays beyond the time limit expressed in the Social Security Act 1975.
Once a decision is made it must be communicated in writing to the claimant, who then has three months in which to appeal against it to the SSAT.
The document communicating the decision advises the claimant of the right of appeal.
Fewer than one in five hundred decisions are appealed.
Practice and Procedure in SSATs
The Nature of Tribunal Adjudication
The three members of the tribunal share the responsibility for decision making on appeals; the lawyer and the lay members have an equal say on all issues whether of law or fact.
The main role is the adjudication of the dispute between  the claimant and the relevant department on entitlement to benefit.
The process of judging in SSATs involves five tasks:
reading the case papers;
identifying the legal test relevant to the appeal;
considering the evidence and making findings of fact relevant to the legal test;
applying the legal test to the facts as decided by the tribunal and making a fair decision on the law; properly
recording the evidence heard and considered, the facts found, the decision of the tribunal and the reasons for it.
The foreword by the first President of the SSATs to The Guide to Procedure stresses the enabling functions of the tribunals:
Most claimants at the time of their appeal will be too troubled and hassled by the more practical day to day problems of their plight ever to have the emotional energy to study the nuts and bolts of the machinery by which their appeal will be processed.
For them, any meaningful guide of one hundred pages is one hundred pages too long, no matter the style in which it is written.
For people in this category my message is short: ‘Comply with the instructions set out in the forms which bring your case before the tribunal.
Once there, let others whose job it is to look after procedure do so.
Don't worry about it yourself.’
(p. vii)
Tribunals should adopt a flexible procedure which facilitates the presentation of evidence and argument by claimants and representatives with a range of communication skills, some outstanding, some very limited.
Within the requirements laid down by the Franks Report of the need for openness, fairness and impartiality, the objective is to achieve a formal procedure with an informal atmosphere.
The Social Security Commissioners too have stressed the investigative or inquisitorial role of the tribunals.
In R(S)1187 , Commissioner Hallett said:
The jurisdiction of…the social security appeal tribunal…is investigative or inquisitorial.
A social security appeal tribunal is exercising quasi-judicial functions and forms part of the statutory machinery for investigating claims in order to ascertain whether the claimant satisfies the statutory requirements which entitle him to be paid benefit.
It is not restricted, as in ordinary litigation which are proceedings between parties, to accepting or rejecting the respective contentions of the claimant on the one hand and the adjudication…officer on the other….
Its investigatory function has as its object the ascertainment of the facts and the determination of the truth.
(para. 14(3))
A Tribunal of Commissioners echoes these sentiments in R(S)4182 , where they described the judicial process in tribunals as ‘fair play in action’.
A recent study, which included observation of tribunals, showed that tribunal  chairmen in the tribunals believed in the investigative approach to the determination of appeals:
During observations of social security appeal tribunal hearings the vast majority of chairs were found to be courteous, sensitive and at pains to be helpful to appellants, reflecting, presumably, the ‘enabling’ role that has been stressed under the new regime and the belief expressed by all chairs that hearings were fundamentally ‘inquisitorial’.
In this context, the term inquisitorial seems to mean that chairs feel they have the freedom to investigate cases and elicit the information they think they need in order to get to the truth of the situation, rather than to choose between competing arguments.
(Genn and Genn, 1989, p. 159)
Making the Appeal
Making an appeal to an SSAT is a very simple task.
The appeal may be made by completing the form provided for this purpose by the Department or by writing a letter of appeal.
No fee is payable on filing an appeal.
The time limit of three months from notification of the adjudication officer's decision is important.
Appeals can only be accepted outside the time limit if there are ‘special reasons’ for the delay and the case law on these is not particularly generous to claimants.
Though the appeal should set out the grounds on which the appeal is based, appeals which fail to do so will not be regarded as inadmissible.
The grounds of appeal are not viewed formally and may be enlarged at a later stage.
But there are two reasons why it is advisable to set out in full the reasons and facts upon which the appeal is based.
The first is that, as we shall see, the letter of appeal will be included in documents made available to the tribunal in advance of the hearing and a good clear account will ensure that the chairman and members are clear about the claimant's grievance.
The second reason is that an appeal triggers a reconsideration of the case by an adjudication officer, who may revise the decision in the claimant's favour forthwith.
The more information the adjudication officer has, the more likely will be a revision in the claimant's favour.
In order to make the best of a case at this stage most claimants will need advice and assistance because preparing a case for appeal involves three tasks: establishing the facts of the case, understanding the applicable legal rules and integrating facts and law in a well-constructed argument which includes meeting the reasons put forward by the adjudication officer for denying the claim.
This issue of getting help is considered in more detail below.
But the claimant who has received no help should not despair, because there is a significant element of inquisitorial procedure in the tribunal's decision-making process.
The Adjudication Officer's Written Submission
The adjudication officer must in all cases prepare a documentary case for submission to the tribunal in advance of the hearing.
This is also sent to the  claimant.
It will contain details of the claim and of the adjudication officer's decision, together with a note of the statutory provisions and decisions of the Commissioners upon which the adjudication officer is relying.
The claimant's letter of appeal will be included and there will be a full written submission by the adjudication officer setting out the facts and law as they have been determined and applied to the claimant's case.
For the unrepresented claimant, these papers are undoubtedly daunting.
They will be accompanied by informational literature about the tribunal, but success at the hearing will be determined in part by the use made of the information provided in the written submission.
It seems that a curtain of gloom falls over some claimants at this stage who abandon their fate to their own written statement of appeal.
Bell's research on NILTs concluded that a major cause of non-attendance at the hearing results from ‘a combination of pessimism about the outcome and practical difficulties’(Bell et al., 1974).
The Hearing
The tribunal hearing itself is in an informal setting.
All participants sit around a large table.
Typically the tribunal members will sit along one side of the table, the clerk at one end and the adjudication officer and claimant opposite the tribunal members.
Normally six cases will be listed for a half day, which would allow about 30 minutes per case if all the claimants attended, but a significant number do not.
This allows more time for attended cases, since non-attended cases tend to be dealt with very speedily.
The tribunal clerk will have some idea of the numbers likely to attend and to be represented from the replies to the short questionnaire sent to claimants with the adjudication officer's submission.
It seems that most chairmen do offer a brief explanation of the tribunal's procedures, though these may be rather perfunctory.
The hearing is technically in public, though it is very rare for anyone other than those immediately involved to be present.
The claimant can request a private hearing.
The procedure is for the chairman to decide.
It is usual for the claimant to be asked to outline the reasons for the appeal following which the adjudication officer may ask questions of the claimant and of any witnesses brought along by the claimant.
The tribunal chairman and members will also ask questions as the case proceeds.
Witnesses do not give evidence on oath.
The formal rules of evidence that apply in courts do not apply in tribunals.
Any material which is relevant and helpful may be considered, though the weight to be attached to different types of evidence will vary.
Tribunals will generally regard first hand evidence as more likely to be correct than second-hand evidence, but there is no general requirement that what the claimant says must be corroborated by another person's evidence.
Nor is there any requirement that evidence must be in writing to be persuasive.
The adjudication officer, who will not normally be the one who made the initial decision, will then put forward any submissions he or she may wish.
It is clear that the role of the adjudication officer at the tribunal is not to be an adversary  of the claimant defending the Department's original decision.
On more than one occasion the courts have stated that the procedure is investigatory and that the role of the adjudication officer is to act as amicus curiae (friend of the court) assisting the tribunal in its investigation of the claim (R v. 
Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner, ex parte Moore ,[1956]1 QB 456;R v. 
National Insurance Commissioner, ex parte Viscusi ,[1974]1 WLR 646).
Though the onus of proving entitlement to the benefit claimed is normally on the claimant, in a number of cases the burden of proof is placed on the adjudication officer to satisfy the tribunal on the balance of probabilities of particular facts.
One example is disqualification from receiving unemployment benefit following the termination of employment as a result of misconduct (Commissioner's Decision R(U)2/60 ).
Attendance at the tribunal need not result in a claimant being out of pocket because the cost of transport to the tribunal and of any loss of earnings is reimbursed by the tribunal.
Similar costs incurred by witnesses reasonably called to support the claimant's case will also be met out of public funds.
The Decision
Once the tribunal has heard the submissions of the parties, everyone except the tribunal members leaves the room while the tribunal deliberates.
It is presidential policy that, wherever practicable, claimants should be told the outcome of their appeals on the day, but in all cases the claimant and adjudication officer must be sent a written record of the decision which includes a note of the evidence and submissions of the parties, a statement of the tribunals findings of fact and of the reasons for the decision.
The grounds for any dissenting opinion must also be stated.
The written decision is usually relatively brief, though it must be sufficiently full and complete that the claimant can tell what facts have been accepted and rejected, the reasons for the rejection of any evidence and how the law has been applied to the facts as found.
Commissioner Watson said in R(SB)5/81 :
Findings and reasons need not be lengthy; indeed brevity clearly indicating them is often to be preferred to a lengthy and possibly ambiguous record.
It is not possible to lay down a general rule for recording findings and reasons since that depends on the nature of the evidence and of the case.
(para.10)
If the decision is so brief as to be inadequate, this may provide grounds for an appeal to the Commissioners, since it will amount to an error of law.
Where the decision is adverse to the claimant, information about the right of appeal to the Commissioners must be given.
In deciding appeals before them, SSATs are bound by decisions of the Commissioners.
Their decisions form a self-contained body of rules of precedent value both for adjudication officers and for tribunals.
It follows that it is important for relevant decisions to be considered in deciding cases.
Setting Aside, Reviews and Appeals
There are three ways in which the decision of the tribunal can be changed.
The first is where it is set aside, in which case it is treated as if it had never existed.
There are three gateways to the setting aside of a decision:
a document connected with the appeal was not received in time by one of the parties or their representative;
a party to the appeal of their representative was not present;
there has been a procedural mishap.
Once one of these grounds has been established, the party seeking the setting aside, which can be the adjudication officer or the claimant, must show that it is just to set the decision aside.
The tribunal which decided the case considers the application, but, if it is allowed, the case must be listed for a tribunal composed of different people to be heard afresh.
Review is only available to adjudication officers, who can revise the decision where it is shown that it was given in ignorance of, or mistake as to, a material fact, or there has been a relevant change of circumstances.
Again, once the ground for review has been established, the adjudication officer must consider whether it is right to revise the decision in the light of the circumstances now revealed.
Any decision given on review attracts a further right of appeal just like the original decision.
The final way in which the decision might be varied is on appeal.
Decisions of tribunals may be appealed to the Social Security Commissioners on a point of law.
Leave must be obtained from the chairman of the tribunal which decided the case, but if it is refused, then leave can be sought from the Commissioners.
The time limit for appeals is three months.
The Social Security Commissioners
Appeals from decisions of SSATs lie, with leave, to the Social Security Commissioners, who are all lawyers.
They normally deal with appeals individually, but the Chief Commissioner may decide to convene a Tribunal of three Commissioners to hear appeals involving questions of law of particular difficulty.
The main procedure is a written one.
Legal aid is not available for representation, though advice and assistance under the Green Form scheme will provide assistance.
A former Chief National Insurance Commissioner has described the procedure on appeal as a good example of a procedure which is informal and yet under which an appellant's case is considered fully and fairly.
He suggested that, in the vast majority of cases, the procedure was accessible to unrepresented appellants (though he did concede that they should receive assistance) and that it would be undesirable to extend legal aid generally to cover such appeals (Micklethwait, 1976).
It is difficult to see how unrepresented claimants who fare  so badly in tribunals of first instance could expect to fare better at the appellate level; indeed representation has increased considerably over the past few years.
The claimant sets out the grounds of appeal, though these need not be detailed.
But the clearer the grounds of appeal, the better the chances of success.
The adjudication officer is then asked to respond and the claimant is given an opportunity to comment on those responses.
The construction of a written case demands perhaps even greater skills than the preparation of oral argument.
It is vital to cover all the ground and to be clear and accurate since there is no immediate opportunity to clarify matters by the process of question and answer.
At this stage the parties can request an oral hearing which will be granted unless the appeal is an obvious winner or loser.
Many appeals are decided on the papers alone.
The Commissioners take considerable trouble to ensure that all relevant arguments are canvassed in the written case, and will invite observations on issues which appear to be relevant and which have not been raised in the written case.
Following the decision of the Commissioners, a full written record of the decision is sent to the claimant and to the adjudication officer.
Decisions of the Commissioners are binding on adjudication officers and on tribunals, but not all decisions of the Commissioners are reported.
It is the task of the Chief Commissioner to decide which decisions are to be reported and he or she is assisted by the Commissioners starring decisions they consider worthy of reporting.
Parties and their legal advisers, as well as welfare organizations, may also make representations that a decision should be reported.
The criteria for selection for reporting are that the case involves an issue of legal principle and contributes to the orderly development of the law.
The Chief Commissioner seeks to ensure that all reported decisions have the assent of a majority of Commissioners.
It remains open to claimants and the adjudication officer to cite unreported cases, but advance notice of their intention to do so is required.
Adjudication officers are expected to rely on reported decisions as far as possible.
The existence of this body of appellate decisions in social security matters has the obvious effect of contributing to consistency of decision making not only by adjudication officers in their initial decisions on claims, but also by SSATs.
About one in four appeals is successful.
Though appeals are available from the Commissioners to the Court of Appeal, these are rare.
One reason for this has been the deference shown by the Court of Appeal to the expertise of the Commissioners, a deference which appears to be justified by the thoroughness of the re-examination of the cases by the Commissioners.
The effective bypassing of the High Court (judicial review remains theoretically available) also reflects an increasing recognition of the Commissioners as being of the same judicial standing as High Court judges (Ogus et al., 1988).
Attempts have been made to use judicial review to challenge a refusal of leave, but these have found little favour with the High Court (R v. 
Social Security Commissioners, ex parte Morris , reported as an appendix to Commissioner's Decision R(A) 5/83 ).
Overall little criticism can be levelled at the Commissioners' decision making, though there is a problem over help for appellants to the Commissioners.
Attendance and Representation
Research in 1970 on NILTs showed that about half of claimants do not attend the hearing and that representation was present only in one in five cases (Bell et al., 1974).
In so far as later information is available, no dramatic improvement of these figures is indicated (Frost and Howard, 1977; White, Robin, 1982; Genn and Genn, 1989).
One study showed that trades union representation was the major type of representation followed by relatives and friends with lawyers representing only three per cent of those represented, about the same number as social workers (Bell et al., 1974).
But this is a fairly old study.
Though the overall level of representation does not appear to have improved dramatically, it seems that the numbers represented by specialist lay advisers have increased so that now the most common representative is the trades union representative or the specialist lay adviser.
There is a significant variation in success rates depending on representation.
The overall success rate has remained fairly constant over the years at about one in five cases.
But if the claimant is not represented and does not attend, the success rate falls to one in twelve, while unrepresented attenders win in about one in six cases.
Represented claimants are successful in two out of every five cases (Bell et al., 1974).
A similar sort of pattern emerged in SBATs, as noted earlier in this chapter.
These marked differences between represented and unrepresented cases must place some question marks after the claim that the tribunals are genuinely inquisitorial and that their processes are accessible to claimants appearing in person.
Concern over the reported variations in success rates of represented and unrepresented applicants to tribunals led the Lord Chancellor in 1987 to commission a two-year research project to investigate the effectiveness of representation at tribunals (Genn and Genn, 1989).
The research would inform planning and decision making over the use of legal aid in tribunals.
The project was designed to establish whether representation affected the outcome of tribunal hearings, and to analyse the contribution of representation both to pre-hearing processes and to the hearings themselves.
This research showed that the level of advice and representation in SSATs is lower than in the other tribunals investigated.
One in five appellants had made some attempt to obtain advice prior to the hearing, but only one in eight appellants is represented by an expert, as distinct from being accompanied by another member of the family or a friend without expert knowledge.
About a third of the help came from advisers in Citizens Advice Bureaux.
The presence of specialist representation increases the chances of success from one in three to one in two.
Specialist lay representation tended to be more successful than representation by solicitors and barristers.
The research also showed that attending the hearing, especially if a witness was brought along, also significantly improved the chances of success.
Even the identity of the chairman could affect the likelihood of success.
The study reported that one by-product of representation is that the tribunal tends to scrutinize other cases more carefully.
So success rates in urban  areas, where representation is more likely to be present, were higher than in outlying areas.
In commenting on the enabling function of the tribunal, the research study speaks of the heavy burden placed on the tribunal of eliciting all the relevant information about the case and applying the law to the facts in an impartial and objective manner.
Compensating for the absence of representation could be time consuming and difficult when appellants are confused or inarticulate.
Social security appeal tribunals are categorized as the least formal of the tribunals investigated, but it is reported that appellants nevertheless found attendance before them a nerve-wracking ordeal.
Many appellants reported extreme anxiety and bewilderment and confessed to having had difficulty expressing themselves.
The study concludes:
It has been persistently asserted by policy-makers, some administrative law scholars, and those concerned with the administration of tribunals, that the informality of tribunals, their simplicity, and their accessibility, have rendered representation both unnecessary and undesirable.
The evidence of this study indicates that while simplicity in initiating proceedings, informality in surroundings, and procedural flexibility are valuable qualities worthy of preservation, they should not be used as a justification for denying the contribution that representation makes to tribunal decision-making processes, nor the need of appellants to have cases advocated on their behalf.
(Genn and Genn, 1989, p. 248)
Conclusion
Social security appeal tribunals are generally regarded as the least formal system of adjudication.
Social security legislation by contrast is a complex web of primary and secondary legislation.
It is a tribute to the tribunals that the technicality at the heart of the appellate process in these tribunals can and does coexist with the relative informality in atmosphere and with procedural flexibility.
These are qualities which the Genn study argued should be preserved.
Yet the Genn study in particular shows that no amount of enabling by the tribunal can compensate for the difficulties claimants face in attending the tribunal and arguing their cases.
It is unknown territory leading to confusion and bewilderment.
The challenge to the Lord Chancellor's Department is to preserve the best features of the tribunal system while providing the necessary advice and support needed by claimants to ensure that all of them put their cases at their best.
When these tribunals operate at their best, they offer a consumer orientation sadly absent from other areas of adjudication.
13
Dealing with Unfair Dismissal Cases
Introduction
Many tribunals are concerned with disputes between the citizen and authority in some form.
The social security appeal tribunals are a typical example.
They are concerned with grievances held by individuals against the two Government Departments who administer social security benefits.
By contrast, industrial tribunals in the exercise of the unfair dismissal jurisdiction are concerned with disputes between employee and employer.
Such disputes are often disputes between citizen and citizen, though the employer will often be a partnership or company.
Much of the jurisdiction of industrial tribunals is concerned with rights given to individuals to be exercised against their employers.
The unfair dismissal jurisdiction accounts for about three-quarters of the business of the tribunals.
This represents around 30,000 cases a year.
The major study, the Dickens study, of the operation of the unfair dismissal jurisdiction of the industrial tribunals is that conducted by a team of researchers from the University of Warwick (Dickens et al., 1985) which involved large-scale interviewing of those involved in the tribunal processes in three regions of England and Wales.
The interviews sought information on ‘the nature of the parties; what happened to them; their expectations, experience, perceptions and assessments of the industrial tribunal system’.
Industrial Tribunals
Industrial tribunals were established under s.12 of the Industrial Training Act 1964 with a narrow jurisdiction to consider appeals against the levy on employers to finance the industrial training boards set up under that Act.
In the following year they were given a new jurisdiction concerning redundancy payments, and concerning statutory rights to information about particulars of contracts of employment.
Even with this fairly technical jurisdiction, some commentators saw the tribunals as providing the nucleus of a system of ‘labour  courts’(Whitesides and Hawker, 1975).
The boost to their growing jurisdiction came when the Royal Commission on Trades Unions and Employers' Associations (Donovan Commission) of 1968 approved the extension of tribunal jurisdiction (Donovan, 1968).
The Donovan Commission had approved tribunals as ‘an easily accessible, speedy, informal and inexpensive procedure’ for the settlement of disputes between employers and employees.
The unfair dismissal procedures first introduced in the ill-fated Industrial Relations Act 1971 survived the repeal of that Act by the Trades Union and Labour Relations Act 1974.
The structure of industrial tribunals has long been settled.
Tribunals consist of a lawyer chairman, many of whom are full-time appointments, sitting with two lay members, one representing employers and one employees.
The lay members are intended to bring industrial experience and practical knowledge to bear on the issues coming before the tribunal.
They are of equal standing to the chairman.
One commentator says of lay members:
Lay members, experienced in industrial relations, know what an employer should or should not put up with, equally they know what an employee can expect.
They know the unwritten custom and practice which form such an important part of industrial relations.
Thus they have a most valuable part to play in reaching a just decision.
(Jukes, 1978, p. 5)
A presidential system has been adopted.
A President is appointed who is responsible for the overall operation of the system.
He is assisted by a network of regional chairmen.
The system is organized around a central office in Bury St Edmunds, with regional offices in large cities in the regions and local offices in other cities.
Each tribunal has a clerk who deals with the administration of the tribunal.
Clerks are also expected to assist unrepresented parties with advice on the procedure adopted in the tribunals.
Today the industrial tribunals enjoy a wide jurisdiction over statutory employment rights.
The most important, at least numerically, of these jurisdictions has been the unfair dismissal jurisdiction, but other employment disputes within their jurisdiction include discrimination and equal pay claims, redundancy payments claims and claims concerning particulars of contracts of employment.
The jurisdiction upon which attention will be focused in this chapter is unfair dismissal claims.
The current law is to be found in Part V of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978, as amended by subsequent employment legislation.
Proposals are currently under consideration to transfer contractual disputes arising out of the employment relationship from the civil courts to the industrial tribunals, but no enabling legislation has yet been implemented to secure this.
A former President of the industrial tribunals has said that:
The tribunals are meant to provide simple informal justice in an atmosphere in which the ordinary man feels he is at home…an atmosphere which does not shut out the ordinary man so that he is prepared to conduct his own case before them with a reasonable prospect of success.
(Conroy, 1971, p. 4–5)
As this chapter will show, this goal has not been achieved because the tribunals have adopted an accusatorial or adversarial model of hearings.
The procedure is very like that operating in the county courts despite the provisions of the rules of procedure which state that tribunals ‘shall so far as appears…appropriate seek to avoid formality in its proceedings’ and the absence of formal rules relating to the admissibility of evidence.
Protection against Unfair Dismissal
Before examining the practice and procedure of industrial tribunals, an outline of the law relating to unfair dismissal will be offered.
This is, of necessity, an incomplete and oversimplified account which reflects a typical claim before the tribunals.
The employment protection legislation has created for certain employees a proprietary right in their jobs.
Before this proprietary right was granted, the relationship between employer and employee was regulated solely by the contractual terms agreed between employer and employee and embodied in the contract of employment.
Thus, provided that an employer gave the notice required by the contract, the employer was free to terminate an employee's contract.
The employment protection legislation operates to restrict the grounds on which an employer can terminate the contract of employment with impunity.
The protection is acquired once an employee has been in a particular employment for two years, though there are special rules concerning part-time employees and for calculating the date up to which the continuous employment is measured.
No protection exists for men over 65 or women over 60 or for persons over normal retiring age in a particular employment whether that age is more or less than the ages given above.
Once the protection is acquired, the employee can make a claim that he or she has been unfairly dismissed.
The employer must then establish before a tribunal the reason, or if there is more than one, the principal reason, for the dismissal, and must show that it was one of the following reasons:
reason relating to the capability or qualifications of the employee for the particular employment; or
a reason relating to the conduct of the employee; or
that the employee was redundant; or
that some legislation precluded the continuance of the employment; or
some other substantial reason justifying dismissal.
These general grounds have been elaborated by decisions of the Employment Appeal Tribunal on appeal from decisions of industrial tribunals.
Establishing the existence of a reason for dismissal falling within the legislation is only the first hurdle upon which the employer has the burden of proof.
But there is also a reasonableness test, where there is no burden of proof placed on either party.
The reasonableness test is for the tribunal to consider, though both parties will normally make representations to the tribunal on this issue.
The tribunal is  required to determine whether the employer acted reasonably or unreasonably in treating the established reason for dismissal as sufficient reason for dismissing the employee, having regard to equity and the substantial merits of the case and to the size and administrative resources of the employer's undertaking.
Three remedies are available for persons found to have been unfairly dismissed: reinstatement, re-engagement or compensation.
Reinstatement involves treating employees as if they had never been dismissed.
So they must be paid all arrears of wages, granted full pension rights accruing through continuity of employment, and given any pay increases that would have been their due if they had not been dismissed.
Re-engagement involves offering the employee a fresh contract of employment.
Significantly, the employee will have to serve in that employment for two years before again gaining the protection of the unfair dismissal legislation.
Compensation is calculated to a complex formula which includes a basic award related to gross earnings and length of service and a compensatory award which seeks to meet the employee's actual and future losses arising as a consequence of the dismissal.
Interest is payable on all sums due to applicants following industrial tribunal awards.
The most common remedy is compensation.
Practice and Procedure in Unfair Dismissal Claims
Pre-action Procedures
In the consideration of the plight of litigants in the civil courts, reference was made to the difficulty of collecting evidence to support a claim.
In some cases, notably personal injuries cases, rules of court have provided special machinery to assist a plaintiff.
In employment law three rules provide substantial assistance to an employee.
The first is the requirement that not later than 13 weeks after the beginning of the employment, an employee is entitled to a written statement containing particulars of the terms of the employment, which must include details of disciplinary and grievance procedures available to the employee, unless the employer employs fewer than 20 people.
An employee denied such a statement may refer the matter to a tribunal which will determine the particulars which should have been included and referred to in such a statement.
In this way, all employees are able to ascertain the main terms of their employment.
Many employees do not worry about such matters until a dispute arises, but the provisions do enable employees and their advisers to obtain details of the main terms of the contract of employment without too much difficulty.
The second rule assisting employees is the provision contained in the legislation entitling any employee of at least two years' standing to a written statement of reasons for dismissal.
Not only is this statement admissible in tribunal proceedings, but unreasonable refusal to provide such a statement renders the employer, on the application of the employee to a tribunal, liable to a penalty payable to the employee of a sum equal to two weeks' gross pay.
This is an extremely useful provision which requires early disclosure by the employer of the case against the employee.
The third rule is that an application to a tribunal claiming unfair dismissal casts the burden of proving a reason for the dismissal falling within the Act on the employer.
This is in marked contrast to the position of most other applicants or plaintiffs who will have the burden of proving the facts on which their claim is based.
The justification for the reversal of the burden of proof in unfair dismissal cases is that employers will be in the best position to explain what reasons they had for terminating the employment.
The Originating Application
Armed with the written statement of reasons for the dismissal, an employee is in a position to begin proceedings before the industrial tribunal.
Commentators still tend to remark on the informality of industrial tribunal procedure (Farmer, 1974; Walker, 1985), but the industrial tribunal's rules of procedure are no longer informal, and it has become an adversarial forum (Dickens et al., 1985; Genn and Genn, 1989).
There are detailed rules contained in regulations, which can be used strategically by representatives, and the documents used to outline the grounds of claims are increasingly being regarded as pleadings, so that inconsistencies or changes of tack revealed later may prejudice the parties.
Great care therefore needs to be taken over the completion of documents.
The employee opens the proceedings by completing an Originating Application (also known as Form IT1); this is accompanied by some notes for guidance, and the employee will usually have the Department of Employment booklet on unfair dismissal claims.
The Originating Application requests the names of the parties, details of the employment and remuneration, of the date of dismissal, a statement of the grounds of the claim and a non-binding intimation of the remedy sought.
The form also, quite inappropriately, requests the employee to proffer an opinion as to the reason for dismissal.
This is inappropriate because the burden of showing the reason for dismissal rests with the employer.
Experienced advisers never respond to this question, but the unrepresented applicant often responds to the question with bizarre unsupportable allegations of bias and corruption by the employer which are sometimes seized on by the tribunal to the prejudice of the applicant.
The completed form is sent to the Central Office of the Industrial Tribunals in London (COIT).
It must arrive within three months of the ‘effective date of termination’ of the employment, basically the date of dismissal or some later date deemed by statute to be the date the employment ended.
No fee is payable on filing a claim.
The Notice of Appearance
On receipt of the originating application, the COIT copy the application and send it to the employer with a Notice of Appearance (Form IT3), which the employer must complete and return within 14 days, showing whether the claim will be resisted and, if so, on what grounds.
Failure to respond has draconian consequences.
The employer ceases to be entitled to take any part in the proceedings.
Since the employer has the burden of proof, this will usually be fatal to the employer's case.
For this reason failure to respond is rare and late responses are deemed to include an application for an extension of time, which is invariably allowed.
On receipt of the Notice of Appearance, the COIT send a copy to the applicant and send the papers to the most convenient Regional Office, who in turn allocate the case to the most convenient local office.
Either party, or the tribunal of its own motion, may request further and better particulars of the grounds on which the claim or reply is based.
The Dickens study tells us that not every dismissed employee eligible to claim unfair dismissal does so.
Only about one in ten of those eligible to claim actually does so.
Among those who apply there is a greater tendency to bring unfair dismissal proceedings where the employer is a small single establishment employer with below average unionization.
Nearly half of all applications are against employers with fewer than 20 employees.
The larger the employer, the less likely it is that there will be an unfair dismissal claim.
There are a number of possible explanations for this pattern of application.
Larger employers are likely to have internal appeals procedures and failure there, where union representation may have been provided, is the point at which the employee draws the line.
Employees may feel a sense of powerlessness in taking on a large organization or it may be that advisers are more reluctant to take on large organizations.
The typical applicant to the tribunal is a male, middle-aged, non-union manual worker dismissed after a relatively short period of service.
The study found that access to advice was an important factor, tending to be haphazard.
Even where applicants had some access to advice and representation, that service itself adopted procedures for selecting the cases in which representation before the tribunal would be provided.
The Genn study confirms this profile of applicants (Genn and Genn, 1989).
Seven out of ten applicants sought advice and half of these approached solicitors (Genn and Genn, 1989).
A real difficulty here is that legal aid does not extend to representation in the tribunal.
The Green Form scheme is the only relevant part of the legal aid scheme and will provide advice only.
Respondent employers also sought advice frequently, almost always from solicitors or in-house employment law experts.
Conciliation
While the parties are sorting out any issues over the grounds of the claim, a formal statutory process of conciliation is brought into play.
Conciliation officers from the Advisory Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) will have been sent copies of the Originating Application and Notice of Appearance.
They will intervene to try to secure a settlement of the claim without its being determined by an industrial tribunal, and in doing so they are required to seek to promote the reinstatement or re-engagement of the employee.
In practice conciliation officers tend to view the achievement of a settlement as their principal function, with the actual remedy a secondary consideration.
Most settlements are for compensation.
Typically the conciliation officer will contact each party or their representatives to discuss the case.
It is important for the parties to realize that the conciliation officer will tell the other side what each has said about the claim.
Conciliation officers are often reluctant to express an opinion about the likelihood of success before the tribunal, but will make clear an opinion whether the case appears to them one which is strong or weak and so ought to settle.
In particularly weak cases the conciliation officer will go so far as to advise the applicant to withdraw the claim.
About one in three claims which do not go to a hearing are dropped by applicants.
The process can be a useful one to get the other side talking about settling.
Conciliation officers are very useful for advising employers of the tasks before them at a tribunal hearing.
Even 20 years after the introduction of employment protection, there are still many small employers who do not appreciate its impact on managerial decision making.
The negotiations are conducted on a ‘without prejudice’ basis and information communicated through conciliation officers is by statute not admissible at tribunal hearings unless the person who gave the information to the conciliation officer consents.
The success of conciliation can be measured by the volume of withdrawals or conciliated settlements.
Around two-thirds of all cases result in withdrawals or conciliated settlements.
Agreements resulting from conciliation are normally registered with the tribunal as a form of consent decision.
Though a formal part of the processes which operate when an unfair dismissal application is made, conciliation is a separate process from adjudication by the tribunal.
This is emphasized by conciliation being the province of ACAS and by the confidentiality which surrounds the process.
Conciliation and adjudication are alternative methods of dispute settlement.
There is a long history of the use of conciliation in employment relations, justified because one objective is to secure the continuance of the relationship between the parties in dispute.
The process of conciliation in unfair dismissal cases serves two purposes.
The first is to facilitate agreement between the parties on the settlement of the dispute on terms selected and agreed between them.
The second is to act as a filter to ensure that only those cases which for some reason need to proceed to a formal process of adjudication do so.
The conciliation process is very effective as a filter disposing of two out of every three applications without the need for adjudication.
The Dickens study showed that the parties generally viewed the involvement of ACAS favourably, though opportunities for complaint about their involvement were limited in the interviews conducted by the researchers.
Other writers have complained, particularly in discrimination cases, that conciliation officers are too willing to encourage settlement at any price and fail to provide the support an unrepresented applicant may need against the relatively advantaged position of the employer (Gregory, 1987).
Four out of every five settlements achieved by conciliation officers are for compensation and only one in ten for reinstatement or re-employment.
The Dickens study concludes:
Very few offers of settlement conveyed by the conciliation officer are refused by applicants.
The inequality in the employer-employee relationship  and the relative disadvantage of an unfair dismissal applicant within the industrial tribunal system is perpetuated, not ameliorated, by the neutral stance required of ACAS in conciliation.
In the context of a tribunal system used by unaided and unrepresented applicants the description of conciliated settlements as voluntary agreed outcomes of an assisted bargaining process, qualitatively superior to tribunal imposed awards, is inappropriate.
The description might have more applicability if there were rights enforcement officers to aid unrepresented applicants.
Inherent in some of the criticism made of ACAS conciliators…is the assumption that they should take a more positive, rights-enforcing, stance.
(Dickens, 1985, p.180)
Interlocutory Applications
The process of conciliation runs alongside other pre-hearing procedures.
These include power to strike out an application because the applicant is not taking the proper steps to further the claim, or because it is ‘scandalous, frivolous or vexatious’.
Because the formal rules of evidence do not apply, there is no automatic procedure equivalent to discovery and inspection, but documentary evidence is often important in unfair dismissal claims and there are powers to order the production of key documents on the application of one of the parties.
There are also powers to compel the attendance of witnesses by obtaining a witness order.
Pre-hearing Assessments
At this stage either party can invoke a procedure introduced in 1980, which can place pressure on the other side to withdraw or settle at an early stage.
This is the pre-hearing assessment.
The tribunal may also direct of its own motion that there be a pre-hearing assessment.
Though available to either party it is in reality a procedure designed to enable employers faced with weak cases to apply a potential costs sanction to encourage the early demise of weak cases.
The purpose of the pre-hearing assessment is to sift out those applications which are unlikely to succeed.
Application for a pre-hearing assessment can be made by letter, and the obvious time for an employer to request such a hearing is when returning the Notice of Appearance.
The chairman will consider the paper claims and decide whether to allow the application.
If it is allowed, both parties are invited to make written submissions and to attend a hearing before a full tribunal of three members.
At this hearing no evidence is called, but the tribunal does like to have a full account of the claims of each party and of the evidence to be called to support them.
The tribunal then decides whether to issue an ‘unlikely to succeed’ warning to either party, the result of which is that if that party persists with the claim or a contention as part of a claim at the hearing, and loses, then costs may be awarded against that party.
The full hearing of the claim must be before a differently constituted tribunal who will not know until the end of the case of the warning.
In 1982 pre-hearing assessments were requested in six per cent of  cases filed, about half by the tribunal of its own motion.
The procedure is an effective means of scaring off applicants.
In 1982, 78 per cent of cases in which pre-hearing assessments had been requested did not proceed to a full hearing.
Of course, what is not revealed by these bald figures is anything qualitative about the claims.
Without research into the merits of the claims, it is impossible to say with authority whether most claims terminated in this way had no hope of success or whether applicants are forced to withdraw by the fear of costs.
The procedure has, however, not worked as well as expected and its use has declined.
In 1987 it was used only in one case in 400 (DoE, 1988).
It also seems that applications to the tribunal selected for a pre-hearing assessment are more likely to proceed to a hearing than other cases, while at the same time the success rate for those who proceed in the face of an ‘unlikely to succeed’ warning is not very different from other cases (DoE, 1988).
In order to tackle the perceived problem of unfounded applications, the Government had proposed in 1986 in its White Paper Building Businesses…
Not Barriers that there should be a £25 fee payable on making an application to an industrial tribunal.
This proved an unpopular suggestion against which the charge of taxing justice was made.
The Department of Employment therefore proposed an alternative of giving industrial tribunal chairmen, acting alone, discretion at the pre-hearing stage, on the application of one of the parties or of its own motion, to require a deposit of up to £150 from the other party as a condition of proceeding further, if the chairman considered that the case had no reasonable prospect of success.
Deposits would be returned to the payee unless the case went to a full hearing and the party which had paid the deposit lost and had an order for costs made against them, in which case the deposit would be forfeit as part of the costs payable.
The consultation paper also proposes the abolition of pre-hearing assessments and the substitution of a pre-hearing review by a chairman acting alone which would have three objectives:
to ascertain and clarify the issues in dispute, and record admissions and agreements;
to give directions;
to determine any jurisdictional issues not reserved for a tribunal, as distinct from a chairman acting alone.
At a pre-hearing review the chairman would have power to give a costs warning and to order the payment of a deposit.
The necessary rule-making power to accommodate the new system has been included in the Employment Act 1989.
The Hearing
If the applicant has survived this far and avoided a pre-hearing assessment, the case will be listed for hearing.
Most industrial tribunal buildings are purpose built and are reasonably comfortably equipped.
The physical distance between  the parties and the tribunal members is minimized.
The tribunals sit in public and, for this reason, the members may sit on a slightly raised dais.
Otherwise there is little of the ritual of the courts, though everyone is expected to stand when the tribunal members enter or leave.
When questioning witnesses and addressing the tribunal, parties and their representatives do not stand.
It is for the parties, and not for the tribunal, to see that all relevant evidence and legal argument is adduced.
The procedure at the hearing is determined by the tribunal within the framework of the statutory rules which provide that the tribunal shall ‘so far as appears to it appropriate seek to avoid formality’.
The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
The usual order of events is for the employer to open the proceedings by making a short opening address.
Then witnesses are called.
Evidence is given on oath and witnesses are subject to cross-examination.
If the parties are not represented, it is usual for the chairman and members to ask many questions.
Where the parties are represented, interventions from the tribunal are less frequent.
The employee then puts his or her case in a similar manner.
Once all the evidence has been given, each side may address the tribunal by way of summary and legal argument.
One chairman has commented that tribunals operate a sliding scale of formality.
Where representation is present and the ‘stakes are high’, the proceedings will be very formal, but where there is no representation, the proceedings are much less formal (Macmillan, 1983).
In practice the procedure is one which is best coped with by those with appropriate forensic skills in the questioning and cross-examination of witnesses, and the marshalling of evidence and argument, coupled with a sound knowledge of the legal framework within which such cases are determined.
The tribunal members retire and deliberate once both sides have presented their cases.
The lay members have the same say as the chairman.
Majority decisions are rare.
The tribunal returns and the chairman announces their decision.
This may be a brief summary of reasons or a full decision dictated by the chairman.
In coming to a decision the tribunal is bound by decisions of the Employment Appeal Tribunal and must ensure that its decisions take full account of the cases presented to them and any others that are relevant.
In general, tribunal chairmen are well-informed and familiar with most authorities.
Having said that, most cases turn on their facts and not on points of legal principle.
The parties are later sent by post either a summary decision or a full written decision as soon as it has been typed up and signed by the chairman, which is accompanied by information about applying for a review of the decision and of appealing to the Employment Appeal Tribunal.
Since March 1985 a full written decision has only been provided at the request of either party.
The purpose of the change was to save time and money, but the change is not wholly welcome, because in practice it will draw an even sharper distinction between represented and unrepresented parties.
Representatives ask for a full written decision as a matter of course, whereas unrepresented parties are less likely to exercise the right to a full written decision.
Contested cases where there is representation can easily last a full day, or even longer if the facts are at all complicated, and the written decisions are lengthy, often running to six or seven pages of single-spaced typescript.
Employees are successful in about one in three cases.
Representation at the Hearing
It appears that around one half of applicants are represented at industrial tribunals.
About 33 per cent of applicants are legally represented, as compared with 63 per cent of respondents (Macmillan, 1983).
The Dickens study reported that 55 per cent of applicants and 67 per cent of respondents were represented, though in the remaining cases the companies' representatives' status could not be readily identified (Dickens et al., 1985).
The Genn study reported that 38 per cent of applicants were represented either at a hearing or during settlement negotiations, though 70 per cent had sought advice about their application.
Employers had expert representation at hearings in 74 per cent of the cases in the sample, compared with 57 per cent of applicants.
Both parties were represented in 48 per cent of cases and neither party in only 17 per cent of hearings.
In 12 per cent of cases an unrepresented applicant faced an employer represented by a lawyer, while an unrepresented employer faced an employee represented by a lawyer in only five per cent of the cases; when non-lawyer experts are included, this figure increases to nine per cent(Genn and Genn, 1989).
The overall picture is represented in figure 6.
In response to a question in Parliament in 1984, figures based on a 10 per cent sample were given of the comparative success rates of different types of representation.
The success rate of lawyers was consistently better than that of trades union representatives and of individuals representing themselves over the four years from 1979 to 1982 covered (DoE, 1984).
The success rate of lawyers in 1982 was 36.9 per cent whereas that for trades union representatives and for individuals representing themselves was 25.1 per cent.
The Department of   Employment review of representation (DoE, 1981) concludes that the initial views that industrial tribunals should be bodies where representation was not necessary must now be re-evaluated in the light of an increasing trend not just towards representation, but towards legal representation.
Figure 6 Representation in Industrial Tribunals (including only expert representation) Source: Genn, 1989
The Genn study is the most recent on the effect of representation and concluded:
As far as representation is concerned, applicants can only improve their chances of success through representation when the respondent is not represented.
Where the applicant is legally represented and the respondent is not represented, the probability of the applicant succeeding is increased from 30% to 48%.
Where the applicant has no representation and the respondent is legally represented the applicant's probability of success is reduced to 10%.
Where the applicant is represented by a non-lawyer, and the respondent is represented by a lawyer the probability of the applicant succeeding is 18%.
(Genn and Genn, 1989, p. 99)
The Royal Commission on Legal Services' treatment of tribunals was lamentably weak (Benson, 1979).
The only issue discussed in any detail was that of representation.
The Commission expressed concern at the figures showing that the unassisted lay person was at a disadvantage:
Whatever the tribunal and however informal its procedure, representation, whether by lawyer or a skilled layman, in the majority of cases confers an advantage on the represented party.
(Benson, 1979, para.2.17)
The Commission's task in tackling this problem was complicated by the generous provisions of the rules of procedure of adjudicatory tribunals as to rights of audience.
Whereas representation before the civil and criminal courts is normally limited to solicitors and barristers, adjudicatory tribunals allow anyone to act as representative.
As we have seen, representation other than by lawyers has become an important form of representation before tribunals.
A major factor accounting for this development is the absence of legal aid for representation before tribunals.
It is important to have a clear understanding of the impact of legal aid on tribunal representation.
Save for the exceptional case of Mental Health Review Tribunals, legal aid does not cover representation before tribunals of first instance.
The Green Form scheme will provide two hours' work by a solicitor on a case (more with an extension), but the solicitor cannot recover the cost of appearing before a tribunal to argue a case under this component of legal aid.
Unless the solicitor is prepared to act without charge, at the point at which the client most needs a lawyer, the lawyer apparently abandons the case.
At best a written submission for presentation to the tribunal will be prepared, but this is not normally an adequate substitute for the interactive process of actual appearance before the tribunal.
Few parties before tribunals have the resources to fund the use of a lawyer.
It will therefore come as no surprise that empirical research confirms the low level of activity in welfare benefits and  tribunal work among solicitors (Lawrence, 1980a).
Finally, it should be noted that legal aid only remunerates lawyers and not other representatives.
The Royal Commission made three recommendations to tackle the problem of representation: the simplification of tribunal procedures, the development of lay advice and representation, and the extension of legal aid.
On the first limb of the response, the Royal Commission rather lamely noted that the procedures of some tribunals have become ‘legalistic’, mainly because the law governing their work has become more complex, and recommended that procedures be reviewed ‘to ensure that applicants in person are able to conduct their own cases wherever possible’.
The work of advice agencies was praised and it was recommended that public funds should be available for their development.
Parties to tribunal proceedings should be sent a list of agencies in the area offering advice and representation.
No effort was made to quantify the need or to address a major issue with public sector legal services generally.
At present, there are not enough specialist lay advisers to meet the demand for their services.
As a consequence, such agencies are selective in the cases they will represent.
In some cases all that is offered is advice; in the busiest agencies even the amount of advice and assistance offered may be rationed.
The third limb of the Royal Commission's policy was the recommendation that legal aid be extended.
It was accepted that there are some cases before all tribunals where legal representation is needed.
This being so, it was necessary to establish an appropriate merits test.
The traditional requirement that there be reasonable grounds for taking the proceedings was accepted, and to this was added the subsidiary test that it must be reasonable to employ a legal representative.
In applying the second limb of the merits test, the Royal Commission felt that the relevant criteria should be:
Does a significant point of law arise?
Is the evidence so complex or specialized that the average lay person could reasonably wish for expert help in assembling and evaluating the evidence and in testing or interpreting it?
Is it a test case?
Is deprivation of liberty or the person's occupation at stake?
Is the amount at stake, though small, significant in relation to the financial circumstances of the applicant?
Is suitable lay representation available?
Are there any special circumstances making legal representation desirable or would hardship follow if it was withheld?
The Government response has been to accept these recommendations in principle ‘subject to further consideration being given to timing and the availability of resources’(Government Response to Benson, 1983).
Unanswered questions relate to how the complementarity of roles of lay and legal advisers will operate, and when, in the current climate of Lord Chancellor's concern about legal aid expenditure, resources for an extension of legal aid to tribunals is likely to be available.
No attempt has been made to establish criteria for distinguishing those  cases where applicants might reasonably be expected to represent themselves from those where representation either by specialist lay adviser or by lawyer is appropriate.
The Government response to the Genn study for the Lord Chancellor's Department may answer some of these questions.
Outcomes
The most common remedy granted is compensation.
Awards after a hearing are significantly higher than those agreed by conciliation (Dickens et al., 1985; Genn and Genn, 1989).
Most awards are for less than £1000.
Research is needed to establish whether the level of conciliated settlements is fair to applicants or whether applicants simply prefer the bird in the hand to that in the bush.
There are suggestions that conciliated settlements are finalized without conciliation officers taking a view on the equity of the monetary settlement they conciliate.
The Dickens study concluded that the prime reason for the relatively low amounts awarded by way of compensation is the statutory rules for determination of compensation and the exercise of the tribunal's discretion in areas where this is open to them, such as in the consideration of future loss of earnings.
The study also found tribunals frequently willing to attribute some contribution to the dismissal to the employee, which operates like a finding of contributory negligence to reduce the compensation payable.
Overall the study considers that a low price is set on unfair deprivation of a job and that unfair dismissal compensation has little deterrent value for most employers wishing to dispense with the services of employees.
The industrial tribunal has no enforcement powers of its own.
If an employer defaults on an award of compensation, then the employee must register the tribunal's decision with the county court and use the enforcement powers available in the county court to recover the award.
If the applicant (or respondent) has avoided an ‘unlikely to succeed’ warning in a pre-hearing assessment, there is little risk of costs being awarded.
The only basis on which costs can be awarded is that a party has acted ‘frivolously, vexatiously or otherwise unreasonably’.
Parties and witnesses are entitled to allowances for loss of earnings, subsistence and travel to and from the tribunal.
An Assessment of Industrial Tribunals
Both the law and procedure for unfair dismissal claims are complex.
The money figures at stake can be high.
The industrial tribunals have become arenas in which there is inequality between applicant and respondent.
At present many more employers than employees are legally represented, and it is not uncommon for counsel to appear for employers.
Furthermore non-legal representatives of employers, including in-house representatives, may well be highly trained personnel with considerable experience of employment law (Macmillan, 1983; Dickens, 1985).
No legal aid is available to provide representation for employees.
The law is far too complex to justify a policy of allowing only advice and assistance.
The understanding of the interaction of statute and case law required in this area is no different from that required in many cases pursued in the county courts and High Court.
Nor is the law as self-contained as social security law; many employment cases require a command of principles of contract law.
When this difficulty is coupled with the inequality of unrepresented applicant facing represented respondent, the case for the extension of legal aid is overwhelming.
No procedural devices can accommodate such an imbalance of skills within what is a procedure requiring party presentation of the issues and the testing of evidence by process of cross-examination.
This is not a criticism of the tribunals themselves, which contain some valuable devices to assist employees, but of the failure to provide the required assistance to employees to enable them to pursue their claims effectively.
Entrusting the decision in unfair dismissal cases to tribunals was a conscious decision designed to include as part of the decision-making process the industrial experience of employers and employees.
There was some mistrust of mainstream court-based methods of determining these types of dispute.
The presence of lay members would also, it was believed, contribute to informality.
The Dickens study reports that the contribution of lay members on matters of industrial and practical knowledge are tempered by the carefully constructed legal framework within which unfair dismissal applications must be considered.
In general lay members did not see their role as an enabling one and do not play a particularly active role in hearings.
The research identified an ‘underlying accusatorial model of hearings and a tendency towards legalism’(Dickens et al., 1985, p. 84).
The JUSTICE Report defines legalism in two ways.
The first refers to the manner in which the tribunals interpret and apply employment legislation, though the Report recognizes that the complex language and structure of the controlling legislation contributes to the potential for legalism.
The second refers to the degree of formality in the physical arrangements and court room atmosphere; the major obstacle here is seen as the adversarial system of examining and cross-examining witnesses (JUSTICE, 1987).
The Genn study is even more forthright:
Industrial tribunals are totally adversarial.
They are courts of first instance and their purpose is to adjudicate disputes between employers and employees, arising under employment protection legislation.
(Genn and Genn, 1989, p. 198)
Review of Tribunal Decisions
Industrial tribunals enjoy a power to review their own decisions on application of either party within 14 days of notification of the tribunal's decision.
The grounds for such a review are circumscribed by the tribunal's rules of procedure.
Five grounds are listed:
the decision was wrongly made as a result of an error on the part of the tribunal staff; or
a party did not receive notice of the proceedings; or
the decision was made in the absence of a party entitled to be heard; or
new evidence has become available which could not have been reasonably known of or foreseen; or
the interests of justice require a review.
The procedure seems to work well providing a balance between finality of decision making and the interests of justice in allowing the re-opening of certain decisions.
It is a simple and relatively cheap procedure for remedying mistakes or obvious injustices, which complements the work of the Employment Appeal Tribunal which can only deal with questions of law (McMullen, 1984).
Appeal to the Employment Appeal Tribunal (EAT)
The EAT is the indirect successor to the National Industrial Relations Court which was so unloved by trades unions that it could not survive in its original form the repeal of the Industrial Relations Act 1971.
After a short interregnum in which appeals went to the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division, the EAT was established to hear appeals on points of law from industrial tribunals.
The EAT is staffed by High Court judges who normally sit with two additional members representative of employers and employees.
The procedure lacks the ritual formality of the High Court, but there can be no doubt that serious legal issues are being considered.
Legal representation is common and legal aid is available to meet the cost of this.
A party aggrieved by a decision of an industrial tribunal has 42 days in which to file an appeal.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal Rules 1980 (SI 1980: No. 2035) set out standard forms for appealing.
Even at this stage conciliation is encouraged and the EAT is enabled to take such steps as it thinks fit to enable the parties to avail themselves of the opportunity for conciliation.
The EAT has proved to be of major importance in clarifying and elaborating the rules contained in the statutory material.
Their decisions are binding on industrial tribunals and have had a significant impact on managerial practices by major employers.
The sensitivity of employment law issues may perhaps be gauged by the frequency with which employment cases go to the Court of Appeal and House of Lords, though this may also have something to do with the looseness of the statutory language used in the legislation.
Alternative Proposals
The Dickens study offered as an alternative to the current system an arbitral system as a way of overcoming the perceived disadvantages of the industrial tribunal system (Dickens et al., 1985, ch. 9).
The focus would move from the determination of who is legally right and from consideration of the  reasonableness of the employer's action in the circumstances of the individual dismissal to the location of the dispute firmly in the realms of industrial relations, rather than employment law, where the search would be for a workable and acceptable solution which took account of the wider context.
It was argued that such a system would generally be more favourable to employees and would be more likely to curb ‘the exercise of managerial prerogative in the interests of individual job retention as well as avoiding the tendency to legalism’.
The JUSTICE Report takes a different tack.
It recommends the introduction of two different procedures for determining unfair dismissal disputes: the investigative model and the adversarial model (JUSTICE, 1987).
For nine out of every ten cases, the investigative model would be sufficient.
The tenth case would require an adversarial approach backed by equality of representation and access to resources to enable the dispute to be presented effectively and efficiently.
Such cases would go to a higher body, described as an upper-tier Industrial Court staffed by senior chairmen and members.
The criteria for transferring cases to the Industrial Court would be:
where a significant point of law arises;
where the case has important implications beyond the interests of the individual parties;
where the evidence is highly complex or specialized and raises difficult questions of evaluation.
For such cases the Report argues that legal aid should be available as in the lower courts.
For those cases dealt with by the investigative procedure, a chairman would direct, after reading the Originating Application and Notice of Appearance, preliminary investigations by an officer of the tribunal.
It is envisaged that the investigation officer would be a legal officer in the Civil Service with special training, who would take full statements from parties to the dispute and any key witnesses and inspect all the documentation relevant to the case.
The investigation officer would then prepare a full dossier to be sent to both sides prior to the hearing.
The investigative role would not supplant the conciliation stage, which would remain with ACAS.
The tribunal members would read the dossier in preparation for the hearing and would take the initiative at the hearing by indicating the issues of fact and law on which evidence and submission remained necessary.
The tribunal would itself take the lead in questioning, reducing the reliance of parties on representatives with the forensic skills of questioning and cross-questioning.
The parties would have a secondary opportunity to ask questions of any witnesses and to make submissions on the law.
Conclusion
The industrial tribunals represent the tribunals whose practice and procedure is most like that of the courts.
There can be little doubt that they have now become  the forum for the expert.
The evidence is overwhelming that the unrepresented party suffers serious disadvantage in this forum.
The issue now facing policy makers is whether the tribunals are equated with the county courts and legal aid extended to them or whether structural changes are made which enable unrepresented litigants to have a fair chance to present their cases in a manner which gives them a fair chance of success.
14
Review and Supervision
Introduction
The parties to litigation, whether before a court or a tribunal, which results in trial and judgment have resisted many encouragements to settle the claim along the road to trial.
Both parties will have been convinced of the correctness of their arguments on the facts and law.
The party who loses will inevitably be disappointed.
Sometimes the loser will not only be disappointed but also aggrieved because the trial judge or tribunal has taken some view of the facts and the law, which are believed to be wrong.
Alternatively one party may be arguing for a significant change or development in the law, and might actually be expecting to lose at first instance.
That party knows that only a higher court is likely to push forward the boundaries of some legal rule.
For these cases the appellate process provides the remedy.
In civil cases the rights of appeal are not ungenerous, though the overall system of civil appeals has been described as a ‘hotchpotch’ needing rationalization (Woolf, 1988).
It is usual to be able to take one appeal as of right with a second appeal being possible with leave.
Appeals are not retrials, but considerations of whether the trial judge erred in some way.
This chapter is concerned, with the practice and procedure of appeals from courts and the appellate tribunals, and, with an introduction to the general objectives of appeals in civil cases.
From what follows it will be clear that the Court of Appeal, civil division, is at the heart of the civil appeal process.
The House of Lords may be the highest court in the land, but it hears comparatively few appeals each year.
Its contribution is particular rather than general, and some have questioned whether there is a need for two levels of appeal court.
The Processes of Review and Supervision
Two separate functions of appeals have been identified, which have been labelled review and supervision (Blom-Cooper and Drewry, 1972; Drewry, 1973).
Review is the process by which defects in the trial process are corrected.
These may typically be errors of practice and procedure, incorrect conclusions on the  facts and inferences to be drawn from them, improper exercises of judicial discretion or an incorrect application of established legal principles.
Supervision is the process of the laying down by the courts of guidelines for the development of legal principles.
The process may involve a critical reconsideration of an area of law in the light of changing social conditions or an authoritative interpretation of a statutory provision.
There is one type of appeal which falls in the grey area between review and supervision.
This is the appeal which involves a review of an existing line of authority without any reconsideration of it.
The Court of Appeal exercises the functions both of review and of supervision.
Gavin Drewry's analysis of the grant and refusal of leave to appeal to the House of Lords in 1971 demonstrated that leave was routinely refused in cases where the second appeal raised issues of review, that leave was granted in cases involving issues of supervision, and that there was a mixture of refusals and grants in cases falling in the grey area of reconsideration of authority without critical re-appraisal of the cases (Drewry, 1973).
It also seems that the work of the Court of Appeal is predominantly the determination of appeals involving review.
The grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal most frequently relate to issues of fact or practice and procedure.
The Court of Appeal is a very busy court which has to ration its time and manage its business carefully to avoid unacceptably long delays in the determination of appeals.
By contrast the House of Lords, though not short of cases, has a small workload of key cases.
Time and the most careful deliberation of the issues raised are available in the House of Lords.
It is the system of requiring leave to appeal which rations the case load of the House of Lords and filters out cases for attention which involve issues of supervision.
Once the distinction between review and supervision is understood, the reasoning behind the conditions required for leap-frog appeals becomes more readily understandable.
The conditions are designed to distinguish cases involving issues of supervision from those involving issues of review.
Judicial Control and Supervision of Tribunals
Some tribunals, like SSATs and the industrial tribunals, are part of a two-tier system with separate tribunals enjoying appellate jurisdiction.
The constituent legislation of other tribunals contains provisions allowing access to the High Court, whereas some tribunals have to fall back on the appeals contained in s.13 of the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1971.
Indeed the decisions of some tribunals are not subject to any appeal.
An example is the Vaccine Damage Tribunals established under s.4 of the Vaccine Damage Payments Act 1979 to review questions of the extent and cause of disablement by persons claiming to be entitled to payments under the Act as a result of disabilities arising from vaccination damage.
The provision of appeals through separate tribunals enjoying appellate jurisdiction is generally more satisfactory than where reliance must be placed on the High Court.
Making an appeal to a specialist appellate tribunal is cheaper, quicker and easier than using the High Court.
Examples of appellate tribunals  are the Social Security Commissioners and the Employment Appeal Tribunal, which were considered in the chapters 12 and 13.
But review by the High Court of decisions of tribunals is a common feature of many other tribunals.
Section 13 of the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1971 provides two forms of appeal to the High Court from specified tribunals.
It is important to realize that this is not a general power in respect of all tribunals.
To enjoy these types of appeal there must be specific statutory authority.
Section 13 provides that a person dissatisfied with a decision of a specified tribunal on a point of law may either appeal against that decision to the High Court, or require the tribunal to state a case for the opinion of the High Court.
The section further provides that rules of court may regulate and restrict the appeal in particular cases to one or other form of appeal (see RSC O.56, rr.7–12 and 0.94, rr.8–11).
In addition to the tribunals to which s.13 applies, there are a number of tribunals whose constituent legislation provides that a person aggrieved by a decision of the tribunal may require the tribunal to state a case for the opinion of the High Court.
This is the same process as the stating of a case under s.13.
The distinction between an appeal on a point of law and the requiring of a tribunal to state a case is important.
The appeal operates like any other appeal; it will be for the appellant to formulate the grounds of appeal and to present the arguments in favour of the appellant's view to the High Court.
The respondent may also adduce argument.
The tribunal itself need do nothing to further the appeal, other than making available the notes of evidence and the chairman's record of the hearing.
The appeal will be restricted to the point or points of law raised in the notice of appeal.
By contrast requiring a case to be stated, just like the appeal by way of case stated from a decision of a magistrates' court or the Crown Court described in chapter 7, obliges the tribunal to set out its decision and the reasons for it together with a formulation of the questions to be considered by the High Court.
The parties will, of course, have the opportunity to address argument to the Court on these questions.
Unlike the position in criminal proceedings, the procedure may be used to enable a tribunal to obtain a preliminary ruling on a point of law which arises during the hearing of the case.
The hearing will be adjourned pending the delivery of the High Court's opinion, at which time it will be relisted and a decision given on the merits in the light of the High Court's opinion on the law.
This procedure is rarely used.
Indeed appeals to the High Court from tribunals number about 100 a year, most of which are tax appeals.
Once ‘plugged’ in to the High Court, the possibility arises of using the ordinary system of civil appeals to challenge the decision of the High Court.
Thus ordinarily appeals will be available with leave to the Court of Appeal and thereafter to the House of Lords.
Those tribunals with their own appellate tribunal do not enjoy the appeal to the High Court, but appeals on points of law lie with leave to the Court of Appeal from the EAT, Social Security Commissioners, and thereafter to the House of Lords.
Judicial Review
In addition to the statutory procedures described above, the Queen's Bench Division (QBD) of the High Court enjoys a common law power to control the  operation of inferior courts and tribunals in certain circumstances by way of judicial review.
The QBD may grant one of the three prerogative orders:certiorari , prohibition or mandamus.
Certiorari quashes a decision which is found to be invalid because it is outside the powers granted to the court or tribunal (ultra vires ), or has been given in proceedings in which the principles of natural justice were not observed, or where there has been an error of law on the face of the record.
Prohibition lies to prevent some unlawful action by a tribunal on the same grounds as the granting of an order of certiorari .
Whereas certiorari quashes past unlawful conduct, prohibition prevents future or continued unlawful conduct.
Mandamus is a royal command to secure the proper performance of a tribunal's functions.
It is usually sought in addition to an order of certiorari and is designed to ensure the performance of a public duty.
For example, mandamus would lie to compel a tribunal to hear a case which it had mistakenly decided was not within its jurisdiction.
The details of the availability, scope and grounds for such orders need not detain us here because they form part of substantive administrative law.
All these remedies are now sought by a single application for judicial review (Supreme Court Act 1981, s.31; RSC 0.53;O'Reilly v. 
Mackman ,[1983]2 AC 237).
Because the granting of a prerogative order is discretionary in nature, leave of the High Court must be obtained to make application for them.
The distinction between appeal and judicial review is an important one to grasp.
Appeal is concerned with the merits of the decision being appealed, while judicial review is concerned with the legality of the process by which that decision was reached.
In the latter case the jurisdiction is described as being supervisory.
If a bad decision on the law was made or the court or tribunal took a view of the evidence that no reasonable tribunal could take, which does not appear as an error of law on the face of the record, that is a matter for appeal rather than judicial review.
Equally a perfectly proper decision on the law and facts taken in proceedings which did not meet the required standards of procedural regularity (for example, a decision of an SSAT where no reasons for the decision were given) could be quashed by means of judicial review.
With the development of rights of appeal against tribunal decisions, the significance of judicial review is diminishing in relation to such tribunals.
This is particularly so where tribunals have their own appellate tribunal.
Very often the appeal to the appellate tribunal can cover matters that might be raised on judicial review.
For example, the Social Security Commissioners will regard a failure to have regard to the principles of natural justice as an error of law which can form the basis of an appeal to them.
Such a deficiency in the first instance tribunal's deliberations would also, of course, ground an application for judicial review.
It is noticeable that, where the decisions of the appellate tribunal are not appealable to the Court of Appeal, as is the case with the Immigration Appeal Tribunals, more frequent use is made of judicial review.
Nevertheless judicial review remains an important process for curing illegality.
In 1988 there were 1087 applications for leave to seek judicial review in all civil cases of which 618 were allowed to proceed to consideration of their merits (Judicial Statistics, 1988).
Finally, it should be noted that s.14 of the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1971, restating a rule first contained in the 1958 Act, provides  that no provision in legislation prior to 1958 should be taken as ousting the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court, thus making clear the Government's intention that all statutory tribunals should be subject to this jurisdiction regardless of whether other remedies are provided.
The overall importance of judicial review is reflected in the words of Sir Jack Jacob:
The introduction in 1977 of the remedy of judicial review was a milestone in the history of English civil justice.
It constituted one of the most beneficent, significant and effective innovations and improvements in the fabric of English civil justice.
It restored credence in the creativity of the system of English justice; it provided a virile and vigorous procedure for remedies in the public law area to replace those that were in a weary and withering state.
(Jacob, 1987, p.180)
Rights of Appeal
Getting Advice on Appealing
Parties to litigation in the High Court or a county court do not receive a full written judgment containing the trial judge's reasoning.
The official court documentation will simply deal with the disposition of the case.
Initially the parties will rely on the notes made by solicitors and counsel when the trial judge gave the reasons for his decision when delivering judgment in open court.
In the High Court, if the case justifies the expense, a transcript of the judgment may be ordered from the shorthand writer who has kept the verbatim record of the proceedings.
Of course, in the High Court, a case of particular significance may be reported, but the law report will almost certainly not appear before the time allowed for appealing has passed.
In the county court, apart from the judge's own note, there will only be the lawyer's notes of the decision, and there will also be a written decision from the first instance tribunal.
By contrast, litigants before the Social Security Commissioners or the EAT will receive a full written decision.
Losers may be aggrieved for a number of reasons: they may disagree with the findings of fact, statements of the law, award of damages, or even the way the case was conducted.
In considering an appeal all these avenues will need to be explored.
Though not expressly so stated as in the case of criminal appeals where there is a criminal legal aid order, it seems that a civil legal aid certificate will also cover advice on appeal.
If an appeal is merited, application can be made for an extension of the legal aid certificate to cover the appellate proceedings.
This can be done expeditiously, though initially the extension will probably only cover the obtaining of any necessary transcripts and a formal opinion of counsel on the likelihood of a successful appeal.
Once these papers are to hand there can be a proper consideration of whether or not there are good grounds for extending  legal aid to cover the arguing of an appeal.
If the litigant was not assisted at first instance, or before one of the appellate tribunals, a full application for a legal aid certificate must be made.
In either case it is unlikely that all the legal formalities will have been completed in the time allowed for filing an appeal.
The Court of Appeal has intimated that such cases are appropriate cases for the grant of extensions of the time allowed for appealing (Legal Aid Handbook, 1990).
From the County Courts
There is a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal, civil division, from decisions of the county courts in contract and tort where the claim is for £2500 or more.
If the claim is for less, then leave of either the county court judge or of the Court of Appeal is required, unless the decision includes or preserves an injunction (County Courts Act 1984, s.77; County Courts Appeal Order 1981, SI 1981: No. 1749).
The notice of appeal, or application for leave to appeal, must be filed within four weeks of the date the judgment was entered, unless an extension of time has been allowed either by the county court or the Court of Appeal.
The correct procedure is to apply first to the county court judge for leave, but if leave is refused, the application may be renewed before the Court of Appeal.
A single judge of the Court of Appeal may dispose of the application and there is no appeal against such a decision (Supreme Court Act 1981, s.54(6)).
If the point raised is particularly complex, the single judge may decide to refer the matter to a court of two or more judges.
From the High Court
In actions in contract and tort, there is a general right of appeal to the Court of Appeal (Supreme Court Act 1981, s.16), which is excluded in relation to particular matters of which the only significant one for our purposes is the exclusion of a right of appeal against a decision of the High Court allowing an extension of time for appealing.
The Court of Appeal may also allow an extension of time for appealing.
The notice of appeal must be filed within four weeks of the date on which the judgment was entered.
Changes made to rule-making powers in Part I of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 will result in changes to the general right of appeal.
Leave will be required in specified circumstances (Donaldson, 1990a).
From the Social Security Commissioners
There is no general right of appeal, since this will be the second appeal following the decision of the SSAT.
The appeal lies only where a point of law is involved.
Leave to appeal must be obtained from the Commissioner or, failing that from the Court of Appeal: Social Security Act 1980, s.14.
There is a three-month time limit, which can only be extended for good reasons.
From the Employment Appeal Tribunal
Again the appeal to the Court of Appeal is only available where a point of law is involved.
Application is made initially to the EAT, but if that fails, it may be renewed before the Court of Appeal: Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978, s.146.
The Grounds of Appeal
The notice of appeal must set out clearly and completely, shortly and simply, the grounds of appeal.
The Court of Appeal has very wide powers to remedy deficiencies in the decision under appeal and the grounds of appeal are not restricted in any way.
They must show the error in the court below or the tribunal and the relief being sought.
It is important that the grounds of appeal are full because any omission can only be cured with the leave of the Court of Appeal.
The detailed rules governing appeals to the Court of Appeal in civil cases can be found in O.59 of the Rules of the Supreme Court.
The Powers of the Court of Appeal
In general terms the Court of Appeal has all the authority and jurisdiction of the court or appellate authority from which the appeal is brought (Supreme Court Act 1981, s.15).
Indeed it is now clear that the Court of Appeal may on appeal even exercise a power conferred on the court below after the date of the judgment against which the appeal is lodged (Attorney-General v. 
Vernazza ,[1960]AC 965).
Though the appeal is said to be ‘by way of rehearing’, it is not a re-creation of the trial with witnesses giving evidence again before the appeal court.
The appeal will be limited to the matters raised in the notice of appeal, and normally only legal argument will be presented.
In theory it is possible to raise new points not dealt with in the pleadings or argument in the trial, but the Court of Appeal is reluctant to exercise the power to admit them, since it smacks of allowing the running of alternative arguments where those run at trial have failed.
Where evidence is relevant, the court almost always relies on the chairman's notes of evidence in tribunal proceedings, on the county court judge's note, or on the transcript.
It is difficult to persuade the Court of Appeal to alter a finding of direct fact by the trial judge.
The court takes the view that it has not had the benefit of seeing the witnesses, hearing their evidence and forming opinions as to the weight to be attached to it.
Accordingly, they will not lightly interfere.
There is more chance of persuading the court to substitute its own finding of inferential fact from the direct facts, because this goes to the conclusions drawn by the trial judge from direct facts.
The best example is a conclusion that direct facts do or do not amount to contributory negligence, which will always be an inference drawn in the light of the facts found.
It is possible to appeal against the amount of damages awarded by the trial judge and here the Court of Appeal will amend the amount if the trial judge has  applied an incorrect principle of law or has awarded a sum which is clearly inconsistent with awards in comparable cases.
The appeal court will only interfere if there is a significant divergence from the norm; here again they allow the trial judge a margin of appreciation because that judge has seen the parties and heard the evidence.
Different principles apply to awards by juries, which are used only rarely in civil cases, usually in defamation cases.
There is here the traditional reluctance to interfere with decisions of jurors (Cassell v. 
Broome ,[1972]AC 1027).
In certain cases the ordering of a retrial will be the appropriate solution where the damages appear excessive because the jury has taken into account irrelevant matters, or has not considered relevant matters (Rubber Improvement Ltd v. 
Daily Telegraph Ltd ,[1964]AC 234).
Recent high awards of damages in libel cases have led the Court of Appeal to a greater willingness to interfere.
The Court of Appeal has power to receive fresh evidence only on special grounds.
The test for the admission of fresh evidence is laid down in Ladd v. 
Marshall ([1954]1 WLR 1489) and was approved by the House of Lords in Skone v. 
Skone ([1971]1 WLR 812).
Three conditions must be satisfied:
the evidence could not have been obtained with reasonable diligence at the trial; and
if given at the trial, the evidence would probably have had an important influence on the result of the case; and
the evidence is apparently credible, though it need not be incontrovertible.
These rigorous tests mean that the Court of Appeal hears fresh evidence only rarely; it will certainly need to be satisfied that the appeal is not being used merely as an attempt to argue the case in a different way.
If the matter cannot be resolved by the Court of Appeal, it has power to order a retrial.
The civil division of the Court of Appeal enjoys much wider powers to order a retrial than the criminal division.
Some have already been mentioned; others relate to jury trial.
In addition to these the Court of Appeal has powers to order the retrial of a case tried before a judge alone in the following cases:
where there has been improper admission or exclusion of evidence;
where there has been surprise, as where the trial judge allows the case to proceed on a basis other than that pleaded without giving the other side an opportunity to consider the new material;
where there have been irregularities in the course of the trial, as
where the judge intervened so much that proper cross-examination was precluded (Jones v. 
NCB ,[1957]2 QB 55).
The final power to mention is not a power exclusive to the Court of Appeal, nor is it a power whose exercise disposes of the appeal.
This is the power to make a reference to the Court of Justice of the European Communities seeking an authoritative interpretation of a point of European Community law relevant to the determination of the dispute before the court (RSC 0.114).
Any court or  tribunal may make such a reference, and final appeal courts must make a reference where the point of European Community law is relevant to its decision (EEC Treaty, Article 177).
The effect of a reference is to suspend the proceedings before the referring court until the Court of Justice has handed down its opinion which is then applied by the referring court to the dispute before it.
Managing the Business of the Court of Appeal
Significant changes were made by the Supreme Court Act 1981 in the arrangements for the management of the business of the civil division of the Court of Appeal.
Prior to the implementation of the Act the civil division had no staff of its own except the clerks to the Master of the Rolls and the Lords Justices of Appeal.
As a result much judicial time was taken up with administrative matters and with interlocutory matters which did not justify the use of the time and expertise of the judges.
In December 1978 the unpublished report of a Working Party headed by Lord Scarman recommended the establishment of a Registrar of Civil Appeals having both judicial and administrative functions.
The Act made provision for such an office, which has now been established and has already contributed to increased efficiency in the division.
The Act also made provision for some appeals to be disposed of by courts composed of two judges rather than three.
There is now a clear hierarchy of powers exercisable by the Registrar, and by one, two or three judges of the division.
The most important points to note are as follows.
The Registrar has power to deal with most interlocutory matters arising on appeal, though there is provision for review of his decisions by a single judge with the possibility of appeal with leave to a full court.
The single judge may review decisions of the Registrar and make interim orders outside the Law Terms.
Most importantly, of course, the single judge may decide applications for leave to appeal.
Refusals of leave by a single judge are final.
Two judge courts will normally deal with appeals concerning interlocutory matters and may hear any final appeals with the consent of the parties.
In addition two judge courts are competent to hear appeals from county court decisions and most appeals from the High Court where the amount of the claim or counterclaim does not exceed the county court limits (Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Order 1982, SI 1982: 543).
Where the court consists of an even number of judges who are equally divided, the case must be re-argued before an uneven number of judges before appeal to the House of Lords is possible.
The principal work of three judge courts will now be the determination of appeals from the High Court where the amount of the claim or counterclaim exceeds the county court limits.
Of course, it will remain open to the court to list any appeal which involves important points before a court of three or more judges.
The importance of the role of the Master of the Rolls as head of the civil division of the Court of Appeal should not be overlooked.
The Master of the Rolls sets the tone of the court and can control the distribution of business among his colleagues.
The matching of judges to cases can, of course, have an effect on the  outcome of appeals.
It will be the Master of the Rolls who decides whether an appeal is so important that it should be referred to a court composed of more than three judges, even though decisions of such courts formally have no greater weight than those of three judge courts.
A good modern example is the decision of the former Master of the Rolls, Lord Denning, to convene a special court of five judges to hear the appeal in Davis v. 
Johnson ([1979]AC 264) concerning the scope of the county court's jurisdiction under the provisions of the Domestic Violence and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1976 to exclude a person from premises in which that person has a proprietary interest.
The problem was that there were two previous decisions of the Court of Appeal, by which the court would normally be bound, which would, contrary to the justice of the case, have denied a remedy in the case before the court.
The device of a court of five judges was adopted to add weight to the reconsideration of the earlier cases.
The case was taken on appeal to the House of Lords, who upheld the decision of the Court of Appeal on the merits, but rebuked the Court of Appeal for not following its own previous decisions.
We shall return later in this chapter to the doctrine of precedent.
As part of the campaign to increase the efficiency of the civil division of the Court of Appeal, the Master of the Rolls, Sir John Donaldson (as he then was), has introduced a number of innovations following the recommendations of Lord Scarman's Working Party (Practice Note ,[1982]1 WLR 1312, as amended by Practice Note ,[1983]1 WLR 598).
The first is the early listing of cases in which it appears that the only purpose of the appeal is to secure some advantage by preserving the status quo pending the outcome of the appeal.
The example given was of a tenant against whom an order for eviction had been made securing further time in residence by appealing.
Early listing is seen as likely to remove the incentive for such appeals (Donaldson, 1983).
The average delay in the hearing of appeals in 1983 by two judge courts was six to seven months, but before three judge courts was between 12 and 14 months.
The second innovation is more interesting and raises wider issues.
In a Practice Note in April 1983 ([1983]1 WLR 1055) Sir John recommended the submission shortly before the hearing of the appeal of ‘skeleton arguments’ by counsel for the parties.
These would also be exchanged between counsel.
The contents of the skeleton arguments should be a list of numbered propositions expressed in no more than one or two sentences which counsel proposed to argue.
References to authorities and to documents, to which counsel intends to refer in his or her submissions to the court, should be annexed to the skeleton arguments.
Counsel should also ensure that there is annexed any material which counsel would expect the court to note in detail.
The judges hearing the appeal will read the skeleton arguments prior to the hearing along with the notice of appeal and the judgment appealed.
The benefits of skeleton arguments are seen to be:
the saving of time because the need for longhand notes is obviated;
the elaboration of the substance of the appeal which is not usually apparent from the notice of appeal;
the provision of an  aide-mémoire for convenience of reference for counsel.
The Practice Note emphasized the informal nature of the arrangements and stated that counsel should not be inhibited from departing from the skeleton arguments.
Their use was not envisaged in every case; express reference is made to the submission in simple appeals only of material counsel would expect the court to note in detail.
The use of skeleton arguments has been popular with the Court of Appeal, but met with some resistance from some members of the Bar (Blom-Cooper, 1984).
Their use has now been refined and extended (Donaldson, 1990a).
The current guidance is contained in a 1989 Practice Direction (Court of Appeal: Presentation of Argument)([1989]1 WLR 281 as amended by [1990]1 WLR 794).
Skeleton arguments are now compulsory in all appeals before the Court of Appeal except in cases of urgency or where the court otherwise directs.
Paragraph 3 of the Direction specifies the requirements as to content:
The purpose of a skeleton argument is to identify not to argue the points.
A skeleton argument should therefore be as succinct as possible.
In the case of points of law, it should state the point and cite the principal authority or authorities in support with references to the particular page(s) where the principle concerned is enunciated.
In the case of questions of fact, the skeleton argument should state briefly the basis on which the Court of Appeal can interfere with the finding of fact concerned, with cross-references to the passages in the transcript or notes of evidence which bear on the point.
In the case of respondents whose arguments will be simply that the judgment of the court below is correct for the reasons given, counsel for the respondent can send in a letter to that effect in lieu of a skeleton argument.
Where, however, the respondent is going to rely on any authority or refer to any evidence which is not dealt with in the judgment of the court below, a respondent's skeleton argument must always be lodged.
Skeleton arguments are not pleadings and, save in exceptional cases…need not answer the skeleton arguments of the other side.
The skeleton arguments must be accompanied by a chronology of events, which must be contained in a separate document for ease of consultation.
Skeleton arguments are to be exchanged between the parties and four copies delivered to the court 14 days in advance of the hearing.
The issue raised by these developments is whether the principle of orality upon which English trials and appeals proceed is the best way of dealing with appeals.
The English requirement of oral presentation of the whole of the case stands in marked contrast to the rules obtaining in other jurisdictions.
The judges have repeatedly rejected the introduction of written briefs into English civil procedure, but Sir John Donaldson's proposals and their development over the past five years are a step in the direction of a written stage in appellate procedure, despite the somewhat ambivalent caveat added at the end of the Practice Note :
It cannot be over-emphasised that skeleton arguments are not formal documents to the terms of which anyone will be held.
They are simply a tool  to be used in the interests of greater efficiency.
Experience shows that they can be a valuable tool.
The judges of the court all hope that it will be possible to refine and extend their use.
This caveat is echoed in the statement in the explanatory introduction to the 1989 Practice Direction that the Court of Appeal remains ‘firmly wedded to its long established tradition of oral argument in open court’.
In Mardas v. 
Official Receiver (New Law Journal , 24 November 1989, p. 1597) Lord Donaldson said:
One of the points of skeleton arguments is this.
Judges ought, when they are pre-reading a case, to be able to pick up the skeleton argument, and they ought actually to be able to start with the skeleton argument, which would tell them in very succinct form the background facts and what the points are.
Appellate procedures in the United States rely on the submission of written briefs by each side followed by limited oral argument, upon which a strict time limit is placed.
The Evershed Committee in 1953 considered the introduction of such procedures in the Court of Appeal but rejected them.
The principle of orality was considered to contribute to unanimity in decision making because of the thorough sifting and testing of argument in unrestricted oral argument.
This teamwork aspect of the work of the Court of Appeal would be lost if written briefs were read individually by judges prior to limited oral argument.
The strongest objection raised by the Evershed Committee was that the system would not fit easily into the division of labour between solicitors and barristers.
It was stated that solicitors would not find it possible to prepare the written briefs, and that it would be unfair to expect them to do so.
If barristers were to be instructed to prepare written briefs, they would need to be remunerated fairly for the work and there would be a resulting rise in costs (Evershed, 1953).
The conclusions of the Evershed Committee, particularly with regard to the division of work between solicitors and barristers, are open to challenge.
The real problem is that if solicitors prepare the written brief, there is much less of a case for denying them the right of audience to argue that brief before the court.
Indeed to suggest that solicitors might not be equipped to prepare written briefs is rather odd, since much of the paperwork in litigation is done by solicitors, though traditionally counsel settle documents to be used in court.
The rejection of written briefs was repeated by Lord Evershed in 1962 in a Practice Note ([1962]1 WLR 395).
An interesting attempt was made in 1966 by Michael Zander, acting as solicitor for the appellant, to introduce a written brief into the Court of Appeal.
Though received in the case before it, Danckwerts LJ said that the submission of such a document was ‘wholly irregular and contrary to the practice of the court and…should not be allowed as a precedent for future proceedings’(Rondel v. 
Worsley ,[1967]1 QB 443, p. 509).
Lord Scarman's Working Party also rejected the introduction of written briefs.
If the introduction of skeleton arguments works well, and the indications are that it  does, then the case against fuller written briefs becomes less easy to answer.
The principle of orality clearly belongs to an age in which the speedy production of multiple copies of documents was a slow labour-intensive exercise.
In the age of photocopiers and word processors, the case against written procedures is more difficult to sustain.
To save time when judgment is given, the practice has been adopted of stating the disposition of the case in open court, but of providing printed copies of the full judgments to the parties' lawyers and to the representatives of the press in court.
This is a further, but eminently sensible, erosion of the principle of orality.
The current volume of appeals to the Court of Appeal from all sources is about 1630 cases a year, of which 930 will be final appeals and 700 will be interlocutory appeals.
The major sources of appeals are the county courts which generate about 300 final appeals and the QBD of the High Court which generates about 400 final appeals.
About one in five appeals succeeds in whole or in part(Judicial Statistics, 1988).
Appeal to the House of Lords
From the Court of Appeal
In civil cases a precondition to any appeal from the Court of Appeal to the House of Lords is the obtaining of leave from either the Court of Appeal or the Appeal Committee of the House of Lords, which consists of three Law Lords.
Leave will only be granted if the appeal involves a point of law of general public importance.
In those cases where no time for appealing is fixed by statute or by order of the House, the time for appealing is three months from the date the judgment of the Court of Appeal was handed down.
The proper procedure is to apply first to the Court of Appeal, but if leave is refused, the application may be renewed before the Appeal Committee within one month of the refusal of leave by the Court of Appeal.
The Appeal Committee will hear oral argument before deciding whether leave should be given.
The criteria which seem to be applied by both the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords in deciding whether leave should be granted are (Blom-Cooper and Drewry, 1972):
Does the case raise a point of law of general public importance?
Does the appeal appear likely to succeed?
Has the case resulted in significant differences of opinion in the courts below?
It is common for conditions to be attached to the grant of leave.
The most common condition is that the appellant must bear the costs of the appeal whatever the outcome.
This is almost standard in appeals by the Inland Revenue.
The justification is that a respondent should not be put at further risk of costs by virtue of the Revenue's wish to have final authority on some aspect of taxation law, which will inevitably be of general application.
The use of a written procedure was pioneered in the House of Lords where each party has for some years been required to lodge a ‘Case’ with the court which is very similar to the skeleton arguments more recently introduced in the Court of Appeal.
The Case did not appear to play an important part in the process of decision making in the House of Lords during the period under review (1957 to 1973) in Alan Paterson's book The Law Lords , which indicates that both counsel and the Law Lords in practice diminished the effect of the written Case in the arguing of the appeal (Paterson, 1982).
A similar conclusion had been reached in an earlier study covering the period 1952 to 1968 (Blom-Cooper and Drewry, 1972).
If this remains true today, it is probably because the House does not have the same pressures placed on its time as the Court of Appeal and is able to devote as much time as it wishes to oral argument.
Appeals to the House of Lords are heard by the Appellate Committee of the House, which consists of those members of the House qualified to deal with its judicial business.
This should be distinguished from the Appeal Committee which considers applications for leave to appeal.
Following oral argument the Law Lords inevitably take time to consider their opinions.
The opinions are printed and handed down to the parties rather than being read aloud.
The House has no power to implement its own decisions, which are transmitted to the trial judge to be converted into enforceable judgments or orders.
From the High Court
In some cases appeals may proceed directly from the High Court (not from county courts or tribunals of first instance) to the House of Lords.
Part II of the Administration of Justice Act 1969 introduced the procedure universally known as the ‘leap-frog’ procedure to deal with those cases where determination by the Court of Appeal might not be the most effective way of disposing of the case.
The conditions to be met before a leap-frog appeal can take place indicate the type of case the legislature had in mind.
Two conditions must be met before there can be such an appeal:
1
the trial judge must grant a certificate which is only available where:
(a)
the parties consent, and
(b)
a point of law of general public importance is involved
(i)
which relates to the construction of legislation, or
(ii)
in respect of which the trial judge was bound by a decision of the Court of Appeal or House of Lords and which in either case was fully considered by the trial judge or in the previous decisions by which the trial judge was bound; and
2
the House of Lords must give leave on the basis that the case is one which ought to be heard by the House.
It should be noted that both the trial judge and the House of Lords have discretions.
Trial judges are not required to grant certificates where the conditions are met; they simply have power to grant certificates.
The restrictive conditions  governing the leap-frog appeal reflect the usual caution over the introduction of innovations and the real misgivings some members of the judiciary had over the introduction of the procedure.
These were that the House would be inundated with appeals relating to the interpretation of statutes and that the House would not have the benefit of the careful consideration of the case before it went up to the House (Drewry, 1973).
The conclusions drawn by Drewry in 1973 remain apposite today.
The use of the leap-frog appeal has been surrounded by considerable caution and the very stringent conditions to be met before such an appeal can be taken has meant that there have been very few such appeals.
In 1988 there were four.
A further reason for the small number of appeals is that there is only a small pool of cases involving principally the interpretation of legislation or the resolution of conflicting cases.
There is also the problem of breaking with tradition; the House of Lords is accustomed to having the assistance of judgments from the Court of Appeal following full and careful consideration of detailed argument on the points of principle involved in an atmosphere which, though busy, is not quite so frenetic as that of the High Court.
It is not clear why the consent of the parties should be a precondition to leapfrog appeals, and the issue was contentious when the Bill was debated in Parliament.
If it is appropriate for a case to go direct to the House of Lords it seems wrong that a litigant should be able to frustrate what appears to be a proper course.
No doubt if such a condition were not written into the Act, the trial judge and the House of Lords would have regard to the significance of the adoption of the procedure for litigants and to their wishes in exercising their respective discretions to grant a certificate or leave to appeal.
It seems that the absence of transcripts of evidence, argument and judgment in the county court explains why the leap-frog procedure does not apply to decisions of county courts.
This is surely right, even though in cases like Davis v. 
Johnson , which began in the county court, situations can arise in which there is not only an important point of interpretation to be decided, but also binding decisions of the Court of Appeal to be considered.
Such cases could be met by adopting for civil cases a procedure similar to the Attorney-General's reference in criminal proceedings.
Such a procedure would allow the Attorney-General to refer a point of law of general public importance arising in any litigation to the Court of Appeal or House of Lords.
References to the House of Lords would be available following a decision of the Court of Appeal, but could also be allowed from either the county courts or the High Court where the Attorney-General was satisfied that the criteria for the grant of a certificate under Part II of the Administration of Justice Act 1969 were met.
To grant a power to make references on points arising other than in connection with litigation would present difficulties in the selection of points for reference.
Furthermore the judges have never relished answering hypothetical points.
The Case Load
The House of Lords is not overworked.
The number of civil appeals is small.
In 1988 there were 144 petitions for leave to appeal in civil cases.
Six were  withdrawn, 100 were refused and 30 were allowed.
In the same year 78 appeals were determined including four leap-frog appeals.
In 34 cases the House affirmed the decision of the Court of Appeal, while in 19 cases the decision of the court below was reversed (Judicial Statistics, 1988).
It is fair to say that 1988 was typical year for the House of Lords.
The Functions of Civil Appeal Courts
The Impact of the Doctrine of Precedent
The doctrine of precedent ensures that decisions of the Court of Appeal and House of Lords are of the greatest importance for lawyers and litigants alike.
The doctrine of precedent requires that trial judges follow decisions of the Court of Appeal and House of Lords.
The Court of Appeal itself is, subject to limited exceptions, bound by its own previous decisions and is always bound by decisions of the House of Lords.
The House of Lords is, as we shall see, no longer bound by its own previous decisions and enjoys a unique power to reshape legal principles established by an accumulation of case law.
With his tongue firmly in his cheek, Mr Justice Murphy, the colourful judge of the High Court of Australia (roughly the equivalent of our Court of Appeal), has described the doctrine of precedent as follows:
Then there is the doctrine of precedent, one of my favourite doctrines.
I have managed to apply it at least once a year since I've been on the Bench.
The doctrine is that whenever you are faced with a decision, you always follow what the last person who was faced with the same decision did.
It is a doctrine eminently suitable for a nation overwhelmingly populated by sheep.
As the distinguished chemist, Cornford, said: ‘The doctrine is based on the theory that nothing should ever be done for the first time.’
To state that trial judges are bound by decisions of the Court of Appeal and House of Lords seems remarkably straightforward, but the multiple judgments of the Court of Appeal and of the House of Lords immediately make the issue more complex.
The solution has been to separate the propositions made in judgments into two categories: those of binding authority and those of persuasive authority.
Indeed some propositions falling into the second category are of such little weight as to amount to virtually no authority at all, while others are so significant as to be more important than those apparently of binding authority.
Only that part of the judgment classified as binding authority is required to be followed in a similar later case.
The key to unlocking the secret of the system of precedent is the ability to unravel lengthy individual judgments in order to identify the key propositions of law relevant to the essential facts of the litigation.
This will reveal the reason for the decision, known among lawyers as the ‘ratio decidendi’(reason for deciding) of the case.
This is the binding authority of the decision.
Unravelling cases is not, as some commentators have suggested, a formalistic process.
It is rather one which results from the process of ‘legal reading’, that is, the reading of the text against the background of ‘the legal reader's access to a store of specifically legal relevant contexts’(Davies, 1987).
Attempts have been made to offer formulae for determining the ratio decidendi of cases, but few have proved to be really satisfactory.
Too much emphasis on the search for the ratio decidendi of cases can be misleading.
Though it is the ratio that will be binding, the significance of other statements (obiter dicta ) which have only persuasive authority may be considerable.
For example, faced with the ratio of a two to one majority decision in the Court of Appeal as against dicta of three judges in the House of Lords agreeing with the dissent in the Court of Appeal and casting doubt on the correctness of the majority opinion, but not expressly overruling it, it is clear that the Court of Appeal must follow the dicta of the House of Lords rather than the ratio of their earlier decision, so paradoxically preferring the persuasive to the binding authority.
Courts also avoid the slavish copying of earlier decisions by the technique of distinguishing cases.
The judge in the later case finds some relevant fact in that case of sufficient importance to justify a different approach from that adopted in the first decision.
The use of cases as precedents therefore involves an evaluation of the weight of propositions, both of binding and of persuasive authority, and of their application to the facts of the instant dispute.
In evaluating the weight of propositions, the following factors will be relevant:
1
Greater weight is given to propositions by judges of courts higher in the hierarchy of courts.
2
Greater weight is given to propositions contained in judgments where the judges took time to consider their judgments.
This is indicated in the law reports by the abbreviation cur. adv. vult (curia advisari vult which translates ‘the court wishes to be advised’) at the end of the judgments.
Judgments in the House of Lords are always reserved, but in the much busier Court of Appeal many judgments are delivered extemporaneously after very brief deliberations.
3
Greater weight is given to propositions which have been repeated by judges in a number of cases.
4
Greater weight is given to propositions in cases where the decision was unanimous.
5
Greater weight is generally given to propositions which have stood the test of time.
6
Greater weight is given to propositions which appear to be broadly consistent with the general law governing the area in which the proposition arises.
7
Greater weight will usually be given to propositions which have met with general approval among lawyers and commentators.
But if, for example, the Law Commission in a law reform proposal has suggested that a proposition is ripe for alteration by statute, that would seriously erode the importance of the proposition.
The doctrine of precedent depends upon courts lower in the hierarchy respecting the authority of previous cases.
As an intermediate appellate court the Court  of Appeal is bound by its own previous decisions and by decisions of the House of Lords.
It now seems clearly established that the Court of Appeal may only depart from one of its own previous decisions in four circumstances.
The first three exceptions were spelled out by a six judge Court of Appeal in Young v. 
Bristol Aeroplane Co.
Ltd ([1944]KB 718):
1
When faced with two conflicting decisions of its own, the Court of Appeal is entitled and bound to decide which it will follow.
2
The Court of Appeal is bound to refuse to follow a previous decision of its own which, even though not expressly overruled, cannot in its opinion stand with a subsequent decision of the House of Lords.
3
The Court of Appeal is not bound to follow a decision of its own if it is satisfied that the decision was given per incuriam .
A decision is given per incuriam if it appears to have been made in ignorance of relevant statutory provisions or binding case law (Morelle v. 
Wakeling ,[1955]2 QB 379).
4
The Court of Appeal is not bound to follow an interlocutory decision made by two judges of the Court of Appeal which it considers to be wrong (Boys v. 
Chaplin ,[1968]2 QB 1).
Once cases disposed of by two judges under the new rules for the determination of final appeals become common, there will, no doubt, be an attempt to extend the decision in Boys v. 
Chaplin to such cases, though that will require reconsideration of the current view that the weight of authority in the Court of Appeal does not depend on the number of judges hearing the appeal.
Lord Denning as Master of the Rolls fought long and hard to persuade his colleagues that the Court of Appeal should free itself from the fetter of being bound by its own previous decisions just as the House of Lords had done in the 1966 Practice Statement (see below), and also suggested that the Court of Appeal was free to refuse to follow decisions of the House of Lords which were considered to be clearly wrong (Carty, 1983).
Lord Denning and the few colleagues agreeing with him met with little success in either case.
In Cassell v. 
Broome ([1972]AC 1027) and Miliangos v. 
George Frank (Textiles) Ltd ([1976]AC 443) the House of Lords made it clear that the Court of Appeal is bound by decisions of the House of Lords whatever its views as to the correctness of those decisions.
Lord Denning's views on the liberation of the Court of Appeal from the obligation to follow its own previous decisions were crushingly rebuffed in Davis v Johnson ([1979]AC 264) in which the authority of Young v. 
Bristol Aeroplane Co Ltd was re-affirmed.
With the retirement of Lord Denning, it seems that the issue has been laid to rest for some time, since his successor, Lord Donaldson, and most of the current Lords Justices of Appeal do not appear to share the views of the former Master of the Rolls.
Until 1966 the House of Lords was also bound by its own previous decisions having so decided in London Street Tramways v. 
London County Council ([1898]AC 375).
But in 1966 the Lord Chancellor, Lord Gardiner, with the concurrence of the Law Lords, announced that in future the House would regard itself as free to ‘depart from a previous decision when it appears right to do so’.
A principal justification for the change was said to be that it unduly restricted the proper development of the law (Practice Statement ,(Judicial Precedent ),[1966]1 WLR 1234).
The decision to change the rules of precedent in the House of Lords was not a sudden one.
By 1960 the judicial approach in the House of Lords, which has been summed up by Alan Paterson as ‘be fair, be consistent, don't legislate’, was beginning to be seen as too restrictive and the potential conflicts between the requirements of fairness, consistency and creativity were being recognized.
By a process described by Paterson as ‘Dissimulation’, the Law Lords began to violate one of the three expectations of judicial activity necessary to do justice in individual cases while, nevertheless, appearing to uphold all three expectations.
The years 1962 to 1966 immediately prior to the issuing of the Practice Statement were marked by considerable judicial creativity (Paterson, 1982).
It was always envisaged that the House of Lords would use the freedom to depart from its own previous decisions sparingly, but in the years following the Practice Statement the potential impact of the new freedom was narrowed by the addition of a series of riders.
The effect of these riders was to stress the need for certainty in decision making.
Thus it was considered inappropriate to overrule a previous decision if:
this would defeat the legitimate expectations of those who had acted in some way in reliance on the old authority; or
this would change the interpretation to be given to particular statutory provisions; or
the House could not foresee all the consequences of the change proposed; or
the whole area of law in which the question arose is in need of comprehensive reform.
The main types of case appropriate for the application of the Practice Statement appear to be those which will rectify some uncertainty which has arisen in the case law or which are outmoded or unjust in relation to some broad issue of principle.
The sparing use of the Practice Statement is confirmed by the statistics: the use of the Statement was made 39 times between 1966 and the end of 1989, but in only 12 cases has it been applied to overrule a previous decision.
The main importance of the change of practice in 1966 is that it allowed the Law Lords to accept an innovatory role and to avoid the practice of ‘Dissimulation’.
The removal of the shackles of the doctrine of precedent also confirms the special role of the House of Lords as a court of supervision.
Do we Need Two Levels of Appeal Court?
The distinction between supervision and review and the discussion of the differing roles of the Court of Appeal and House of Lords provide part of the answer to this question.
But the small case load of the House of Lords and the expense of bringing a second appeal have produced suggestions that there is no  need for the second appeal if the Court of Appeal were to be free to reconsider its own previous decisions.
In considering the merits of such suggestions, it is important to realize that the House of Lords is also the final appeal court for cases originating in Scotland and Northern Ireland which have their own legal systems.
Without the House of Lords there would be no institutional link between these legal systems in which there is considerable overlap of legal rules.
Blom-Cooper and Drewry concluded that there was a role for the House of Lords and argued that the House of Lords was neither unfitted to retain its present judicial role nor prohibitively expensive to use.
Such conclusions are surely right.
Once the distinction between review and supervision is grasped, there is surely sense in having a special type of final appeal for cases involving issues of supervision, which allows more leisurely consideration of the issues than is possible in the Court of Appeal.
Though the Court of Appeal is also a court of supervision, it appears to be too busy to be able to devote as much time and thought as is needed to such cases.
But what is also clear is that it is unfair to litigants that they should meet the cost of a second appeal, one of the principal purposes of which is to resolve issues of law of general public importance.
Such issues should, as currently occurs in most tax cases, always be litigated at the public expense.
The discretionary nature of the grant of leave to appeal to the House of Lords avoids any suggestion that there might be abuse of such an approach.
Are the Judges Fitted for the Task of Making Law?
It will be clear from the description of the functions of the Court of Appeal and House of Lords that they make law to meet the needs of cases arising before them and lay down guidelines for judges in courts below.
Even in cases involving the interpretation of legislation the judges' choices between competing or differential readings of the words of the statutory material involve judicial creativity or innovation.
The doctrine of precedent restrains tribunals and the trial judges in the county courts and in the High Court from digressing into frolics of legal innovation, but even the trial judge will be presented from time to time with issues upon which there are no binding precedents.
After all every great House of Lords decision, which does not involve a departure from precedent, began with the presentation of issues at first instance.
So to a limited extent all judges are involved in the process of supervision and the gradual accretion of legal rules by layer upon layer of precedent.
All judges face choices in the process of adjudication.
Nevertheless the overwhelming majority of trials turn on the establishment of facts and the matching of those facts to well settled legal rules.
Simon Lee has argued that judges' creativity ought to vary according to four factors:
1
Does the case involve statutes or common law (the latter allowing more freedom)?
2
Where is the judge in the courts' hierarchy (the higher up, the more creativity is suitable)?
3
Is the subject matter such that creativity or justice is more important?
4
What is the likelihood of other institutions of government correcting any injustice?
(Lee, 1988, p. 202)
Given the greater creative role of the judges in the appellate courts, it is appropriate to question whether they are fitted for the task of supervision.
Today appellate judges, apart from the Lord Chancellor, are in practice recruited exclusively from among the best High Court judges, who after serving the Court of Appeal may be elevated to the House of Lords.
This is a quite extraordinarily narrow group within the legal profession.
Until the passing of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, only barristers could become High Court judges.
Not only will the years at the Bar have moulded the barrister, but ‘judicial qualities’ will have been noted under the Lord Chancellor's system for recording the progress of barristers.
Dossiers on barristers, known as ‘yellow sheets’(actually pink cards), are kept by the Lord Chancellor's Department which record the progress of the barrister and judges will pass on comments, both favourable and unfavourable, about barristers appearing before them.
By the time a barrister is considered for judicial appointment, the dossier will contain considerable information about him or her.
In addition there will be discreet enquiries about the barrister's personal life.
Finally there will be an interview with the Lord Chancellor.
No applications are invited for High Court judgeships, though they are for Circuit judgeships (Shetreet, 1976; Lord Chancellor's Department, 1990).
This system of selection for elevation to the High Court bench and for promotion to the Court of Appeal and House of Lords results in the character of the judiciary seeming to be self-perpetuating.
The system secures a marked uniformity among the puisne judges and consequently among the appellate judges.
It would also seem to discriminate against women and ethnic minorities (Cohen, 1982a).
The time spent on the High Court bench will also impose its further stamp upon the potential appellate judge.
The typical appellate judge will be at least 60 years of age, white, male and educated at public school and at Oxford or Cambridge and have lived in the insular world of the Bar for more than 30 years.
There is clearly much scope and a very strong case for broadening the representation of the legal profession, both practising and academic, on the appellate bench.
Where issues of supervision are involved, the necessity for practice at the Bar as a qualification for office is much harder to sustain than in relation to trials and appeals involving review.
Against this background, it is hardly surprising to find assertions made that judges consistently support ‘the conventional established and settled interests’ and that this role of preserving stability is in conflict with the role of the judiciary as protectors of the liberties of the individual (Griffith, 1987).
Professor Griffith's book The Politics of the Judiciary first published in 1977 caused a considerable stir in documenting such assertions with many examples.
On judicial creativity Professor Griffith was worried that judges' emotional and personal prejudices became, perhaps unconsciously, a part of their decision-making process, and therefore lacked impartiality.
The perceived need to ensure stability in society took precedence over fairness and justice.
But no recipe for remedying the perceived deficiency was offered.
In an article responding to the gauntlet hurled down by Professor Griffith, Lord Devlin does not deny the homogeneity of attitudes of the appellate judges, but goes on to argue that this is probably inevitable.
Lord Devlin concludes:
To my mind none of the evidence, general or specific adds much to the inherent probability that men and women of a certain age will be inclined by nature to favour the status quo.
Is it displeasing to the public at large that the guardians of the law should share this common tendency?
(Devlin, 1978, p. 509)
But in the context of a consideration of judicial creativity, or perhaps lack of it, the selection of the judiciary and their ‘politics’ in the sense used by Professor Griffith seem to be marginal considerations.
Even in the United States' Supreme Court with its overtly political processes of appointment, it seems that, in deciding landmark cases embodying sweeping reforms of the law, the justices do not always fully appreciate the significance and social consequences of their decisions (Horowitz, 1977).
This is despite, in addition to the special process of appointment, the presentation of elaborate written briefs and in appropriate cases ‘Brandeis briefs’ containing detailed economic and social data pertinent to the issue being litigated.
In the English appellate courts it may be true to say that change that can be based on reasoning by analogy and the evolutionary development of legal rules is the most that can be expected, and that major changes of direction require legislation which, to overcome the bias of judges in favour of the status quo, must be unequivocally expressed.
While permitting a degree of creativity, the doctrine of precedent, even in the House of Lords, operates to limit the changes in the law which the judges are willing to make.
The judges can develop the law, but major exercises in ‘judicial legislation’ are not perceived as appropriate.
Indeed if there is any validity in the argument that the narrow background and insularity of judges renders them unfitted to make decisions with significant broad social consequences, there is some merit in a system which limits their ability to change the law and reserves such questions for full consideration by a democratically elected legislature.
But there is scope for innovation and change both in the composition and procedures of appellate courts (Bell, 1983).
The greater use of written procedures has been mentioned.
Other possibilities are the use of a broader range of amicus curiae briefs in cases involving issues of supervision.
For too long the modernization of the appellate courts has been geared towards the management of case loads rather than with equipping the appellate judges better for the task of the development of legal rules.
Part IV
The Delivery of Legal Services
15
The Legal Profession
Introduction
Growth and Problems
After a period of modest growth in the 1950s, both branches of the legal profession in England and Wales experienced major growth in the 1960s and 1970s.
In 1963 there were approximately 20,000 solicitors and 2000 barristers.
By 1989, this had grown to about 55,000 solicitors and 5000 barristers.
Growth in the size of the legal profession occurred during the time when consumer movements were coming of age.
It became fashionable and acceptable to criticize the delivery of professional services.
The legal profession was not immune from this trend, particularly in relation to the perceived poor performance and high cost of conveyancing work (Joseph, 1980).
It was argued that across a range of services, costs were too high, the service to the client was poor and that the legal profession was failing to meet the needs of all sections of the community.
The ground swell of concern continued at a sufficient level that the issue could not be ignored.
The Labour Government of the day responded by establishing in 1976 the Royal Commission on Legal Services (Benson Commission, 1979) with wide terms of reference.
It was to examine the structure, organization, training and regulation of the legal profession and to recommend those changes that would be desirable in the interests of justice.
Over the years Royal Commissions have been noted for the lack of impact made by their recommendations, but there can be no doubt that the profession was frightened by the Benson Commission.
They feared structural change and the loss of monopolies on property transfer work, in probate and in the conduct of litigation.
In particular, the threat to conveyancing work was viewed as undermining the main fee earning activity of many practices.
It was a source of great satisfaction to both branches of the profession when the Benson Commission's Report in 1979 did not propose any radical change, though the Report was generally unpopular with other commentators.
One editorial described it as ‘characterised by an over-anxiety not to offend the professional establishment’.
The Benson Commission's Concept of a Profession
What is clear to anyone reading the report is that the Benson Commission accepted that the practice of law was a professional activity and that professions display a number of common characteristics:
the existence of a central organization or governing body representing
the profession and having powers of control and discipline over its members;
the function of giving specialist advice and services in a specialized field of knowledge;
entry and training are controlled by the profession itself and are dependent on a formalized system of education and training;
the activity is self-regulated, enabling the requirement of high standards in relations with clients, usually higher than that imposed by the general law;
the first and paramount responsibility of the members of the profession is to act in the best interests of their clients.
The existence of these characteristics required the independence of the profession from interference by government.
Without independence, the interests of the client cannot be a first and paramount consideration.
The self-regulation of the profession and the high standards demanded of its members are said to be the justification for the monopolies enjoyed by those engaging in the activity and by the restrictive practices permitted.
The Calm Before the Storm
The period of calm and stability which followed the publication of the Report of the Benson Commission was short lived.
Perhaps the profession became too complacent about their privileged position, but three events can be identified as catalysts for the current period of dramatic change.
The first event was the scandal which has come to be known as the Glanville Davies affair.
The failure of the Law Society to act effectively in dealing with complaints against a solicitor and respected member of the Council of The Law Society, Mr Glanville Davies, attracted enormous publicity and led to a complete breakdown of public confidence in the Law Society's ability to regulate professional conduct.
Mr Davies did not contest an application by the aggrieved client, Mr Parsons, that he should be struck off the roll of solicitors following the reduction on taxation of a grossly inflated and inaccurate litigation bill from £197,000 to £67,000.
The litigation and the subsequent enquiries by the Lay Observer and by the Law Society (known as ‘the Ely Report’) revealed an appalling catalogue of errors, insensitivity and lack of sound judgment (Lay Observer, 1984; Law Society, 1984).
Despite radical revision of the complaints procedures, there remains dissatisfaction about the handling of complaints similar to those concerning police complaints procedures considered earlier in this book (Newbold and Zellick, 1987).
The second event was the ending of the conveyancing monopoly.
In 1983  Austin Mitchell introduced a Private Member's Bill proposing the establishment of licensed conveyancers able to undertake residential conveyancing in competition with solicitors.
This Bill failed but the Government undertook to introduce its own legislation on conveyancing in the Parliamentary session 1984–5 with the same objective.
The Government honoured its undertaking and included the extension of the conveyancing monopoly to licensed conveyancers in the Administration of Justice Act 1985.
The effect of this change has not been as dramatic as had been feared.
Conveyancing work has become more competitive, but solicitors have not lost substantial amounts of work to the modest number of licensed conveyancers who have set up in practice.
Much more fear has been engendered by the proposal that banks and building societies be allowed to offer conveyancing services.
Such bodies have a very large, almost captive, clientele since many of those buying houses will go first to the bank or building society to arrange to borrow the money to buy the house.
The third event was the liberalization of the restrictions on advertising, which had previously permitted only institutional advertising such as the ‘See a Solicitor’ series of leaflets.
The removal of restrictions was, in part, a reaction to the threat of competition from licensed conveyancers.
From a position where individual advertising was considered inconsistent with the professional image of solicitors and where there were rules determining the size and style even of the name of the practice on its premises, The Law Society moved speedily to a virtually deregulated advertising regime.
The sole remaining restraint is the requirement that the advertising must not impair the solicitor's independence and integrity and must not bring the profession into disrepute.
Sending brochures and leaflets to clients, and advertising in local newspapers and some specialist journals are now common, though larger well-established firms seem to do less advertising than smaller and newer practices.
Many solicitors still obtain business through ‘networking’, that is, establishing a network of friends and business contacts likely to refer business to the solicitor.
It is common for solicitors to build cordial relationships with estate agents, building societies and even with the custody officer at the police station, in order to secure referrals.
Solicitors also participate in social activities likely to get them and their firms known to potential clients.
In 1967 Abel-Smith and Stevens asserted that ‘solicitors tend to be active members of rotary clubs, golf clubs, rugby football clubs and to become freemasons and leading churchmen’(Abel-Smith and Stevens, 1967, pp. 142–3).
More recent empirical research tends to confirm this assertion (Podmore, 1980).
These three events also coincided with a period when the character of legal work was changing.
The 1980s saw an explosion in corporate, commercial and financial services work on such a scale that there is currently a shortage of lawyers, despite the admission of record numbers of new entrants to the profession in recent years (The Law Society 1990).
There is no doubt that the professions are today under attack.
Privileges and self-regulation are no longer accepted as necessary corollaries of professional status.
For some, the chill wind of competition is again blowing through their offices.
The abolition of many remaining monopolies and restrictive practices is again on the political agenda.
The Great Reform of the Legal Profession
The great reform of the legal profession is the result of three major enquiries into the legal profession within a decade.
The first is the Royal Commission on Legal Services (Benson Commission, 1979), which has already been mentioned.
The second is the joint committee set up by the General Council of the Bar and The Law Society, chaired by Lady Marre, which reported in July 1988 (Marre Committee, 1988).
The third and by far the most important is the trio of Green Papers (Cm 570, 571 and 572) issued by The Lord Chancellor in January 1989 followed by a White Paper (Cm 740) in June 1990 and culminating in the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
The Benson Commission
The Royal Commission on Legal Services, which was chaired by a lay person and had a majority of lay members, devoted three years to its study of legal services.
It took voluminous evidence, undertook its own research studies, and engaged in lengthy consultation and deliberation.
The Report published in 1979 runs to four volumes.
There is much of value in the Report and implementation of many of its recommendations would undoubtedly have resulted in improvements in the system for delivering legal services.
The Benson Commission's unpopularity with commentators (though not with lawyers) is based on its recommendations that the status quo be retained in three areas seen by the profession as crucial: the retention by barristers of a monopoly on rights of audience in the higher courts, the retention by solicitors of the monopoly on conveyancing work and the division of the profession into solicitors and barristers.
In 1983 the Government accepted the Report, though it has never been debated in Parliament.
The Government indicated that implementation of a number of recommendations was subject to resources becoming available or would need to await an appropriate legislative opportunity.
The Marre Committee
When solicitors lost the conveyancing monopoly with the enactment of the Administration of Justice Act 1985, they turned their attention to the advocacy monopoly enjoyed by barristers in the higher courts.
The absurdity of the monopoly was brought to public attention when Cyril Smith MP's solicitor sought the leave of the High Court to read out an agreed statement in settlement of a libel action, because he considered the fee proposed by counsel for doing this to be ‘unnecessarily expensive’.
Leave was refused at first instance and in the Court of Appeal, though a few months later a Practice Direction ([1986]2 All ER 226) was issued indicating the collective view of the judges that solicitors should be permitted to appear in the High Court or Court of Appeal in formal or unopposed proceedings.
There followed a public and acrimonious debate between representatives of  solicitors and barristers on the issue of rights of audience.
The General Council of the Bar responded by proposing a joint committee with The Law Society to consider the future of the legal profession.
The Marre Committee was born, but its report was a great disappointment.
Its deliberations had been hurried, its request for evidence stressed the need for a brevity viewed by many as excessive and it lacked sufficient resources to produce a credible alternative to any Government proposals.
The credibility of the final report was further damaged by the Note of Dissent attached by the barrister members and some independent members on the proposed extension of rights of audience.
The Marre Committee concluded that unless the professions themselves initiated change, it would be forced upon them.
Commercial considerations should not alone determine the future supply of legal services and the profession should retain only those rules which are ‘essential for the maintenance of professional standards in the public interest’.
The biggest area of unmet need was identified as the provision of social welfare law, particularly in rural districts, in parts of London and in the urban conurbations of the Midlands and the north of England.
Realism was needed in providing new services because of resource constraints.
Informational and education initiatives were encouraged.
On legal aid, the Committee essentially recommends the status quo , but does recommend the extension of legal aid to tribunal proceedings.
Law centres and other advice agencies should receive funding from the Legal Aid Board, but the idea of a national legal service and of a public defender system were disapproved.
The controversial part of the report related to rights of audience, where the majority recommended the creation of a Rights of Audience Advisory Board which would recommend to The Law Society the licensing of suitably qualified solicitors to act as advocates in the Crown Court.
Employed lawyers should also be entitled to rights of audience in the courts.
Lord Mackay's Proposals
In January 1989 Lord Mackay issued three Green Papers:The Work and Organisation of the Legal Profession (Cm 570);Conveyancing by Authorised Practitioners (Cm 572)and Contingency Fees (Cm 571).
The Green Papers are short, sharp and to the point.
They seem to depend more on policy preferences than research and to reflect the Government's preference for action not words, for speedy response rather than lengthy debate, and perhaps also a deep disregard for the theoretical overview.
Notions of ‘value for money’, ‘efficiency’ and ‘market forces’are firmly embedded in these reports.
They state that the Government believes that free competition between the providers of legal services will, through the discipline of the market, ensure that the public is provided with the most efficient and effective network of legal services at the most economical price.
The mood of deregulation is tempered only by reference to the need to assure the public of the competence of providers of legal services.
The debate which the Green Papers generated has been fully chronicled elsewhere (Cownie, 1990; Donaldson, 1990b), but the response to the proposal that rights of audience should in future depend on certificates of competence in  advocacy rather than membership of a particular branch of the profession met a predictably hostile response from the Bar and a response verging on the intemperate from the judges.
The subsequent White Paper,Legal Services: A Framework for the Future (Cm 740), adopted a different tone, referring rather more to the requirement for legal services to be responsive to clients' needs than to notions of competition and the discipline of the market; but in content the proposals actually gave little ground on key points.
Extended rights of audience are to be permitted, both for present advocates in more courts and for new classes of advocates.
For certain classes of work (small claims, debt cases and housing cases in the county courts) there will be no restrictions at all on rights of audience; the only control will be the court's discretion to restrict the involvement of unruly or corrupt representatives.
The Government believes that it is for the professional bodies and other organizations whose members provide legal services to satisfy the courts and the public that their members are competent to undertake representation.
Professional bodies will produce rules of conduct for such activity having regard to advice from an Advisory Committee to be set up by the Lord Chancellor.
The concession to the Bar is that any person called to the Bar will have rights of audience in all courts on completion of pupillage, dependent only on their compliance with rules of conduct made by the Bar.
Once the new Act is in force, any change to the rules relating to education training and conduct will be subject to the concurrence of the Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief Justice, Master of the Rolls, President of the Family Division and Vice-Chancellor, who will act having regard to advice received from a new Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct.
The Law Society becomes a recognizing authority under the new scheme and so will be able to recognize a solicitor as qualified as an advocate in a particular court or courts, again subject to rules on education, training and conduct which will parallel the arrangements for the Bar.
Again there will be no loss of existing rights of audience; solicitors will be recognized as having competence to be advocates in the lower courts.
The gain for The Law Society is that they will be able to certificate solicitors who have undertaken further training entitling them to rights of audience in the higher courts.
This in turn opens the way to appointment to the High Court bench for solicitors.
The new Act removes the monopoly on starting and conducting litigation.
The Government considers that this unnecessarily hinders the ways in which the provision of legal services might develop.
Anyone suitably qualified will be permitted to undertake this work.
The Government will licence authorizing bodies which may include bodies other than The Law Society and the General Council of the Bar.
The Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct will play a central role in the revised arrangements for supervising legal education and ensuring satisfactory standards of conduct by those entitled to undertake legal services.
The functions of the Advisory Committee will be to advise on questions that arise as to what qualifications are necessary for providing legal services connected with litigation and what requirements are necessary to ensure proper  standards of conduct.
An annual report will be presented to the Lord Chancellor and will be laid before Parliament.
Professional bodies are to be placed under a statutory duty to have regard to advice from the Advisory Committee in preparing rules of competence and conduct for their own members.
The Courts and Legal Services Act 1990
The proposals which require legislative change for their implementation have been included in Part II of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 (White, Robin, 1991).
This lays down a general statutory objective of making provision for new or better ways of providing legal services and a wider choice of person providing them, while maintaining the proper and efficient administration of justice.
The Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct is established.
Chaired by a judge of the High Court or a higher court, it has 16 members, a majority of whom must be persons other than practising or academic lawyers.
The system of advocacy licensing is also detailed in the Act.
There are a multitude of other very significant changes on specific matters relating to monopolies and styles of practice.
But these do not impact dramatically on the overall work of the profession.
The Organization of the Profession
A Divided Profession
The legal profession in England and Wales is divided into solicitors and barristers, with the latter being considered the senior branch of the profession.
The solicitor gives advice and has the conduct of the business of the client from day to day and will retain a barrister to carry out a specific task in handling the client's business.
Solicitors (subject to very limited exceptions) alone have the right to brief counsel, who will be called in as the occasion demands to give specialist advice, to draft documents or to act as advocate in the higher courts.
The barrister is currently alone entitled to act as advocate in the higher courts.
Each branch of the profession has its own system of entry and training, its own governing body and its own rules of conduct and discipline.
The distinction between the two branches of the profession is an artificial one.
There are, in fact, no tasks exclusive to one branch.
Solicitors regularly appear as advocates in the lower courts and, by special hat of the Lord Chancellor, in some Crown Courts which are geographically remote from barristers' chambers.
Equally, there are many barristers who very seldom appear in court, spending virtually all their time on written opinions on the law.
Over the years there has been much debate on the fusion of the two branches of the profession.
The issue of fusion was considered by the Royal Commission which unanimously concluded that the legal profession should continue to be divided.
Advocates of fusion, who represented a minority among those who submitted evidence to the Royal Commission, criticized the divided profession on a number of  grounds: duplication, inefficiency, delay, and inaccessibility.
Duplication of effort arises because convention demands the involvement of both solicitor and barrister where only one need be involved.
Barristers do not appear in court alone; the solicitor, or a representative of the practice, must also be present.
Clients must consult solicitors even if their only need is for an opinion from counsel.
No convincing answer has been given to this criticism; all that is offered is the general argument in favour of a specialized division of the profession which is free from hour to hour to engage in advocacy and other specialist work.
Inefficiency obviously arises because of the necessity to reduce everything to written instructions.
Conferences at an early stage are only common in major litigation.
Very frequently counsel will only begin to prepare on the night before the case is to be heard and will only meet with the client on the morning of the hearing.
If the brief has been badly prepared, there cannot be effective representation.
Nor does the system guarantee that the barrister of the solicitor's choice will be able to take the case and in minor cases, last minute changes of barrister are fairly common.
The Royal Commission's response to this criticism was to note that fusion might not improve matters and to suggest that a more detailed set of standards should be prepared for both solicitors and barristers on the preparation and handling of briefs.
The argument in favour of a divided profession which found favour with the Royal Commission was that the existence of a separate branch of the profession ensured that there was a body of specialist advocates available to all solicitors, which would be dispersed if the two branches were fused.
There is some merit in the Royal Commission's reasoning, but it does not seem to warrant so total a separation of the two branches of the profession as exists currently.
Ultimately the issue may not be that important, because the impact of fusion for clients may well be minimal.
In order to allow time for attendance in court to represent the client, office administration probably demands that there be separation of preparation and advocacy.
Furthermore even in a fused profession, the barristers in chambers in the Inns of Court and elsewhere would undoubtedly enter into partnership as specialist trial advocates and do agency work for other solicitors, whose own staff were unable to act as advocates in every case or where the complexity of the case justified bringing in a specialist advocate.
On the other hand, there would be much greater flexibility for clients and lawyers, and much more control by the instructing client who would have direct access to the advocate in the case.
No party would be able to shelter behind the barriers inevitably created by the divided profession.
Often ill-informed and repetitive, the debate has tended to ignore the interests of the client and has frequently been conducted by those whose minds are already made up on the issue.
Increasingly, the distinction is being blurred and fusion will eventually arrive in some form.
The provisions on advocacy rights in the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 provide a further blurring of the distinction.
Solicitors
Solicitors are increasingly becoming the dominant branch of the profession despite the historical recognition that they are the junior part of the legal profession.
Solicitors are governed by The Law Society, established by Royal Charter in 1831, which also acts as the main professional association of solicitors.
The Law Society acts through its Council which is composed of 70 solicitors, 56 of whom are elected by members of the Society with the remaining 14 being elected by the Council itself.
There are also 121 autonomous local law societies, which have an important role to play in the formulation of policy by The Law Society.
Admission to practice requires the completion of three stages of training: the academic stage, the vocational stage and the apprenticeship.
The academic stage of training is satisfied by completion of a qualifying law degree containing the six core subjects or by passing the Common Professional Examination.
The six core subjects are Constitutional and Administrative Law, Contract, Tort, Criminal Law, Land Law, and Equity and Trusts.
The second stage of training is the Solicitors Final Examination taken after a further year of study at one of the professional schools.
This is known as the vocational stage of training, which is designed to provide a bridge between the academic stage of training and what might be labelled the clinical stage of training in articles.
Though the subjects available as part of law degree courses have increased enormously in range in recent years, the balance of courses offered is still weighted considerably in favour of‘practical’ subjects reflecting traditional private law concepts of property rather than the ‘new property’in the many entitlements deriving from the public law that regulates the welfare state (Abel, 1982; Zander, 1978).
The final stage is two years' apprenticeship to an established solicitor, known as articles of clerkship, which can be regarded as the clinical stage of training during which the skills of managing an office, interviewing clients, writing letters, instructing counsel and handling client money are learned.
Articled clerks, recently renamed trainee solicitors, are paid salaries, which have in recent years become increasingly attractive.
The salary will naturally depend on the size and range of work of the practice in which the trainee solicitor is articled, but The Law Society sets down recommended minimum salaries and can refuse to register articles where the salary is less than this figure.
On satisfactory completion of the period of apprenticeship, trainee solicitors are entitled to be formally admitted as solicitors and to describe themselves as such.
They may not set up in practice on their own account for a further three years.
Once admitted, the solicitor is required to maintain a practising certificate, for which a substantial annual fee is charged.
The solicitor must also contribute to the compensation fund, which makes good any losses suffered by clients when a dishonest solicitor makes off with their money.
All solicitors other than employed solicitors are also required to take out compulsory professional indemnity insurance as a condition of the grant of the annual practising certificate.
Barristers
The barristers' governing bodies are more complex than those of solicitors.
They are the barrister's own Inn of Court, the Senate of the Inns of Court and the General Council of the Bar, often known simply as the Bar Council.
In order to become a barrister it is necessary to become a member of one of the Inns of  Court: the Inner Temple, the Middle Temple, Lincoln's Inn or Gray's Inn.
Each Inn is governed by benchers appointed by existing benchers.
The Inns are very powerful and wealthy institutions which rent chambers (offices) for the large majority of London barristers.
There is also a collegiality within each Inn which maintains for the members dining and library facilities and, some would argue, a retreat from the real world.
The Senate of the Inns of Court consists of 101 barristers (some of whom will be judges) representing the profession of barrister; some are appointed by the benchers of each Inn, some are ex officio members like the leaders from each of the six circuits, and some are elected by members of the Bar.
The Senate's powers are essentially supervisory and policy making, enabling the four Inns to speak with one voice on matters of common interest.
Though admission to the Bar is still largely the domain of the individual Inns, the formal education of the trainee barrister is centralized through the Inns of Court School of Law run by the Council of Legal Education, which is a committee of Senate.
The other governing body for barristers is the Bar Council whose membership derives much less from the Inns; it is the barristers' elected representative body.
The Bar Council is responsible for the maintenance of professional standards and represents the general interests of the Bar in its relations with outsiders.
There is considerable overlap in membership of the Senate and Bar Council.
The establishment of the Senate does not yet appear to have resulted in any discernible shift of power away from the individual Inns (Hazell, 1978; Benson Commission, 1979).
The training of barristers can, like that of solicitors, be divided into the same three stages: academic, vocational and apprenticeship.
The requirements of the academic stage are common to both branches of the profession.
The vocational stage for the barrister consists of a year at the Inns of Court Law School followed by Bar Finals.
Success in Bar Finals entitles the candidate to admission to the Bar, known as call to the Bar provided that they have completed the quaint requirement of eating the necessary number of dinners in their Inn.
Following call, candidates can call themselves barristers but may not yet practise as such.
A one year period of apprenticeship to an established barrister must be undertaken.
In marked distinction to the solicitors' branch of the profession, the pupil barrister may not earn any money during the first six months of pupillage and there are only limited opportunities for earning in the second six months of pupillage.
This places financial constraints on qualification as a barrister which do not exist for intending solicitors.
The award of bursaries and scholarships can mitigate the difficulties the system causes and very recently the Bar has taken on board the need to change the system so that the equivalent of salaries can be offered during pupillage.
Barristers are all sole practitioners, though they work in sets of offices (called sets of chambers) in groups of between 12 and 20 sharing central services notably of a clerk but also secretarial and other services.
Each set of chambers is required to have at least one clerk, who performs the functions of office administrator and accountant, business manager and agent.
Work coming in from solicitors is allocated among members of the chambers by the clerk, who also negotiates the fee  for the brief.
The clerk therefore has some control over the flow of work for each barrister in the chambers.
A senior clerk takes a commission of between five and ten per cent of the brief fees rather than a salary, which can exceed the earnings of many of the barristers in the chambers.
(Flood, 1983).
After around ten to fifteen years in practice, successful barristers can consider applying for promotion to Queen's Counsel, known as ‘silk’ from the material of which the QC's formal gown is made.
Queen's Counsel are appointed by the Queen on the advice of the Lord Chancellor, who will normally consult senior members of the judiciary.
Being a Queen's Counsel brings status, high income, and relief from some of the more tedious paperwork done by barristers.
It may also often be a step on the way to judicial appointment in the High Court.
Socialization
Socialization refers to the mechanisms by which the profession reproduces the motivations and attitudes regarded as appropriate for the practice of law.
The lengthy period of training required for admission to either branch of the profession has a socializing effect on entrants to the profession.
The character of the profession is thus maintained.
Since the standard route of entry is graduate entry, the social profile of graduates is the starting point for consideration of the social profile of the profession.
The social composition of undergraduate law students is predominantly middle-class in origin and outlook (Benson Commission, 1979; McDonald, 1982).
The social composition of admitted solicitors is remarkably similar to the profile of law students, but the socialization process involved in qualifying to practise at the Bar dramatically increases the preponderance of persons from professional and managerial backgrounds.
The process in both branches of the profession impacts adversely on women and ethnic minorities, who, even when they do enter the profession, tend to be relegated to lower status work (Hazell, 1978; Podmore and Spencer, 1982; Cohen, 1982b and 1982c; Abel, 1988).
The traditions and customs of each branch of the profession tend to determine the form of education and training rather than any objectively determined educational needs.
The eating of dinners as a precondition to call to the Bar and the serving of pupillage as a precondition to practice at the Bar are the most obvious examples of socialization processes.
For potential solicitors the apprenticeship to an experienced solicitor in the form of articles of clerkship performs the same function.
The apprenticeship is the period when the motivations and attitudes important for the practice of the law are inculcated and reinforced.
It seems inevitable that the social profile of lawyers is going to be markedly different from that of society at large because the social profile of persons attaining the level of educational achievement required for admission to higher education does not itself correspond with that of the whole community.
The differences, however, go beyond this, most notably at the Bar.
This has important consequences for the delivery of legal services, which are only now being slowly realized.
The social class composition of lawyers compared with particular client groups appears to make it easy for some to consult lawyers while presenting  barriers to other sections of the community.
Poorer working-class groups do not seem to perceive lawyers as providing a service for them.
Law centres have tried to address this problem, but it is difficult to isolate the factors which make law centres more accessible to working-class clients.
The offering of a free service and the ability to advertise have obviously been key factors having little to do with questions of social class composition, though they have much to do with socialization since law centres perceive their role very differently from those in private practice.
Monopolies
One common feature of professions is the claim that their services are more than business transactions and that this aspect of the delivery of professional services justifies in the public interest monopolies that would not be acceptable in the ordinary industrial and commercial arena.
Many of the traditional monopolies applicable in the legal profession are under attack and some are on the point of disappearing.
There have always been surprisingly few monopolies though they have become principal protectors of the exclusivity of the legal profession.
These are the conveyancing and probate monopolies, restrictions on instituting litigation and on rights of audience.
There is no general monopoly on the giving of legal advice, but the monopolies that do exist have been very effective in reserving most legal work for solicitors and barristers.
There has been some encroachment in specific areas such as employment law advice and welfare benefits advice where tribunals with their generous rights of audience are major institutions.
Barristers and solicitors together with certificated notaries (who are normally also solicitors) and licensed conveyancers enjoy a statutory monopoly which makes it an offence for any other persons to draw up or prepare documents connected with the transfer of title to property for payment.
This is commonly known as the conveyancing monopoly.
Solicitors, barristers and certificated notaries enjoy a statutory monopoly over the drawing up or preparation of the executor's affidavit and account; these are formal documents which must be obtained before probate can be granted.
Like the conveyancing monopoly, the probate monopoly affects only a small part of the work involved in the administration of the estate of a deceased person.
In both cases the practical effect of the monopolies is in most cases to reserve all the work for solicitors (and in the case of property transfer, licensed conveyancers).
By practice rule barristers do not undertake conveyancing and probate work falling within these monopolies.
Despite popular opinion to the contrary there is no monopoly over the preparation of wills.
Both the conveyancing and probate monopolies are extended under Part II of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 to authorised practitioners.
Restrictions connected with litigation cover two situations.
First, only solicitors may begin and conduct litigation on behalf of others.
Secondly, there are rules restricting rights of audience.
Both will be affected by the implementation of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
Obviously individuals may begin litigation  on their own account and represent themselves in those proceedings, but otherwise only solicitors and barristers have the right to act as advocates in courts and only barristers in the higher courts, other than on formal or unopposed business.
Legal executives and lay advisers have rights of audience before judges in chambers and in certain proceedings before Masters and Registrars.
It is important to note in this context that courts have an inherent power to permit anyone to act as advocate, though this is seldom exercised except for the massive exception which at one time allowed police officers to act as prosecutors in the magistrates' courts.
Rights of audience before tribunals are much wider as noted in chapters 12 and 13.
Restrictions on rights of audience ensure that persons appearing as representatives before courts have a minimum level of competence as advocates.
Most of the argument has related to the divided profession's respective rights of audience discussed above, with much of the argument centring on solicitors being granted full rights of audience before the higher courts, especially the Crown Court.
The monopoly over the initiation of proceedings has proved to be most contentious in relation to claims assessors who deal with accident claims on a contingency basis taking part of the compensation as remuneration.
Because few such cases proceed to trial it was argued that claims assessors should be able to issue proceedings on behalf of their clients.
These claims were rejected and the rule that a solicitor be involved was seen as protecting the client who might otherwise be advised to settle too early or for too little to maximize the claims assessors' cash flow (Winn, 1968).
The Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 opens the monopoly to authorized litigators who are members of bodies approved by the machinery set up in Part II of the Act.
The Work of the Profession
This section focuses on solicitors since they remain the initial point of contact for those seeking legal services from the profession.
With some 15,500 outlets for their business, solicitors are likely to remain for some time the principal providers of legal services even if there is considerable expansion of alternatives to the use of solicitors for some legal work (The Law Society, 1990).
What follows is a description of a typical general practice, but this description should be set against the increasing stratification of legal practice in England and Wales.
For example, 60 per cent of all solicitors now practice in London, many doing commercial and financial services work for corporate clients in very large firms, some with over 400 lawyers in post.
Outside London, there has also been a trend towards larger practices seeking to soak up the commercial work which remains in the provincial cities of England and Wales.
Yet there are still large numbers of small, modestly supported and equipped practices.
These are where the ordinary citizen goes for the help of a lawyer.
The type of practice which the ordinary citizen is most likely to encounter is the partnership of between two and four solicitors, who will employ one assistant solicitor, one articled clerk (trainee solicitor), two legal executives and  seven clerical staff.
About half of all firms of solicitors fell within this profile, while about one in six firms have five or more partners (Benson Commission, 1979, vol. 2, Section 16).
The annual statistical surveys produced by The Law Society continue to show the predominance of the two to four solicitor partnership.
Only one in 25 practices has more than ten partners.
For many years solicitors' practices have employed non-lawyers to do professional work.
Formerly known as managing clerks, this body of employees has been known as legal executives since 1963 when the Institute of Legal Executives was established.
The Institute has worked hard to ensure recognition of the professional work done by such staff and operates its own qualification procedures.
Associates of the Institute must have served in a solicitor's office for three years and have passed four examination papers in law and Fellows must be over 25, have served eight years in a solicitor's office and have passed a further three examinations from a list of subjects offered by the Institute.
These three papers are said to be of the same standard as the six Law Society's finals papers.
There is no requirement that a person holds a qualification from the Institute in order to be employed as a legal executive.
It is estimated that over half the legal executives working in solicitors' practices hold no formal qualification in law at all.
The Royal Commission on Legal Services commissioned a survey into the use of lawyers' services and the matters upon which they consulted lawyers.
The survey did not include use of lawyers by business clients.
In so far as the typical client can be identified from the survey information, he is likely to be a male owner-occupier aged between 25 and 34 and be himself a member of the professional or employers and managers socio-economic group.
Incidence of lawyer use drops off dramatically for those over 45, for those renting their homes, and is markedly less for those from the skilled manual and own-account and semiskilled or unskilled manual socio-economic groups.
There was no significant regional variation in the incidence of lawyer use, despite earlier evidence of considerable regional variations in the concentration of solicitors (Foster, 1973b).
Table 1 Royal Commission on Legal Services survey on work of solicitors
Table 2 Podmore Survey on work of solicitors
The enquiry into matters about which the public had consulted lawyers in 1977 confirmed the generally accepted division of work by lawyers.
The results are set out in table 1.
The survey did not include work for the business client.
A different kind of survey conducted among 103 West Midlands practices showed that company and commercial advice and taxation advice often associated with the drafting of wills were regarded as important categories of work (Podmore, 1977).
The results are reproduced in table 2.
Firms were asked to rank categories of work on a seven point scale; from 0 representing ‘not important at all’ to 7 representing ‘extremely important’.
The Podmore survey indicated that on average 15 per cent of a practices' time would be taken up with company and commercial work.
The survey is perhaps also significant for the total absence of any importance being placed on welfare law work.
More recent surveys confirm these general findings (Chambers and Harwood, 1990).
Paying for Legal Services
The Basis of Charging and the Control of Fees
The income of solicitors and barristers in private practice comes from the fees paid by clients.
Solicitors and barristers in private practice are in business and must make a profit to survive.
This section will focus on solicitors' charges but will only consider them in outline.
There are two important distinctions to make: that between contentious and non-contentious business, and that between private payment of fees and legal aid.
Contentious business is work involving litigation, while non-contentious business is the rest of the solicitor's work of which the most important component will be conveyancing and probate work.
The broad basis of all private charges of fees is what is fair and reasonable having regard to the complexity of the  matter and its importance to the client.
This translates in reality into the use of time charging plus a mark-up for the profit element and for the care and conduct of the matter.
For the latter, half of one per cent of the value of the matter to the client is common.
Clients are often aggrieved by the size of the bill delivered at the conclusion of the business brought to the solicitor and, save perhaps recently for conveyancing work, advance estimates of total costs are not common.
There are three ways clients can challenge the fees charged.
First, they can always return to the solicitor to seek more details of the basis of charging; many bills are uninformative about this.
Secondly, they can require the solicitor to obtain a remuneration certificate from The Law Society to show whether the fees are fair and reasonable.
This involves the solicitor submitting full details of the transaction for consideration by The Law Society.
If the fees certified by The Law Society are lower than those in the bill, only the lower sum is recoverable by the solicitor.
No solicitor can sue for fees unless the client has been told about the remuneration certificate procedure.
The use of the procedure is free and the bill can only be lowered; it can never be increased.
At any time, even after requiring a remuneration certificate, the client may apply to a High Court taxing master for taxation of the bill.
Taxation is a formal process of verification of the fairness and reasonableness of the charges.
The applicant pays the costs of taxation if the bill is reduced by one-sixth or less.
Neither procedure is commonly used, but taxation is hardly used at all, which is not surprising in view of the costs risk.
The main recommendations of the Royal Commission, which found that three-quarters of all clients had no complaints about their bills, was that more information in writing should be given to clients about the basis of charges at the time the solicitor is first instructed.
Costs in contentious cases are more complicated because a successful party may normally recover some of the costs from the losing party.
In this context formal taxation of costs on the standard basis has a major role to play, though in minor cases costs may be agreed between the parties without the need for taxation.
Finally, in cases involving legal aid, legal aid rates are established by regulations and it will be these which determine the amount payable to the solicitor out of the Legal Aid Fund for work done whether contentious or non-contentious.
It is a breach of the legal aid regulations for a solicitor to receive money for fees from a client who is legally aided other than the contribution payable under the Green Form scheme.
Legal Aid
Fear of costs is one of the major inhibitions which prevents clients from consulting lawyers.
It is a fear which often arises out of ignorance, because for those on low to middle incomes, some assistance may be available under the various components of the legal aid scheme.
A number of choices were made on the introduction of legal aid after the Second World War, which have affected its development.
These might now be labelled ‘fundamental principles’ and it is  important to bear them in mind when looking at the limitations of the legal aid scheme (Pollock, 1975):
1
There should be free access to all courts within the jurisdiction and to legal services to make such access effective, including access to assistance which avoids the need to resort to litigation.
2
Persons receiving legal aid should make such contribution to the cost of legal services as they are deemed able to afford having regard to their resources.
3
Persons eligible for legal aid should have a free choice of lawyers and the services provided should be of the same quality as those available for fee-paying clients.
4
Lawyers offering legal services under the legal aid scheme must remain professionally independent.
5
Lawyers should be fairly and reasonably remunerated for work done under the legal aid scheme.
The obvious impact of these principles has been to graft the legal aid scheme onto the existing structure of private practice.
Persons within the scheme are provided with an indemnity against the cost of legal services subject only to the payment of the contribution.
The legal aid scheme developed over the decades as a means of paying for a lawyer in connection with litigation work.
Its impact has been greatest in personal injuries litigation and matrimonial proceedings and in the defence of those charged with serious criminal offences.
These aspects of the legal aid schemes were fully discussed in the parts of the book on the civil and criminal justice systems.
An attempt was made in the Legal Advice and Assistance Act 1972 (now consolidated in the Legal Aid Act 1988) to extend the scope of legal aid beyond the confines of civil and criminal litigation.
Since April 1973 the Green Form scheme has been available.
This is the simplest component of legal aid, but alterations and adjustments to it make it best to think of it as encompassing a number of different types of help.
Standard Green Form work is the basic part of the scheme.
Any person is entitled to ask for advice on any question of English law except one concerning conveyancing services, wills or a step in proceedings.
Those over 70 and certain other vulnerable groups are entitled to receive advice and assistance connected with wills.
The solicitor or some other member of the practice will conduct a simplified means test using a green form and a key card to determine financial eligibility.
If the client is happy to pay any contribution required, the solicitor is authorized to provide up to two hours of work.
The work which can be done is any work a solicitor normally does other than representation in a court or tribunal.
It is even possible for the solicitor to draft a submission for the client to present personally in a court or tribunal.
Obviously the time limit may not be enough to enable the solicitor to complete the client's business.
If this is so, the solicitor may seek an extension from the Legal Aid Board, who, if satisfied that there is a need to spend further money, will authorize further expenditure.
There is no limit to the number of different problems which can be taken to a solicitor  under the scheme.
In undefended divorce cases a higher initial time limit of three hours' work applies.
Assistance by way of representation (ABWOR) is best thought of as a simple and easily administered type of civil legal aid for particular types of litigation.
ABWOR covers certain civil litigation, but is administered on arrangements more like Green Form than civil legal aid.
Potentially ABWOR can be used for any proceedings.
Currently the main cases for which it is used are:
applications to the domestic panel of the magistrates' court for various kinds of matrimonial relief;
representation of parents in care proceedings;
applications to Mental Health Review Tribunals;
applications concerning certain prisoners before Prison Visitors.
If legal aid becomes available in other tribunals, ABWOR is almost certain to be the legal aid component used.
The intention behind the introduction of the Green Form scheme was to extend the range of services offered by solicitors which would be covered by legal aid.
Unfortunately this expectation has not been fulfilled.
Three-quarters of Green Form work is made up of advice on divorce and family matters and on criminal cases.
It is also often used to pay for the preliminary work involved in making applications for civil and criminal legal aid.
New ways of delivering legal advice and assistance are being explored by the Legal Aid Board including schemes which will franchise certain work to specific firms or agencies rather than making such advice available from any solicitor (Smith, 1989).
Looking at the legal aid scheme overall, it is clear that it offers nothing new in the system for the delivery of legal services.
The scheme is neatly dovetailed into the established system of private practice.
No attempt has been made to see the needs of legally aided clients as different from those of fee-paying clients.
Yet as we shall see in the next chapter, with poorer clients the problem is not simply one of providing lawyers for people who cannot afford them from their own resources.
For the areas of work traditionally offered by lawyers, the legal aid scheme provides very good coverage for the poor.
For the rich the cost of legal services is not a barrier to the use of lawyers.
But the legal aid financial limits all have cut-off points.
Income above the prescribed figures operates as a bar.
This has left a section of the community without effective access to legal services for expensive litigation.
A number of alternatives have been suggested.
The use of contingent fees, whereby lawyers recoup their fees from damages recovered but agree to accept no fee if the case is lost, have been rejected despite the ability to operate such schemes alongside legal aid and the English system of costs (White, Robin, 1978).
A limited version of the Scottish speculative fee is included in the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
Another alternative which is attracting increasing attention is the development of legal expenses insurances against such risks which has been welcomed and sponsored by The Law Society (White, Robin, 1984).
Complaining about Lawyers' Services
Key Distinctions
Following the Glanville Davies debacle, The Law Society completely revamped its complaints machinery in an effort to regain some credibility with the public.
But there remains a key distinction between complaints of negligence and of other deficiencies which determines whether The Law Society will investigate complaints.
The Law Society takes the view that the remedy for negligent work is to sue the negligent solicitor for compensation.
Because of difficulties experienced in the past over finding one solicitor prepared to take negligence actions against other solicitors, The Law Society has established Negligence Panels.
These are essentially lists of solicitors experienced in negligence claims, who will offer an initial one hour consultation free of charge.
There is also an arbitration scheme under which many negligence claims are settled.
The Solicitors Complaints Bureau
The creation of the Solicitors Complaints Bureau (SCB) in September 1986 was The Law Society's answer to critics of the complaints machinery.
The SCB has its own budget, appoints its own staff and operates from its own premises.
It runs as a quasi-autonomous organization.
The SCB is a convenient name to describe three elements involved in the consideration of complaints about solicitors: the staff of the Bureau, the Investigation Committee and the Adjudication Committee.
Most complaints are dealt with by staff of the Bureau.
Complaints can cover any aspect of the solicitor's work, excluding negligence.
It can include inadequate professional services or ‘shoddy work’ and the definition of this concept has proved to be a difficult one for the SCB.
Inadequate professional services are services which fall below an acceptable standard, but are short of negligent work.
The dividing line is a thin one.
The single largest cause of complaint is delay by solicitors in the handling of client matters.
Persons wishing to complain but who have difficulty in explaining their case will be put in touch with a solicitor on the Interview Panel, who will see the complainant and will help to put together the information needed for presentation to the SCB.
This service is free.
Once the complaint is received by the SCB, it is logged onto the computer and allocated to a section.
There an Investigation Officer will consider the documentation and decide whether the solicitor about whom the complaint has been filed has a case to answer within the powers of the SCB.
Those sending in inadequate documentation may be referred to a solicitor on the Interview Panel before the matter proceeds further.
If there appears to be a case to answer, the observations of the solicitor will be sought on the complaint.
In serious cases, the request for observations is accompanied by a warning that if disciplinary proceedings result from the investigation, the reply may be used in those proceedings.
A copy of the solicitor's reply is then sent to the complainant together with a comment from the Investigation Officer.
Sometimes complaints end at this point.
Where the complaint is of shoddy work, the solicitor's file is called for and is passed to an experienced report writer for detailed comment.
It is then vetted by a second report writer and if there is any divergence of view, the opinion of a third report writer will be sought.
The solicitor's observations are sought in any case where shoddy work is found and the solicitor can request further consideration by a review panel of practising solicitors.
A conclusion that the complaint reveals no evidence of shoddy work will be communicated to the complainant and solicitor, if necessary through a solicitor on the Interview Panel.
If the complainant remains unhappy about the conclusion, the file must be referred to the Investigation Committee, since in these circumstances only they can conclude the investigation.
Where the complaint of shoddy work is found to be substantiated, the Investigation Officer prepares a report on the case for the Adjudication Committee, who have the final power of decision.
Such cases will, however, first be considered by the Investigation Committee.
The Investigation Committee consists of eleven members of whom only four are solicitors.
The functions of the Investigation Committee are to review cases which the Investigation Officer wishes to terminate as not substantiated but the complainant does not and cases where the Investigation Officer is referring the file to the Adjudication Committee.
It has power to recommend further investigations.
The Investigation Committee also has a general monitoring function over the handling of complaints by the SCB.
The Adjudication Committee consists of 18 members: nine members drawn from The Law Society Council, three other solicitors and six lay members.
All the disciplinary powers of The Law Society have been delegated to the Adjudication Committee.
The Adjudication Committee can take a broad range of actions in relation to complaints: it can:
call for a file to investigate a complaint of misconduct or shoddy work;
order an inspection of a solicitor's accounts; in serious cases, intervene in a solicitor's practice to protect the interests of clients;
intervene to recover a particular item;
refuse, or impose conditions on, practising certificates;
prohibit a solicitor from taking an articles clerk;
control the employment of a solicitor who has been suspended from practice or struck off the roll of solicitors;
control the employment of solicitor's clerks;
order payment of interest on client's money;
order payments out of the Compensation Fund where a person has lost money as a result of a solicitor's dishonesty;
issue rebukes relating to solicitor's conduct;
require a solicitor to take specific action, such as compliance with an undertaking;
order a solicitor found guilty of shoddy work to remit fees, waive the right to fees, or to rectify a mistake at his or her own expense;
take disciplinary proceedings against a solicitor before the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal;
dismiss a complaint.
The Adjudication Committee is therefore the body with teeth.
In 1989 the SCB received 21,000 complaints.
Most were disposed of at the Investigation Officer stage, though an interesting innovation in 1989, which is to be extended nationally, is local conciliation by experienced solicitors designated as Local Conciliation Officers.
In 1989 the Adjudication Committee dealt with 2729 cases.
Complaints of shoddy work accounted for 345 cases; in 271 a financial penalty was imposed and in 49 no further action was taken (SCB, 1989).
Power is given in the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 to award compensation of up to £1000 to a client who has been the victim of shoddy work.
In December 1990 The Law Society announced a major reorganization of the SCB including the introduction of an appeals procedure.
Three divisions are to he established to deal with
conduct matters;
compensation and inadequate professional services;
and conciliation.
The current Adjudication and Investigation Committees will combine to become the Adjudication and Appeals Committee, split into sub-committees of two solicitors and one lay member each.
A policy advisory committee is established which will report annually to the Council of The Law Society.
The appeals procedure will be available to both complainants and solicitors.
The Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal
The Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal is wholly independent of The Law Society and its members are appointed by the Master of the Rolls.
The Tribunal sits in groups of three: two lawyer members and one lay member.
The principal function of the Tribunal is to determine applications in respect of solicitors relating to allegations of unbefitting conduct or breaches of the rules relating to professional practice, conduct and discipline.
Most applications are made by The Law Society through its Adjudication Committee, but it is open to anyone to make application to the Tribunal without recourse to The Law Society.
The Lay Observer also has power to make applications.
The penalties available to the Tribunal include striking a solicitor off the roll of solicitors, suspension from practice, the imposition of a money penalty not exceeding £5000, and payment of all or part of the costs of the application.
The Lay Observer
The Lay Observer, who must be neither a solicitor nor a barrister, is appointed  by the Lord Chancellor to consider the investigation of complaints about solicitors.
The Lay Observer makes an annual report to Parliament.
There are no more than about 300 complaints to the Lay Observer each year and it is rare for the Lay Observer to criticize The Law Society's handling of a complaint.
The Lay Observer has been replaced with a Legal Services Ombudsman with rather wider powers than the Law Observer under provisions contained in Part II of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
Complaints about Barristers
The Bar also has a complaints machinery, but it is less complex than that relating to solicitors.
Many of the complaints emanate from judges rather than members of the public and relate to conduct in court.
Complaints are investigated by the Professional Conduct Committee of the Bar, which considers a written report from a barrister who has been given the task of investigating the complaint.
Substantiated complaints may result in applications to the Bar Disciplinary Tribunal, which can disbar the barrister, suspend from practice, order to repay or forgo fees, or order various types of rebuke to be administered.