

1
The Saint, the Schoolboy and the Nun
He was, as a child, much obsessed with Holes.
Not common or garden holes, not those bodily orifices so absorbing to his contemporaries.
Not holes in the ground.
It was the holes in the universe that troubled Preston, the kind of holes that St Augustine wrote about.
Preston was familiar with the works of St Augustine, or, at least, more familiar than the majority of seven-year-olds, from the teaching of Mother Bernard to whom he went for catechism once a week.
There are holes in the essential goodness of the universe, St Augustine had written, through which Evil comes into the world.
This was an alarming concept to Preston.
He used to look out for them on his way to school and on his way home in the evenings.
But what could you do if you saw one, he used to wonder, who would you report it to?
And what form would the Evil take, as it came seeping through?
Would you know it if you saw it?
And who caused the holes to appear?
And what if it was all his fault?
Sometimes Preston felt that St Augustine had raised more problems than he had solved with his theory about the holes in the universe.
Of course, Preston did not spend all his time looking out for the holes.
He also had to watch out for the bears that pounced on you if you stepped on the lines in the pavement, and the killer bats that hung upside down in the shadows under the roof of the railway  arch, and the rats that came out of the cracks in the brickwork and infected you with their deadly diseases simply by breathing out into the same air that you breathed in.
Going to school and back was a hazardous operation for Preston.
He couldn't relax for an instant.
Sometimes he felt that it was only the power of his concentration that kept everything in order.
If he ever stopped concentrating the whole thing could collapse in chaos.
He used to think it would get better when he grew up.
But it didn't.
It got worse.
2
Devil Dog Eats Man, 36
Here is Preston Moody walking across the Common.
Shoulders hunched into the collar of his leather jacket, fists clenched inside the pockets, eyes little worry beads of suspicion.
Thus might some fretful merchant have ventured through the medieval forest, nerves braced for the sudden twang of bow strings, the murderous rush from ditch or thicket.
It is Sunday morning in the suburbs.
‘Mind the dog pooh,’ shouts Preston to the two children running heedless before him, though dog pooh, even here, where it thrives like fungus after rain, is the least of his worries.
Preston this dank October morn has encountered greater hazards and is prepared for more.
Mad dogs, mad cyclists, mad kids hurling sticks at conker trees and forgetting that what must go up must come down, or, more likely, not caring either way.
Mad model aeroplane enthusiasts practising ground attacks.
And a mad old wino shouting Fuck the Pope at a party of church-goers, unaware that they are Jehovah's Witnesses.
‘Mind the swings,’ shrieks Preston as his charges finally reach their goal and narrowly escape decapitation by one, propelled through the air by a boy who is old enough to be banned, or, if he is not, should be.
Mind the swings, mind the shit, mind the psychopaths, sadists and prowling malignants, mind the drunks who should never be allowed out on the road, mind the child molesters, torturers and Satanists, mind the mass slayers and maimers of innocent victims, mind the drunk drivers, mind the aeroplanes that fall from the sky and the ones that are aimed at you, MIND THE HOLES IN THE UNIVERSE, PRESTON, MIND YOU DON'T DROP THROUGH.
And here is William, medieval scholar, sitting on a park bench, a plaque on the back of which informs the enquiring public that it is dedicated to the memory of a Mrs C. M. Elliott who so loved…
Quite what is obscured by William's lanky, sprawling, untidy frame.
William's young son, Edwin, plays on the Adventure Playground nearby.
Edwin is named from the Anglo-Saxon ‘Eadwine’, meaning ‘prosperous friend’, but this is small comfort to him.
His own friends call him Ed when they are feeling kind and when they are not, Winnie.
His parents call him Pooh.
When he is old enough to have a say in the matter he will change his name to Jack.
In the space next to William on the park bench there is a Sunday newspaper, as yet unfolded.
William is reading a book entitled Rats, Lice and History .
He has read it before but he dips into it from time to time as a priest might consult the Bible in preparation for a sermon, or a poisoner Feltman's Toxicology in preparation for a murder.
There are probably other examples, but these are the two that most spring to mind while contemplating William on his park bench.
It is hard to say why, just something about him.
William knows the book practically by heart.
He is one of the country's leading authorities on medieval plague, in particular the Black Death of 1348, about which he has written numerous papers and articles in historical journals.
He reads Rats, Lice and History as a kind of reassurance, a reminder of basic principles, and also, sometimes, to deter people from sitting next to him in pubs or restaurants, or on park benches.
After a while, there being no apparent threat of this, he closes it with a sigh and selects the review section from the thick fold of newspaper beside him.
But he is in restless mood and his wandering eye, seeking distraction, is caught by the sight of an attractive woman walking beside the park lake.
She has shoulder-length blonde hair and wears an expensive-looking leather coat.
Even at this distance, and despite the coat, William can tell that she is quite slim.
William likes thin women.
Or, more precisely, and he likes people to be precise, and would be quite anxious not to be misunderstood, he is not overly fond of fat women.
He does not like spare flesh.
Big breasts hold no attraction for him.
His preferred mate would be a feminine version of himself, but William tries not to admit this, even to himself.
Indeed, he resists it.
His own wife is not thin.
He watches the woman by the lake.
She is not alone.
She is accompanied by a man and two children and two Labrador dogs.
They all look quite thin, even the dogs.
Fit.
A very happy-looking, together, fit, thin family.
See them laugh as they feed the ducks.
They are not actually a family, says the Demon inside William.
The woman is married to the man's best friend who is away on a business trip.
The man's wife is at home, preparing the Sunday lunch.
The children are not related; the boy is the woman's child, the girl the man's.
I'm not sure who owns the dogs, I'll come back to you later on that.
The man and the woman are lovers.
They have secretly wished to be lovers for years but the consummation of their affair is a recent event.
They are still in the first flush of passion.
And guilt.
Soon they will return to the man's house and have lunch with his wife.
The guilt will increase and the passion diminish.
But the affair will continue.
A few days before Christmas her husband will discover her adultery in a manner I will subsequently reveal to you, and in a fit of jealous rage he will push some sharp, thin instrument, a pen, perhaps, or a knitting needle, or a personalised automatic cocktail stirrer purchased from Global Inventions Inc. by mail order, up her left nostril, not to kill or maim, but merely to inflict some pain as a small, desperate expression of his own; pushing too far, however, he will accidentally pierce the brain.
She will become a vegetable in a wheelchair.
Her son, that small boy you see there, happily throwing his crusts at the waterfowl, will shortly afterwards contract some strange but deadly virus, possibly from the Labradors, and will lose the sight of both eyes.
The man, her lover…
But William has had enough.
He turns the voice off, a remedy still available to him, but for how long?
And looking round, disturbed by a vague presence at his left shoulder, encounters his friend.
Preston.
‘We used to meet in piano bars,’ said Preston, sulkily, flopping down beside William on the park bench.
‘Hi,’ said William, smiling.
‘Excuse me?’
Betraying, with both expressions, his American origins.
But perhaps only to Preston.
‘Piano bars,’ Preston repeated.
‘Don't pretend you don't remember.’
But was he pretending?
It was, after all, so long ago, and had anything ever happened there worthy of remembrance?
‘I mean, look at you,’ said Preston.
‘You don't even bother getting dressed any more.’
William, still smiling, shrugged.
An amiable punchbag.
He wore a baggy tracksuit with what looked like a jam stain down the front and egg yolk all down the sleeve.
And on his head a woollen ski hat with a bobble on top.
Preston found the bobble particularly vexing.
‘I mean, it's Sunday lunchtime,’ he said.
‘A few years ago we'd be down the piano bar listening to…’
He tried to remember what they used to listen to but the names that came were too embarrassingly ancient to be spoken in public, even to William.
Oh God, thought Preston, I'm only thirty-six and it's started already.
This is it, Middle Age, and it will go on like this for the next thirty-six years until, without any big deal, without even noticing probably, it will be Old Age and we'll still be sitting here.
Old friends Sat on their park bench Like book ends.
That was one of the songs.
Or perhaps that was earlier, surely, much earlier than piano bars, please.
Mrs C. M. Elliott who so loved.
Once upon a time.
Didn't we all.
‘You know, meeting all the crowd, cracking open another bottle of sparkling Saumur.
Now what do we do?’
He stared expressively in the direction of the climbing frames.
It was a mistake.
His small son, age five, was hanging from a steel bar eight or ten feet above the ground while William's, a year older, taunted him from a greater height and threatened to tread on his fingers to make him drop.
Don't scream, Preston disciplined himself, don't even shout.
He'll be all right, you don't want him growing up a wimp.
But what if he was hurt and Polly found out?
Would it be grounds for denying access?
The child dropped and Preston shot to his feet.
But Daniel was already up and climbing again, yelling abuse.
William appeared not to have noticed.
‘How are you?’ he said.
‘Fine,’ said Preston.
‘How are you?’
‘Fine,’ said William.
‘Good,’ said Preston.
One day, thought Preston, one glorious day when someone asks me how I am, I shall tell them.
I shall detain them with my Mariner's ancient, emaciated claw and give them the full works.
Thank you for your interest, comrade, sit down in the listening corner and I shall begin.
And an hour or two later I shall leave them feeling considerably older and wiser than they were when I started.
‘Newspaper?’ said William.
‘Pardon?’
‘Do you want a bit?’
Preston sighed and picked up the news section.
The front page contained nothing to lighten his mood.
‘Another jogger savaged to death by Rottweilers,’ he commented with grim satisfaction.
‘That makes five this month.’
William looked vaguely perturbed.
Preston read on with mounting rage and dismay.
‘If you think a Rottweiler is going to attack you, it's no good staring at it like you do with other dogs.
Apparently staring doesn't work with Rottweilers.
If you stare at a Rottweiler it thinks you are challenging it and goes for you immediately, knocking you down and tearing your throat out.
‘The only chance you've got, it says here, is to run towards it waving your arms and shouting.’
His voice was hoarse with incredulity.
'’ This may fool it into thinking you are not afraid and therefore more powerful than it is.’‘
He thought about this for a moment.
‘Imagine running at one of those things, shouting and waving your arms.
They can weigh up to eighteen stone, it says, of solid muscle.’
He read to himself for a few minutes while William perused the review section, but his agitation could not long be contained in silence.
‘Good God,’ he said.
‘Apparently Rottweilers aren't the real problem.
According to this, the real problem is cocker spaniels.
There are more attacks on humans by cocker spaniels than any other species of canine.
’’ Cocker spaniels,’'he quoted, '’become overwhelmed with an Avalanche of Rage.
It only lasts seconds and then they are overwhelmed with a Wave of Remorse.’
‘Fat lot of good that is,’ he observed, ‘if they've chewed your balls off in the meantime.’
He turned the pages morosely in search of further confirmation of his own apocalyptic view of the world.
You could usually trust journalists to come up with something.
‘Listen to this,’ he enthused, when he found it.
‘There's a bloke here, junior minister of something or other, urging old people to cut fuel costs and keep warm by dressing up in newspapers.’
William was mildly sceptical.
‘I'm not kidding,’ Preston assured him.
‘He says they should save old newspapers because, I quote, ‘folded up tight they make good logs for the fire and,in extremis ’— that's what he says, the fucker,in extremis —‘they make better insulation than wool.’‘
He shook his head in sheer admiration.
‘I bet that's cheered a lot of old dears up,’ he said.
‘I bet that's given them a real sense of purpose.
They're probably really looking forward to winter now they know that.
They'll be pitching out their Agas all over the country.
There'll be over-sixties’ clubs planning wild parties on the money they're going to save.’
He folded the newspaper carefully, but not tight enough to make a log.
‘They get it from my Auntie Ethel,’ he said.
‘Excuse me?’
‘You must remember my Auntie Ethel.’
Even if he had forgotten piano bars.
‘Remember her political theories?
What she'd do to the unions, dole scroungers, the unemployed?
How she'd eliminate Socialism, Inflation and the Wrong Element?
We used to laugh at her then.
Government policy now, most of it.
You know all those government think-tanks?
They're just cover for my Auntie Ethel.’
He indicated the headline.
‘This is one of hers.
She's got a thing about newspapers.
Don't you remember, she used to make me wear them in my shoes to go to school when it was raining?
It worked, too.
I could hardly walk but it kept my feet dry.
Once she showed me how to fold one to make a club.
In case of attack by footpads.’
William shook his head.
‘Your Auntie Ethel,’ he said.
William was Preston's oldest friend.
He was not the friend Preston might have picked for that distinction had there been any rivals in the field.
If all Preston's childhood friends had lined up against a wall, as when they were waiting to be picked for football, Preston would most likely have left William to pretty near the end and then put him at left back, or somewhere he would do the least damage to his own side.
That little devil Billy Quirk, Preston's Auntie Ethel used to call him.
Or, simply, Trouble.
Hello, Trouble , she'd say.
And it was a fact that William and Preston together led to more trouble than Preston alone, or Preston and any combination of other boys.
And now he was so respectable.
And solid.
And safe.
Just what Preston wanted, in his current state of vulnerability, with every nerve raw from the break-up of his marriage and all that had contributed to it.
Preston needed an old friend, like he sometimes needed nursery food after a disappointment, or a hangover, and William was the only one left lined up against the wall.
Good old William.
So why this lingering unease?
What childhood skeletons rattled so disturbingly in their cupboards?
Preston knew, if he cared to think about it.
But he didn't.
Let them rattle away, so long as no one opened the door.
William gave up trying to read the book reviews and stood up, revealing that Mrs C. M. Elliott so loved watching the children play.
And died of hypothermia, Preston surmised, because she didn't have enough newspapers shoved up her vest.
‘Better be on our way,’ said William.
‘Lunch should be ready.’
3
The Freed Killer
Here is Kate in the kitchen chopping carrots.
Chop, chop, chop.
Chopping as if she really means it, the sharp knife hacking through the orange flesh, the bits flying, almost as if it is something personal.
It is.
Kate is William's wife.
And she is not happy.
She is in fact extremely irritated, and the carrots help, in some measure, to alleviate this, but not enough.
Kate feels put upon, a not uncommon sensation.
She is trying to figure out why she is here in the kitchen preparing the Sunday lunch while William is on the Common with the Sunday papers and their child.
It is not, after all,her friend who is coming to lunch.
She knows that if she had pointed this out to William, and expressed her own wish to take child, and papers, to the Common, William would obligingly have offered to stay at home and chop carrots and peel potatoes and keep an eye on the lamb in the oven.
But this does not make her feel less irritated.
Because Kate also knows that if this had happened she would have returned from the Common an hour or so later to find the carrots unchopped, the potatoes unpeeled and the lamb burned.
And William standing in the middle of the kitchen looking pained and vaguely apologetic, and a reference book on Deaths among Rural Clergy during the Black Death lying recently discarded on an armchair.
Of course, Kate could have shrugged and let him stew in his own juice, or lack of it.
She could have taken herself off to the local Italian with her child and a book of her own, for Kate also likes reading though her tastes are less morbific.
But Kate is not made that way.
Kate is a socialist.
Kate cares.
That is the advantage William has over her.
Kate will always care enough to make sure the fridge is full of food and the airing cupboard full of clean linen and the beds changed regularly and the carpets swept and the dishes washed and the lunch cooked and the rats and the lice and the assorted nasties consigned to the dustbin of history.
This is what is so irritating.
Kate knows that deep down it is all her fault .
A more ruthless woman would have sorted William out long ago.
A more ruthless woman would have let the whole place slide into chaos until he learned to do things for himself.
Except that he probably wouldn't even have noticed.
And she would.
This is the disadvantage of being well brought up.
William and Kate have been married for nine years and known each other for sixteen.
They met when they were both at university.
She was attracted to him partly by the little-boy-lost quality which she now finds so infuriating.
That puppy-dog expression of one who has been up to mischief and is worried you will find out but knows you will forgive him anyway.
She knows a lot of men like that and has heard of more, but it does not reconcile her to having one herself.
She sighs, but peeling the taters is having its usual calming effect.
Kate likes taters.
There is something about taters, something deeply satisfying, even in the peeling of them.
Kate puts this down to the peasant in her.
Kate's family came over from Ireland a long time ago and their closest contact to the soil is the odd spot of weekend gardening, but Kate associates closely with the dispossessed peasantry of old Ireland, and anywhere else for that matter, and taters brings out the culchie in her.
One day soon when she has a garden again, she will plant taters of her own, whole rows of them.
In the meantime she must Plan.
Something must be done about William, and soon.
William had better watch out.
As an historian  he should know that peasants, when pushed too far, have been known to revolt.
‘Toxicara canis ,’ said Preston, profoundly.
‘Excuse me?’ said William, poised over the carrots, sugar-glazed and dripping as Kate likes them.
‘That's the name of the worm I was telling you about,’ said Preston, ‘the one that lives in canine excreta.
Apparently the soil of every park and common in the city is infected with it.
Hundreds of children go blind from it every year.’
William glanced up at him sharply.
‘Do they?’
It seemed to remind him of something.
‘Is that so?’
His expression took on its normal abstracted, slightly troubled, look.
‘Do you think we can change the subject,’ said Kate, sweetly, ‘while we're eating?’
‘Sorry,’ said Preston.
‘It's just that you do get rather obsessive about them in the city.
I'm not against dogs in the country at all.
I quite like them there.
Like sheep and cows and…’
He sought desperately for other examples, but the best he could come up with was, ‘Things.’
‘Ah, the country,’ said Kate.
It was a small poisoned dart aimed at William, but if it went in there was no visible sign of agitation.
‘Do you miss it?’ enquired Preston, politely.
Hens, he thought, geese, turkeys, pigs…
It all came back once he began to think about it.
He hoped Kate wasn't offended.
He rather thought of Kate as a country person.
He could easily imagine her in wellies with a basket of grain or something, throwing it about the yard for Things to peck at.
Not William, though.
‘Sometimes,’ said Kate.
‘Days like this I do.
Are you with us, darling?’ she enquired of William, watching with interest as his mind returned, startled, from whatever journey it had been on, the glazed eyes focusing, with puzzlement at first, then dawning recognition.
It took the merest instant, but as a process it never ceased to fascinate her.
She used to wonder where he'd been in the meantime, but not any more.
She'd given up.
‘Carrots?’ he said.
‘More lamb?’
Kate sighed.
‘It'll be better when we get-our own place,’ she told Preston, ‘and our own things around us.’
The move from a fenland cottage to a rented London flat had been far too abrupt for Kate, and she was sufficiently self-aware to acknowledge that this was a large factor in her current sense of alienation.
Yet, like so many other things she later regretted, it had been her own decision.
She could have stayed on in the country, until they found a place of their own, or even permanently, with William coming back at weekends.
But within a few weeks of William's appointment she had applied to three different London boroughs for a job — any job — in social work, taken the first one she'd been offered, fixed up the flat, put the cottage on the market, found a school for Edwin, and fled from the last five years of her life with almost indecent haste.
Panic, that's what it was.
The feeling that if William went now, by himself, and she stayed, that would be it.
And she wasn't ready for that.
Not quite.
Not yet.
She had to give it at least one more try.
‘Well, it's good to see you,’ said Preston.
‘I missed you both.’
Kate smiled but inwardly doubted.
They had seen little of Preston in recent years.
He and Polly and the twins had been to stay at the cottage once, that was all, for a weekend.
She had found him a bit too inclined to enthuse, like a tourist visiting some primitive culture, while Polly was ‘tense’.
But she felt sorry for him now.
There was a look about him, as if he'd recently returned from the Front.
So she smiled and said, ‘Well, it will be good to see some of our old friends again.
You tend to get a bit buried in the country.’
She felt a small tug in the maternal breast which she knew she must resist.
The wounded-bird or stray-cat syndrome.
It was strong in Kate and she knew if she was not careful she would be offering him refuge, sorting out his problems, arranging his life for him.
She was aware, too, that certain couples tend to acquire single men like Preston, or women for that matter, like pets, almost as a kind of catalyst for their own uneasy, brittle relationships.
She was not sure she really wanted to acquire Preston just yet.
‘William said you've started a new job, too,’ she said.
He looked surprised.
‘Me?
No.’
William spoke.
‘You said you'd been transferred.’
‘Oh, that.
That was some time ago now.
I moved from Women to God,’ he explained to Kate.
She nodded sagely, but was in fact unenlightened.
He realised the ambiguity and laughed, shaking his head, as if at some private, bitter joke.
‘I mean programmes,’ he said.
‘I used to do women's programmes but I was moved to the God slot.
As a kind of punishment.’
Preston was one of the few male friends William had who did not teach at a university.
He was a television producer at the BBC.
But she wasn't sure what that meant exactly.
‘The God slot?’
‘Religious programmes.
I produce them.
Well, some of them.
I don't know why we still call it the God slot.
We spend most of our time trying to pretend it's not about God at all.
In case people switch off.
God hardly gets a look in.
We try and slip him in on the sly when we think we've got them hooked.
I'm doing the Devil at the moment.’
‘Satan, you mean?’
William was momentarily deflected from his frenetic attack on the meat and two veg, which was doubtless how he described it to himself.
William normally ate as if food were some sort of obstacle between him and the next vital task, an obstacle which had to be demolished in as short a time as possible.
Then, when he had finished, he would sit there, fidgeting, until everybody else had.
Kate, who enjoyed the ritual of eating as much as the food itself, had been known to find this irritating, also.
‘Same thing isn't it?’ said Preston.
‘Satan.
The Devil.’
‘No.’
William assumed what Kate thought of as his tutorial manner.
‘There's lots of other devils.
Or different versions of the Devil.
But I thought you meant Satan, people usually do.
What are you doing about him?’
‘Oh, you know, how he became part of popular mythology, what he's supposed to represent…
I've only just started on it.’
He felt embarrassed, suddenly.
‘Interesting,’ said William.
‘People should know more about devils.’
‘Why?’ demanded Kate.
It came out more aggressively than she had intended.
They both looked at her.
Then William shrugged and said, ' 'Cos it's interesting, that's all,’ and picked up his fork again.
But Preston felt constrained to answer.
‘Well, if Satan is the opposite of God it seems to me that we know very much less about him, and yet, his works are rather more evident, don't you think?’
‘His works?’
‘I mean, wars, famine, disease…’
‘You seriously think they're caused by the Devil?’
‘Who do you think causes them?’
William joined in again, rather abruptly, as if he wanted a fight about it.
But Kate didn't.
It would be like arguing about fairies, she thought, and while that might appeal to William, as an academic exercise, it certainly didn't to her.
Kate had been brought up as what her father called ‘a healthy heathen’, or at least as much of one as the English state school system would allow.
Neither of her parents were church-goers and her father had so far lapsed from his native Catholicism as to despise and detest ‘the whole primitive priestly caboodle’, as he called it.
‘Give me a child at seven,’ he'd mock, ‘and I'll fill its head with so much gibberish and superstition I'll have it scared of its own shadow for the rest of its life.’
He was a deeply pragmatic man, a doctor with a group practice in a Midlands market town, and Kate was, in most things, her father's daughter.
She spent the greater part of her working life trying to understand people's needs, but the need for a God who would comfort and console and right wrongs — in the next life if not in this — although she might understand it, was something she could not uphold.
Belief in supreme beings of whatever creed or breed seemed to Kate to constitute an evasion of personal responsibility.
Belief in some prancing horned beast who conjured up all the mischief in the world strained her tolerance to the limit.
‘The Devil's greatest success has been in persuading people  he doesn't exist,’ William was saying.
‘In the Middle Ages he was just as real as God was.
People saw them as two opposing dynasties, with their courtiers and generals and secret agents, and even jesters…’
Kate sighed and reached for the wine.
‘Everything had an opposite, you see.
Every force for Good was matched by a force for Bad.
God and Satan.
Jesus, Lord of Heaven, and Beelzebub, Lord of the Flies.
The Holy Ghost and Dagon, the Devil's almoner…’
This could go on a long while, Kate thought.
She inclined her ear to the opposite end of the table in the hope of more mature conversation, but the disease had spread…
‘What kind of ghost?’
Edwin was enquiring.
‘The Holy Ghost,’ said Anna, with disturbing authority.
‘What's that?’
‘It's a kind of bird,’ said David, learnedly, ‘like a kind of pigeon what can do magic.’
Where did they get it from?
Preston?
School?
Surely not Polly…
She'd have to have a debriefing session with Edwin when they'd gone.
She began to clear up plates.
‘…
Asmodeus, the Devil's banker’— William was still working his way through the forces of Good and Evil —‘who was also the Maker of Bad Marriages…’
‘And when it speaks,’ said Daniel, ‘flames come out of its mouth.’
‘What about when it poohs?’ asked Edwin, who knew anything to do with pooh usually got a laugh.
It did this time, too.
Oh the joy of dining, thought Kate, the flowing wine, the flowing wit.
The taters.
She carried the empty plates out into the kitchen.
‘How's things at home?’
William enquired of Preston, over coffee in the sitting room.
‘Home?’
Preston looked puzzled.
‘I meant with your mum and Auntie Ethel,’ said William hastily.
‘Oh.
That home.
Fine.’
He considered.
‘At least I think it is.
I haven't been back since I told them about me and Polly.
Couldn't  take the tight lips and the heavy sighs whenever they looked at the twins.’
‘I was up there last week,’ said William.
There was something in his tone, something a little too carefully casual, that put Preston on his guard.
‘Oh yes?’ he said, warily.
‘Everything all right?’
‘Oh, fine.’
That word again.
‘Mum's doing all right for herself — with the shop.
Grandad seemed a bit down, though.’
One of the few but important things Preston and William had in common as children was the dominant role of women in their lives.
They had both lost their fathers in the same year, Preston's having fallen victim to leukaemia, William's to the charms of Another Woman, and this had left William's grandad as the only adult male presence in both households.
He was a big, shambling, shy man, more than a little soured by life, but he had taken the two boys under his wing and Preston had loved him.
He felt a sharp twinge of guilt now for not taking the trouble to visit, but William's family had moved to a better neighbourhood when William's mum had made her first million, and Preston had gradually lost touch.
‘What's the matter with him?’ he asked.
He had frozen the image of William's grandad in his late fifties, but he must be nearer eighty now.
‘Oh, he's fit enough, for his age, just a bit morose, that's all.’
An uncomfortable pause while he sat forward on the sofa holding his coffee cup in both hands and gazing into it as if he was waiting for some kind of chemical reaction.
‘He keeps going on about the murder.’
He looked up at Preston then and it was Preston who looked away.
One of the cupboard doors had creaked open and he didn't want to see inside.
‘It must be nearly thirty years ago,’ he objected.
‘Twenty-five,’ said William.
‘We were nine or ten at the time.
Remember?’
Preston said nothing, but he remembered.
‘He keeps on about Barry Moxton,’ said William, ‘and how he must be out of prison now…’
And the door was wide open and the bones rattling away in the shadows.
‘He must have been let out years ago,’ said Preston.
‘What's a life sentence these days?
Fifteen years?’
‘I had a feeling he'd been committed to an asylum.
For the criminally insane.
They can keep them in there for ever.’
Preston shrugged, trying to cast off the memory.
‘Well, I don't know what happened to him.
I haven't given him a thought for years…’
It was almost true.
‘What made your grandad worry about that all of a sudden?’
‘I don't know,’ said William.
‘Probably just his age.’
Kate came back from the kitchen and the ghosts cringed back into their corners.
Preston glanced at his watch.
‘I suppose I'd better be going then.’
‘I'll walk with you across the Common,’ offered William.
But Preston wasn't going back across the Common.
His time was up.
‘I'm going straight to Polly's,’ he said, ‘with the kids.’
Polly's , he thought.
Formerly known as Home.
4
The Beast of the Underground
Preston took the tube to Polly's, an experience which the twins anticipated with rather more enthusiasm than he.
Preston did not like the tube.
Awful things happened to people on the tube.
Preston had read the headlines.
He'd seen the movie.
It was one of those Made-in-the-Fifties horrors bought up in bulk by the television studios to show in the early hours of the morning to night-workers and insomniacs like Preston, and it pandered to all his worst fears and fantasies about the London underground.
It opened with a lone commuter waiting for a train late at night.
He begins to pace restlessly up and down the platform, his pacings taking him nearer and nearer to the tunnel at the end.
He peers down it irritably, then with hope.
Is that a noise?
Is it a train?
It is a noise.
But not a train.
It is the noise of a foul and loathsome beast which emerges from the tunnel and drags him screaming into the darkness and eats him alive.
For those who stayed with the film, like Preston, it turned out that the underground was infested with such creatures.
They had once been commuters themselves but they had waited so long for trains they had taken to living permanently in the tunnels, skulking in the darkness by day and emerging late at night to devour unwary travellers.
Preston thought this a bit far-fetched, but only a bit.
He was prepared to believe almost anything of the London underground.
Only last week one of the ‘free’ newspapers which regularly infested his hallway had reported a spate of knife attacks by gangs  who ‘worked’the lines, preying on travellers late at night and early in the morning, robbing them of their valuables and occasionally, to relieve the monotony, stabbing them to death.
This seemed to Preston only a degree or so less deplorable than a tube system inhabited by ghouls.
It seemed to Preston that if you avoided being stabbed to death by terror gangs, you stood an even chance of being burned to death by sudden conflagration, or pushed on to the live line by a psychopath lurking among the rush-hour crowds, or struck down by a heart attack brought on by the extreme rage and frustration of trying to understand a platform announcement.
Preston avoided travelling by tube as much as possible, but sometimes it was forced upon him.
Part of the ‘deal’ struck in the course of his recent marital separation was for Polly to keep the family car.
Preston normally travelled by bicycle or, if he was really pushed, bus.
But the former was impossible with the twins in tow and the latter unthinkable given the length of time he'd have to wait for one on a Sunday.
He briefly considered lashing out on a taxi, but only briefly.
The current state of Preston's finances put taxi rides across London among the long list of temptations he would have to put behind him for a while.
He marched the twins in the direction of the nearest station and prepared for a long, boring wait.
Preston had a long association with railway stations.
His own name had been inspired by a brief interlude at Preston station in Lancashire where his parents had changed trains one Sunday afternoon on their way to Blackpool for their honeymoon.
They had ‘liked the sound of it’.
Preston, who didn't, sometimes wondered if there was more to it than that and he'd actually been conceived there, in the waiting room of some remote platform or in the empty carriage of some forgotten train.
It was hard to imagine, but then he couldn't imagine his mother Doing It anywhere.
She herself, when pressed, indignantly refuted the suggestion.
If copulation had indeed been the cause of Preston's subsequent arrival on this earth, and she was far from admitting the connection, it had more than likely occurred in the seaside boarding house that was their eventual destination.
‘But we couldn't very well call you Blackpool, could we?’ she had remarked once to Preston with somewhat suspect logic.
Preston might have preferred to have been called Blackpool, all things considered.
Blackpool Moody had a certain ring to it.
People might have thought he was a blues singer in an American jazz band.
But, whatever the truth of the matter, this pre-natal adventure had done little to increase Preston's regard for stations as an institution.
He viewed them universally as dismal, dirty, draughty places where unpleasant incidents frequently occurred, especially on Sundays.
He was marginally cheered by a sign near the ticket barrier warning that Dogs Must Always Be Carried On Moving Escalators.
‘Otherwise,’ an authoritative hand had inscribed, in Biro, below, ‘they can get their paws ripped off.’
This seemed to explain one of the few advantages of the underground network to Preston — the fact that it was comparatively free of Rottweilers and pit bull terriers.
Doubtless the prospect of carrying eighteen stone of solid muscle and jaw up a moving escalator was something of a disincentive.
Though given the number of escalators actually working it probably wouldn't be for long.
Preston tried to keep his fears from the twins but he also kept them as far from the edges and ends of the platform as he possibly could in case of beast attacks.
He wished William hadn't told him about Barry Moxton.
He'd almost forgotten about him.
But no, that wasn't true.
Barry Moxton had been lurking there all the time, just below the surface of his consciousness, waiting to spring out at him.
He peered uneasily down the dark tunnel at the end of the platform and remembered something else from their past: Mother Bernie and her holes in the universe, the holes that let the Evil in.
William used to go to Mother Bernie, too.
They used to go there together, on Saturday mornings, or Thursdays, after school.
For catechism.
It was another one of their common inheritances.
They were both Catholics in a world of black Proddy dogs.
Preston Moody and Billy Quirk.
United in adversity, if in little else.
The  shared misfortune of an alien religion, a fatherless family, and a peculiar name.
Education had been the final tie that bound them, and forever parted them from their contemporaries.
And now William was the last surviving friend of his childhood and they met as dissidents who have escaped the Gulag but left their roots behind and need each other to share the memories.
Or was it to exorcise them?
The arrival of the train recalled Preston to more immediate concerns.
He shepherded the twins aboard without losing either of them down the gap and found seats for them in the same row.
So far, so good.
Now to keep them occupied for the journey.
He drew their attention to the route map on the opposite wall and set them to counting how long it took between stops, a favourite exercise that was considered by the twins to be the height of intellectual prowess but risked serious brain damage to everyone within hearing distance.
Preston sought anaesthesis in the colour supplement he had brought with him and was distracted for a while by a feature on Great Journeys undertaken or contemplated by the Rich and the Famous.
None of them seemed to include the tube in their itineraries, but there was some useful advice on how to secure the best berths on a Nile river cruiser and an interesting complaint about the lack of leg room on Concorde which assured him that the R and the F of this world had to contend with life's little niggles just like everybody else.
He was startled out of this sombre reflection by the sudden awareness that something was Not Quite Right.
He detected it at once.
The counting had stopped.
The train was still moving between stations but the twins seemed to have lost all interest in knowing how long it took and relaying this information to the rest of the carriage.
Instead they were staring with considerable fascination at a fellow traveller who was reclining, fortunately with his back turned, a few seats down from them.
He wore a black leather jacket heavily embossed with metal studs and his legs, which were stretched out into the aisle, were wrapped in an assortment of rags and torn denim.
But the feature which Preston knew had so captivated the twins was the great crest of  plumage rising from the centre of his otherwise shaven skull and gelled into sharp canary yellow spikes.
Preston, whose coming of age had coincided with the New Wave, mentally categorised him as a Punk and, therefore, Harmless.
Punks were not normally aggressive, and though he adhered to his normal practice of avoiding eye contact in public places he was fairly relaxed about them.
But apparently the twins had never seen anything like this before.
Anna tugged at his sleeve to bring Preston's ear nearer to her mouth and enquired in a stage whisper, ‘Daddy, is it a bird?’
Preston was amused.
He appreciated that the literature favoured by the twins made little distinction between people and animals.
‘Yes,’ he whispered back.
‘It's a chicken.’
‘What did he say?’
Daniel wanted to know.
‘He said it's a chicken,’ Anna replied, matter-of-factly, and in a voice loud enough to carry.
Preston, now less amused, shushed her urgently.
A small black lady smiled indulgently from the opposite seat.
She wore a large white straw hat and looked as if she'd just been to church.
The train slowed down as it reached the next station and the Punk stood up and came down the aisle towards them.
The crest of hair added about a foot to his height but he was no shrimp without it.
His leather jacket was adorned with the face of a screaming woman symbolising, according to the caption below, Chaos, and his own blunt and pitted features suggested to Preston not so much those of a bird as of a pit bull terrier with acne.
Preston was aware that the twins were taking in all this with wonder and admiration, and as the Punk drew level with their seat, Daniel remarked in a reverent but not hushed tone:
‘BIG chicken.’
The Punk stopped.
Preston froze.
Eye contact became unavoidable.
‘Did ‘e call me a fucking chicken?’ the Punk enquired.
It wasn't really a question but Preston corrected him, politely.
‘A big chicken,’ he said, smiling what he hoped was a disarming smile.
‘He didn't mean to be rude.
He prefers chickens to people, actually.’
This did not go down as well as he might have hoped.
The doors shut and the train began to move out of the station.
‘You made me miss me stop, you fucker,’ said the Punk.
Preston began seriously to question his information on the non-violent nature of the beast.
‘Now look…’ he began.
He had a number of set speeches which he frequently rehearsed for such occasions.
The content varied according to the imagined circumstances but it invariably contained the information that he was a magistrate, an exponent of the martial arts, or someone who had recently been diagnosed as HIV positive and would have no hesitation in biting if attacked.
In one version he combined all three.
But before he could select the right tone and story-line for these particular circumstances, there was a diversion.
The small, elderly lady opposite leant forward and poked the aggressor in the thigh with a delicately gloved forefinger.
‘Don't you be using words like that in front of them children,’ she instructed him fiercely.
‘You oughta be shamed.’
Preston stared at her with mingled hope and alarm.
On the one hand he was glad of an ally; on the other he would have preferred someone a bit more the Punk's size.
He looked around the carriage to see if there were reinforcements to hand, but it did not look promising.
If there was anyone large, male and under sixty, he was hiding under the seats.
When he looked back, the Punk had taken the woman's straw hat off and looked as if he might be about to eat it.
Preston realised he would have to Take Action.
He was not, in fact, an exponent of the martial arts, but for a few short but character-forming weeks during a university summer vacation he had boxed a kangaroo called Cobber in a travelling circus.
He had never been able to hit the animal but he knew how to throw a punch, and the Punk wasn't such a good mover as Cobber.
What he hadn't counted on was how much it hurt.
5
Polly and the Tube Hero
‘Where on earth have you been?’ demanded Polly when she opened the front door.
I've been worried sick.’
Preston raised his bandaged wrist in its sling.
‘Sorry,’ he said.
‘Had an accident.
Tried to ring you but couldn't get to a phone.’
‘Daddy had a fight with a chicken,’ Daniel announced proudly.
‘Then the police came and took it away,’ said Anna, ‘and we all went to hospital.’
‘Preston,’ said Polly, when she came down from putting the twins to bed and in a tone he had come to recognise over the years.
‘Polly,’ he said, smiling the same kind of disarming smile that had failed to disarm the Punk.
Polly appeared to be no more susceptible, but then his expectations had not been high.
He was suspicious of her motives in inviting him into the house — he usually got no further than the front doorstep.
It was possible, of course, that she wanted to dispense tea and sympathy, but he had his doubts.
They were quickly confirmed.
‘I'm sorry, Preston,’ she said, ‘but I just don't think you're behaving very responsibly at the moment.’
‘Oh, I don't know,’ said Preston.
He pointed out quite reasonably that defending an old lady from assault on a tube train could conceivably be described as extremely responsible behaviour and doubtless would be by most right-thinking members of society, Polly's opinion notwithstanding.
‘But what if he'd had a knife?’ she said.
Preston shrugged, as one did who had just single-handedly dispatched a Beast who Rode the Underground.
He could see the headline now: ‘TUBE HERO FLOORS MUGGER’.
‘I mean, you've got the twins to think about,’ Polly insisted.
‘Couldn't you have talked your way out of trouble like most people with any sense?’
‘I was thinking about the twins,’ protested Preston.
‘And I did try to talk my way out of trouble.
I only hit him when the situation looked like getting out of hand.’
‘And look what happened.’
Polly pointed triumphantly at the sling.
‘All right, I sprained my wrist,’ Preston admitted, ‘but you should have seen the other bloke.’
The other bloke was being sat on by three other passengers, including the little old lady in the straw hat, while Preston hopped around moaning and clutching his wrist, but he did not tell Polly this.
He was rather proud of the Punch that had floored the Punk, and he wasn't having Polly make mock of it.
‘I'm not saying you shouldn't have hit him,’ said Polly patiently, who was, after all, the daughter of a trained killer (Squadron Leader, RAF, Ret.) and not unduly given to pacifism.
‘Maybe you didn't have much choice in the matter, but you do have a habit of getting into situations like this, don't you, Preston?’
Preston denied this with some zest, pointing out that it was the first time he'd thrown a punch at anyone since his days in the ring with Cobber the kangaroo.
‘I don't mean fighting,’ said Polly.
‘I mean situations.’
Preston decided not to pursue the subject.
He knew that if pressed to give examples Polly could, and would, produce a long and depressing list, complete with times, places and personalities involved.
He sighed and looked at his watch.
Twenty-five past nine.
And he'd meant to watch the God slot.
‘Anyway,’ said Polly, ‘that's not what I wanted to talk to you about.’
She sat down opposite him at the kitchen table and fixed him with the kind of look that usually preceded a full eighteen-round contest.
‘How's the wrist?’
‘Oh, fine,’ said Preston, surprised.
‘Well, it's…’
‘Not hurting?’
‘No, no…they said it might later, but…’
‘Good,’ said Polly, with satisfaction, as if she needn't worry now about pulling any punches.
‘Well, what I wanted to talk to you about is this flat of yours.’
‘Oh?’
Preston was momentarily relieved.
‘I mean, when are you going to get yourself a decent place to live?’
‘Ah.’
‘I mean, you can live where and how you like, it's no business of mine, but there's the children to think about.’
The relief evaporated and was replaced with a profound anxiety.
‘Anna says it's filthy.
She says there's no carpets on the floor or anything.
And there's no garden.’
Bloody women, Preston thought.
And she was only five.
‘And you know how particular Daniel is about the bathroom.
He says it's absolutely freezing in there, and there's hardly ever any hot water.’
‘The guyser ‘s a bit temperamental…’
Preston began.
‘The geezer?’
‘I think that's what I mean.
The thing you light and it heats the water up.’
‘Good God, I thought those things went out with the ark.
They're very dangerous, Preston, don't you know?
They blow up on people.
Haven't you got a boiler — central heating?
What kind of place is this?
Daniel says it's the kind of place poor people live.’
‘The little shit,’ said Preston.
‘Preston.’
Polly reproved him sharply.
Preston modified his tone.
‘It's only temporary,’ he wheedled.
‘Until I buy somewhere.’
‘It's been temporary for six months now.
You haven't spent the mortgage money, have you?’
This stung.
As compensation for Polly's keeping the house, Preston had received the sum of twenty thousand pounds to put down on a  small flat.
Not wishing to live in south Durham and commute daily, this had presented something of a problem for him.
‘I'm not asking you to buy a palace,’ said Polly.
‘But if you could just find somewhere they'd feel a bit more comfortable, that's all.
You've just got to get your act together.
Go and look in cheaper areas.’
‘Yes, well, I'd already crossed Belgravia off the list,’ Preston confessed.
‘And another thing we've got to talk about — it's not really fair that you have them every weekend.
I've got a full-time job now, I hardly get to see them during the week.’
‘All right, then, let's alternate,’ said Preston, reasonably.
‘I'll have them every other week and you have them every other weekend.’
Polly had to think about that.
‘And how will you get them to school in the mornings?’
‘I'll just have to get up a bit earlier, that's all.’
But he could see what was coming.
‘And travel halfway across London?
On the tube?
Like tonight?’
Preston threw in the towel before it went the whole distance.
He could have come back on that one, if he'd really tried, but sometimes it was much easier to lie on the floor and watch the lights on the ceiling and listen to the count going on.
‘Okay,’ he said.
‘You have them next weekend and I'll look for a house.’
He trudged back to the tube station on his own.
His wrist was beginning to hurt, he had a headache and he was depressed.
He'd have quite liked to have spent the night on the couch in Polly's living room, as he had for the last few months of their marriage, but it had not been offered as an option and he supposed it was just as well.
That part of his life was over.
He had to get used to the new arrangement.
But it still depressed him.
In his mind's eye, Preston saw himself as the daddy in one of the twins' bedtime books.
It was called Are We Nearly There ? and it was about a little boy who was on a journey with his father.
Only at the end of the story do you realise that his parents are separated or divorced and that the journey is to return the child  to his mother after an access visit.
The picture on the last page shows the father walking off alone along the darkening street, leaving the brightly lit house behind him.
Preston always found the story deeply distressing, but the twins seemed to like it.
Preston took full responsibility for the breakdown of his marriage.
He had compounded a number of venial failings with the mortal sin of adultery.
Worse, he had been Found Out.
It followed as naturally as night followed day that he should now be punished for it.
That was how it worked.
Mother Bernie had said so a long time ago and all Preston's life's experiences since then had born it out.
Mea culpa, mea culpa , said Preston to himself, as he had said aloud as a child at Mass with neither thought nor understanding then,mea maxima culpa .
He understood now, all right, and there was some comfort in taking on the complete burden of guilt, a kind of purgative sense of martyrdom, not unrelated to self-pity.
In another age Preston would have been out there with the self-flagellants, scourging away for all he was worth.
But from somewhere in the fog of received wisdom and what passed for it, struggling to be heard above the sound of cracking whips, a persistent and unrepentant voice relayed a subversive message.
Bullshit , it said.
Preston identified it at once.
It was the Voice of Reason, and it perched on the opposite shoulder from the Voice of his Conscience, and it was frequently on his side.
Preston's marriage had been ended, as the official record, Polly and his conscience would have it, by his adultery with Carla, rising star of the modern spoiled-brat school of journalism and presenter of Shrews at Ten , a women's magazine series which Preston had produced and which had achieved a certain dubious fame before ending in tears, tantrums and Preston's demotion to the God slot.
But the Voice of Reason argued that Preston's marriage, and his career, were demasted, holed and rudderless a long time before they foundered together on the rock of Carla.
Carla had done a fairly professional job of staving in the rotten planks, that was all.
The modern femme fatale in baggy trousers, sloppy T-shirts  and Doc Martens.
Every broken marriage, every wrecked career must have one, in some form or another, and doubtless career and marriage might have drifted aimlessly on together for a few more years if the sea had been clear of Carlas, but it would have ended some time or other, and possibly with a lot more pain than there was now.
He kept on remembering the good bits, that was the trouble.
He kept seeing them over and over in his mind, like an action replay of a not very good football match that only showed the goals.
He saw clips of them with their heads together across a table in a wine bar, or making love in the garden of a cottage they had once rented in the New Forest, or building a sand castle with the twins on their first family holiday together at the seaside.
He knew the bad bits existed, but he had edited them out.
He didn't want to look at them.
And so when he talked to Polly now, and when she talked to him the way she did, it depressed him.
He could not reconcile it with the images he had preserved.
He was too depressed even to care about travelling back on the tube with his right wrist in a sling during a period which the Tooting Guardian had described as a peak time for knife attacks.
Or to worry about the thin but penetrating drizzle that greeted him when he finally emerged from the subway.
He was only jolted out of his misery when he approached the front door leading to his much-maligned flat and, as he struggled to pull his keys out of his right pocket with his left hand, a voice spoke to him from the shadows of the front porch.
‘Preston,’ it said.
‘At last.’
6
The Corsican Connection
The figure stepped out from the porch and the light from the street lamp spilled on to its face.
Preston started to breathe again.
‘Emily!’ he said.
‘Jesus Christ.’
‘Sorry,’ she said.
‘Did I startle you?’
He felt his heart.
‘Oh God, I'm going to die.’
She put her arms up to embrace him and noticed the sling.
‘What happened to your arm?’
‘Never mind that, what are you doing skulking in my porch?’
‘I wasn't skulking, I was sheltering from the rain.
Where've you been?
What happened?
Is it broken?’
‘Emily, what are you doing here?’
‘Well, charming,’ she said, stepping back a pace.
‘If I'd known I was that unpopular…’
‘It's not that,’ Preston assured her.
‘I just thought…’
What had he thought?
That it was the Angel of Death?
Certainly that, though, curiously, an image of Carla had also flashed across his mind.
Preston.
At last !
And he'd been braced for the knife lunging out of the darkness.
But why?
Why should he fear Carla?
It was all over months ago and, as far as he knew, with no hard feelings.
Obviously his conscience was not so sure.
‘Well, if that's how you feel, I won't trouble you any further,’ said Emily, and she made to push past him.
But not very convincingly.
Preston stopped her without much trouble with his one good arm.
‘Here, take the key,’ he said.
‘Open the door, let's get out of the rain.
I'm sorry, I've had a bad day.’
The flat felt colder than it was outside, but at least it was dry.
Preston put the fan heater on in the kitchen and produced a bottle of brandy.
Emily perched on a stool, biting her bottom lip.
She looked as if she was fighting back tears.
‘What's the matter?’ said Preston, more gently now, but with an ingrained wariness.
He wasn't quite sure how to treat Emily.
They were at that stage of going out that wasn't yet a Relationship.
Or at least, that was how Preston saw things.
He wasn't certain that Emily hadn't forged ahead a stage or two.
He'd met her at work, which was about the only place where he did meet people these days.
She was a production secretary attached to a programme in the same series as Preston's ‘Who is the Devil?’ documentary.
She was twenty-four and rather beautiful in a pale, pensive, studiously Pre-Raphaelite way, with a glint of hennaed gold in her curly hair and large, solemn eyes.
Unfortunately she was also crazy.
On their first date she had shown Preston, with nonchalant pride, the scars where she had slashed her wrists a few days after her nineteenth birthday.
‘Most people try to kill themselves when they're nineteen,’ she'd informed Preston.
‘I didn't feel very loved.’
It was surprising, now he came to think of it, that this hadn't scared him off, but he'd been lulled by her flippancy.
It was all part of the mad social whirl that young women of her age had to endure.
Suicide attempts (‘Not that it was serious,’ she told him, ‘just attention-seeking’), anorexia, the odd abortion (only one in her case, but she gave the impression this was well below average) and messy affairs with married men.
‘I had a lot of emotional problems when I was younger’ she told him, ‘but I'm fine now.
Quite boring in fact.’
Preston had given the expected response and they were off and running.
Even Preston had to admit it was fun at times.
She showed an  enthusiasm for sex and a lack of inhibition which was entirely alien to Preston's recent experience.
He felt that, given time, he could really get to like it.
If only he could stop worrying about the consequences.
One of these was Getting Involved.
Preston wasn't sure he wanted to.
Not with Emily, not with anyone, at the moment.
The bruises left by Polly and Carla were still too sore.
Another was the horror stories.
Emily had a way of launching casually into an anecdote about some fix she'd got herself into in the past and Preston would listen with increasing alarm, wondering just what he'd got himself into.
What bothered him most was that the past seemed to get closer and closer to the present.
It appeared that for two years after the wrist-slashing incident she'd been in and out of mental hospital.
At the same time she'd had ‘this disastrous affair’ with a married man that led to her pregnancy and a late abortion.
(‘I couldn't make up my mind whether I wanted it or not, and then I just panicked.’)
There had been ‘complications’ and she'd been told she couldn't have children.
And that was intimately connected with the other problem.
They were making love without contraceptives.
Preston was astonished at himself for letting it happen, but when he'd first suggested wearing a condom Emily had said, ‘You don't have to,’ and told him the story about her abortion, and he'd felt too sorry for her, and too embarrassed, to insist on doing so for health reasons.
He looked at her now, sitting there like a bird with a broken wing, and was torn between wanting to give her a hug and a kiss, as he would with Anna when she'd fallen and hurt her knee, and a rather more powerful instinct for self-preservation that urged him to climb into the airing cupboard and pull the door shut after him.
Unfortunately there was no airing cupboard.
Only a guyser.
Alleged by his wife to be dangerous.
‘Come on,’ he said, ‘what's up?’
‘Only after you tell me why your arm's in a sling,’ she said.
Preston told her why his arm was in a sling.
She was impressed, also sympathetic.
Preston warmed to her.
They kissed.
They took  the brandy into the sitting room and lit the gas fire and curled up on the sofa.
‘It could be very cosy here,’ said Emily, cuddling up to him and shivering, and clutching her brandy, ‘with a bit of effort.’
Preston looked around the room.
Objectively, he could see why his treacherous brood might be moved to complain.
There was a cold, unlived-in, unloved feel about the place.
The walls and ceilings were all painted the same insipid magnolia and there was rush matting on the floor which trapped bits of food and stuff and hurt if you walked on it with bare feet.
He had rented the flat through an agency and had no idea who owned it, only that he was male and single and working abroad for a year.
Preston, in the idle early hours when he wasn't watching fifties horror movies, sometimes speculated on what kind of person he was and what he did for a living.
The place itself provided few clues, only that he must be entirely devoid of imagination and not overly bothered by cold and lack of comfort.
He'd decided he was most likely an agronomist attached to an Antarctic survey team.
He was upset about the kids.
He would have to find somewhere they would like.
He wondered if he should move out of London.
Buy a caravan with a horse, maybe, and try and make it into an adventure.
Or a narrow boat on a canal.
But he'd always hated horses and he knew nothing about boats.
And whatever he did it would probably be wrong.
‘There doesn't seem much point,’ said Preston.
‘I won't be here that much longer.’
She looked up at him, anxiously.
‘Oh, why's that?’
But Preston didn't want to go into his domestic problems.
He wanted to know what Emily was doing adding to them.
He found a more tactful way to put it.
‘So what brings you here?
Great though it is to see you.’
‘Well,’ she said, ‘I kept getting these phone-calls.’
‘Oh, yes?’
‘You know.
When no one answers and there's just silence at the other end, but you know someone's there.’
Preston regarded her uneasily.
‘How often?’ he said.
‘Oh, about four times last night.
Then I left the phone off the  hook.
But it started again this evening.
Three times in one hour.
Brenda's away until tomorrow so I was alone in the flat.
And when I went out yesterday I had this horrible feeling someone was watching me all the time.
I didn't think I could cope with another night in that flat all alone.’
‘Someone watching you?’
‘Yes.’
‘You saw someone?’
‘No.’
Preston thought about this and came to no satisfactory conclusion.
Like most people who are themselves paranoid, Preston had difficulty in taking other people's fears very seriously, unless they could be directly related to his own.
He had not himself suffered from mystery phone-calls and silences on the line.
In Preston's experience the problem came from people he knew extremely well screaming down it at him.
‘It was just a feeling I had,’ she said.
‘No idea who it could be?’
‘Well…’
A longish pause.
He shifted so he could look at her.
Whenever Emily started to screw her face up like that it invariably preceded some appalling confession.
‘Emily?’
‘Well, I think it might be my husband.’
‘Your what ?’
The screw turned a little tighter.
‘Didn't I tell you about that?’
‘No.’
‘Oh.
I thought I'd mentioned it.’
‘I think I'd have remembered if you had.’
‘It's something I'm trying to forget.’
Preston untangled his arm from around her shoulder and reached for the brandy glass.
‘How long ago was this unmemorable event?’
‘You're not upset, are you?’
‘Me?
No.
Not at all.
A little surprised, perhaps, that's all.’
‘That was why I left university.
I met him during the summer vac.
In Nice.’
Preston nodded to himself.
It all fitted.
At some stage during  her crisis-strewn life Emily had gone to the University of Lancaster to study French but she'd never completed her course.
Preston had not liked to ask why.
Or else he'd been too afraid of the answer.
‘I thought he was French,’ said Emily, ‘but he turned out to be Corsican.’
‘Was this before or after you were married?’
‘You are upset, aren't you.’
‘No, no, I'm not.
I promise you I'm not upset.’
‘Then why have you got that sort of stiff look?’
Preston was looking stiff because he was braced for another horror story.
He felt he needed more brandy, but the glass was nearly empty and the bottle was in the kitchen.
‘Sorry, I'll try to relax,’ he said.
‘Go on.’
‘He was in the tourist trade.
It was a family business.
Quite big.
He ran the office in Nice.
But the rest of the family were in Corsica.’
The juxtaposition of those two words, ‘family’ and ‘Corsica’, rang serious alarm bells in Preston's mind.
He concentrated hard.
‘He was quite a bit older than me.
He'd been married before.
But his first wife died.
In a car crash.’
Preston drained his glass and decided to go for the bottle in the next interlude.
‘The day before I was due to go back to England he asked me to marry him.
I still don't know why I said yes.
Except that I was all caught up in it, the romance and everything and the sunshine.
We had this balcony and I used to sit out there sunning myself with no clothes on.
Some days I didn't bother to get dressed at all.
Others I'd just throw on a cotton frock and a pair of sandals to go out shopping.’
She giggled.
‘I never used to wear any pants.
I felt like Betty Blue.’
Preston felt a moan coming on, from deep inside.
‘And he was very good-looking.
And very…well, I'd better not say any more about that.
I was just in love with being in love, you know what it's like, I loved the image of myself being in love in that kind of careless, easy way.
Haven't you ever felt like that?’
‘Not when there's been sunshine as well,’ said Preston.
‘Excuse me, I'm going to throw up.’
‘What?’
‘I mean, top up.
The glass.
Sorry, I don't know why I said that.’
He fled to the kitchen and brought back the bottle.
‘Anyway,’ she said, ‘we went over to Corsica for the marriage and that's when things started to go wrong.
The family weren't exactly wild about me — at least the women weren't —‘
No, they wouldn't be, thought Preston.
’— and then it turned out they wanted him to stay on over there.
I was dead against it, but he always did what the family wanted.
I soon sussed that out.
‘They owned this kind of enclave on the coast just outside Ajaccio — like a kind of tourist village — that's where they kept the women, really, while they were away on business.
So there were people to keep an eye on you.
And the babies.
All those babies.
I nearly died when I saw them.
That's what you did, you see, if you were a wife, you had babies.
Well, I suppose that would have been fine if I could have gone along with it, but I wasn't quite ready for that.
Certainly not on those conditions.
I knew what those men were like.
They were off running the travel business and having affairs with all those couriers and secretaries and people while the wives prayed and cooked and had babies.’
But Preston had spotted a hole in the plot.
‘But — hadn't you told this, what's-his-name, you couldn't have babies?’
She looked guilty.
Or was it coy?
Or was it both?
‘Well, actually, I wasn't sure I couldn't then.
I mean, the doctor had told me, but I'd kind of shut it out.
It was only when I didn't, and we'd been making love without contraceptives for months and months, that I decided he must have been right.’
‘So you wouldn't have minded having one?’
‘I didn't have much choice, did I. He wanted me to have babies.
He wasn't going to wear a condom and I didn't have anything.
And I didn't know where to get anything from.
Everything was so controlled .
The doctor was one of his uncles, for God's sake.’
‘So you still didn't tell him?’
‘I couldn't by then.
It got to be such a strain, though.
And all those women and babies.
My God, you felt like a leper without one.
And then there was him .
He just changed completely once he got back with his family.
He was a real chauvinist.
And so jealous.
He had these terrible rages.
Once, just because I wasn't wearing any knickers — and he used to love it in Nice.’
The fire had at last begun to warm the room up a bit, and the brandy was warming him up inside, and Preston was suddenly feeling terribly, terribly randy.
He wondered how difficult it would be to make love with his arm in a sling.
He lifted his wrist experimentally to see what it felt like without the support.
It hurt.
He winced.
‘Is this very painful for you?’
Emily enquired.
‘No,’ said Preston.
‘I'm fascinated.’
That was the trouble with Emily's stories.
You had to get to the end of them.
You knew it was going to be awful, but you had to know .
‘Finally I couldn't stand it any longer, so I left him.’
‘That can't have been easy.’
‘No, it wasn't.
I had to steal a car and…all sorts of things.’
Preston nodded.
He didn't mind skipping a bit.
Especially ‘all sorts of things’.
He wanted to get to the phone-calls.
‘So you never got divorced?’
‘I didn't want him to know where I was.’
‘No.
So what makes you think the phone-calls are from him?’
‘Because he tried it once before, when I was working up in Manchester.
The phone kept ringing and no one there, and then he turned up on the doorstep.
I had to pretend I wanted to go back with him.
Then I gave him the slip and came to London.’
‘So he does want you back?’
‘You needn't sound so surprised about it.’
‘Oh, I'm not.
I'm sure he does.’
‘Well, if you must know, I think it's because he just doesn't like the idea of me leaving him .
It hurts his pride.
You know, all that male machismo.’
‘I've heard about it,’ said Preston, absently.
He was worried now.
Even if only half the story were true, he was still worried.
‘You didn't feel watched on the way here?’ he asked, trying to make it sound light-hearted.
‘Preston, I was two hours waiting for you in that porch.
I think I'd have noticed if someone was watching.’
‘That's true,’ he said.
But he had to restrain himself from leaping up and switching the light off and peering out into the street from behind the curtains.
He no longer felt randy.
But Emily apparently did.
‘I can't do much with this wrist,’ Preston pointed out.
‘You don't have to,’ Emily assured him.
‘Not with your wrist at any rate.’
It was a novel experience for Preston, going out with somebody who wanted him for his body.
That part of his body, anyway.
Carla had been opposed to penis penetration on political grounds and Polly had never once achieved orgasm during intercourse.
Emily, however, was one of the minority featured in the Hite Report who invariably did.
Either that, or she was a very good actress.
So Preston put his reservations behind him and his wrist in front and lay on his back on the sofa while Emily bounced on him.
It was her preferred position, slings notwithstanding.
She liked to ride him, as she put it, and the ride was accompanied by a kind of commentary, as if she was urging a horse along in a steeplechase.
This was the main problem about sex with Emily.
In Preston's experience there was always something and with Emily it was the commentary.
‘You're doing fine,’ she'd say.
‘That's great, that's just fine.
No, no, easy, easy.
Not too fast.
Hold it there, hold it right there.
Don't you dare come.
Now, a bit faster…a bit faster…
Perfect.’
If Preston kept his eyes shut and his mind on something else, they occasionally achieved simultaneous orgasm, but it took energy, it took stamina.
Most of all it took discipline.
Not infrequently he wished his penis didn't have to take the entire responsibility for the success or failure of the operation.
Once he'd achieved erection the trick was to keep it up without coming but without losing rigidity.
He normally managed this by allowing himself a few seconds of pure indulgence in sensation  and then thinking of something neutral for a while and, if this didn't work, something really horrible.
Then, when it started to go down, he'd open his eyes and concentrate on Emily for as long as his self-control would allow.
Thirty seconds was about the limit.
Sometimes it was much less.
Tonight he tried to imagine what the Corsican looked like in a rage.
This worked for a while.
It even made him groan a bit, which Emily liked.
It also made him feel sick, which wasn't so good.
He thought about the incident in the tube train, but this almost induced total decline.
So he resorted to an old favourite, which was to imagine himself as a First World War fighter ace engaged in an aerial duel with an enemy pilot.
He concentrated hard.
He was in a Sopwith Pup, or was it a Camel?
The other man was in a Focker Triplane, a Tripehound.
No, not a Tripehound.
An Albatross.
A bright yellow Albatross with Maltese crosses.
It was behind him, lining him up in the sights.
Dadadadada…
Bits of wings falling off.
What could he do?
The Immelmann Turn.
A difficult manoeuvre named after the pilot who had invented it.
A German, one of the Baron's men.
It was a kind of loop and roll that dodged the pursuing aircraft and brought you up behind it.
Then, a quick burst of the twin Lewis guns.
Dadadadada…
He was halfway through the Immelmann Turn when he became aware that Emily's commentary was rising to a peak.
He opened his eyes and cleared his mind of Camels and Albatrosses and Pups and Tripehounds, cleared his mind of everything but the thought of her beautiful body and the beautiful things she was doing with it, and for the next minute or so they were almost flying.
‘You're a very solid person, Preston,’ said Emily, surprisingly, and with a sigh, when she cuddled up to him afterwards.
‘I feel very safe with you.’
He meant to check the street for signs of the Corsican before he went to bed but he was so tired he forgot.
He only remembered when he heard the scream.
7
Terror in the Night
He thought it was part of the nightmare at first, though up to then there'd been nothing much to scream about.
He only classed it as a nightmare because of the head, and even that had more farce to it than terror.
He was a mechanic in the Royal Flying Corps in France during World War One and he had to patch the planes whenever they got smashed up or shot down.
It wasn't a role he was particularly keen on — he'd rather have been a pilot.
As usual, William was in the dream, and he was a pilot.
He came into the hangar where Preston was gluing bits of plane together and told him he was taking one of the new chaps up for a spin.
The new chap looked about eight years old, but then, so did William.
‘Get the machines ready,’ he told Preston.
But they didn't have any machines.
Not ones that could fly, anyway.
They were all in pieces.
They had to pretend.
They stretched their arms out to make wings and Preston swung an imaginary propeller and they made engine noises with their mouths and ran out of the hangar.
Preston went back to his pot of glue.
Moments later there was an almighty crash and a head flew in through the door of the hangar and bounced across the floor.
That was when Preston realised he was in a nightmare.
He was not unduly alarmed.
He'd had nightmares featuring William before and they invariably ended with someone being beheaded or disembowelled or otherwise mangled in an unpleasant manner.
He  knew, deep down, that this was something to do with Barry Moxton and the murder, but he didn't wake up sweating and shaking the way he used to when he was younger.
He just picked the head up from the floor and wiped the blood off a bit and looked at it.
It was the head of the new pilot, of course.
He still had his flying helmet on but the goggles were smashed.
You couldn't see his expression, but Preston knew it would be anxious.
He put it on a shelf at the back of the hangar with the rest of the heads.
Then William came back.
‘Lost the new chap,’ he said.
‘Crashed on take-off.’
‘I know,’ said Preston.
‘He's dead.’
William sighed.
‘S'pose I'll have to write to his mother,’ he said.
‘And he didn't even have any medals I could send her.’
Preston felt angry then.
Bastard, he thought.
He wanted to smash William's teeth in, he wanted to kick him all round the airfield.
But he stayed very calm.
‘I've got his head here,’ he said.
‘You could send her that.’
William looked surprised.
‘D'you think she'd like that?’ he asked, doubtfully.
Preston took the head down from the shelf.
I'll show him, he thought.
I'll show him who's chicken.
Big chicken .
‘She'd love it,’ he said.
‘I'll give it a bit of a clean up.
I'll get a new pair of goggles for it.
She could put it on her mantelpiece.’
He thrust the head at William.
‘Stop it,’ he told him.
He didn't shout.
He didn't even raise his voice.
He was just very firm.
‘Stop doing this.
Stop filling my hangar with bits of corpse.’
It was then that he heard the scream.
And there was something about it that froze the blood, even before he woke up and knew it was real.
‘No,’ he yelled, reaching for the baseball bat he kept by the side of the bed for intruders and finding he couldn't move his arm.
It seemed to be tied to his neck.
He flung the bedcovers off and stood up, shaking and staring wildly into the darkness, trying to identify the threat, knowing it had to be the Corsican and bracing himself for the shotgun blast  that would cut him in half, disembowel him, blow his head off, send it bouncing across the floor of the bedroom.
But there was no intruder, no Corsican, no shotgun.
Just Emily.
Still screaming.
He felt for the bedside table with his left hand, remembered why the right one was all bandaged up, and switched on the light.
Emily was rolling almost rhythmically from side to side in the bed with her arms crossed over her breasts and her eyes wide open and staring.
She looked terrified.
‘Emily?’
He reached out to touch her.
‘What's the matter?’
She stopped screaming then and began to sob.
And Preston sat there beside her, patting her ineffectually on the shoulder, saying, ‘It's all right, it's all right , really, it's all right ,’ until finally the sobbing stopped, too, and her eyes closed and she gave a great, shuddering sigh and slept.
If she'd ever been awake.
Preston sat there for a while stroking her and then, when he was sure that she was sleeping soundly, he crossed over to the window and lifted a corner of the curtain and peered cautiously out into the street.
It was still dark, and he could see the rain slanting down in the light of the street lamps.
There was no sign of anyone watching the house.
Was that what he had expected?
A solitary figure standing there in a trench coat under one of the street lamps?
The Corsican come to claim his own?
He didn't know his name.
But ‘the Corsican’ sounded better than a name.
More sinister.
Was he the cause of Emily's distress?
But it seemed more primitive, less articulate than that.
as if there was something locked deep inside her that she just had to let out.
It was just after three in the morning, and there were no lights on in any of the houses and nothing moving on the street.
It was somehow reassuring to see all those houses, those solid Victorian terraces in the rain and the soft yellow light of the street lamps.
But it was depressing, too, because he did not know a single person who occupied them.
He hardly knew the people in his own house, only to exchange a casual greeting if he met them going out or coming in.
Perhaps they had heard Emily screaming.
If so they had done nothing about it.
He might have murdered her.
He found himself wishing he was at home again, at Polly's home, and could creep stealthily into the twins' room and sit there as he sometimes had at night, on the floor among their discarded toys and cuddly animals, with his back to the wall, listening to the sound of their breathing.
Like a watchdog.
No, not a dog, a bodyguard stationed there to protect them from evil.
But he couldn't.
He couldn't go into their room and he couldn't keep the evil out.
It was a three o'clock in the morning thought, negative and self-destructive.
So he went back to bed and slid in beside the now silent, still figure of Emily, and nursed his throbbing right wrist with his left hand and imagined himself as one of those recumbent stone knights you sometimes see in churches, stretched out with arms crossed at the breast, cold and grey and dead, feeling no pain.
And closed his eyes and tried to sleep.
8
The Prince of Darkness
‘Jam on your toast?’
Preston opened his eyes.
Emily was sitting on the edge of the bed in one of his shirts, holding a tray.
He smelt coffee.
‘Sleep well?’
So he had obviously slept.
‘What time is it?’ he said.
It was eight o'clock.
His last memory was of a rather half-hearted dawn chorus outside the grey windows, so he'd probably slept for about two hours.
Not well.
Emily, however, looked as if she had.
Her hair was tied in a ribbon and she looked positively chirpy.
He eased himself up on the pillow and examined the breakfast tray.
Orange juice, coffee in a pot, toast, butter, jam, marmalade.
Did he really have all that in the kitchen or had she sent out for it?
The curtains were half drawn back, it had stopped raining and there was sunshine.
Preston felt foul.
‘Just butter,’ he said.
‘Thank you.’
He took the orange juice and observed her warily while he drank and she spread.
‘So how are you,’ he said, ‘this morning?’
‘Fine,’ she said brightly.
‘Much better than last night.’
So she wasn't going to mention the screaming.
Perhaps it was like sleepwalking and she wasn't aware of it.
Perhaps it would be dangerous to tell her.
He took the toast and bit thoughtfully.
Crumbs fell on his sling.
‘D'you want me to come back with you tonight?’ he asked her.
Meaning did she plan to come back with him?
But she shook her head.
‘I'll be all right,’ she said.
‘Brenda will be there tonight.’
Brenda was her flatmate.
A New Zealander.
Not easily intimidated.
‘Besides,’ she said, ‘I don't think it was him now.’
‘Oh?’
Preston was surprised.
‘Why not?’
‘Well, I've been thinking, why should he ring and ring like that and not come round?
He'd ring once to make sure I was in and then he'd be at the front door, wouldn't he?’
Unless he was driving across France, Preston thought, and ringing every time he stopped for a break, to make sure she was still there.
He'd probably be on his way across the Channel now and waiting outside her flat just as she got home from work.
He did not mention this possibility to Emily.
On consideration it did not seem likely.
But it still left the question of who had been ringing her.
Assuming she hadn't made the whole thing up.
‘If the phone rings again I'll get Brenda to answer it,’ she said.
‘She's got this whistle thing she holds next to the receiver and it blasts your eardrums out.’
‘Wonderful,’ said Preston.
‘Does she ask who it is first or does she just use it as soon as she hears a man's voice?’
Preston wasn't sure about Brenda.
He thought she had a attitude problem.
Towards men.
Emily chuckled.
She looked very nice in his shirt.
She looked very young and girlish and normal.
He had to ask her about the screaming.
He couldn't just leave it like that.
‘You know you were crying out in your sleep?’ he said.
He thought that was tactful.
Then she could always pretend it was a nightmare.
Perhaps it was a nightmare.
Perhaps she had nightmares with her eyes open.
‘I wasn't asleep,’ she said.
‘Not properly.
I wasn't properly awake either.
It's just something that happens in my brain.’
‘Were you scared about something?
Him?’
She shook her head.
‘It's not as rational as that.
I'm scared but I don't know what of.
I feel as if I'm drowning, or as if the room's closing in on me.
I feel as if I'll die if I stay where I am but I'm scared to get up and go somewhere else.
It's awful, I can't explain it.
Poor Preston, did I scare you?’
‘I was worried about you,’ he said.
They took the same tube into work but walked apart on the final stretch to the office in case anyone saw them together and jumped to the right conclusion.
There was a note on Preston's desk.
‘Call William,’ it said, ‘soonest.’
And a number.
Preston stared at it for a moment, frowning.
He'd never had a call from William at work before.
He wondered what it could be that was so urgent, and why he hadn't mentioned it yesterday over lunch.
He dialled the number.
‘Preston.
It was good to see you, yesterday.’
‘It was good to see you,’ said Preston, cautiously.
‘I was just thinking when you left — I've got an idea that might interest you.’
‘Oh yes?
For a programme?’
‘No.
No, nothing to do with television.
Look, are you free for lunch and I'll tell you about it?’
‘It would have to be this side of town,’ said Preston.
‘I've got a meeting that'll probably go on until one at least.’
He could see the vultures gathering already in the executive producer's office.
‘That's fine,’ said William.
‘Anywhere you like.’
Preston gave him directions to a small and inexpensive restaurant not far from the studios and put the phone down thoughtfully.
He wished he could feel easier with William.
More than that, he wished he could put his finger on why he didn't.
There were plenty of  individual reasons.
He could tick them all off, one by one, the petty misdemeanours and misadventures of childhood, starting with the trespass on the railway line and ending, of course, with the murder at the Turk's Head.
But it was none of these, nor the sum of them.
It was something else, some element in William himself.
He was dialling the restaurant to book the table for lunch when it came to him.
It was a facility for unleashing chaos.
Of course, he'd long since grown out of it.
It was a childhood thing.
He was a university lecturer now, a family man, respectable, boring, even.
His life was ordered, there was not even a hint of chaos in it now.
But it was a surprising and disturbing thought, all the same, and no sooner had it presented itself than he had another, even more surprising and disturbing.
Emily had it, too .
Only with her, it was still very much an ongoing thing.
She was there at the departmental conference and he included her in the general nod and smile as he entered the executive producer's office, but his eyes were guarded, and not just on her account.
The conference was to discuss the programmes currently under production as part of the documentary series.
Although Preston still referred to it privately as the God slot, as he had indicated to Kate it made little or no reference to the Almighty.
The Almighty was something of an embarrassment to the BBC of late, ever since He had ceased to be the exclusive property of the Church of England.
He now came in so many shapes and sizes they didn't know quite where they were with Him.
It was almost as if , after years of stolidly predictable behaviour, an old and respected great-uncle had declared himself to be a Buddhist or a Muslim or the follower of some obscure Eastern mystic, and, instead of keeping it to himself, insisted on dressing up in a variety of different-coloured kaftans and talking to people loudly about The Meaning of Life at drinks parties.
It was not the sort of thing you did in polite company.
It was certainly not the sort of thing you did at the BBC.
It was best to ignore Him.
To pretend He didn't exist.
The traditional God slot early on Sunday evening was now given  over entirely to sing-songs, and the late-night documentary series concentrated on moral issues.
The first three films in the new series were about mercenaries, murderers and adultery.
Preston's was the only film that even mentioned God, and that was only in connection with his opposite number.
Preston had been quite keen when he started the project but now he felt a bit shamefaced about it.
If God was an embarrassment, a politically suspect and rather quaint anachronism, how much more of an absurdity was the Prince of Darkness?
This film was obviously going to be yet another stage in Preston's own decline and fall as a BBC producer.
He wouldn't have minded so much if there'd been a rise somewhere along the line — a moment of triumph, no matter how brief — but he'd gone from children's programmes to women's programmes to the Devil in one slow, unspectacular but continuous slide.
He looked around him at the other producers and researchers.
All bright young things, on their way up, or looking as if they were, with their murderers and their mercenaries and their adulterers.
He caught Emily's eye on him and looked away quickly.
Adulterers.
That's what they both were, technically speaking.
He'd never really thought about it before today.
Before he knew about the Corsican.
He suddenly noticed everyone was looking at him.
He blushed guiltily, but the small part of his brain that had been vaguely monitoring the discussion alerted him to the fact that he had been asked a question by the executive producer.
But not, unfortunately, to what it was.
‘Sorry?’ he said, startled.
‘I was asking, Preston, how you were getting on with the Devil.’
William was already there when he arrived at the restaurant, and halfway through a bottle of wine.
‘Sorry,’ said Preston.
‘It went on longer than I expected.’
‘That's all right,’ said William.
‘Have a drink.’
‘I need it.’
said Preston.
‘Problems at work?’
‘It's my film about the Devil,’ said Preston.
‘No one will take him seriously.’
‘Ah,’ said William, absently, ‘that's where he scores.’
Preston looked at him curiously.
‘Do you?’
William was studying the menu.
He looked up.
‘Excuse me?’
‘Take him seriously.
The Devil.
All that stuff you were telling me yesterday.
Beelzebub and the Devil's Cabinet and Amadeus…’
‘Asmodeus.
Well, I'm not saying I see it quite like that, I mean, that's the mythology…’
‘But you believe in him?
As a supernatural being?’
William wriggled.
‘Honestly, how can I say?
Theologians have been arguing this for two thousand years…’
‘But what do you feel , William, what's your gut reaction to this?’
But he could never get a straight answer out of William, not nowadays.
Perhaps he didn't have gut reactions any more.
He'd spent too many years being an historian, analysing things.
‘Well, it always seemed to me that the Cathars had got pretty close to it,’ he said.
‘The what?’
‘Cathars.
The Albigensians.’
‘I'm sorry, William, you've lost me.’
‘After Albi.
The city in Provence.
But it spread through most of southern France during the latter half of the twelfth century.
Have you never read Montaillou ?’
‘No, no, I haven't.’
William was always doing this to him.
He talked about events in the Middle Ages as if they'd happened-yesterday and been fully aired on the nine o'clock news.
He was always surprised that no one else had the faintest idea of what he was talking about.
‘It was a religion, a heresy.
Cathars believed there were two co-equal powers, God and the Devil.
God was the Good One, the Lord of light, the ruler of the spirit world: Satan was the  Lord of Darkness and ruler of the material world.
He tried to corrupt people by the desires of their bodies…’
‘So he had a lot going for him.’
‘Exactly.
That's why the world is so corrupted.
The Cathars believed you had to forgo earthly pleasures.
You were forbidden to take life of any sort.
Couldn't eat meat.
Couldn't have sex…’
‘I take it this didn't exactly catch on?’
‘Oh, on the contrary.
Among the common people it was very much the thing.
There was a let-out — only the perfecti , the priests, had to obey all the rules.
Everyone else was allowed a lot of latitude, particularly in sexual matters, and then just before they died they took the consolamentum which permitted them to enter the life of the spirit.’
The waiter was waiting to take their order.
‘Italian sausage with potato and beans,’ Preston ordered.
He felt like nursery food after the pummelling he'd had during the meeting and that was the nearest thing to it on the menu.
Afterwards he would have a pudding.
His consolation.
‘So you could have your cake and eat it,’ he said.
‘I can see why that went down big in the South of France.
What happened to them?’
‘Oh, the Catholics persecuted them,’ said William, as if it was obvious.
‘Don't you remember?
Simon de Montfort led a crusade, massacred them by the thousand…’
‘The Parliament chap?’
‘No, no, no.
His father.
I thought you read history.’
‘Modern history.
I didn't go that far back.
So what was it the Catholics objected to?
The sex bit, or not eating meat?’
‘Oh, there were all sort of political reasons.
They didn't like the competition.
Also, of course, they didn't like this idea of Satan being God's equal.
They were locked into this idea of God being omnipotent.
If you ask me, they should have incorporated Catharism into their own theology, it would have filled in a lot of holes…’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Well, they've always been pushed to explain why an omnipotent God permits Evil…’
‘The Fall of Man,’ said Preston.
‘Original sin.
Free will.’
‘Yes, well, I always thought Augustine was a bit simplistic in his ideas,’ said William, waspishly, as if he was talking about a rival academic.
‘God's great apologist.
Always trying to blame it on Man, as if God had nothing whatsoever to do with it.
You know why, of course?’
Preston shook his head.
‘Fear.
Trying to make up for his misspent youth.
Thought if he sucked up to God enough he'd get away with it.’
‘Wasn't he the holes in the universe chap?’
‘Excuse me?’
‘Remember Mother Bernard and the holes that let the Evil in?’
‘Of course.
Fancy you remembering that.
Yes, she was rather struck on Augustine, wasn't she.
A lot of nuns are, of course.
Rather more of a sex symbol than Jesus.’
Preston was shocked.
‘Poor old Mother Bernie,’ said William, shaking his head.
‘She had theories, too, you know.
Quite a theologian in her own eccentric way, was Mother Bernard.
Remember her theory about Hell?’
Preston frowned.
‘It rings a vague bell.
Go on…’
‘She reckoned it was like a department store, don't you remember?’
‘That's right, I remember.
Mary Ann Evans's.
Before your mum bought it.’
It all came back now.
Mary Ann Evans's, the oldest, poshest store in town, which was always, out of respect, called by its full name, never simply Evans's, and which in those days still had the old-fashioned lifts with wood-panelling and carpets and concertina doors, and uniformed attendants who called out the wares on each floor.
First floor: ladies' lingerie knitwear maternity garments bedlinen swimwear and ladies' separates…
And the attendants would wait with their expressionless faces while some people got out and others got in, and then they'd press a button and off you'd go again.
Second floor: menswear children's wear sportswear toys electrical goods and gents' toilets…
It was almost as good as a ride at the fun fair.
‘And when you die,’ said William, ‘according to Mother Bernie, you get in the lift and if you're in a state of mortal sin the Demon who works it takes you down instead of up…’
Preston remembered.
Going down, first floor: gluttons drunkards lechers blasphemers debauchees hooligans and defilers of religious relics…
And you had to get out on the floor that catered for your particular dominant moral propensity, and stay there for the whole of Eternity.
‘And on the very bottom floor,’ William reminded him, ‘was the Adultery Department.
Except that it was for adulterers,and murderers.
They were on the same floor.’
Preston stared at him.
‘I don't remember that,’ he said.
William grinned and Preston saw the schoolboy again, full of mischief, with the devil in him.
That Billy Quirk, as Preston's Auntie Ethel called him, a child too advanced for his years.
‘You probably didn't know what adultery meant,’ he said.
‘No,’ said Preston.
William would have known, though.
Or pretended he did.
Throughout their infancy, and into early adolescence, William had been Preston's sexual consultant, advising him on all technical and ethical complications.
He invariably had some spicy piece of information to impart that would add to Preston's meagre understanding.
Unhappily, he did not so often get it right.
It was William who had convinced Preston at an impressionable age that little girls, as they grew up, also grew ‘two tits and a willy’, a fantasy which Preston had accepted as gospel for at least two years and which he sometimes thought still influenced his relations with the opposite sex.
It was William who had given Preston the first believable explanation of how you made babies.
According to William, the man and the woman took all their clothes off and climbed into the bath so the woman was sitting with her back to the man, and the man peed into the water.
Then little invisible tadpole things in the pee swam through the bathwater up the woman's bottom and laid eggs, and six months later she had a baby.
He'd even got the gestation period wrong, but given the rest of it this was a minor consideration.
Preston sometimes thought that Mother Bernie and William between them had ruined whatever chance he'd ever had of a normal sex life.
Whatever that was.
He emptied the rest of the wine into their glasses and wondered if he should order another.
He had to try and rescue his documentary from the mauling it had received during the morning conference, so it might be wise to keep a clear head.
On the other hand, it might be even wiser to get totally pissed.
It was always difficult to tell.
He ordered another bottle.
‘What was this idea of yours?’ he said.
‘Oh, that,’ said William, as if it had completely slipped his mind and he'd have been quite happy talking about Satan and Hell and related matters for the rest of the afternoon.
‘It's a house,’ he said.
‘A house.’
‘A big house.
Kate found it.’
‘Oh.
You mean to live in?
You're going to buy it?’
‘We'd like to.
Only it's too big.
So we had this idea of getting other people to buy it with us.’
‘I see…’
‘There's already one other couple interested but I'm not sure it's such a good idea to have just two couples.
We thought…well, maybe you'd be interested as well.’
‘And divide it up, you mean?
Into flats?’
‘Well, not necessarily.
It would depend.
Kate thinks it might be good to turn it into a sort of commune.’
‘A commune?
These days?’
‘Well, that's the point.
Kate thinks it's time for a revival.
She says things have gone too far the other way.
She says the way the world's going we could use a bit less individualism and a bit more collective responsibility.’
It sounded like the sort of thing Kate would say, Preston thought.
He wasn't sure about Kate.
He wasn't sure Kate was sure about him.
‘So this is all Kate's idea?’
‘Well, more or less.’
‘And who suggested bringing me in?’
‘Well, I did.
I thought we needed a single person as a sort of…catalyst.
What do you think?’
Preston was suspicious.
‘I don't know,’ he prevaricated.
‘Who's the other couple?’
‘Old friends of ours.
Well, more Kate's than mine.
Louis and Tess.
I don't think you've met them.’
Preston shook his head.
‘Well, think it over,’ said William.
‘I mean, I'm not so ideological as Kate, but I just think it makes sense for all sorts of practical reasons.
Like pooling our resources and that.
And the price of big houses like that has really plummeted in the last year.
It's a bargain.’
‘How big is it?’
‘Come and see for yourself.
We're all going to look at it tomorrow night.’
‘Well, I'll think about it,’ said Preston.
‘Where is it, anyway?’
9
The House
It wasn't far from where he lived, just a stop further on the tube, but he'd not been to the area before.
Nor, from the look of it, had the developers.
No wonder it's cheap, he thought.
The first thing he saw when he came out of the station was an antiquated sign on a lamppost saying, ‘Stand for 6 licensed hackney cabs’.
No cabs, of course, hackney or otherwise.
Just a tired row of shops opposite and a seedy-looking pub on the corner and a disused laundry with boarded-up windows and a For Sale notice.
It felt closer to Dickens's London than to Preston's.
But perhaps that was the fog.
Not quite the fog of Dickens, or even his own childhood.
They'd cleaned it up since then and taken the soot out.
The poisons it contained were less visible now.
But it was still a proper fog, a city fog, with a whiff of brimstone in it, a hint of the old sinner it used to be.
It crept round the corners of the buildings and hung in the doorways and fled in ragged wisps from the car headlights.
He turned right out of the station, according to William's instructions, and then right again, and saw the viaduct.
Come and look at the place , William had said,it's like everyone's dream of a Victorian childhood .
And here it was, the nightmare.
It spanned the road ahead, the brickwork streaked with dark tears and three black holes in the middle, one for the traffic and two smaller ones on each side for pedestrians, and they looked to Preston like mouths, or nostrils, breathing fog.
It was the monster of his infancy, lying in wait for him all these  years, or a warning sign, saying, Go Back, make your excuses and leave, exert your free will…
But he was older now and in another city, and besides, the wench was dead.
So he shook off the ghosts and walked on, his footsteps muffled by the fog, shivering from a chill that wasn't just in the air, until the nearest mouth engulfed him.
It was a real Fanny-by-gaslight relic of the old city, redolent of gin and vomit and brutal crimes, and the fog had crept in like an old friend and made a dripping urinal of the walls.
Only the graffiti was of the present, but even that had its roots in ancient hatreds.
Troops Out of Ireland.
Keep Britain White.
Bring Back Hanging…
They should never have abolished it, hanging's too good for him.
A life sentence.
He'll be out in ten years…
Committed to an asylum for the criminally insane…
For a moment he thought he saw a figure at the far end, waiting, but that was from the nightmare, too, just a trick of the light and the fog.
There was a significant improvement on the other side of the viaduct, a Victorian class divide that had survived the years, and within two blocks he was walking down a tree-lined avenue composed of tall, detached houses set back from the road behind fair-sized gardens.
He could see from the number of bells beside each door that they'd nearly all been turned into flats now, or dentists' surgeries, and some were in urgent need of renovation, but they still retained some of their former grandeur, or was it pretension?
The make-believe pomp and affected circumstance of the people for whom they'd been built, the doctors and lawyers and merchants and administrators of Empire who all, in one way or another, made their money out of trade but built houses like miniature castles, or palaces, to reassure themselves that they were closer to the Barons than lo the Peasants, and safe from both.
Preston was fascinated by them.
As a very young child he had learned to read from picture books that showed children living in houses like these, in nurseries with sloping ceilings and toy yachts and teddy bears on the floor and solid Papas and gentle Mamas and a view through the window of rooftops and spires, and if there was a cloud across the moon it was in the shape of a sailing ship.
As an adolescent and well into his twenties he had affected to despise the whole fairy tale — the people, the properties, the false virtues, the false security it represented.
But now he was of an age and living in an era whose insecurities craved the reassurance of nursery images, the illusory solidity of Victorian values which, if they had never existed, could always be invented.
He was confused by a barrage of conflicting ideologies.
The sneer had turned into a lump in his throat.
The contempt into envy.
The house that William had found was down one of the side streets and not so majestic, but it still had a fair bit of the Gothic about it, and the brass knocker on the front door had the face of an ogre.
Preston lifted it and knocked.
Kate answered the door but he heard William's voice, shouting down the stairs.
‘Is that Preston?
Come in, shut the door on the fog.’
It evoked some distant memory but he couldn't quite pin it down.
He stepped into the hall.
‘Bloody hell,’ he said.
‘Take some heating, this.’
He stamped his feet on the tiled floor.
Original by the look of it, and so were the banisters, but someone had painted them a kind of snot green.
‘What do you think of it?’
William bounced down the stairs, a grinning schoolboy again, and he could hear other voices somewhere in the upper reaches.
‘He hasn't seen it yet,’ complained Kate.
‘Give him a chance.’
‘He's seen the outside.
Wait until you see the fireplaces.’
Preston couldn't remember when he'd last seen him so enthusiastic about anything.
‘Wait until you see the soot,’ said a sardonic but unseen voice, and then a woman emerged from one of the downstairs rooms off the hallway.
Preston stopped stamping his feet.
She was stunning.
She had tawny blonde hair down to her shoulders and a rather thin face with high cheekbones and a wide  mouth.
She wore a leather coat and boots and his first thought was that she looked Slavonic, a Russian or a Pole.
His second was that she was from the estate agent's.
His third that he was in love.
But he was mistaken.
She wasn't Russian or Polish, she wasn't from the estate agent's, and if he was in love, it was the worst mistake of all.
‘This is Tess,’ said William.
‘Louis’ upstairs with the kids.’
Her handshake was cool and firm and her eyes were grey.
But Preston had stopped looking.
‘They're bloody choosing the rooms already,’ said another voice, deep and loud, and from somewhere above ceiling level, and Preston looked up and saw the man who must be Louis, hanging over the banisters on the landing.
Was this the ogre?
Preston's glance took in the broad shoulders, a black beard, a lean, dark face and a big nose.
‘Bit premature, isn't it?’ said Tess.
And there was a small, uncomfortable silence, or so Preston imagined, and a chill in the air, but that could have been real.
‘Preston, Louis,’ said William, and he was half bent at the waist, like a supplicant monk, rubbing his hands and smiling, nervously.
He is nervous, Preston thought, he wants us to like each other.
Louis came bounding down the stairs.
He was as tall as William and half as wide again, and he exuded a genial, gregarious energy.
He looked, at closer quarters, less of an ogre, more like a Victorian explorer, but was this an improvement?
And yet Preston did like him, instinctively, and without his usual reserve.
More than that, he wanted Louis to like him, but he didn't know why.
‘Come and look at the fireplaces,’ said William, and they filed dutifully into the room Tess had just come out of.
Preston looked at the fireplace.
A steel grate like a suit of armour, a long time unsquired, and what looked like a tile and marble surround, it was difficult to tell, the snot-green artist had been busy here, too.
‘We'd be able to have coal fires,’ said Kate.
‘They only allow smokeless fuel these days,’ said Preston.
He knew what he was doing but was incapable of stopping it.
It was the same thing that made him physically shrink into his scarf and his leather jacket.
He felt he was being drawn  out of his comfortless hole into something altogether more vast and impressive and alarming.
‘Well?’ said William, when they'd seen it all and adjourned to the pub opposite the station, an old waiting room of a pub that had not yet been converted into a wine bar or a theme park and was consequently empty.
The three children were at a separate table, grudgingly tolerated by the landlord.
‘Well it's…big,’ said Tess.
‘Big?’ thundered Louis.
‘Is that all you can say?
It's fantastic.’
‘Fourteen rooms, three bathrooms, a hundred-foot south-facing garden…’
William intoned.
‘You sound like an estate agent,’ said Tess.
William looked stricken.
Tess relented.
‘Sorry, but it's a bit…overwhelming, really.
The work we'd have to do.’
‘That's why it's so cheap,’ said Louis.
‘My God, woman, you were the one who said we needed more space.’
‘I said we needed a playroom for the kids and a bit more garden — not a damn great manse at the arse-end of the Northern line with its own private wilderness…’
‘Where's your sense of adventure?’
‘I exhausted it on you, darling.’
Preston kept his head down and his nose in the beer.
‘So, I take it we look elsewhere,’ said Kate, flatly.
She sounded disappointed.
‘Is it the house — or the whole idea?’
William demanded.
He looked so crestfallen Preston felt sorry for him.
He wished he could say something encouraging, but he didn't feel encouraged.
He was on Tess's side.
She sat crumbling a beer mat between her fingers.
She looked more out of place in the shabby pub than any of them.
‘I really like it,’ said Kate plaintively.
‘I think we could do an awful lot with it.
And think of the advantages of sharing.
Sharing the shopping, babysitting…’
‘Decorating?’ said Tess.
‘Mending the roof?’
‘We'd get builders to do that.’
‘Oh God, you mean we'd have to live with builders as well?’
‘There's nothing wrong with the roof,’ said William.
‘Not as far as I know…’
‘Anyway, I think we should be more positive,’ said Kate.
‘We have to make it work.’
‘Maybe it's just the fog,’ said Preston.
‘And seeing it at night…’
But no one was listening.
‘She's just a bloody pessimist,’ said Louis.
‘Always looks on the dark side.
I think it's great.
I think the house is great, I think the idea's great.
My God, we're all victims in this fucking city.
They're all out to screw us.
Plumbers, builders, estate agents, the government, the council, bloody thieves…
We've got to fight back.
Otherwise we're just prey.’
Preston stared at him in astonishment.
Anyone less like prey he couldn't imagine.
He looked as if he'd make a Rottweiler pause for thought.
‘Consumers,’ said Kate, with a shrug, ‘that's what we are.
And they use the whole sham of our so-called individualism to make it easier to manipulate us.
Buy what they want us to buy, live the way they want us to live.
We have to learn how to live collectively again.
I know it's not exactly fashionable at the moment, but it's the only hope we've got.’
‘Exactly,’ said Louis.
‘Collective security.
Fuck the bastards.
Especially burglars.’
He banged the table with his fist and the glasses jumped and the drink spilled.
The landlord glared.
Preston wondered where the burglars came into it.
His face must have registered his confusion.
‘We had a break-in last year,’ said Tess.
‘That's what this is all about really.’
‘Bollocks!’
Tess was undaunted.
‘The house is full of weapons,’ she complained.
‘It's like we're preparing for Armageddon.’
‘What kind of weapons?’ said Kate.
‘Well, on the hallstand we have a set of those ball things Argentinian cowboys swing round their heads and jump in and out of…’
They looked at her blankly.
‘You know, for bringing down runaway cows.’
‘I shouldn't have thought you were troubled much with runaway cows,’ said Kate, mystified.
‘Not in a first-floor flat in Clapham.’
‘For intruders,’ explained Tess.
‘Rapists, murderers, burglars.
It's for throwing at them as you retreat into the living room.
He's got it all worked out, he calls it Defence in Depth.
We have regular drills.’
Louis was glowering over his beer.
William looked embarrassed.
Preston was impressed.
‘And then in the living room we've got an umbrella stand with two stout walking sticks and a Samurai ceremonial sword, and on the Welsh dresser in the kitchen there's a lemon squeezer full of ammonia, and on top of the wardrobe in the bedroom he's got an air pistol that fires steel ball-bearings…
Knock out a rabbit at fifty paces, they told him in the shop.
We're not sure about burglars but we think it might have a deterrent effect.’
‘Good God,’ said Kate, ‘what about the children?’
‘Oh, they've just got plastic bows and arrows,’ said Tess, ‘but we reckon that if a burglar's been squirted with ammonia and slashed with a sword and pelted with ball-bearings and wooden balls his resistance is going to be pretty low by the time he reaches the kids’bedroom, don't you think?’
‘I didn't mean that.
I meant, aren't you worried about the kids playing with them?’
‘Speaking personally, yes, this is a point of concern, but Rambo here seems to consider that's one of the things we have to live with if we're going to beat the baddies.’
She smiled at him, tauntingly, and raised her glass of dry white wine.
‘Isn't it, darling?’
‘Clever bitch,’ he said.
‘I don't notice you laughing when I have to go away for the night.
It's chains and bolts on the door, the telephone next to the bed, all the lights left on…’
Tess flushed, ever so slightly.
‘All right, I don't like being alone in the house with the children, I admit that…’
‘Well, you wouldn't be,’ said William, ‘if we all shared.’
He looked quite flushed, too, Preston noticed.
He had a feeling this was all getting rather out of hand.
But perhaps they were always like this.
A catalyst, he thought.
My God, I'd have my work cut out with this lot.
He didn't quite understand the chemistry yet, but it looked complicated.
He glanced at the other table.
At least the kids seemed to be getting on.
‘Preston, you're not saying much,’ said Kate.
‘What do you think?’
10
An Evening with Emily
‘I think it could be great fun,’ said Emily.
‘I think you've got the wrong attitude.’
‘So what's the right attitude?’
Preston demanded.
People had been telling him he had the wrong attitude since he was potty trained.
Probably before, if only he could remember.
‘You always see the obstacles in everything.
You're so cautious.
Sometimes you've just got to take a chance and dive in.’
Like you?
Preston thought, crabbily, though he knew it was true.
Emily saw herself as the Elephant's Child in the Just So Stories , drawn by her ‘satiable curiosity to partake of all new experience.
Constant messy encounters with crocodiles seemed not to have deterred her.
‘I don't like rushing into things until I've thought them through,’ he said, reasonably.
This was the first time they'd been out together since the alleged phone-calls, and if there'd been any more since then she hadn't mentioned it.
Yet.
They were in a wine bar not far from the studios, and every time the door opened Preston looked up nervously in case it was one of their colleagues, or the Corsican with a sawn-off shotgun.
‘What you don't like is commitment,’ said Emily.
Preston knew what this was about now, or thought he did.
‘I don't mind commitment,’ he said, mildly.
‘Once I know what I'm committed to .’
Was this true?
He'd never really felt committed to Polly, even after six or seven years of marriage.
Nor to any woman.
He'd always held something back.
It seemed only sensible.
‘I've only just met these people,’ he said.
‘How do I know what they're like to live with?’
‘I thought you'd known them for years.
I thought this bloke was your oldest friend.’
‘William, yes.
I'm talking about the other couple.
And I'm not that mad keen on the house, either.’
Their glasses were empty and he took them to the bar for a refill.
It was Emily who had suggested this ‘drink after work’, and he knew it would lead to more than that.
Either a row or bed, or both.
It was over a fortnight now since they'd last met, outside the office.
He told himself he was ‘trying to take the heat out of the relationship’ but he knew he was running scared.
He watched her covertly in the mirror behind the bar.
She looked very sexy, dressed all in black with one of those tight little ribbed skirts and her long legs crossed…
If only it could be uncomplicated .
‘What are they like?’ she asked when he came back to the table.
‘This other couple?’
Preston considered, choosing his words carefully.
‘Well, I quite like Louis He's very open and extrovert and…’
Reassuring?
You need a reassuring presence in your life, Preston .
Who'd said that?
Probably Carla.
But it could just as easily have been his wife.
At some period during his affair the distinctions between the two had become a little blurred in Preston's mind.
Carla, however, usually had the edge when it came to put-downs.
He chose another word.
‘Big,’ he said.
‘Friendly?’
‘Yes,’ he said, more cautiously.
‘Sort of.’
‘A Big Friendly Giant.
Nice.
I could do with one of those in my life.’
Preston recognised this as a personal criticism and felt it was unjustified.
Also it was the wrong analogy.
Louis did not at all resemble Dahl's amiable dream dispenser as Preston remembered him from the twins' illustrated paperback.
He sought alternative images from his nursery reading.
‘More like Beorn,’ he said, ‘the skin-changer in The Hobbit who could turn from a man to a bear.’
And who could turn nasty if the mood took him, who could turn dangerous.
‘What does he do?’
‘Well, from what I can gather he makes up fantasies…’
‘I meant for a living.’
‘That's what I meant.
He designs fantasy games.
You know,Heroes and Dragons ,Lost in the Labyrinth , that sort of thing.
It started as a kind of hobby, now it seems to be his main source of income.
He taught sociology before that.
William met him at university.’
‘And what about her?’
Preston frowned.
‘I don't know what she does.
They've got a couple of young kids, four and five, so she's probably got her work cut out with them.
Only…’
‘Only what?’
‘I just don't see her as a full-time mother…’
He was on dangerous ground here.
Carla would have taken him to the cleaners for that.
The chance remark that revealed his deep-rooted chauvinism and basic male insensitivity.
She'd have had him back to the manufacturers for radical restructuring.
Or melted down for soap.
Either way it wouldn't have been pleasant.
Preston had more or less given up being a New Man since Carla — it was so difficult to get it right all the time and they kept moving the goalposts — but he still liked to make the right noises.
The problem was they kept coming out as grunts.
Emily was looking at him curiously.
Or was it with suspicion?
‘What does she look like?’
‘Oh…’
Preston pushed his bottom lip out as if he had never really considered the matter but that anything in the range between plain and repulsive would just about cover it.
‘Bit thin,’ he said in the end, ‘but she's got…quite a nice dress sense.’
He was irritated with himself for being so pathetic.
Why didn't he just say she looked absolutely wonderful?
What was he so afraid of?
Emily sighed.
‘I wonder how you'd describe me if someone asked you,’ she said.
‘Nice body, no brain, that's what you'd probably say.’
‘That's not true, Emily.
Emily, what is this?’
‘Could you ever see me as a full-time mother?’
Preston groaned.
‘I'm sorry, Emily.’
‘Sorry for what?’
Sorry you can't have children.
Sorry you want them.
Sorry you don't have a career to compensate.
Sorry you don't want one.
Sorry you're so low on self-esteem.
Sorry I don't love you.
‘Just sorry,’ he said.
‘It's not your fault.’
No.
So why did he keep blaming himself?
It's a form of conceit, Preston .
That was Carla, too.
Be open with her, he urged himself, tell her…
What?
I'm sorry but I just don't want a relationship right now.
I'm about to get divorced.
I'm scared stiff I'm going to lose touch with my children.
I don't know what I want.
Except…somewhere safe .
Something with four solid walls the won't blow down in the first puff of wolf's breath.
I need a refuge.
What I don't need is a love affair with a woman who's on the run from her past, her husband and God knows what else I haven't been told about yet.
Any of that would have done.
Or even, just,Well, see you next week .
The one thing he shouldn't have said was, ‘Let's have supper.’
Emily chose the restaurant.
A franchise bistro near her flat where the food came straight from the freezer to the infra-wave and the waitresses were on their way to something better and wanted you to know it.
Emily had a post-anorexic's lack of interest in food and anything to do with it.
She picked listlessly at a plate of Sole bonne femme while Preston ate something called a Scampi provençale in a kind of nervous frenzy.
They both drank a lot.
And it was clear, some way into the second bottle of Frascati, what was going to happen next.
Or perhaps it had been clear a long time before that.
She lived on the fifth floor of a pre-war block, and when they went up in the lift she casually passed him her handbag and said, Hold this, and started to take her clothes off.
Preston began to panic.
‘God, Emily…’
But he could only watch, alarm contending with excitement and coming out about a nose ahead.
‘What if someone gets in?’
And the mouth pouting, eyes full of mischief, and the breasts popping out under the sweater as she tugged it over her head.
And the lift still moving up through the floors, and no one else getting in, yet, and a voice in Preston's brain chanting tunelessly…
Second floor: ladies' lingerie bridal garments maternity wear murder and adultery…
When it stopped she wore only her shoes and stockings and Preston had an armful of clothes.
He followed, gibbering, down the corridor to the door of her flat.
‘What if Brenda's there?’
‘Give me my coat then,’ she said.
‘If you're worried about it.’
Preston bundled her into her coat and tried to hide the rest of her clothes inside his jacket.
But Brenda wasn't there.
Emily walked into the sitting room, let the coat fall to the floor and sat down on the couch, crossing her legs as she had in the wine bar, and watching him coolly as he stood there in the doorway.
She hadn't even drawn the curtains.
‘What if she comes in?’ hissed Preston.
He still had his arms wrapped round his jacket to stop her clothes from falling out.
‘Don't worry about Brenda,’ said Emily.
But it wasn't that easy.
Brenda was very particular about keeping the place clean and tidy.
She didn't really like Preston being there at all.
She didn't like him sitting on her cushions or dirtying her nice clean towels or weeing in her water closet or dripping on her bleached oak vinyl tiled floor.
Once Preston had entered the bathroom to find a sign hung there that said: ‘PLEASE WIPE SURFACES AND SURROUNDS AFTER USE.
He knew it was directed at him.
He had met women like Brenda before.
He knew that when she looked at him she saw a leaking penis.
Preston quailed at the thought of being caught by Brenda in an act of passion on the sofa without a box of tissues to wipe up the drips.
Emily put her feet up and stretched out and closed her eyes.
Putting her hand between her legs, she began to stroke with an expert finger.
Preston stopped worrying about Brenda.
He stopped worrying about the curtains and the tissues and the drips.
For a while he stopped worrying about anything.
But only for a while.
It came back, like a pain, temporarily dulled by drugs, in the terrible early hours in Emily's bed where he lay, awake and fretful, scourged by his conscience or his sense of preservation, or whatever it was he had so recklessly ignored, tensed for another screaming fit and wondering how he would explain to Brenda that it wasn't his fault.
But Emily lay beside him, sleeping peacefully.
Tonight, only Preston was in torment.
He lay awake through the night wishing he could go home or into the sitting room and watch a horror movie, and then, as the room paled with the threat of day, he drifted into an uneasy sleep, finally waking in full light with a foul taste in his mouth and the disjointed memory of a dream in which he was trapped in a lift dressed in women's underwear and wondering how to explain it when the fire brigade finally came and rescued him.
He sat up and groped for his watch on the bedside table.
It was nearly eight o'clock.
He leapt out of bed and began to search for his clothes.
‘What's the matter?’
Emily rolled over and squinted up at him.
‘Where're you going?’
‘I've got someone coming to see me at nine,’ he said.
They did not speak again until he was dressed and ready to leave.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘better be off, then.’
She still said nothing.
‘I expect I'll see you in the office,’ he said.
She muttered something into the pillow.
‘Sorry?’
She turned round to face him and he thought that she had been crying.
‘I said I won't be in the office,’ she said.
‘I've got an appointment with the pregnancy advisory service.’
He didn't understand at first.
He thought it was some research she was doing.
But she wasn't a researcher.
‘I'm having an abortion,’ she said.
‘Next Tuesday.’
11
The Man Who Let the Evil Out
‘But I thought you said she couldn't…’
‘I did,’ said Preston.
‘Or rather she said.
But she was wrong.
She can.
Apparently.’
‘I used to rehearse what I'd say to my students if they came to me with a problem like this,’ said William, ‘but no one ever did.
I don't know if it was because it never happened, or because they didn't think I was the right person to talk to.’
He sighed.
‘You're not,’ said Preston.
‘If there was anyone else I could possibly talk to about this I would.
I'm beginning to think I'd be better off talking to my Auntie Ethel.’
They were in one of the pubs near William's college.
A typical students' pub, full of old beams and smoke and noise.
And students.
It took Preston back fifteen years.
Like the problem.
It was a problem of youth, not of approaching middle age.
Except that, ironically, it had never happened to him then.
He'd always taken precautions.
Or someone had.
William seemed to be obsessed with the fact that he hadn't.
‘Quite apart from the risk of pregnancy,’ he said sententiously, ‘weren't you worried about…’
They were in a comer, speaking low, but he lowered his voice even further.
‘…Aids?’
as if the mere sound of it would send students screaming from the premises.
‘Yes,’ said Preston.
‘Yes, I was.
Only…’
He put his hand up to his eyes and squeezed them together.
He felt very tired.
Perhaps it was the smoke.
Perhaps it was William.
Perhaps it was life.
‘She's got this thing about me being so bloody cautious about everything.
Not diving in and all that.
For God's sake, William, I know.
But what am I going to do now?’
William looked around the bar, with a slightly hunted expression.
Preston waited.
He'd desperately needed to talk to someone about this and when he'd thought about it, William was the only person he could talk to.
This had been a shock.
‘And I thought you wanted to talk about mortgages,’ said William.
‘I expect you did,’ said Preston.
‘Sorry.’
‘No, no,’ said William, hastily.
‘It's quite all right.’
He had a drink of beer.
‘What do you think you should do?’ he said eventually.
Preston studied him curiously.
‘Is that what you rehearsed?’ he said.
‘I mean, when you were a moral tutor, was that the first line?
I mean, did they train you to say that?’
William was stung.
‘Well, it's a reasonable question, at least to start with.
You don't expect me to tell you what you should do, do you?’
‘It's not a question of me,’ said Preston.
‘It's Emily.
It's what she should do.’
It disturbed him that she hadn't broken the news by saying she was pregnant.
I'm having an abortion next Tuesday .
It felt like they'd missed out a stage or two.
‘All right, I'm sorry,’ said William.
‘I was just a bit taken aback, that's all.
Are you saying she doesn't want this abortion?’
‘Oh, I don't know.
I think she feels she has to, but she'd rather not.
She was shattered when she was told she couldn't have children.
Now she feels it's a bit like looking a gift horse in the mouth.’
‘But you don't want her to have it?’
‘How could I?
We're not even going out, really.’
It sounded ridiculous.
‘I mean, we're not…committed in any way.’
‘Then it's probably just as well.
And it is her choice.’
That old chestnut, thought Preston.
‘I keep trying to tell myself that,’ he said, ‘but I know she wants me to say, Have it.
I did say, If you really want it, I'd help with  the money and things.
I wouldn't leave her in the lurch.
But she wants more than that.
She wants commitment.
And I can't give her that.’
‘You mean she won't have it unless she has you?’
‘I think that's what I mean, yes.’
‘Then there's really nothing you can do.
It is her decision.
Not yours.
All you can do is be supportive…’
He sat back as if that was the final word on the matter.
Next student, please.
What's your problem, old boy?
Examination, Matriculation, Accommodation, purple lesions on the skin or just another female in the family way?
‘I know that,’ Preston said, irritably.
‘But…’
‘Is it the Catholic thing?’
‘I don't know.
Maybe.’
‘You still believe in all that?’
Preston sighed.
‘I didn't think I did.
But when it comes to something like this, there seems to be a lot of left luggage lying around.’
‘Funny, that's what Grandad used to call it,’ said William.
‘Left luggage.
Well, baggage, really.
Remember?
All that baggage they pile on you, he said, and you're going to have to carry it round with you for the rest of your life.’
William's grandad had fought a lonely war against the priesthood — and the grandmothers and mothers and aunts who were allied to it-but he'd lost every battle so far.
‘We still have this idea that if we do something morally wrong, or what They said was wrong, there'll be some kind of Divine Retribution,’ said William.
‘Some sudden thunderbolt from Heaven.
Or Hell.
It's ingrained.
We can't shrug it off.’
‘I'm not worried about Divine Retribution,’ said Preston.
This wasn't true, but he didn't want to get dragged into one of William's theological discussions, not just at the moment.
‘I'm worried about Emily.’
But there was no stopping William now, he was off on one of his tangents.
‘Did I ever tell you about the Man who Let the Evil Out?’
‘No,’ said Preston, in the tone of voice which would have convinced most people he didn't want him to.
But not William.
‘It was some research I was doing at Cambridge into the Black Death,’ he said.
‘There was this village, it was wiped out by the plague, no one was left except the priest.
He tended to the people while they were dying, gave them the Last Rites and everything, buried them.
But he never caught it.
Everyone else died but not him.
And in the end, when the last of them was dead, he went into the church and hanged himself.’
There was a moral in there somewhere but Preston wasn't sure if he'd cracked it yet.
‘He left a journal,’ continued William.
‘A kind of confession.
He'd committed adultery with the wife of the local steward — the land agent for the lord of the manor.
He thought that was why the plague had come.
It was all his fault.’
He leaned forward across the table, fixing Preston with eager gaze.
‘His sin had let the Evil out.’
‘I see,’ said Preston, after a moment.
He waited to see if there was any more, but there didn't seem to be.
William sat back and finished his drink with apparent satisfaction.
‘So you think I should hang myself, then?’
‘Excuse me?’
‘Or wait until we see if there's any adverse effect first.
I mean, a sudden leap in the statistics for people dying from Aids or some disease they haven't put a name to yet.’
‘I only offer it as an example of the Catholic guilt complex,’ said William, looking hurt.
‘Ah,’ said Preston.
‘Well, thank you very much.
It's been good talking to you.
I feel a lot better for it.’
They walked to the tube station together.
It was the tail end of the rush hour.
‘I said we'd go away together for the weekend,’ said Preston.
‘Somewhere in the country.’
‘To talk it over?’
‘Not really.
I don't think there's much to talk over.
No, more as a kind of…consolation.
A treat before the pain.
You know, like your grandad and the elastoplast.’
When they were little, whenever they had a cut or a graze and had to have the plaster taken off, which was painful, William's  grandad used to give them a treat first.
A chocolate bar or an ice-cream, or sometimes he'd just take them for a walk.
The two boys and the grandad.
They'd walk round the block and along the side of the railway embankment as far as the viaduct where the line crossed the road, and then they'd turn and walk back.
Preston used to love these walks, far more than the chocolate bars and the ice-cream, though he favoured having all three if William's grandad could be pushed that far.
He loved the ritual and the quiet sense of harmony between them as they walked along, and the things they talked about.
He especially liked them when it was William who had the plaster that had to be taken off.
‘I used to hate it when they yanked it off,’ said Preston.
‘I always wanted to ease it off, even if it prolonged the agony.
But they were ruthless, those women.’
Those women.
Five of them, there were.
William's nan and his mum and Preston's nan and his mum and his Auntie Ethel.
And just the one grandad.
No wonder he kept losing the battles.
‘I don't suppose you've thought any more about the house,’ said William.
‘Not really,’ said Preston, ‘it's been difficult.
You'd better count me out.
Sorry.’
‘That's all right.’
He seemed to hesitate for a moment.
‘We thought we'd go ahead anyway.’
‘Just you and Kate?’
‘No.
Louis and Tess are coming in.’
Preston was surprised.
‘She didn't seem too keen,’ he said.
‘Well, Louis must have persuaded her.
Anyway, we won't look for anyone else a while.
So if you do decide…’
‘Okay,’ said Preston.
‘Thanks.’
But he thought he'd already decided.
They took the same tube for the first few stops.
‘Where're you going away to,’ William asked, ‘for this weekend?’
‘I don't know yet,’ Preston said.
‘Haven't really thought about it.
Some country house hotel, I expect.
I'll have to look through a guide book.’
‘You could stay at our place if you want.’
Preston thought he meant in London.
He tried to say it wasn't quite what he had in mind.
But William meant the house in the country, near Cambridge.
‘I thought you'd sold it,’ said Preston.
‘Well, we've had an offer and it's going through the system, but it's still ours.
And all the furniture's still there.
All you have to do is turn the electricity on.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Of course.
We keep going back ourselves so it's quite lived in.
We'd be back this weekend only we're staying with Kate's parents in Sussex.’
‘Well…’
‘It's very pleasant.’
William seemed almost anxious for him to accept.
‘Remember?
You came there with Polly and the twins…’
12
The Picture
Preston remembered.
A weekend in May and the fields full of blossom and the twins a little short of their third birthday.
It was unthinkable, of course, to take them this time, but it was a wrench leaving them behind with Polly.
It's started, he thought.
He was on his way to becoming a statistic, one of the sixty per cent of fathers who lose all contact with their children within five years of divorce.
And he wasn't even divorced yet.
He hired a car for the journey because the cottage was difficult to reach any other way.
His wrist still throbbed from his fight with the Big Chicken but it seemed to be the only part of him that still had feeling; the rest had retired bleeding but numbed into some secret cave of its own.
They set off early to beat the traffic, and instead of blossom there were dead leaves on the pavement and a thin white mould of frost.
Emily's mood was sombre.
They listened to tapes throughout the journey and hardly spoke until they reached the cottage.
‘But it's lovely,’ said Emily, with surprise, as if it was the last thing she had expected.
‘How could they bear to leave it?’
It did look good from the outside, even at this time of the year, an eighteenth-century fenland cottage, half-timbered and thatch-roofed, originally built as a home for the man who worked the sluice gates.
But Preston wasn't sure about it.
On his previous visit he'd been full of gushing enthusiasm, trying to banish, or at least mask, the strange sense of unease it evoked.
It was partly the proximity to the fens, for though they'd long since been drained and farmed, all the fields were bound by ditches and dykes and he felt as if the land was oozing bog water, or sinking  imperceptibly into some primeval slime.
And though the cottage was pretty to look at, it was rather poky inside with small, dark rooms and low ceilings.
But the worst of it was the paintings.
They were prints from some medieval Book of Hours that William had had framed and stuck up on the walls.
There was one of Adam and Eve being tempted by the Serpent, another of them being kicked out of the Garden of Eden, and three others depicting Heaven, Hell and Purgatory.
And there was one other that Preston liked least of all.
It was in the kitchen and it consisted of three panels side by side.
The first panel showed people in a tavern, indulging in various forms of merriment, otherwise known as self-abuse, such as eating, drinking, carousing, kissing, cuddling, squeezing the barmaid's tits and fucking under tables.
In the second panel the same people, considerably sobered and looking as if they had a serious hangover, were being led away by the classic medieval figure of Death, a grisly skeleton in a black robe and cowl, who rather reminded Preston of an old schoolmaster he had known called Mr Pilkington.
In the third panel they were in Hell, stark naked and having various sharp instruments poked up them by a load of chortling demons.
It wasn't the kind of thing that grew on you.
He couldn't believe, now, that he had brought Emily here.
Was it just to save money, or had he imagined the atmosphere would perhaps induce a miscarriage?
Either way, it seemed to be the latest in a long line of crass decisions.
But Emily seemed quite cheerful about it all, now she'd arrived.
She went from room to room, praising the decor, and if she noticed the paintings they didn't appear to do her any obvious mischief.
There was a pile of logs and some firelighters and paper in a large basket in the hearth, and Preston started to pile them in the grate while she continued her explorations in the garden.
He had quite a cheerful blaze going by the time she came back, with an armful of twigs and berries which she arranged artistically in a vase on the table.
Then she came over to where he was kneeling by the fire and put her arms round him from behind and pressed her cheek against his.
‘Thank you for bringing me here,’ she said.
‘It's nice.’
For a moment, Preston thought it was going to be all right.
They made up the double bed in William and Kate's room, which was the best room in the house, overlooking the back garden and mercifully free from images of death, destruction and eternal torment, which presumably meant that William had been kept out of it, at least so far as the decor was concerned.
The walls and ceiling were papered with a print of forget-me-nots and there were original water-colours of the fens on the walls and a large portrait of Christ.
Not the Sacred Heart sort Mother Bernie and his Auntie Ethel tended to go for, but a post-Renaissance Rembrandt Christ, serene but human.
He bore a calm, gentle, sort of all-knowing but all-forgiving look.
Like a sixties' hippie, Preston thought irreverently, halfway to getting stoned.
It wasn't the sort of thing he would have put on the wall next to his bed but it was a lot more acceptable than Mr Pilkington in a black cowl.
They went to the village pub for lunch.
It was called the Eel and Boot and it had a large sign outside with a welly covered in slime and an even slimier serpentine creature peering irritably out of the top of it like Ridley Scott's alien in one of its earlier manifestations.
But it was an improvement on William's taste in art and they served a good pint of bitter, and Preston might almost have settled back to enjoy it if he'd been able to forget their reason for being there and if Emily hadn't kept on at him about William and the Black Death.
She'd seen one of his books in the cottage and Preston had told her that William was a leading authority on the subject.
He thought now it might have been a mistake.
‘But why did he choose that?’ she wanted to know.
‘I don't know,’ he shrugged.
‘Maybe he just kind of drifted into it.’
‘You don't drift into things like that,’ she said.
‘He must have had a reason.’
‘Well, he's always been a bit into death and destruction,’ Preston conceded.
‘He's a Catholic.’
‘So are you,’ Emily pointed out.
‘Not any more,’ said Preston, shuddering.
He didn't like the way the conversation was going.
‘Even so…’
She looked thoughtful.
‘What else have you got in common?’
‘Nothing,’ said Preston, firmly.
The thought of having anything in common with William horrified him.
‘Then what made you friends with him?’
Preston shrugged again.
‘My Auntie Ethel said I had to mind him,’ he said.
‘Mind him?’
‘Look after him.
You know.
Be his Minder.’
‘Why?
Was he much younger than you?’
‘No, but he was kind of…strange.
Vulnerable.
His mum married an American.
An airman from this base near us.’
as if this explained everything.
‘My dad's a Master Sergeant,’ William used to tell them, with a swagger in his voice, which was not wise in that neighbourhood.
Hank the Yank, they called him, or Quirk the Jerk.
‘My mam says he's prob'ly in prison or run off with a bit of stuff,’ said one of the hostiles in the playground one milk-break.
‘That's why he ain't around.’
And William in there with fists flailing and Preston inevitably drawn in, too, as the fight spread until they were hauled off to the headmaster's study for retribution; he was a caning head and it was two strokes on each hand for a fight in the playground, four for the classroom.
It was no picnic being William's Minder.
‘He's gone to look for a house for us,’ William would tell Preston on their way home from school.
‘He doesn't want us to come until he's found somewhere nice.’
And Preston, embarrassed, saying nothing.
The mystery of the missing Master Sergeant kept them all embarrassed for the best part of a year.
The story was he'd left the USAF and gone to America to find a job.
William and his mother were supposed to be going to join him later.
In the meantime he sent back parcels full of toys to keep William's spirits up; wonderful toys like an electric train with  a cowcatcher and a working headlight on the front and models of Liberators and Mitchell bombers and a replica of a Colt Peacemaker in a real leather holster.
They did nothing to improve William's popularity in the neighbourhood.
And then the toys suddenly stopped.
And Preston knew that William knew what the rest of them had known, or suspected, for some months: that he and his mother were never going to America and that the Master Sergeant was never coming back.
‘He's found another W-O-M-A-N,’ Preston heard his Auntie Ethel tell his nanna.
‘Apparently she's having his C-H-I-L-D.’
Preston's Auntie Ethel didn't seem to think Preston could spell until he went to university.
‘Elaine sent him a letter telling him to stop sending the T-O-Y-S and things.
She says it only unsettles him.’
Preston's Auntie Ethel and William's mother, Elaine, had been best friends at school, which was why Preston had been detailed as William's Minder — another one of Auntie Ethel's great ideas, like the newspaper that could defend you against muggers.
‘They were a grand lot for rallying around in a crisis, my family,’ Preston told Emily.
‘It kind of brought out the best in them.
Mind you, they'd had a lot of practice.’
The male Moodies had a long history of accidental death.
Preston's maternal grandad, his Great-Uncle Eddie and a cousin called Pete had all died from having things dropped on them from cranes down the docks.
Preston's father had decided to vary the tradition by volunteering, whilst in the Royal Navy, to be bombed by a low-flying aircraft with bags containing radioactive dust.
The idea, as subsequently explained to Preston, who was naturally curious, was to test its effect on steel deck planks.
No one, in those early days of nuclear weaponry, seemed to have anticipated the adverse effect it would have on the men sheltering below.
There was still no public admission of a connection with the leukaemia from which most of them, including Preston's father, had died.
‘The one thing I do have in common with William,’ conceded Preston, ‘is that we both grew up knowing the heavens might open at any moment and drop a load of shit on our heads.’
And if there was any risk of their forgetting it, there was William's grandad to remind them, who had a lifetime's experience of dodging flying effluent, not always with complete success.
William's grandad had been a surrogate father to both of them and some small counterweight to the preponderance of nans and aunts and mothers.
‘I think that's why William and I stayed friends,’ Preston told Emily.
‘Because I loved his grandad.’
They spent tie rest of the afternoon shopping in Ely for food and wine — and a pair of thigh-length boots which Emily said she wanted to wear ‘about the house’.
Without anything else.
But there didn't seem to be much of a demand for thigh-length boots in Ely.
They certainly couldn't find any in one of the four shoe shops.
‘Perhaps you could try waders,’ suggested Preston.
But in the end she settled for a pair of thick black stockings that she said would have to do.
She then announced that she wanted some cream cakes.
This seemed a little out of character.
‘I want you to eat them off me,’ she said.
‘On the rug in front of the fire.’
Preston looked over his shoulder to see if anyone had heard.
But no, Ely High Street went about its normal Saturday afternoon business without any visible sign of outrage.
The towers of the cathedral did not crumble and fall, the choir in the precinct outside did not falter in their fund-raising performance for the Conservation of Rural England.
Emily led him to a cake shop and he viewed the selection in the window like a naughty schoolboy surveying a stack of girlie magazines in a newsagent's.
‘Does it have to be real cream?’ he asked her.
‘That's up to you,’ she said.
‘You'll be eating them.’
But in the end she had to choose for him.
He said he was too embarrassed.
He said he was sure the shop assistants would know what he wanted them for from the way he asked.
She chose a chocolate eclair and a dairy cream sponge with strawberries and kiwi fruit.
‘The messier the better,’ she said, as they were leaving the shop.
Preston drove back to the cottage in a state of high nervous excitement but with some serious reservations.
This seemed to be developing into a regular pattern in his dealings with Emily.
Perhaps it would be good for him.
He wasn't sure about the rug, though.
It began well.
They ate, they drank, they took their clothes off, Emily put on her stockings and Preston piled more logs on tie fire.
And then Emily fetched the cream cakes in from the fridge.
They were quite a success, too, at first.
Preston was in such a state of arousal that he stopped worrying about the rug.
He managed to eat most of the cream, anyway, and Emily seemed to absorb the rest.
Also, he found that by glancing occasionally at William's medieval illustrations he was able to prolong the actual phallic performance to well over half an hour, a personal best, even deducting the time taken to eat the cakes.
But afterwards he felt depressed, and a bit ill, and there was a nagging pain in his chest which could either be indigestion or the start of a heart attack.
He recovered sufficiently to make love once more before they went to bed, but it wasn't as frantic or as demanding and he fell asleep afterwards on the sofa.
He couldn't remember the transition from sofa to bed, but he must have made it because he woke up there in total darkness with a headache and a blocked nose and a sense that something was not quite right.
There was a noise in the room, like the breathing of some large animal.
He felt for Emily, but she wasn't there.
‘Emily?’
He sat up in bed.
The noise grew louder.
He felt for the light switch.
Emily was curled up in a foetal position, naked, on the floor, sobbing.
Preston stumbled out of bed and tried to give her a hug, but  she fought him off as if it was an attack.
It seemed to be another fit like the last one, only worse.
‘It's the drink,’ he said, desperately.
‘It's just the drink, we shouldn't drink so much.’
It was very cold on the floor with no clothes on.
Emily must have been there some time.
Her body felt cold as death.
He pulled the duvet off the bed and tried to wrap it round her, but she reacted violently, as if he was trying to suffocate her.
After a long period of soothing and occasional stroking he managed to get his arms round her.
She was shuddering uncontrollably, either from cold or terror, or both.
He tried to warm her with his body but he was so cold himself he didn't know if it would work.
He kept trying to make calming noises but his teeth wouldn't stop chattering.
Finally he was able to coax her, half carry her, back on to the bed.
He began to chafe her with his hands to get some warmth into her, and suddenly, and to his complete astonishment, they were making love.
Or at least Emily was.
At first he thought she was attacking him.
And it was a form of attack, a ‘frenzy of passion’.
He'd always thought of that as a cliché before he met Emily.
The body that had been racked with sobbing was now pressing into him and moving in an altogether different rhythm.
She was covering him with kisses, her nails digging into his back.
But Preston's mind couldn't cope with it, and nor could his body.
‘Emily,’ he said.
‘Please…’
He tried to hug her again, comfortingly, but she wouldn't have it.
She started to moan and pull at his limp penis.
Her face was wet with tears, her eyes open but without expression.
He didn't know what to do.
He kept stroking her.
Then, over her shoulder, he caught sight of the reflection in the glass of one of the picture frames.
The picture itself was so dark he could only see the image of Emily in the glass, naked and moving wildly, her buttocks pumping urgently against him.
Preston felt an immediate response from that part of his body  which was most necessary to the occasion.
His brain still felt numbed.
They both came together very quickly, and Emily fell asleep almost immediately, her breathing regular, her body still.
But Preston stayed awake, staring at the picture on the wall.
The Rembrandt face of Christ.
Had he been truly ignorant at the time of what it was?
Had he known, but refused to acknowledge it?
And did it make any difference, theologically speaking, whether he knew or not?
These were the kind of questions they never gave you in catechism.
‘Preston?’ said Emily, in the morning, standing by the bed with a glass of orange juice.
He took it gratefully and drank.
He caught Christ's eye on him and flinched.
What could you say?
But it can't have happened.
It was all a dream, or he wasn't properly awake.
Or the picture had been transformed, temporarily, into a mirror.
Or it was just some seventeenth-century Dutch hippie paid to sit still for a few weeks in a dark robe in a cold studio.
What would Mother Bernard have said?
My God, did the lift go down low enough?
I did it for the girl, he protested.
But Adam had taken that line and it hadn't done him much good.
Emily sat on the bed beside him, smiling, and running the back of her hand along his cheek.
‘Sorry about last night.’
He nodded, and took her hand and kissed it.
‘At least we had a nice love,’ she said.
Then the phone rang.
Emily jumped and spilled her juice.
‘It's all right,’ said Preston, but he'd been shaken, too.
‘He said it was still connected.’
They were like a pair of burglars, he thought, making free of someone's house while the owners were away on holiday.
It was William.
‘How are things?’ he said.
‘Fine,’ said Preston, wondering.
It was just after eight.
‘No problems?’
‘No.’
Preston glanced guiltily towards the rug by the fire but he couldn't see any stains, not from here at least.
‘Anything you want me to do?’ he enquired.
‘No, no, I don't think so.’
A silence.
Preston knew then that something was wrong.
Perhaps he'd known before, as soon as the phone rang.
‘I've just had some bad news,’ William said.
‘I thought you'd want to know.
About Grandad.
He had a heart attack…’
And Preston's heart, too, seized and violently squeezed, and then released so the blood pumped wildly.
‘They got him to hospital, but then he had a second attack.
He died in the early hours of this morning.
I'm going up there now.
I knew you'd want to know.’
The fire was cold, the ashes piled up in the grate.
They'd left the plates lying around and the wine bottles on the floor, and there was still a bit of wine left in one of them.
They'd have a fair bit of tidying up to do before they left.
Preston opened the back door and stared out into the garden.
He couldn't see the hedge at the far end.
There was an early morning mist rising from the fens.
Come in, lads, come in and shut the door on the fog.
He remembered who had said it, now.
‘Preston?’
He turned and saw Emily watching him from the bottom of the stairs with his leather coat wrapped around her.
She looked very sexy.
‘Who was it?’
‘It was William,’ he said.
‘He wanted to tell me that someone's died.’
13
The Marmot and the Black Rat
William sat by the phone for a long while after he had called Preston, wondering if he'd done the right thing.
He couldn't help wondering if he'd interrupted him in the act of copulation.
Copulation.
Now why did he call it that, rather than making love?
And why did it matter if he had?
But William knew why it mattered.
They had both, from an early age, made the sinister connection between sex and death, and he didn't want Preston to make it now.
He didn't want him to feel guilty.
Sex and death, where d'you get that from ?
He could hear his grandad's scornful retort.
The poor mad nuns down the convent, I suppose .
William had loved his grandad, but he'd never really listened to him.
Never really accepted his reasoned view of life and history.
It was too simple, too enlightened.
William was invariably drawn to the darkness, finding a deeper, more complex truth in the world of myth and superstition; to the ‘poor mad nuns down the convent’; to the world of Mother Bernard and her visions of Hell and Damnation; to the demons and the shadows…
When he was a child of about ten or eleven, William used to play a kind of game with his shadow, except that it wasn't a game, really, it was deadly serious.
At night, when he was getting ready for bed, he would switch on his bedside lamp and stand with his back to it so he could see his shadow against the far wall.
Then he would make a pair of horns  with his hands and step slowly backwards, and the closer he got to the bedside lamp the bigger the shadow grew, so that finally it outgrew the wall and spread across the ceiling and towered above him, a vast and terrible Demon.
And then, when he couldn't step back any further, he would walk forward, watching the shadow shrink before him until it ended up as a small and pathetic figure beneath his feet.
He was never quite sure why he played this game.
It was partly because he got a weird buzz out of scaring himself half to death, and partly because he felt it was a kind of exorcism, to convince him he had control over his fears — and the horrors that were waiting for him round the corner of sleep.
William suffered greatly from nightmares as a child.
Many of them were predictably connected with the murder at the Turk's Head and what he had seen, or thought he had seen, one night on the railway embankment that ran behind it.
But the two he remembered in the clearest detail, well into adulthood, were a crazy, terrifying patchwork of the history he learned at school, or at his grandad's knee, who was a great, if not unbiased, teacher, and of his own personal history.
One, frequently occurring, featured his father.
He and William were working in a field covered with snow.
William was never very clear what they were doing exactly; picking sticks, perhaps: two peasants in a Brueghel winter landscape gathering fuel for the fire.
William was nervous because he'd been here before and he knew what was going to happen next, but his father kept smiling at him cheerfully, a strong, reassuring presence by his side.
William could see the village where they lived and the smoke from the fires rising straight up into the air and the dark tower of the church rising above a cluster of stark trees, and because he was nervous he wanted to work his way in that direction, so it would not be so far to run, but because his father was beside him, smiling his reassuring smile, he didn't.
He just kept on working in the field.
Until, as he had always known they would, the horsemen appeared, giant figures in steel armour, much larger than life, with great crested helmets dark against the sky.
And suddenly his father wasn't there any more.
He just disappeared, as if he'd never been there at all.
And the horsemen came riding down with  their horned helmets and their lances and William was running, screaming, towards the village, but it was always too far away.
The other nightmare he remembered in detail was the one about the Black Death.
It started with William standing alone in the middle of a street in a typical medieval city.
There were houses all around but all the doors were closed and the windows shuttered and there were great heaps of what looked like garbage in the dark, shadowed alleys between them.
William could see darker shadows moving on the garbage heaps and he knew these were rats and that the garbage was composed of rotting corpses and the rats were eating them, gorging on the swollen, putrefying bodies of the plague victims.
And as he watched, not really wanting to see but unable to tear his eyes away, he heard the death cart coming, trundling through the empty streets with the hooded ghouls of the burial squad walking along beside it tolling their bells.
And William began to run from the approaching cart, which was piled high with the bodies of the plague victims, and as he ran the streets became the familiar streets of his childhood and he knew that all the time he was running from the terrible cart he was getting closer and closer to the dark house by the railway embankment with its shuttered windows and its locked door, and that this was more terrible to him than anything in his history books.
When he was a bit older and more rational, William wondered if his interest in the darkest periods of human history was an attempt to exorcise these terrors of his childhood; to look at the worst of them, coldly and analytically, and not be afraid.
But his friends just thought he was a crazy obsessive with an unhealthy fascination for the macabre.
Either way it was the inspiration for the academic success that took him faster and further from the streets of his childhood than even his mother's success in business had.
And made him one of the leading authorities on the fourteenth century, which was arguably the most terrible century that had ever been, at least until the present one.
His grandad was proud of him.
‘The Professor,’ he called him, or, more often, ‘Young Bamber Gascoigne there…’
But it didn't impress his mother.
He knew that as far as his mother was concerned it was like painting fairground panels, it was like keeping whippets.
It wasn't Real.
‘What you going to do with a degree in history?’ his mother asked him when he graduated with a first.
‘How about taking me on as a lift attendant?’
William suggested, because she'd just bought Mary Ann Evans's and was always talking about the trouble she was having finding good staff.
But his mother didn't think that was funny.
She was thinking of getting rid of the lift attendants anyway.
‘I'm going to do a PhD,’ he told her, ‘on the Social and Economic Consequences of the Great Plague of 1347 to 1350 on Rural Parishes in the South of England.’
‘My God,’ said his mother, ‘and on the taxpayers’money.’
It should have been on her money but William was on a full grant at university.
His mum had a good accountant and technically she was running at a loss.
‘Why don't you do the social and economic consequences of the Great Plague of the Twentieth Century?’ his mum wanted to know.
She meant the trade unions.
But William wasn't interested in the trade unions.
He was interested in the story of the Manchurian marmot.
‘Once upon a time,’ he would begin his lectures, ‘in the remote marches and forests of Central Asia, near a lake called Issyk-Koul in the province of Semiriechinsk, there lived a small, pretty squirrel-like creature called the Marmot…’
His students thought he'd finally flipped and started telling fairy stories, but this was no fairy story, this was a real Gothic Horror.
For thousands of years the marmots had lived on the banks of the lake in Central Asia where they played host to a flea called xenopsylla cheopsis and a tiny bacillus, or disease, called pasteurella pestis , with no dramatic consequences to any of them, and not the slightest impact on the rest of the world.
And then something happened to disturb the marmots.
William didn't know what it was — flood or earthquake, drought  or famine, or a combination of all four — but they moved, and they took the fleas and the bacilli with them, and somewhere in their travels they encountered the black rat rattus rattus , and the drama began to move along a bit, because rattus rattus was a vagabond and a great little mover.
Rattus rattus moved all over Europe and Asia, hitching rides on camel trains and on waggons and particularly on ships, and the fleas deserted the marmots and attached themselves to the rats, and the bacilli went with them.
William didn't know why the fleas left the marmots for the rats.
Maybe they liked the taste better.
Maybe after a few thousand years of marmot for breakfast, dinner and tea they fancied a change.
Maybe they had a sense of adventure.
Maybe they knew this was their big moment, their chance to make history.
Or maybe they had no choice.
Maybe, as William strongly suspected, this first communion between the rat and the marmot had not been without violence and rattus rattus , being the little fucker he was, had savagely copulated with the small, pretty, squirrel-like creature — and then torn her throat out.
Or not necessarily in that order.
Sex and death, the guilty violent coupling; an ongoing historical theme.
He must write a paper on it some day.
But if this were the case, then the fleas had taken a terrible revenge for the loss of their erstwhile companion through history, their life-support system.
Because unlike the marmots, the rats had no resistance to the disease that the fleas carried.
And when they died and the fleas had finished feasting on their blood, which was by then putrid and crawling with the bacilli, the fleas looked round for another host, and if they could not find another rat, or any small hairy creature to their liking, they settled for the next best thing, which was usually human.
What really fascinated him was the idea that it was such a small thing, in such an obscure corner of the world, and between two such insignificant creatures.
The world did not stop in its tracks when it happened, it did not pause for breath, it did not miss a heartbeat.
People continued to go about their daily lives, make their plans, take decisions, eat, drink, love, pray for a good harvest, pray for rain, in complete ignorance of the dramatic effect this far-off encounter would have on their lives.
‘History is the story of humankind's attempt to impose order on chaos,’ William told his students.
‘Feudalism was the process by which individuals bartered their personal liberties in return for protection.
They traded freedom for security; or, rather, the illusion of security.
For chaos was the natural state and there could be no protection against the chance encounter of the Manchurian marmot and the black rat.’
And nor is there now, he might have added, because William was obsessed with the idea that it might happen again; that it might be happening now, the next chance encounter between the marmot and the rat — or whatever their modern equivalent.
The first link in the chain of events that would unleash chaos on the world.
14
The Devil in the Corner
‘Seamed stockings,’ said Preston's Auntie Ethel.
‘Those were his last words on this earth.
Seamed stockings, he said, and then he died.’
Preston winced.
He'd always had a thing about Famous Last Words.
Before his own grandad had died he was alleged to have remarked, ‘By, that wind's a killer,’ seconds before it blew the crane that dropped the crate that smashed his head in.
Whenever Preston said anything that sounded remotely like Famous Last Words, he always said something else quickly, something so trite and meaningless that it could never tempt Fate.
But could you ever be sure of making it trite and meaningless enough?
‘Seamed stockings’ seemed to be a pretty safe bet on the face of things.
But perhaps he'd been over-excited.
‘He always thought they were sexy,’ Preston mused.
‘He said it was because the seams looked as if they were going somewhere…’
‘It had nothing to do with That,’ said Auntie Ethel, sharply.
‘Trust you.
It was because she'd just started to sell them at the shop.
It was too much for him after all that business at the stocking factory.’
Preston knew who ‘she’ was, and it wasn't the cat's mother.
It was William's.
Auntie Ethel's old school friend, Elaine, not so popular now that she was Rich and Successful.
‘But they closed the factory twenty years ago,’ said Preston.
‘It couldn't still be bothering him.’
‘These things do,’ said his mum, ‘especially as you get older.’
‘And it was the last real job he ever had,’ said Auntie Ethel.
‘I don't count that stuff with the fairs.’
They drove to see him at the Chapel of Repose.
He was wearing a navy blue suit Preston had never seen him in before, and his long wispy white hair had been combed back and slicked down with something to make it neat.
Preston would have preferred him in his cloth cap with the old woolly cardigan he used to wear, or the long grey mac.
He didn't look anything like he remembered him.
‘Come in, lads, come in and shut the door on the fog.’
On a chair in the scullery in his cardigan and his cap and his bad leg stuck out to one side, and his tins of paint on newspapers all around, and a big panel of wood propped up against the wall with a picture on it of a battleship in a stormy sea.
And the two of them shuffling in with the hoods of their duffel coats over their heads and their school scarves pulled over noses and mouths like a pair of monks doing the rounds during the Black Death.
They always knew things were bad when they came back from school together to William's house and found William's grandad painting battleships.
It meant he'd been laid off again at the stocking factory.
Whenever this happened he'd get his paints and brushes out and start on another panel for Uncle Titch, who had the contacts with the fairground people.
It kept him occupied and brought a bit of money in, but not much, because fairs were going through a lean patch, too.
William's grandad blamed it all on the Television, like most things, the cathode god, the new opium of the masses.
William's grandad, Samuel Morris Epstein, was a communist and an atheist and a Jew.
He saw no contradictions in this.
To be a Jew was to be a member of a tribe, even if you'd stopped dancing round the totem pole.
He was an outcast among outcasts and proud of it; it didn't mean he had to believe in all the mumbo-jumbo.
Communism had been his religion, the romantic, revolutionary communism of 1917 and Petrograd and the streets full of soldiers and sailors and workers and red flags and armoured cars that looked as if they were made of galvanised steel buckets, and the  cruiser Aurora out on the river with its searchlight blazing — now there was a fairground panel he could have painted if only he could have got away with it — but it wasn't the same any more.
It had grown stale and ugly and he'd left the Party the first time they sent the tanks in, but he didn't stop believing in the dream, the illusion, the myth , any more than he stopped believing in the Devil just because he didn't think there was a God.
He painted, as required, the scenes of Britain's imperial past: red-coated soldiers and turbaned Sikh lancers, and white hunters and gorillas, and aborigines and kangaroos, and Baden-Powell and battleships.
But being a rebel at heart he always modelled the battleships on the Potemkin , and in the corner of every panel he painted a little red devil with a pitchfork and a knowing grin.
‘It's my trademark,’ he told the boys.
‘I like to remind people he's always there.’
It was Grandad's basic contention in life that whenever you were cycling downhill with the wind behind you and the sun on your back and never a care in the world, some little bugger nipped out of a bush and stuck a spike in your spokes.
Though a committed atheist and dedicated opponent of the Catholic Church, William's grandad maintained a healthy respect all his life for the power of Satan.
‘Where's the funeral?’
Preston asked on the drive over to William's house.
They lived in Woolton now, since his mother's move into the merchant classes.
‘At St Oswald's,’ said his mum, who was sitting next to him, prim and nervous in her best hat and coat which was only proper for a visit to Woolton.
‘Really?
But I thought they only allowed you to bury Catholics there.’
A small but significant silence.
He heard Auntie Ethel sniff in the back seat.
He looked at her in the driving mirror.
‘Well?’
‘They had him baptised before he died.’
‘What?’
‘Keep your eyes on the road,’ said his Auntie Ethel.
‘You nearly went into the back of that bus.’
‘Well, it can't do any harm, Preston,’ said his mum.
‘And it might have done him a bit of good.’
‘They had him baptised while he was dying ?’
‘Not while , Preston,’ said his aunt, in the tone of voice she used when she wasn't going to take any nonsense.
But there might have been a hint of defensiveness there, too.
‘Well I presume they didn't wait until he was dead?’
‘No, but you make it sound as if it's a bit tasteless.’
‘A bit tasteless?
My God, it's gross.
How would you fancy having a heart attack with a priest and a couple of altar boys hopping round throwing cold water all over your head?
Jesus Christ…’
‘It wasn't like that — and don't take the name of the Lord in vain.’
‘Well, what was it like?’
‘Well, they don't use altar boys for a start, and they did it between attacks.’
‘Oh, wonderful.
I bet that helped his survival chances no end.’
The poor old man.
He'd always predicted it.
Lying there helpless as a babby, paralysed and drugged and dumb while they fetched the priest to him.
Don't let them do it, boys , he'd said to them.
If you're anywhere near, keep them away from me .
But they hadn't been near enough.
‘Anyway, I thought it was the Last Rites they gave you when you were dying, what d'you call it, Extreme Unction?’
That was the Catholic name for it and it had always seemed very appropriate to Preston, conjuring up visions of an unctuous priest dripping oil and glib assurance.
‘Or did they get two for the price of one?’
More silence, brittle with self-righteousness.
Auntie Ethel sniffed again.
As they reached the outer suburbs it began to drizzle slightly and Preston switched the wipers on.
Big new detached houses on either side of the road with gardens and garages and Georgian colonnades made of plastic.
The odd bit of woodland, neatly railed and labelled and no wolves allowed, and Dogs Must Be Kept on a Lead and Not Be Permitted to Foul the Footpath Penalty £50 and Quite Right Too.
‘Whose idea was this, anyway, his wife's or his daughter's?’
But he thought he knew the answer to that one already.
William's  mum had never been too bothered about the Church; she had other gods to propitiate.
‘He did promise her, you know,’ said his own mum, ‘before they ever got married.
He said he'd convert and he never did.’
‘Only because he wanted to get his leg over.’
His mum giggled.
‘Preston!’
Shock waves from the rear seat.
‘That's no way to speak of the Dead.
And don't you be laughing at him, our Nell.
It only encourages him.’
‘That's what he told me,’ said Preston.
I'd promise anything for a leg over in those days , he used to say,but I've got more about me now .
‘And it's not as if he had any convictions of his own,’ said his Auntie Ethel.
‘What do you mean he didn't have any convictions?
He was a communist.’
Not strictly true, he was a lapsed communist, but Preston meant it to be provoking and it was.
‘Rubbish,’ snapped Auntie Ethel.
‘I hope you're not going to make a nuisance of yourself, Preston, because if you are it would have been better if you hadn't come.’
‘Thanks for coming,’ said William, formally, and he squeezed Preston's arm.
He was wearing a suit, too, a grey one.
Preston felt depressed.
It seemed as if everyone was going to conform to this funeral except him.
‘I wanted to pay my respects,’ he said, equally formal.
But he didn't want to go to the bloody thing, not after what they'd done to the poor old man.
He would hang about outside and then go up to the grave afterwards and pay his own quiet tribute.
Did William know about the forced baptism?
Had they dared to tell him?
Would he care?
‘Did they tell you about his Last Words?’
Preston asked him instead.
‘No.’
William looked puzzled.
‘Mum said he got up in the middle of the night to go to the toilet.
Then she heard this crash.
She didn't say anything about any Last Words.’
Preston told him what his aunt had said.
William stared at him.
‘My God,’ he said, ‘after all those years.’
‘He always said Fashion would be the death of him,’ said Preston.
‘Fashion,’ he'd rant, when they sent him home on short time from the stocking factory.
‘It's all part of the Great Capitalist Conspiracy.
They're just trying to cut labour costs.’
That was when they first changed over from seamed stockings to seamless ones and started laying off the skilled knitters and bringing in the women.
‘Fashion, my arse,’ he'd rave.
‘You don't need a skilled knitter to spin seamless stockings, that's what this is all about.
A trained monkey could operate them new machines — or a woman.’
They learned a lot of things at the twisted knee of William's grandad, and one of them was misogyny.
‘Grandad was never very good at spotting trends,’ said William.
‘He had a knack of jumping on roundabouts just when they were coming to a dead stop.’
This was true.
Ever since the horses.
‘My grandad was a bronco buster when he was younger,’ William used to tell them at school, and they'd scoffed, even Preston, who was meant to be his Minder.
It was just Quirk the Jerk spinning another yarn.
But he wasn't.
Not that time.
Though they weren't the rangy mustangs they took him to mean.
‘Great strapping brutes they were, with backs on them like the deck of a ship,’ William's grandad said, who'd been thrown off both and knew.
‘One kick of them hooves and you'd be in the middle of next week.’
He'd been brought up on a farm and had a way with horses, and his first job when he left school was working for a brewery breaking in the big black cobs they brought over wild from Ireland and put to use as cart-horses dragging the great heavy drays full of ale.
But they got rid of the lot for a couple of Ford motor trucks, and William's grandad with them.
‘The first job I was robbed of by Progress,’ he told the boys, but added darkly, ‘and the Yanks.’
It was the beginning of a remarkable career.
‘The jobs I've been in and out of would tell the history of the twentieth century,’ he'd say.
Preston didn't know the half of them, only the big ones.
Even wars had a way of making William's grandad redundant.
He'd joined the International Brigade just before Franco's final victories and been sent back when he was on his way to Cardiff to catch the potato boat to Bilbao.
‘I knew right away we'd have to start preparing for the next one,’ he told the boys, who were the only ones who'd listen to him by then, in the home at any rate.
So he dug a bomb shelter in the back yard, which was fine for his wife and little daughter, William's mum-to-be, but not so convenient for him when he joined the Merchant Navy and found himself out on Atlantic convoys with the wolf packs at his heels.
They didn't make him redundant this time, they just sank the ships he was on.
The third time he was eight days in an open boat before they picked him up, near dying of exposure, and his nerve gone.
They sent him to a nursing home to recover, deep in the English countryside, well away from the war.
‘In the middle of bleeding Lincolnshire,’ he said.
‘If there was anywhere safe in England in 1943 you'd have thought that was.’
But he was badly informed again and hadn't calculated for the Americans.
They were flying the Liberators in for the big daylight raids on the Ruhr and one of them flew straight into the field where Grandad was working, planting carrots for the war effort.
‘They said it was engine failure,’ he said.
‘But I reckon they just mistook it for a runway.
Bloody Yanks.’
William's grandad was deeply prejudiced against Americans, even before the Master Sergeant.
‘Where were they when we were running down U-boat alley?’ he used to demand, and the boys would shake their heads dutifully, and William with some embarrassment on account of being half American himself.
U-boat alley was the gap in mid-Atlantic where they didn't have air cover from Britain or Canada, but Preston always imagined it a bit like the alley at the back of their houses  with a U-boat at each end firing torpedoes at Grandad as he hopped and scuttled down it on his way to the Turk's Head.
But he wasn't hopping when the Liberator exploded.
He was sprinting for dear life across a carrot patch and doing quite well until one of the pieces caught up with him.
They identified it afterwards as the seat off the chemical lavatory.
‘And that was me, crippled for life,’ he used to say, ‘knee-capped by a Yankee flying bog.’
‘There's nothing glamorous about war,’ he'd tell the boys years later when he found them watching yet another Great American War Movie on the TV.
‘It's all shit and blood, so don't go believing any of the rubbish on That Thing.
And don't tell your nan I said shit.’
When he came out of hospital they fixed him up with a job in a parachute factory, but he'd just finished the training period when the war ended, and they didn't think they'd need so many parachutes for the next one.
But when he got the job in the stocking factory he seriously thought it was for life.
They'd always be wanting nylons, he thought, he'd seen what they'd do for them during the war.
Nylons were part of the US strategy for world domination.
Nylons for the women, Coke for the kids and guns for the men to go on fighting ‘Germins’ or ‘Reds’or whoever happened to be next in the firing line, that was William's grandad's uncluttered view of world history.
‘They didn't reckon on us making our own nylons,’ he gloated.
‘It's the Boston Tea Party in reverse.’
Like Marx, William's grandad went in for the broad dialectic of history and wasn't too fussy about the fine print.
He should have read the writing on the machine they gave him to spin the golden thread.
Made in Reading, Pa., it said.
But William's grandad was too busy working to notice or care, riding shotgun to a great clattering brute of a knitting machine that reminded him of the Irish cobs he'd broken in for the brewery; he could knit thirty fully fashioned stockings an hour, sixteen hours a day.
‘Twenty-two yards long it was,’ he'd tell the boys proudly, during their consolation walks before the elastoplast came off.
‘The length  of a cricket pitch, and you had to move as fast as Denis Compton, believe you me, to get from one end to the other and pull them levers.’
Why the machine had levers at each end was a mystery never satisfactorily explained to the boys, but it created another alley in Grandad's life, the alley between one machine and another, and though there were no U-boats shooting at him, it was hard going with his bad leg.
But William's grandad had a system working for him.
He had an alley mate, the man on the next machine, who pulled the levers for both of them at one end while William's grandad pulled for them both at the other.
The only problem was, they were supposed to be on piece work, and it meant working at the same pace.
The foremen didn't like that; it smacked of syndicalism.
‘They didn't want us to work together,’ William's grandad said.
‘They wanted us to work against each other.
Divide and rule, that was the policy.’
So they kept changing the man on the next machine, and until he could talk him into using the System, William's grandad would have to lurch down machine alley every few minutes, heaving his stiff leg behind him like Long John Silver and cursing like his parrot.
But it was good money most of the time and he loved his machine.
He fed it lots of oil and wiped at it all the time with an oily rag so it shone.
Black Beauty, he called it, on the good days.
And on the bad days, when he didn't have an alley mate, Black Devil.
But like the dray horses its days were numbered, and so were Grandad's.
‘They must have known when they sent them over,’ he raged when he first went on short time.
‘Dumping their old rubbish on us.’
The Pa. stood for Pennsylvania, and the machines had been sent over as part of the Marshall Plan to get Europe back on its feet and wearing nylons just like the Americans.
But within a few years the Americans were using new machines, a fraction of the size, that an unskilled woman could operate for a fraction of the pay, and upon which she could spin as many stockings an hour as the Black Beauty — and without seams.
‘What's the matter with seams?’
William's grandad would roar.
‘Men like seams.
Seams go somewhere.’
‘That's enough of that, thank you,’ William's nan would say.
‘In front of the boys.’
She was careful what was said in front of boys, especially William.
She knew he had the Master Sergeant's genes and she was worried he'd grow up to be an adulterer, just like his dad.
But it was Preston who'd become the adulterer, not William.
‘Where's Kate?’ said Preston.
‘Did she come up with you?’
But William shook his head.
‘Something happened at work,’ he said.
‘She couldn't get away.’
But he seemed a bit tight-lipped about it.
‘Will you help carry the coffin?’ he asked Preston before he left.
‘He was as much your grandad as mine, really.’
‘Yes,’ said Preston.
‘I'd like to.’
But if he was going to carry the coffin he had to go to the funeral service, so the Church had him by the balls again, as it had, more or less, since he was born.
‘Did your grandfather have any favourite hymns?’ the priest asked William before the service.
‘I don't think so.’
William looked helplessly at Preston.
‘He was very fond of ‘Here We Go, Here We Go, Here We Go’,’ said Preston.
It was the battle hymn of the striking coal miners in 1984, and the old man used to sing it while he watched them fighting the police on the television, but it turned out to be another lost cause.
‘Takes you back, doesn't it?’ said William as they went into the church.
Preston wondered if he really didn't know about the deathbed pantomime.
Or was he just pretending to be ignorant?
That was the trouble with William.
You never really knew what he knew.
‘Have Mercy, oh Lord, on the soul of thy dearly departed servant Samuel,’ they all incanted dutifully in the crowded church.
Except for Preston, who had his own one-way dialogue with the Almighty.
‘I don't seriously believe it had anything to do with That Business over the picture,’ he informed his silent Saviour on the cross above the altar.
‘I honesty don't think your mind works like that and I don't suppose you thought it was a very good likeness anyway, but was it the Adultery?’
He didn't think it was a case of God's being vindictive, more a case of rules being rules and God having to administer them, like a caning head, and where there was Adultery there was always a Death, that was the way it was.
Or else he, Preston, had inadvertently torn a hole in the fabric of the universe and the Evil had come seeping through.
But even as he prayed he could hear the voice of William's grandad berating him from under the lid of the closed coffin.
The Voice of Reason.
I was seventy-five years old, you daft bugger, d'you seriously think it was your fault, just because you got your leg over some Judy?
This is the daft nuns they sent you to all them years ago and your head ‘s still full of the rubbish they crammed into you.
He'd fought a long battle against the boys’ religious indoctrination.
There wasn't much he could do about Preston except shout abuse across the garden fence at his nan while she was putting the washing out, but he managed to persuade her it would be a mistake sending him to a Catholic school.
‘You don't want him growing up different from the rest of the kids in the street,’ he said cunningly, because he knew this was a weakness of Preston's nan.
And when William came back from Germany and a decision had to be made about his education, he argued that it made sense to send him to the state school, the same as Preston.
‘He'll look after him,’ he said.
‘He'll stop people from picking on him for being different.’
There was a terrible fear of Being Different in those two houses.
Maybe it was a reaction to William's grandad and his wicked flaunting of convention.
Maybe it was because they thought it was dangerous to stand out in any way from the crowd, in case fate was tempted to drop a crate on their heads.
So both boys went to the state school in spite of Father Michael at St Oswald's, but it was a hollow victory because twice a week, once after school, once on Saturdays, they were sent to the Convent to learn catechism off the nuns so they would grow up good Catholics after all.
‘I might have failed where you're concerned,’ said William's nan, grimly.
‘But I won't with the boy.’
It was part of the feud they fought over his refusal to convert.
‘And the promises he made me, Father, when he asked me to marry him,’ she complained to Father Michael.
‘And you, too, remember?
And never once has he been for Instruction.’
‘Remember our Lord was a Jew,’ said Father Michael, piously, but he remembered and did not forgive.
But William's grandad reckoned the real reason they had it in for him was because of the name.
Mary Teresa Epstein, what kind of name was that for a good Catholic girl, orthodox to the core?
There was a joke to make the Devil laugh, nasty smirking face in the corner of the picture.
So William and Preston were sent for the Instruction that William's grandad had so artfully dodged.
‘Like lambs to the slaughter,’ he said, sorrowfully, thinking of the rubbish they'd be taught and wondering how to counter it.
‘They'd do the same to me, if I was ever helpless enough,’ he'd say.
‘But when the pair of youse has got enough sense you can fight them off for me and all the damn priests and nuns they'll bring along with them.’
‘I can see by those here present that Samuel did not lack for friends,’ said the priest who now filled the place of Father Michael.
‘And I am sure that a mighty host awaits him in the Next World.’
But he cleverly avoided being specific about the geography, Preston noted, obviously not convinced that the late baptism had done the trick.
He might not have been able to dodge the water, but they'd never pinned him down for the Instruction.
He was right about one thing, though, that priest.
William's grandad had a lot of friends, unless they were there only to make sure he was safely laid to rest, where he couldn't get up to much more mischief.
‘I've never seen the church so crowded for a funeral,’ said  William's nan proudly, though there was a hint of suspicion in the eyes that gazed around the congregation.
She was looking for communists and ex-lovers.
Preston didn't see any he could put in either category, not at first.
He didn't know many of the people there.
In the last few years of his life William's grandad had finally found employment in a growth industry — he was a volunteer with the Victims Support Scheme, and a lot of the mourners were people from the office, or victims of muggings and burglaries that he'd helped to put on their feet again.
But Preston found he was scanning the crowd at about the right height for an eight-year-old child, and it was only after a while that he realised he was looking for Uncle Titch.
He was waiting for the crowd to disperse from the grave so he could say his own private farewells when a respectable old lady with a blue rinse came up to him and said, ‘You don't remember me, do you, I'm Mrs Flaherty.’
Preston did a double take.
‘Not the Mrs Flaherty,’ he said, wondering if it could be her sister.
But it was the Mrs Flaherty all right, of Flaherty's Famous Funfair and the Wall of Death Riders and Flaherty's Flying Horses.
She'd lost a few stone since the last time he'd seen her and put on about half a ton of make-up.
‘What happened to the Flying Horses?’
Preston enquired, thinking they'd probably been put down years ago, but the Flying Horses were alive and kicking and in at least as good a shape as she was.
‘People like a good old-fashioned merry-go-round,’ she said.
‘We've got five of them operating now.
We do functions mostly, college balls and barbecues and company outings and that.
I've got a bright young thing working for me does all the bookings and the publicity, can I give you a brochure?’
She took one out of her handbag.
Take a ride into the past, it said, on Flaherty's Flying Horses.
It took Preston back, looking at it.
All that gold, all that scrolling, all those teeth and glaring eyes.
‘People like the old gallopers,’ said Mrs F. ‘They like a bit of  the old nostalgia.
Don't like the present, you see, and can you blame them?
‘He knew that,’ she said, inclining her head towards the grave.
‘And Titch, bless his heart, but it came too late for them.’
She took a white lace handkerchief out of her bag and dabbed a corner of it carefully at the corner of her eyes before the make-up ran.
‘I often wondered what happened to Uncle Titch,’ said Preston.
He saw William looking at him curiously across the crowd and then detach himself from the group he was with and move towards them.
‘Been dead for years now, has Titch, don't live to a grand old age as a rule, his sort, everything's compressed, you see, and he lived a lot longer than they usually do.
I took him into the business with me, you know, after all that bother at the Turk's Head.’
All that bother.
‘I didn't know that,’ said Preston.
‘He just disappeared.’
‘Ah well, you were only a lad, they don't tell you everything do they.’
‘What don't they tell you?’ said William, smiling but curious.
‘This is Mrs Flaherty,’ said Preston, ‘from the funfair.
She was telling me about Uncle Titch.’
He watched William's face, wondering if he'd forgotten, or blocked it out as he appeared to have blocked out so much else.
But he remembered.
‘So he came in with me, into the business,’ said Mrs F., ‘and brought the best part of a blessed fairground with him.
All that stuff Sammy used to paint…’
All that stuff.
All those panels with the Battleship Potemkin , all those scenes of imperial glory, all those horses and birds and lions and tigers and bears in the dark silent rooms covered with blood and the mad eyes glaring.
‘It was Sammy got them out for us and loaded into the van,’ she said.
‘Titch wouldn't go near the place after what happened, and I was surprised your grandad could after what he'd seen.’
‘Excuse me?’ said William.
‘Well, when he found the body.’
Preston's astonishment was reflected in William's eyes, and it didn't look feigned.
‘Didn't you know it was him that found her?
Well, perhaps you were too young, they didn't want to give you nightmares.
Titch left him a key, you see, while he was away, so he could keep an eye on the place, or maybe if he wanted to do some painting, the way your nan carried on about him doing it at home — anyway, he went round there that night.’
She shuddered theatrically.
‘All that blood.
I'm surprised it didn't give him a heart attack there and then.
Mind you, he was younger in those days, and a fit man in spite of his leg.’
They stood there, shocked and remembering among the graves and the mourners filing past paying their respects.
‘I'd better get on, I suppose,’ said Mrs Flaherty.
‘Your mam's invited me back to the house.’
They walked back to the cars together and Preston never did get to stand there alone.
‘I've still got some of the things Sammy painted,’ said Mrs Flaherty.
‘You can always tell the ones he did, he used to put a little devil in the corner, do you remember that?’
15
Uncle Titch
Why had they never told him?
The graveyard was on a slope above the village, and from where he stood William could look down over most of the neighbourhood where he used to live.
He could just make out the railway embankment from here, but not the station or the building that used to be the Turk's Head.
He could see the stocking factory, though, or at least the shell of it.
It had been turned into what they called industrial units but his mum said only half of them had ever been taken up.
One of them made crochet toilet-seat covers that they sold at the shop.
And beyond the factory he could see the bit of wasteland where Mrs Flaherty used to keep the Famous Funfair under tarpaulins for the winter.
There was a car dump there now.
William felt no sense of nostalgia for any of it.
He had never been happy here.
He had never felt as if he belonged.
At times, in the months following the return from Germany, he had actively hated it and all the people who did belong.
Later, usually with Preston or his grandad, he'd felt a bit more at home, but not much.
He was always an alien.
He heard his mother calling from the gate of the church.
‘Come on, William, the car's waiting.’
He used to visit the graveyard sometimes when he was a child and just wander about reading the headstones.
When he went up to Cambridge he met another American who'd been brought up in England, whose father was a journalist in the London bureau of the Washington Post , and he'd had a thing about graveyards, too.
He said it was something to do with digging for roots, but William  didn't know about that, he just liked graveyards.
Graveyards, old churches, gargoyles…
He turned back to look at them, jutting out from the foot of the church tower.
The usual menagerie of demons.
He even knew the names of some of them: Grafficane, the doggish; Dragnignazzo, the fell dragon; Ciriato Sannuto, the tusked boar; Caynazzo, the snarler…
‘William, are you going to stand there all day?’
‘Okay, okay,’ said William.
'’ Where God erecteth his church, the devil in the same churchyard will house his chapel’,’he quoted, as he joined her in the limo.
‘The sandwiches'll be all curled up at the edges,’ his mum complained.
William gazed out of the window as they drove through what used to be called The Village and was now just another suburban shopping centre.
He could remember how strange it had seemed after the base in Germany.
It felt strange now, but there were still a few shops that seemed familiar.
And then he saw the pet shop.
He twisted round, looking back at it.
The pet shop where his grandad had bought him his hamster called Hammer and his goldfish called Sickle and where his nan used to take them for resurrection when they died.
His grandad had told him about that, years later, when he was about fifteen.
‘Your nan used to take you in there,’ he said, ‘with this dead hamster in a cage or the bloody goldfish floating belly up in the bowl, and she'd wink at him and say, It's very sick, can you take it in the back and make it better?
Wink, wink.
Daft bloody woman and you standing there gawping next to her.
‘And he'd go away and chuck it in the bin or down the sink and come back with a new one.
You never knew the difference.
I went in there myself one day for a packet of sunflower seeds for the hamster, and he says to me, I don't know what I'm going to do, Mr Epstein, when she comes in here with you over her shoulder.’
William had been amazed.
He'd thought he had the longest living hamster in captivity.
His nan was furious when she found out he knew, and who'd told him.
‘It's like telling him there's no Father Christmas,’ she sniffed.
‘You'll take away all his illusions.’
‘And a bloody good thing, too,’ his grandad had told her, bold with rebellion.
‘How's the lad ever going to come to terms with death the way you carry on?’
But there never was any coming to terms with it, not in William's experience.
It made its own terms, and the best you could hope for was it wouldn't happen the way it had happened to Mary Moxton at the Turk's Head.
William peered out of the side window when they came to the crossroads but it would be too far away to see anything, even if it was still there.
‘Let's go down the Turk's Head,’ his grandad used to say, when it was still a treat for them both and not the stuff of nightmares.
And he'd wipe his brush on a rag soaked in turps and wash his hands in the kitchen sink and off they'd go, calling for Preston sometimes from next door, because he liked it, too.
The Turk's Head.
‘Sounds like it ought to be a pub,’ people used to say, but it wasn't a pub, it was a café.
Grandad never went near a pub because of what he said they put in the beer.
‘No wonder it makes people sick,’ he said.
‘The things I've seen in them vats when I worked for the brewery.’
One of the things he'd seen was cockroaches and the other was rats.
Dead rats, floating in the brown swill of beer with teeth bared in a last deathly snarl.
It was the first image William ever had of rats, and an enduring one.
So Grandad stuck to tea, and the occasional mug of Bovril when the weather was bad.
You could get both at the Turk's Head, and coffee and Horlicks and Tizer and Eccles cakes and jam doughnuts.
Not much else, though, in the way of refreshment, because the Turk's Head was only masquerading as a café.
It was really a front for Uncle Titch and Grandad's Great Fairground Enterprise.
Uncle Titch was the proprietor, manager and sole occupant of  the Turk's Head, then.
He was called Titch because he was a midget with a very large head and very short legs, and Uncle for reasons that were never satisfactorily explained to William, but then, not a lot ever was.
‘Why did Uncle Titch never grow up?’ he asked once when they were home having tea.
‘Because he stayed in the bath too long and got shrunk,’ said his grandad, who could never get into the bathroom when he wanted to because William or his mum were usually there, her in the bath or him on the lavatory reading a comic, which was one of his little pleasures in life.
‘Because he was forever making dens in trees,’ said his nan, who knew this was another, ‘and one day a big crow flew up and scared him and he lost his hold and fell on to his head and stopped growing so let that be a lesson to you.’
You could rarely get a straight answer from any of them, they'd been dodging questions about his father for so long; evasion was a way of life with them.
One thing William did know was that Uncle Titch had once worked in a circus.
He knew this not just because Uncle Titch said he had — you couldn't believe anything a grown-up told you, and Uncle Titch belonged to the world of grown-ups even if he wasn't — but because of the tricks he could do.
He could do somersaults and cartwheels and he could walk on his hands carrying a plate of Eccles cakes on one foot.
And that was only a fraction of the tricks he said he could do in his Heyday.
In his Heyday, Uncle Titch was a crowd puller, a roller-upper.
Whenever the circus came to a new town he used to dress up in his costume and go out into the streets with a clown on stilts and do a turn.
It invariably ended with Uncle Titch pretending to get cross with the clown on stilts and chasing him along the street on his fat little legs and trying to kick him up the bum and falling over backwards.
This always got a laugh.
‘It couldn't fail,’ said Uncle Titch.
‘People love to see some poor sod making an arsehole of himself.’
Uncle Titch had a bit of a grudge against the world.
He got his own back by playing tricks on it.
He drove about in a horse  and cart and one of his tricks was to whip the horse up into a canter and crouch down behind the seat so people would think it had bolted.
When responsible citizens or policemen came rushing out into the road to grab at it and avert a disaster, Uncle Titch would leap up from behind his seat and pretend they just hadn't noticed him.
‘Just because I'm a dwarf,’ he'd shout, ‘it doesn't mean I'm NOT HERE.’
Another one of his tricks was to lurk behind the counter at the Turk's Head so customers would think there was no one there, and then, when they were thinking of leaving or helping themselves to the jam doughnuts, he'd leap on to a wooden box to bring his large dome head just above the level of the counter and say, ‘Can I help you?’ in a very loud voice.
This was probably one of the reasons the Turk's Head didn't take a lot of custom.
The other reason was the location.
It was hidden away down a dingy little cul-de-sac ending in a railway embankment and a station hardly anyone used any more.
‘Not what you'd call a Major Thoroughfare,’ said William's nan, who had a sarcastic tongue on her at times.
‘Not what you'd call well placed for the passing trade.’
People who came to the Turk's Head really had to know what they were looking for.
It didn't even look like a café.
It looked like a small, run-down Victorian railway hotel, which was fine, really, because that is what it had started off as, some time round the middle of the last century in an age of soaring optimism when all things seemed possible, or at least profitable, even the commercial success of a travellers' rest beside a branch line in the middle of nowhere.
No one could remember the last time anyone had stayed there, or, indeed, if anyone ever had.
Most travellers with their wits about them and an eye for aesthetics would have preferred to rest at the Bates Motel.
It was a mad mongrel of a building, a Victorian folly lampooning the worst taste of several architectural ages.
It looked as if the builder had started off with the plans of a Tudor manor house, swapped them for an Early English cathedral in mid-storey, and  then suffered a total loss of confidence and tried to convert it into a Dutch barn.
The end result was a kind of Gothic Wendy house.
The owner before Uncle Titch had been a retired seaman and he'd renamed it the Turk's Head, not after an Ottoman warrior, as most people thought, but after a special type of nautical knot that looked like a turban.
He thought it would give it a bit of glamour.
But it didn't.
Uncle Titch just shrugged and got on with the important things in life.
He only used the ground floor as a café, anyway.
The other two floors were devoted to the real business of the Turk's Head and Uncle Titch's particular folly.
‘Fairground renovation,’ he grandly called it.
‘Mucking about with bits of junk,’ said William's nan.
‘If there's ever a fairground revival,’ his grandad, who had a stake in the business, would insist, ‘we'll be laughing all the way to the bank.’
‘The only people doing any laughing are the gypsies that sell it to you,’ she'd retort.
‘Daft as a brush you are, the pair of you.’
She didn't have much time for Grandad's artistic flair.
‘You ought to do something that'll bring some proper money in,’ she told him, ‘and take that stuff out the back where I'm not forever tripping over it.’
And if she'd married Vincent Van Gogh it would have been the same story.
‘Get out from under my feet, out in the yard, and let's have none of your histrionics — you're dripping red stuff all over my linoleum.’
Painting was a hobby, it wasn't a job, not something Real.
It was like keeping whippets.
She had a strongly defined concept of what was Real and what was not, did William's nan, and some people were just playing at life.
‘You stand as much chance of getting rich with that stuff,’ she'd say, ‘as I do scrubbing floors at the Liver Buildings.’
Though young and impressionable, and usually on Grandad's side, there was enough of the pessimist in William, even at the age of nine and a half, to concede that his nan was probably right.
Whole rooms of the Turk's Head were taken over by bits  of fairground waiting for the revival that would send Uncle Titch and Grandad chortling off to the local branch of the Co-op.
And while they were biding their time over a game of backgammon down in the café, William used to wander through the silent, cluttered rooms where their investment languished, gathering dust.
Scenes of empires lost and won, Gordon at Khartoum and fuzzy-wuzzies at Omdurman, dreadnoughts and dreadlocks, gallopers plunging and rearing and lying on their sides with their legs broken, bears and tigers and great striding birds and British lions with Union Jack saddles.
A battleground of historic events and a jungle of eyes watching him out of the gloom, bright eyes and eyes dulled from misuse, flaring nostrils and faded plumage and gaping jaws and once-golden beaks.
He was convinced they'd inspired his interest in history, those fairground animals, those famous scenes his grandad painted.
They'd certainly coloured it.
He was rare among scholars in being more interested in events than trends.
He had a childish fascination for battles and revolutions and catastrophes.
Dead horses lying in the dust.
‘He ought to get rid of the lot,’ his nan used to say.
‘Burn it in the yard outside and take in lodgers.’
‘Leave the man alone,’ said William's grandad.
‘He doesn't need you to organise his life for him.’
‘It'll end in tears,’ said Nan, and it did, but that was her fault as much as anyone's.
His mum had got the caterers in back at the house and there were great plates of sandwiches and cakes and even a couple of barrels of Tetley's out in the kitchen with the head waiter from the restaurant at Mary Ann Evans's dispensing from the tap.
William watched the murky liquid gushing out.
‘She's done him proud,’ said Mrs Flaherty, ‘I'll say that for her.’
‘Have you had a chance to talk to Nan?’ he asked her.
‘I gave her my condolences,’ she said, properly, ‘but that was as far as it went.
We've never been what you might call close, me and your nan.
I think she thought I had an eye on your grandad.’
She giggled into her glass of beer.
‘And between you, me and the gatepost, she was right.’
William remembered her in the Turk's Head that time, looking twice the size she was now and wearing a pink suede jacket with studs in the sleeves and a pair of men's corduroy trousers tucked into silver and black cowboy boots.
She'd been involved with fairs and circuses since the age of fourteen, when she'd run off with a Wall of Death rider on his motorbike.
He'd taught her the tricks of his trade until by her own account she was better at it than he was.
‘You wouldn't know to look at me now,’ she'd say, ‘but I could hold them spellbound, the things I could do on that bike in a crash helmet and a pair of tights and a stars and stripes swimsuit.’
One of those held spellbound was the fairground owner, the Great Flaherty himself, who'd lured her away from her Wall of Death rider and made her his child bride and business partner.
‘But I still used to pose on the bike for publicity purposes,’ she'd say archly over her tea and Eccles cakes, ‘until the varicose veins started to show through me silver tights and Flaherty said I'd better call it a day and let them find themselves another pin-up girl.’
Through the crowd round the barrels William saw the priest who'd officiated at the funeral and who'd asked him about the hymns.
‘Would you excuse me a moment?’ he said.
‘I'd like to speak to the Father.’
The Father was a genial soul, and Irish with it.
‘Nice drop of ale,’ he said, raising his glass.
‘I expect your grandfather liked his pint, did he not?’
‘Never touched the stuff,’ said William.
‘The rats put him off.’
‘Ah, yes.
They would, they would.’
But he looked a bit uncertainly into the glass.
‘My nan never said anything to you, did she?’
William asked him.
‘About what brought on his heart attack?’
‘I don't believe she did, no.
She was very distressed at the time, of course.’
William left him holding his glass up to the light from the kitchen window and frowning slightly.
He found his mum in the drawing room showing off her Inchbold original to a crowd of people he didn't know.
‘Mum, can I have a word?’ he said.
‘Of course you can,’ she said, taking his arm and walking him towards the bay window, but she kept one eye on the painting in case they were tempted.
‘I've just been talking to Mrs Flaherty,’ she said.
‘Do you know, that woman's got five merry-go-rounds?’
‘I know,’ said William.
‘And do you know what each of them's worth?’
‘No.
Mum…’
‘Seventy thousand pounds, and that's just the insurance value.
Nostalgia, William, it's what everyone's after these days.’
‘Mum, what was it gave Grandad his heart attack?’
It was a test, really, to see if she said anything about the stockings.
But she just stared at him.
‘William, he was seventy-five years old, it does happen, you know, and he had terrible eating habits.
You should have seen the butter he put on his toast in the mornings, I kept on at him but you know what he was like, he wouldn't be told.
And you know what he'd have for a treat?
Bread and dripping.
Bread and dripping, I ask you.’
She spotted someone poking at her Inchbold.
‘Don't touch,’ she said, scuttling across.
‘It's wired for burglars.’
William gave up, but he tried it on his nan later, when most people had gone.
‘Was Grandad very upset about the seamed stockings?’ he said, gently.
She looked at him for a moment as if weighing up the consequences of telling the truth for once.
Then she sighed and nodded.
‘He took it very bad,’ she said.
‘She gets them made in a factory in Hong Kong.
I knew she shouldn't have told him.
All the rage, she says, selling like hot cakes.
Stockings and suspender belts, nostalgia and sex appeal, she says, you can't beat it.
The madam.
‘He went very quiet but I knew he was upset.
Then, when we went upstairs, he says to me, Mary, he says, first time he called  me that in years, Mary, why is it all my life I've always got the timing wrong?
Then a bit later when I was just nodding off he says, Seamed stockings.
Those were the last words he said to me, apart from when he woke up and said he had to go to the toilet but you don't count that, do you.’
He knew Preston wouldn't have left.
He found him out in the garden, sitting on a wooden bench by the pond.
‘Have you got the car?’ he said.
‘Let's get out of here.’
'Where do you want to go?’ said Preston.
‘Anywhere,’ said William.
‘Let's just drive.’
16
The Murder at the Turk's Head
But, of course, they drove to the Turk's Head.
Or the place where the Turk's Head used to be.
‘They couldn't sell it after what happened,’ said Preston as they sat in the car together at the end of the cul-de-sac.
‘They reckoned it was haunted and no one would buy it, and in the end it got in such a state they got the council to pull it down.
That's what my Auntie Ethel said.’
Where the Turk's Head had once been there was just a piece of waste ground overgrown with weeds and used for dumping rubbish despite the sign that said No Tipping.
The station had gone, too, and they'd shut the line down and taken up the rails.
Only the embankment remained, and the tunnel they used to run through when they were kids, shouting to make the killer bats and the rats think they were bigger than they really were.
They didn't believe in things like that any more, but neither of them made any move to get out of the car.
They just sat and looked.
‘They turned the embankment into a nature walk,’ said Preston.
‘You're supposed to be able to walk all the way from here to the coast.’
Someone walked over Preston's grave and he shuddered.
He knew William would know why, the thought of walking along that embankment, knowing what they knew.
‘Did you know about Grandad finding the body?’
William asked.
Preston shook his head.
‘They never told me,’ he said.
‘Seems there was a lot they never told us,’ said William.
And Preston felt embarrassed, thinking of the Master Sergeant.
There was a gang of kids playing up on the embankment, just as Preston and William had, junior hangers-on, rookie spear carriers in the terrible Derek Sumter gang which had once ruled the neighbourhood, so far as was tolerated by the greater power of the nans.
Playing on the railway embankment was well beyond that tolerance.
In those days, when the trains still ran, it was called trespassing and possessed the double attraction of being unlawful and dangerous.
Do Not Trespass on the Railway Line.
One of a long list of commandments, much more extensive than the original ten, that had circumscribed the exploits of Preston's youth.
Yet another that he had broken.
‘Remember the last time we went up there?’
Preston said to William, knowing that he could not possibly have forgotten, whatever else conveniently slipped his memory.
‘That night before the murder?’
But William just sat there, staring out of the car window at the waste ground where the Turk's Head had once been.
‘She must have been about three or four months’ pregnant,’said Preston, ‘only it didn't show.’
And he had a mental image of Mary Moxton pacing the sparsely furnished room that Uncle Titch had given her, on the floor above the café, alone with her troubles.
In Trouble, that was the euphemism of the time.
Mary Moxton's In Trouble.
Except that they hadn't known how bad.
‘She was always so full of life,’ said William, suddenly.
‘Much more than the rest of them.
They thought she must be daft.’
The Daft One, Preston's nan called her, who had names for them all.
‘She needs her head seeing to, that one,’ she'd say.
‘She's got so many screws loose it's a wonder it stays on her shoulders.’
She might have been daft in some ways, but she knew what was in and what was out, did Mary M. She knew the right clubs to go to.
She was pretty and popular and she lived for the moment.
‘I've got a long way to go before I'm thirty,’ she'd say.
‘Anything could happen before then.’
And she'd let her long hair fall around her face and shake it to some interior rhythm.
'’Get your Mojo working ’,’ she'd mime.
‘Get with it, girls, don't let the grass grow under your feet.’
They'd all grown up together on the same corpy estate, been to the same sink school, gone out with the same dreary lads.
Elaine and Ethel and Nell and Mary — the Girls, as the two nans called them, fondly sometimes, but more often in despair of their ever growing up.
‘They need to find themselves a decent bloke,’ said William's nan once, presumably meaning four decent blokes as she was not a great advocate of polygamy.
‘Or stop looking and make their minds up they're better off single,’ said Preston's, who thought monogamy had its drawbacks, too.
They'd none of them been lucky with men.
Elaine's had run off and Ethel was still running after hers and Nell's was dead and Mary's a dead loss.
That was what they used to call him, the Dead Loss.
Or the Nose Picker.
Or the Queerfella, a widely dispensed sobriquet of Preston's nan, not knowing then how queer a fella Barry Moxton really was.
Barry Moxton was one of the shipwrecks of the area.
Its endemic pessimism had got him by the balls and left him beached and burned out by his late twenties, unemployed, unskilled and unloved by all but his widowed mother.
And Mary Moxton, once.
‘What the heck did she ever see in that one?’
Preston could remember his nan asking on more than one occasion, and his mum shrugging and saying, ‘She thought he looked a bit like Elvis Presley.’
But it had been years, even then, since Elvis was top of the Hit Parade, and if all he had to offer the world was slicked-back hair and a sulky pout, the Dead Loss was set to slip a lot further down the charts, and Mary wasn't going to be there to see it.
‘She leads him a right dance,’ the nans would say, during their daily exchange of news and analysis in the queue at the butcher's, until finally she danced off for good and all and left him with his mother and his clapped-out BSA and his jars of Brylcreem and his collection of 78 records and a lifetime's cumulation of unarticulated resentments.
‘And what does the Queerfella have to say about it?’
Preston's nan demanded when she heard that Mary Moxton was In Trouble and none of his making.
But no one seemed to know, or care, what the Queerfella felt about anything.
‘I remember thinking for a long time afterwards that it must have been Uncle Titch's,’ said William, and Preston stared at him in astonishment, shocked not so much by the thought of Uncle Titch and Mary Moxton in carnal embrace as by this sudden insight into William's dark imaginings.
‘I suppose it was because she moved in with him,’ said William, defensively.
‘Oh, but that was the nans,’ Preston assured him.
‘They persuaded him.
They kept nagging at him about all that space he had and how she'd got nowhere and her dad wouldn't have her back and her with a baby inside her.
Your nan was always on at him to take in lodgers, remember?’
‘So whose was it then?’ demanded William.
‘Did they tell you that?’
‘No, but I knew.’
He felt a childish satisfaction in having that advantage on one who had claimed to be so well informed on such matters.
‘I heard them talking about it.’
He could remember them discussing it over the ironing and himself on the floor playing with his soldiers behind the sofa and keeping very quiet about it because it was way past his bedtime.
It was so clear in his mind, he could hear his nan's voice, even smell that strangely comforting smell of scorched linen as she pressed down on the iron, and yet he had understood little of their conversation at the time, hadn't understood, in fact, until years later.
‘Whose is it then,’ his nan had wanted to know, ‘if it's not too much to ask?’
‘She thinks it's one of the lifeguards at the municipal pool,’ his mum said, and she must have sniggered because his nan came back at her very sharp.
‘It's no laughing matter, madam.
He might be a dead loss but he's still her husband and that makes it adultery in my book, and in the eyes of the Church.’
And Preston very tense behind the sofa, because when his nan called someone madam she meant business, and although he didn't know what adultery meant exactly he knew it was something smutty and another of the things the commandments came down pretty hard on.
Even worse than Trespassing on the Railway Line.
‘And what's he going to do about it then?’ his nan demanded.
‘This fella me lad?’
‘Oh, he'd never admit it was his,’ said his mum.
‘He's married already.’
And the Tut was one of his nan's specials.
‘Some people've got the morals of alley cats,’ she said.
‘It's a bucket of water they need, never mind swimming pools.’
His nan's abhorrence of the neighbourhood toms was legendary, and her punishment merciless when she heard them at it, raw-arsed and rampant, in the nightly flesh pit of the back yard.
Many a time had Preston's youthful slumbers been disturbed by the sound of the deluge from Nan's bedroom window as it hit the corrugated iron roof of their garden shed and the wild feline howls as their coitus was so balefully interrupted.
‘What's going to happen to the baby then?’
‘She says she's going to have it adopted.’
No question of ‘getting rid of it’.
Not in those days, not for a good Catholic girl like Mary Moxton, who would only lapse so far, and abortion was a lot further.
The mystery of Mary Moxton's baby used to puzzle Preston, with his woefully inadequate sexual education.
There was so much talk about it, so many furtive conversations, and yet no one ever saw it.
‘Where is this baby then?’ he asked his mum, boldly, one evening when his nan wasn't around.
‘In her tummy,’ said his mum.
And Preston very dubious, because she didn't look like she had  a baby in her tummy and experience had taught him to be very sceptical about any information his family gave out, especially on the subject of babies and where they came from.
‘How did it get there?’ he insisted, keeping his voice low because he knew having babies was something of an embarrassment, like some diseases you didn't talk about.
‘She caught it at the public baths,’ said his mum, with another one of her sniggers.
But Preston had thought that very plausible at the time.
He'd caught a verruca once at the public baths.
‘She should have worn her flip-flops,’ he said, and was startled by the sudden explosion of mirth, but then his mother was always a bit prone to that sort of thing.
Giggling Sheila his nan called her.
He never discovered how Uncle Titch was persuaded to give refuge to Mary Moxton and her hidden embryo.
He must have put up a bit of a struggle, but they were a persuasive bunch, those women, and the two nans in alliance were practically irresistible.
He could remember him complaining once in the café to William's grandad.
‘I'll not have a babby in the place, I told them.
I made myself very clear about that.
Squealing and squawking and leaving its dirty nappies all over the show.’
‘Oh, they've got that all sorted,’ William's grandad assured him.
‘Them and their precious Father Michael.
He'll have it off her and into a good Catholic home quick as blinking, the poor little basket, and you'll not have sight nor sound of it, and nor the mother, I shouldn't think.’
Well, he was right about that, reflected Preston, looking across the site of the old café towards the abandoned railway line and remembering.
‘And I thought he was the one who killed her, too,’ said William, ‘when they finally told me.’
‘We all did,’ said Preston.
‘We all thought it was him.
Except for Mrs Flaherty.
And your grandad, maybe.’
Murder: he remembered the first chilling thrill of the word in the school playground, when it was still something to be excited about and before he knew who the victim was, or the chief suspect.
‘Killed with an axe…’
‘No, it wasn't, it was a meat cleaver, my mam said…’
‘Cut into little pieces…’
‘One of the policemen was sick…’
And the police up on the railway embankment when they walked home from school, and the tunnel fenced off so they had to go the long way round.
‘They say he escaped along the line,’ someone announced, ‘because he was covered in blood.’
And by then they all knew who ‘he’ was, or thought they did.
‘I'll never believe he done it,’ said Mrs Flaherty, when she came round for a cup of tea and a slice of the action, ‘not if he's convicted by a dozen juries, and don't tell me he'll get a fair trial in the current climate of opinion, not unless they pick twelve men the same size and true.
I know, I've seen the prejudice of people, I know what they are.’
It was another image for Preston to carry into his dreams, or nightmares, of Uncle Titch in the dock and the twelve little dwarves grim and silent on the hard wooden benches.
And we find the accused…
‘Harmless,’ said Mrs Flaherty, ‘harmless he is, harmless as a babby…’
And the last word hanging in the room and the awful silence until William's nan poured the tea.
‘It looks bad for him all the same,’ she said.
‘How many sugars, Mrs Flaherty?’
And Preston trying to catch William's eye to share the wonder of it, for it was not the least of sensations to find Mrs Flaherty of Flaherty's Famous Funfair in William's nan's front room, taking tea.
Mrs Flaherty and the nans did not mix in the same circles.
Mrs Flaherty was what the nans called the Wrong Element.
Only Disaster could bring them together.
‘It's not done him any good,’ said Big Nan, ‘running away like that.’
For Uncle Titch had scarpered, horse, cart and all.
There was a nationwide search out for them, it said on the television.
‘Police state, he calls it,’ said Nanna Epstein with a nod in Grandad's direction, very quiet in the corner, ‘and they can't find a dwarf in a horse and cart — you're not safe in your beds.’
They kept the doors locked all the time now, and on a bolt and chain, and Big Nan had sewn Velcro round all the edges of the curtains so they'd stick together and no one be able to peer in.
‘He'll be with fairground people,’ said Mrs Flaherty, staring into her teacup as if she was reading the leaves.
‘I hate to admit it, but they'll be sheltering him, they always stick with their own kind.’
She looked up and stuck her chin out.
‘But I don't believe he done it, I don't believe he could do a thing like that and her with a babby inside of her.’
There was another awful silence then, because no one, not in Preston's hearing at least , had yet mentioned the babby inside of her.
That was the trouble with Mrs Flaherty, you couldn't trust her not to say the wrong thing in company, that was one of the reasons why she was the Wrong Element.
‘It was us persuaded him to take her in,’ said Nanna Epstein.
‘She'd be alive today if it wasn't for that.’
And the tears starting up again, and the boys quiet and solemn as only boys can be when there's a Disaster in the house and they're short on Information.
‘Well, one thing's for sure,’ William's grandad said, ‘he can't have escaped along a railway line with a horse and cart, not even the po-lice are going to believe that.’
‘They're not interested in details,’ said Mrs Flaherty.
‘They've made their minds up.
He's the one that done it and they don't want to know no different.’
The next day they charged Barry Moxton with the murder of his wife Mary and there was a picture on the front pages of him being led away with a blanket over his head and another of a policeman coming out of his mother's house with a plastic bag that was said to contain his bloodstained and half-burned clothing, and a day or so after that Uncle Titch turned up in South Wales with his horse and cart where he said he'd gone after a merry-go-round and didn't know what all the fuss was about, didn't know about any murder, didn't read the papers and was generally believed, at least by the people on the estate, because it was typical of Uncle  Titch, and by that time the Queerfella who was queerer than any of them knew had made a full confession and it was all over bar the shouting and the trial, when he pleaded guilty and was sent down for life and everyone said he should have been hanged and pretended it had never once crossed their minds that it was Uncle Titch that done it.
But he knew, even though he never read the papers.
And the Turk's Head stayed shut with padlocks on the doors and the windows boarded up, and Uncle Titch went away and no one seemed to know where he'd gone to, not even William's grandad, and no one seemed to know whether he'd taken his fairground with him or whether it was still there behind the shutters and the padlocked doors in the dark rooms with the bloodstains still on the walls and floors.
Those rooms haunted Preston's dreams.
He saw it all reflected in the eyes of those blood-spattered gallopers and bears and lions and tigers and ostriches, all frozen in mid-stride, helpless witnesses of the terror they could not run from, and Preston trying desperately to escape from it, as much in terror of the mutilated corpse of Mary Moxton as he was of her murderer, and running from room to room and pulling open the last door of the last room and out into the night and down the long black tunnel under the railway line getting closer and closer to the grey patch of light at the end until, on the verge of safety, the figure would leap out at him in its bloody clothes with the meat cleaver in its hands…
‘I still had nightmares about it,’ said William, ‘well into my teens.
Still do, sometimes, every now and then.’
Preston looked at him and wondered if they were the same nightmares he had.
They'd be worse, probably.
William always went that step further into life's nightmares, and he'd been closer to it, to start with.
Mary Moxton had been his mum's friend more than anyone's, and Uncle Titch his grandad's, and it had hit them harder than most.
And then there was that night just before the murder when William came to him with his plan.
If you went up the railway embankment at night, he said, you could look straight into the window of the room Uncle Titch had given her and see her getting undressed.
‘Parading around in the Nude,’ said William.
‘She'll have the curtains drawn,’ said Preston, who suspected it was another commandment they'd be breaking, even if he hadn't specifically been told about it.
Thou Shalt Not Spy on thy Mother's Old Schoolfriends Parading around in the Nude.
‘She doesn't have any curtains,’ said William.
‘She hasn't put any up.’
He'd noticed this when they were trespassing on the embankment one day, playing Robin Hood and his Merrie Men.
She probably didn't think she needed curtains, with the room overlooking the railway line, not considering the ambition and initiative of a boy like William.
It was November and the nights drawing in, and they went after tea, telling the nans they were going to a friend's house to play with his electric trains.
But when they reached the embankment, Preston had second thoughts.
It was too dark and he was too afraid, or his conscience troubled him, or it was a combination of the two and so he hung back.
‘Chicken,’ William called him, ‘big chicken,’and went on alone, up behind the Turk's Head where the lights were on.
And came running back in stark terror a few minutes later as if all the hounds of hell were after him, and Preston, who thought they were, a half-length behind all the way back to the alley behind their two houses where they stopped to get their breath back before they went in.
‘What did you see?’
Preston asked him.
But he just kept shaking his head and wouldn't say, and the only thing Preston was sure he hadn't seen was Mary Moxton Parading around in the Nude.
‘Come on,’ Preston urged him now.
‘What did you see?’
And William looked at him with an odd expression, and at first Preston thought he really didn't remember or was pretending he didn't, but then he smiled, even more oddly, and said, ‘The Devil.’
And Preston frowned at him, half smiling himself, but he felt very cold suddenly.
‘That's what I thought at the time, anyway,’ said William, ‘but  I think now it must have been Barry Moxton.
He was just sitting there up the embankment among the bushes.
I nearly fell over him and he turned round, but I didn't really see his face in the dark, or if I did, I blocked it out I was so scared.
I just ran.’
Preston shivered.
The night was drawing in and the kids had gone home and the tunnel under the embankment was deep in shadow.
A black hole, waiting.
‘We should be getting back,’ said Preston, and he started the car.
‘He used to watch most nights, apparently,’ said William.
‘I read it in a newspaper cutting about the trial that Grandad had kept.
And the night of the murder something snapped.
Or else the Devil was there, that particular night, sitting with him.’
‘It was a long time ago,’ Preston said.
He wanted to go now.
He wanted to forget it.
It was all very well picking at the past like this if it helped to exorcise the demons, but he wasn't sure that was what William wanted.
He was drawn to it in some weirdly obsessive, almost dangerous way.
Preston half understood this because it was in him, too, but he rejected it, also, because it scared him too much.
They drove back in silence for a while and then, just before they reached the house where William's mother now lived, William said, ‘It was the reason my mum went into business, you know.’
Preston was puzzled.
‘What was?’
‘What happened to Mary Moxton.
She wanted to be safe, and the only way she knew how to be safe was to be rich.’
Preston shook his head, but it was true that within a few weeks of Mary Moxton's death William's mum had bought her first shop.
Big Nan said she used the money the Master Sergeant had sent her ‘for the boy's education’.
She was running a whole chain of them by the time he went to university.
She specialised in DIY and Home Brew and Clothing Kits.
William's mum was an early exponent of the self-help society.
And now she had the shop — Mary Ann Evans's, with its wood-panelled lifts that went up seven floors and a turnover of so many millions a year.
And a home in Woolton with eight-foot walls round it and floodlights and padlocks on the gate and burglar  alarms linked to the nearest police station and curtains so thick and so wide they never left any gaps even without Velcro.
They were all afraid.
His own mum and his Auntie Ethel were sometimes too scared to go out of the house.
Certainly there were some areas of the city they thought it was Death to enter.
They kept newspaper cuttings on how dangerous the streets were, and stuck them to the door of the fridge with little magnets.
‘NEWSBOY ABDUCTED ON PAPER ROUND.’
‘MASKED RAPIST HUNTED.’
HEADLESS TORSO FOUND IN WOOD.’
‘STREET GANG CRIPPLE BOY VICTIM.’
‘SCREWDRIVER ATTACK ON BUS DRIVER.’
They thought it was best to know what you were up against, but Preston wasn't sure it had done them a lot of good in the long run.
And it hadn't helped him much either.
All things considered he'd rather they'd got rich, like William's mum.
‘We all need to feel safe,’ he said, not really thinking about it, thinking about Emily.
Thinking how quiet she'd gone when he said he was coming up for the funeral and how she'd seemed to withdraw into herself.
He imagined her pacing alone in her bedroom like Mary Moxton and the light on and no curtains, and he was suddenly afraid for her.
‘You know what you should do,’ said William suddenly.
‘You should come into this house with us.’
as if he had been considering Preston's problems and this was his solution to them.
And perhaps it was.
At least there'd be a garden for the twins to play in.
But he rejected it almost as soon as it crossed his mind.
He was feeling vulnerable, that's all.
He must beware.
All the wrong decisions of Preston's life had come from feeling vulnerable.
I'd have to be crazy, he thought.
He wants me to be his Minder again.
But all he said was, ‘I'll think about it.’