

5
Meet the agency
It makes it much easier to understand how an advertisement appears in its appropriate medium, if you know how an agency works.
An agency is not a sort of plate-glass fun-palace in which bejeaned intellectuals dash off a few lapidary phrases in praise of Surf or Oxo between polishing the rhyme schemes of their latest book of sonnets or (more likely) the lyrics of the next chart-topper.
Which is, perhaps, sad for the writers of television series, or even for those more serious people who think agencies are full of a breed of viciously frivolous vampires bent on sucking the blood of the poor innocent public.
An agency is a business, in many ways like any other.
It is a service business, providing a very specific service to its clients.
Like many service businesses it provides, in fact, a quite recognizable ‘product’— advertisements.
To do this, it is usually organized in a more or less formal way, with different departments covering the various specialities of the business.
In an agency, indeed, you will find, in effect, most of the usual functions of a manufacturing business: management, the shop floor, sales, accounts, buying, and so on.
It is not an analogy to be pushed too far, but the point should be clear by now.
You ought to expect an agency to behave recognizably like a business: if it does not, it is reasonable to expect that it will be unbusinesslike in other respects.
Conversely, it ought also to be recognizably an advertising business — not an insurance office or a bank or the civil service.
Recognizing this is perhaps less easy.
The clues lie, probably, in an informality of style; in signs — at least— that someone has thought about the environment of the office; evidence of a lot of the agency's work around the place (if they have nothing to be proud of; they cannot be much use); an approach which is clearly geared to the idea of selling.
If you are in an agency without someone trying to sell you something, even if it is only an old joke or a cup of coffee, within five minutes, you should be suspicious.
A double structure
Agency structures are something of great interest to agencies, but of less concern, generally, to their clients.
After all, the clients' interest is merely in getting an effective job done for their money.
How it is done is less important.
However, it can be quite useful to know how it is supposed to work, because it may explain what is going on, sometimes….
The important thing to remember about agencies is that they have two different ways of structuring themselves.
One is the formal, departmental structure (see Figure 5.1) which recognizes the various specialisms within the business and leads to what may be thought of as an ‘orthodox’, function-based management structure.
The second, which is far more important for the client, and a much more meaningful reflection of the way in which the agency operates from day to day, is the ‘account group’ system, used by the vast majority of agencies, whereby every client's account has a particular group of people, drawn from all the relevant departments of the agency, working on it.
In what follows, I want to look very briefly at the formal structure, and the various departments that may be found in it: and then in rather greater detail at the account group as it may operate on a single client's account, and how it may — with luck — interact effectively with the client's own operations.
Management
Agencies usually have rather large boards of directors.
This is, for the most part, because clients like to feel that they are important enough ‘to have a director working on my account’.
The logic of this means that the majority of directors tend to be account executives — the people with the main responsibility for maintaining contact with the client (see page 46)— rather than heads of departments.
In any but the smallest agency, though, there will be directors in charge of the main functions — creative, media and finance — as well as those who are account executives.
In the largest agencies there will probably be a small management group, drawn from among the 20 or more directors, which has the task of managing the agency, in the orthodox sense of management.
Figure 5.1 A standard agency structure: main functions and  subsidiary departments
Apart from those ‘directors’ who are actually directors of the company, the agency business has a disarming weakness for spawning hordes of other more or less high-flown titles — associate directors, senior associate directors (even!), creative directors, art directors, supervisors, chiefs, group heads, and so on.
In a business which is actually rather short of bureaucratic levels or visible forms of promotion, this title-mongering is a useful way of signifying at least some form of status, both to one's fellows and, indeed, to clients.
It may not always mean a great deal (though sometimes a title of this sort can be read as a genuine sign of worth), but it plays an essential part in reassuring people in a notoriously insecure and uncertain business.
The departments
Agency departments are a mixture of ‘functional’ departments — those concerned specifically with the business of handling accounts and making advertisements for them — and  ancillary and service departments.
The dividing line is not a clear one, but the functional departments consist, basically, of account management, planning, creative, media, and progress/production/traffic.
Account management
Every account has in charge of it a manager, usually called an account director or account executive, whose job is to make sure both that the client's needs are met and that the agency makes a profit.
Within the department there will be, usually, a number of levels, with directors acting in a more or less supervisory role, executives doing the bulk of the detailed work, and, maybe, assistants or trainees helping the executives.
Creative
The typical agency creative department (which probably does not exist) includes both writers and artists.
The writers can, usually, write.
The artists do not have to be able to draw, though it helps: they do, however, have to be able to ‘visualize’ a design or a film and be able to explain their ideas by words and rough pictures so that a specialized artist or photographer can produce the finished illustration.
It is because of this essentially conceptual and guiding role that agency art people are usually called ‘art directors’.
In the late fifties and early sixties, British agencies used to have a copy department and an art department, and then a separate TV department.
As TV has become more important, and agency working methods have evolved, the most common arrangement is for agency creative people to work in ‘teams’.
The core of the team is usually a copywriter-art director pair, who normally work together on all their accounts.
In larger agencies they may have one or more assistants: the assistants' tasks may include working out the minor details of a layout or storyboard, and providing paste-ups (see page 177) and other material for production once the basic idea is approved by  the client.
The creative team works in all media, but usually calls on the services of an agency TV producer to help to set up TV and cinema film production — and often radio, too.
In addition to the creation of ads, the creative group probably also, from time to time, does such things as pack design, devising promotions, and creating point-of-sale material.
This is a field which involves rather different skills from those needed for advertising, and some agencies, my own for one, have a separate design department to handle this type of job.
The creative department is usually run by a creative director who is, ideally, a working director, performing primarily either a copy or an art function within a team, as well as setting standards and providing guidance and inspiration to the rest of the department.
Occasionally, at the other extreme, he or she may be primarily an administrator.
This latter type of arrangement, however, rarely seems to work as well.
Media
Media, too, has two sides to it: planning and buying.
Usually the two functions are combined, though the largest agencies may split them.
In particular, TV buying has come in recent years to be regarded as something of a separate skill — arguably to the detriment of the media operations of agencies as a whole.
The media department works closely with the planning and creative departments to determine which media should be used for a particular campaign, and then negotiates with the media owners to obtain the best possible positions and prices.
Progress/production/traffic
Or, indeed, ‘control’.
Whatever you call it, this is the department that makes sure that everything actually happens, working in close liaison with the account executive.
The range of the job varies from agency to agency, but basically it involves: progress chasing, making sure that jobs are taken through their various stages on time; production, making sure that jobs go to and from studios and publications in the appropriate form, and the appropriate sizes and shapes; and record-keeping, ensuring that a record is kept of what is going on on each account and every job done for that account.
Without a good traffic operation an agency flounders.
It is an absolutely essential part of the nuts and bolts that hold the thing together — though the client rarely meets a traffic person except in a crisis.
Account planning/marketing/research
The majority of the larger agencies have a function called ‘account planning’, and here the planner is an essential part of the functional team.
The planner's role is to use market research to develop the advertising strategy for the client's brand, and then to help evaluate the results of the advertising.
As such, he or she has to work closely with the creative people and with media: in some agencies this includes the media planning, too.
In other agencies, this role is filled by the account executive, but then there may well be a research specialist who fulfils a service function, advising on market research and its interpretation, and perhaps doing some small-scale research personally.
Very few agencies now have their own market research department as such, and the only major agency group in the UK with significant research interests is WPP, which owns BMRB, Research International and Millward Brown, among others.
The ‘service’ departments are a mixed bag, one or two of which may claim ‘functional’status.
Accounts
The one really essential service department for any agency is its accounts section.
Without it, obviously, the agency has problems, and so do its clients.
An efficient accounts set-up can not merely save the agency lots of money: it can improve relationships with its clients.
And an inefficient billing system can so irritate a client as to lead to the eventual loss of the account by the agency.
Other departments
A large agency may have in its offices a large number of other departments: information and library, data processing, legal, personnel, art buying, contracts (with TV and radio actors, personalities, etc.), home economics, exhibitions, overseas, direct mail, merchandising and sales promotion, public relations, audio-visual production, secretaries, receptionists, telephonists, and purely ‘logistic’ departments such as mailing, messengers and office management.
In a smaller agency many of these tasks are carried out either by the managing director, the finance department or a general manager, with help where necessary from other members of other departments.
The agency account group
When you meet your agency account group, you may see very little of all this.
Indeed, with a very small agency, you may see only one person — who may be both account executive and copywriter, and obtain most other necessary services from outside organizations.
If, however, you are using an agency capable of providing a reasonable service — even if it is not a ‘full service agency’— you are likely to meet, at one time or another, an account group, consisting of at least five or six people, who will be doing between them all the tasks involved in creating and placing your advertising.
This group is comprised, and relates within itself, as shown in Figure 5.2.
(The planner is included with dotted lines only, because his or her function is often performed by the account executive.)
Figure 5.2 The nuclear account group
Just who are these people, and how do they relate to you and to the rest of the agency?
The account executive
This is the person with the suit — the one you will see most of and who will be present at nearly every meeting you have with the agency, the one whose job it is to look after your interests within the agency, and to look after the agency's interests in dealing with you.
The account executive is ultimately responsible for planning your campaign and ensuring that the agency delivers the goods.
In order to do this, he or she has to have considerable experience of the advertising business, and may well have spent some time working for a client company.
The account executive must be efficient and well-organized, and have the perspective and ability to see and appreciate business problems in depth.
On top of this, a degree of diplomacy is necessary for the job, as much of it is likely to be spent resolving various forms of disagreement between client and agency.
Finally, an ability to motivate, and generate the enthusiasm for your product that will encourage the creative team to give of their best, is essential.
The account executive will, usually, take the chair in meetings at the agency, and will be responsible for producing the minutes of every meeting — these may be called ‘call reports’ or ‘contact reports’, and are usually designed solely to record decisions and list action to be performed by either the agency or the client.
When the agency has produced specific proposals for your campaign — or anything else you may have asked for — the account executive will normally introduce them, and may present the entire proposals personally, without calling on other members of the group to cover their specialities.
Occasionally, if you are lucky, your account executive may take you to one of those much-talked-about business lunches, or at least buy you a drink.
Expect the agency too, at least to have discovered that you like ballet or horse racing, though you have no right to expect either to be bought tickets for these entertainments or to be accompanied to them by your account executive.
It is polite, true, and it is the sort of thing a lot of clients like.
It even, from time to time, causes them to change agencies.
But it is hardly a rational basis for a business decision.
If your agency is large enough for your personal account executive to be below the level of director of the company, he or she will probably be reporting to a management supervisor (or some such title) who will be a board director.
This sometimes invisible deity is usually meant to keep an eye on the working of the account, provide advice and experience if problems arise, and share a drink once or twice a year with your managing director or chairperson.
If the account is well run, you should not need to see the management supervisor often, but, to be serious, a valuable contribution may well be made to your business through his or her wider experience — a senior agency account director has usually acquired a very passable working knowledge of more different businesses than most middle managers (at least) in the agency's client companies.
Your account executive may, too, have an assistant.
This will usually be someone who has relatively little experience as an account executive (but may well have been in the agency for some time, as a progress controller or planner, for example).
The assistant's task is to deputize, where necessary, for the account executive; to run meetings covering minor points of detail (often follow-up action for major meetings), to attend to detail within the agency; and, in general, to provide a lower level of contact between the client and the agency — on a par with your own assistants or subordinates.
As you will see from this description of the account executive role in your account group, the agency has to try to allow for different levels of contact with your own organization.
With very large client companies — the Unilevers and Cadburys and General Foods — it is usually necessary to do this, because of the hierarchical structure of the client organization.
It does, however, almost certainly increase the amount of time spent by the agency in working on a given account, without necessarily making the results any better, except perhaps in the very general sense of keeping the client organization happy.
From the agency's point of view it is usually more satisfactory to keep the size of the account executive team as small as possible, giving full responsibility to one senior account manager who can provide a high quality of service at a level where it can be most effective — yours.
The creative team
Generally speaking they are the ones who do not wear suits — or look rather uncomfortable when they do.
In a sense, this is an affectation, since it is not necessary to wear jeans, baseball boots, studded leather jackets and ear-rings to devise good advertisements, but good creative people are sufficiently rare and expensive for agency managers to be prepared to pander to most of   their foibles.
What is more, there is some evidence that clients expect it, too: if the creative people look too prosaic and orthodox, clients think that they will get prosaic and orthodox advertising, regardless of any evidence to the contrary.
You may not see a great deal of your creative team — many agencies take the quite reasonable view that the creative people should be busy making advertisements, not chatting up clients, and in one or two like Collett Dickinson & Pearce, the creative department holds itself superior and aloof and deals with clients only through its emissaries, the account executives.
When you should definitely see them, though, is at the beginning, when you are briefing the agency on what you want, and the agency is learning about your business.
It really is vitally important for the creative people to see your factory, try out your hotel or visit your shops or warehouses; to talk to the people who make or devise your product, whatever it is, as well as to those who sell it.
Personally, I believe that the creative group should also present its ideas for advertising to the client, and discuss them with him or her.
I think that they are likely to give a better idea of what the finished advertisement will look like and can do a better job of communicating the necessary commitment to their way of presenting the product than can the account executive.
And, certainly, it is important for the creative group to be present to discuss the client's reactions to their ideas, so as to understand why a particular point may need to be changed.
The creative group will usually, as we have seen, consist of a writer and an artist.
Quite often the artist, whose job is to develop rough pictorial ideas to show how an advertisement would work, will not ever produce any very finished ‘art’ for you.
Often, this is done almost in the form of a doodle (technically a ‘scamp’ or rough) which shows how the elements of the design of the ad will fit together, and may also give some idea of the character of the illustration.
The writer, by contrast, is a finisher.
When an idea starts, perhaps only a slogan or a headline will be produced, but in the end the writer is going to have to write all the words in the ad (though most clients tend to write a few themselves, sometimes over the agency's dead body).
Between them, the writer and artist, prodded by the account executive and guided, perhaps, by an account planner, have the task of producing the ideas to sell your product.
How they do it is very much their problem, but as far as the client is concerned this is, in a sense, the agency's factory floor.
The client is entitled to want a good product: if the agency has been well chosen, this should be obtained without the need to worry too much how it happens.
(It may, occasionally be produced by a freelance team working outside the agency, and this may be another reason why you do not meet the creative group.
Given the shortage of good creative talent, this is not that unusual, and if you find that your agency is using freelances, your immediate reaction should not be to fire them on the spot: give them credit for both knowing their own limitations and for buying good work from outside, always assuming that it is good; but press  them to get a permanent team working on your account soon — it is not in your interest to lose continuity of creative work on your account.)
The account planner
In most agencies, the task of deciding what strategy should be followed in developing an advertising campaign is basically that of the account executive, working together with the creative group.
Large agencies, however, usually have a specialist function, that of the account planner, to perform the major part of this task.
The planner's job, narrowly defined, is to assemble all the available information about the client's product and its market, from the client's brief, from published information sources and from market research commissioned by the client, and occasionally, by the agency.
This information is then analysed and translated into an advertising strategy, which provides the basis on which the creative team will work in devising the advertising.
The reasons why this type of job has arisen in agencies are complex, and reflect weaknesses both in existing agency staffing and structure and in clients' ability to brief their agencies in the right way.
On the agency side, account executives rarely have the time or the depth of market research know-how and experience to make the most of the interpretation of market research.
Some, certainly, are very good at it, but there is a clear tendency for much of their thinking to be rather superficial.
Vis-à-vis the client, some agencies have found that clients' marketing management, especially at brand manager level, has a similarly limited ability to use and interpret market research and, in particular, to interpret it in a way which is appropriate for agencies' creative people to use.
This has been exacerbated by a continuing tendency for clients to reduce the size of their marketing departments.
These two interlinked sets of factors suggested the need for the specialized account planning function which was pioneered by Boase Massimi Pollitt and J. Walter Thompson at the end of the sixties.
An effective planner works very closely with the creative team on an account, and interprets the client's brief in terms of the consumer's present and intended perception of the product, to convey what is needed to the creative people.
At the same time, it is the planner's job to identify gaps in the picture of the market provided by the client, and to suggest research to fill the important gaps.
The planner is thus a sort of agent provocateur on behalf of the consumer, working on both agency and client.
The role and the value of account planning is widely debated in the industry.
The ‘fashion’ phase of recent years seems to be over, and it is clear that planners have to justify their place in the agency by their value to the agency and its clients.
A clear dichotomy is emerging, too, between the tightly defined research-oriented role of the BMP planner, and the ‘advertising consultant’ role typified by JWT.
My personal view is that the latter direction represents the more promising future.
The media group
Most often, a particular account team will include just one media specialist, whose job is, first, to work with the rest of the account group, especially the creative team, to decide what type of media should be used — press, TV; colour or black and white; large or small spaces; etc.
This is, in the jargon, the ‘inter -media decision’.
It is a decision that has, in principle, to be taken early on, so that the creative group can concentrate their efforts on the right type of ads — though because some creative ideas work better in one medium than another, the initial decision may be left more or less open.
Then, once the ads have been developed, it is the media person's job to identify the specific places where they should appear, and to plan and cost a media schedule for the campaign.
This is, specifically, the job of media planning.
Finally, once the client has agreed the schedule with the agency (which may well be done before the content of the ads is finally agreed), it is the media person's job to go out into the marketplace and buy the press space, the poster sites or the TV, radio or cinema spots.
When this is done, there has to be negotiation, in order to get the best possible deal, in terms of the positions of the ads and the discounts or special prices that can be obtained.
To do so, an intimate knowledge is needed, both of the prevailing media rates and the people with whom it is necessary to deal.
In addition to this purely functional role of planning and buying, a good media person has a more creative role, too, of suggesting to the rest of the account group new ways of using a medium, and of bringing to their attention any special opportunities that may exist.
The sort of thing he or she might do, for example, is to suggest the use of a particular pattern of spaces across two or more pages of a magazine; the use of a particular daily newspaper in order to exploit the merchandising services it can provide in support of the advertising; an especially good offer by a TV station to new TV advertisers; a new publication giving especially favourable rates for its first few issues; and so on .
The ability to suggest — and then buy — a two-and-three-quarter minute spot at midday on Sunday for the chairperson of a hotel group to give a message to all the hotel staff on every ITV station simultaneously is an important part of a media person's skills.
The rest of the agency
The people described in the previous section are possibly the only ones you, as a client, will meet at the agency, apart from the receptionist and your account executive's secretary.
As I have indicated on page 48, there are a lot of other things an agency can or might do for you, and lots of departments it could have to do it.
As this is not a book on careers in advertising, the best thing I can do to give you an idea of the sort of people you might conceivably find in an agency is to refer you to the books by Norman Hart and Felicity Taylor (see page 232) which describe them all very comprehensively.
All I ask is that you  should bear in mind that in an agency with 25 or 30 people you are unlikely to find all the jobs described: indeed, you are quite likely not to find them all in an agency with 500 people, and there are precious few of those in Europe, and not many in the USA.
6
How advertising works
Advertising, of course, sells.
Advertisements inform, persuade, remind, influence, change opinions; they even, perhaps, change emotions and attitudes.
Advertising changes society; makes people buy things they do not want; enables multinational capitalistic monopolies to batten on the working classes.
Well, doesn't it?
The truth of the matter is that we do not know how — in any meaningful, scientific, experimentally demonstrable sense — advertising works.
There are plenty of theories, and plenty of assumptions, many of which may have at least a part of the truth.
But there is, certainly, no commonly accepted theory of how advertising works, and no sign of one evolving.
Like much of what is, in effect, the study of psychology, advertising theory is stuck at a very basic level of sophistication.
Does it matter?
In a sense, perhaps it does not.
In practice, advertisers go to advertising agencies, give them a brief, accept (after suitable argument) a recommendation on the content and media for the campaign, and advertise.
If the product sells — because of or in spite of the advertising — all is well.
If it does not sell — because of or in spite of the advertising — all is not well, and the campaign is changed or the agency is fired.
This is, after all, the way of the world.
Would an effective theory of how advertising works have helped?
Quite possibly, it would have made little difference.
Clients are, in general, little concerned with advertising theory: they are concerned with results.
If results do not occur, the marketing director, or, worse, the managing director, looks for a scapegoat, human nature being what it is.
What is easier than to look at the most conspicuous item in the marketing budget and one which is largely the concern of an outside supplier, at that?
It is a brave agency that will argue the toss in the circumstances, and a lucky one that will find a client ready to listen.
The fact is that unless you have a reasonable understanding of what advertising can and cannot achieve, you have absolutely no way of deciding what its role in a marketing programme is, what objectives should be set for it, and how to measure whether it has achieved those objectives.
Figure 6.1 ‘Black box’ effect
Early theories
As little as 40 years or so ago, it often tended to be assumed that there was a nice simple relationship, a sort of ‘black box’ effect, that looked like Figure 6.1.
So long as you delivered enough advertising against the right consumers, the result could be measured in sales.
This is, clearly, a pretty naive view, even of a direct response campaign.
Something must be going on in the black box labelled ‘consumer’.
A bit of thought indicated that, clearly, consumers, having minds, emotions, senses, and all the psychological paraphernalia that foul up our mental processes, would in some way ‘process’ the material coming to them in the form of advertisements.
For this to happen at all, it was assumed, an ad would have to attract their attention.
Once it had achieved this, if it was to go any further it would have to arouse their interest.
For a sale to take place, however, would require more: a desire for the product.
But everyone knew, even then, about unsatisfied or sublimated or postponed desires: the final step must be action.
This, in essence, is the so-called AIDA model, from the initial letters of the steps in the process (Figure 6.2).
AIDA ruled the advertising world for a good many years, in the absence of anything better.
It was still very difficult to see how the process might work, or to account for the fact that some ads worked, and some consumers took action, but others stubbornly did not; or that an apparently good campaign failed to achieve extra sales — for sales were still the only real measure of effectiveness.
Figure 6.2 The AIDA model
Memory: a digression
There were, however, other measures of advertising.
It could be assumed, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, that if an ad had achieved, at the least, Awareness and Interest, it would be remembered.
Therefore it should be possible to measure at least this part of the process by carrying out research into people's recall of ads.
This is what people — many people, all over the world, but especially in the USA and the UK — proceeded to do.
The theory said, naturally, that the more of the ad that was remembered, the better it had succeeded in communicating.
If you take that as a yardstick, it is a fairly short step to designing ads which say nothing much but which are extremely memorable.
Conversely, an ad which is difficult to recall in detail, but (say) highly emotive and therefore, probably, rather effective, would score rather badly.
The fact is that memory is selective and fallible.
It is also, very importantly, of two kinds: short term and long term; so that what is recalled in the short term (the classic example is a string of numbers) may fade rapidly from the memory, while other elements of the communication, which are not so easy to recall immediately, stay in the mind long afterwards.
So there is liable to be a very different result according to whether a recall test is carried out within 24 hours, or a week, or three months, of an ad appearing: and ‘pre-tests’, based on showing an ad to consumers before it appears, and finding out what they remember of it within minutes, can be almost totally irrelevant — except as an indication of intelligibility.
There is, too, it has since appeared, a further problem.
It does not seem to be necessary for an ad to be at all well remembered for it to have an effect.
It was, indeed, at the height of recall testing that the great subliminal advertising scare arose.
‘Subliminal’ advertising, which was most publicly ‘exposed’in Vance Packard's The Hidden Persuaders , is advertising that is supposed to work below the threshold of consciousness: a message flashed for a fraction of a second on a cinema screen was, it was alleged, able to increase sales of popcorn very significantly, even though no one in the audience could have taken it in — or, indeed, remembered it.
The experiment on which this story was based has not been effectively repeated — but it sent a sufficient frisson through legislators and consumerists all over the world for subliminal advertising to have been solemnly banned in most countries where advertising is effectively controlled.
What no one seems to have noticed is that if subliminal advertising worked, recall measures were to a significant extent irrelevant.
Subsequent research seems, in fact, to have shown a very weak relationship between recall (however measured, which is a technically very complex question in itself) and other measures of advertising effectiveness.
It seems likely that a well-recalled ad is something of a bonus to a brand, but little more than that.
Certainly, measuring recall gives no overall, consistent guide to a campaign's success.
In spite of this, advertisers, agencies and researchers persist in pushing the interpretation of recall well beyond the limits of what it can tell them.
Some light is perhaps shed on the problem by the most recent psychological researches on memory, which have identified two rather different kinds of memory —‘explicit’ memory, which amounts to relatively detailed recall of a set of stimuli; and ‘implicit’memory, which is distinctly short of detail, but enables people, in effect, to ‘know I've seen it before somewhere’.
There is no evidence that either type is more potent as a guide to subsequent action.
Attitudes
During the sixties, dissatisfaction with the AIDA model became widespread among agencies.
The growing recognition that advertising was not the only thing that affected sales began to raise doubts as to whether sales measurement was an adequate guide to advertising's success or failure.
But if sales were not to be measured, what was?
Clearly, advertising is a form of communication to the consumer about a product.
But it is not just trying to get the recipient to learn the ad by rote: it is, surely, trying to give information — persuasive information — about the product, so that the consumer will prefer it to its competitors and buy it.
Why do consumers buy one brand rather than another?
Because they think it is better.
In psychologists' terms, they have a favourable attitude towards it.
Indeed, taking things a step further, you can break down an overall favourable attitude to a brand into a set of attitudes to different aspects of the brand.
To cut a long story short, the discovery of the sixties was that you can measure a range of attitudes to each of a group of competing brands, and get a clear, coherent pattern of differences between them: what is more, you can repeat the process at intervals, and monitor changes in these attitudes.
The changes, too, can be clear and coherent.
Now, if you set these changes against the objectives of the concurrent advertising campaigns for these brands, expressed in terms of changes of attitude, you find — if you are lucky — that the attitudes have, indeed, changed in the intended direction.
So, how does advertising work?
By modifying attitudes to brands, of course!
Well, unfortunately there turned out to be flaws in this version of the story, too.
It accounts rather inadequately for new products, where quite clearly a significant part of the task of advertising, and its main visible and measurable effect, is to spread awareness, knowledge and information about the new brand.
It has proved extremely difficult, too, to find significant changes in attitudes in many markets except over a rather long period — which does not disprove the theory, but suggests either that advertising does not work very fast, which no one wishes to admit, or that attitudes are not the whole of the story.
But perhaps worst of all, it has been clearly demonstrated that while a change in attitudes to a brand or product can precede a purchase of that brand, it can equally well follow the purchase: does attitude change influence a purchase, or does it merely result from it?— since people often feel the need to justify a purchase, especially a major purchase, after they have made it.
Back to the consumer
After this set-back, there were various attempts to rebuild the attitude theory, and it still has its uses.
Certainly one of the things advertising can do is modify attitudes.
The latest step in theory building, however, has been to take the basic precept of marketing, that the consumer is the starting point, and see if that helped.
If you consider how people — consumers — actually use advertising, as opposed to how advertisers hope, optimistically, to use people, it is quite clear that, to a given person at a given time, by no means all advertisements are equal.
Some ads will be irrelevant: the viewer or reader is not in the target group, or has just made a purchase in that product group and does not want another just yet.
Some ads will be about products which are most unlikely to be bought; some, even, may concern products or product fields in which the reader is actively looking for something to buy.
Quite simply, the likelihood of a purchase in the product field is one key factor in the way a consumer might respond to an ad.
A second factor is the importance of the purchase.
Over the years there have been a number of theoretical divisions of purchases into different groups, depending on the importance of the decision to buy.
At its simplest, you can divide all purchases into ‘day-to-day’ and ‘occasional’, but it is more useful to make a more detailed breakdown, which relates both cost and frequency of purchase, and produces a scale, something like that shown in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1 Types of purchase
It is a reasonable assumption — though little more than an assumption that ads in the categories at the lower end of the scale as it appears on the page will be more closely studied, and more thoroughly and consciously used by purchasers, than those at the upper end of the scale.
It is also likely that the ads for the more expensive and unusual products will be of greater general interest than those for the cheap day-to-day items: it is quite tempting to study in detail an ad for an expensive car, or browse through the ‘houses for sale’ columns, even if you aspire only as far as a second-hand Escort and have no intention of moving house within the next 10 years.
The logical consequence of this view of consumers' use of advertising is that there is a far greater chance of involving potential customers in the ads for more complex and expensive products.
In one school of thinking, durables, pharmaceutical goods, insurance, etc., have been christened  ‘information-intensive’ products, and there are agencies which set out to specialize in this type of product.
A further consequence, which has certainly met with some interesting results, is that for certain types of advertising campaign it is possible actively to involve the public.
This was done very effectively in the late seventies in campaigns by Whitbread, who ran a series of ads asking for public comments on a number of propositions about the law affecting pubs and licensing; and subsequently by the major banks, who ran a joint campaign partly designed to deter the threat of nationalization — a campaign which attracted many thousands of replies from the public.
The GLC's campaign to prevent its abolition by the Conservative Government was also highly effective in generating public interest and comment.
A very visible recent example is the campaign by the European Publishers Council in conjunction with the European Advertising Agencies Association, which is designed to bring to public attention proposals about advertising by the European commission which the EPC regards, with some justification, as potentially damaging to free speech and, even, free trade.
It is, perhaps, hardly surprising that these examples are all, in fact, from campaigns which were not directly selling anything.
As far as I know, no one has used an ad which is actively involved in selling a product in quite this way.
More usually, ads for these types of product can be found with extensive and detailed copy — but copy designed to sell as well as, sometimes, inform.
(A common device, especially in trade advertising, is the ‘how do you rate?’ type of self-scored, multiple-choice questionnaire, but that is different.)
The corollary of the theory, of course, is that ads for the cheap, day-to-day, convenience type of product are of so little interest to anybody that they should carry a minimum of information, and that they will even then have great difficulty in achieving any very active response from customers.
This may be true, and many advertisers of these categories of goods — which tend to account for the majority of advertisements appearing on TV and in major national newspapers and magazines — behave as if they believe it.
It is difficult to find examples which assume the contrary, let alone to show that they can succeed.
This line of thinking, however, seems to me to miss at least one major point.
If you consider the markets for most convenience goods, they are established markets, in which a large proportion of the buyers have tried most of the major brands available.
A large proportion of the advertising in these markets, is, inevitably, in some sense, ‘reminder’ advertising — which, again, should not need much in the way of information, since it is preaching to the converted.
But if the objective of the advertising for such a brand is, in fact, to talk to newcomers to the market (and there are always newcomers to any market), or to the unconverted, or to disloyal users of other brands, there is, obviously, a very clear, specific case for ads which carry quite a lot of information, presented in a suitably attractive way.
As the research agency Millward Brown has pointed out, a lot of ‘successful’ advertising depends on the fact that it provides ‘new’information.
In most systems for pre-testing advertisements, ‘news’ has a quite disproportionate effect.
No single theory
To cut a still very shapeless and incoherent story short, this latest analysis has taken advertising well away, it seems to me, from any possibility of a single, coherent theory of how it can work.
It will have different effects, on different people, in different markets, in different situations.
What is increasingly clear, however, is that the effects of advertising do not depend only on what the advertiser does.
We are not in the sort of psychological laboratory where white-coated ad people administer a measured dose of pre-tested stimuli to pre-conditioned, salivating consumers.
Certainly, advertising must involve a process of stimulation of responses from consumers — that bit of the adopted jargon of psychology is fair enough.
What has to be recognized, though, is that to a large extent, consumers select the stimuli to which they will respond.
It is up to the advertiser, by careful analysis of the precise situation in which the target consumers find themselves, to identify the appropriate stimulus, from among those available, to produce the right response among this particular target group.
The resulting success of this advertising may be due, in effect, to the following:
The ad may produce an immediate decision to purchase.
The ad may confirm a previous decision to purchase the product, and encourage the buyer to talk favourably to friends about it.
The ad may alter or undermine an unfavourable attitude or group of attitudes to the brand (which may have been based on ignorance or emotion…).
The ad may start a favourable train of thought which could lead to a purchase in a week's (or a year's) time.
And so on.
Part of the process whereby these various results have been achieved may be conscious: but part may be virtually subconscious.
It seems very likely that although there seems to be little in the idea of subliminal advertising, it is quite possible for a familiar ad for a familiar product to have at least some effect of reinforcing a favourable attitude without, to all intents and purposes, being consciously noted by the consumer at all.
Certainly, psychological research shows that a single sight of a picture can produce clear recognition of the picture when it is seen again, even at intervals of months or more: ‘implicit’ memory in action.
What is clearly the case is that there is no simple, magic theory to explain what advertising does, and how it does it.
In terms of an apparently satisfactory way of explaining what goes on we are far less confident than in the good old days of AIDA — but at least we know that AIDA was as inadequate as a theory as her operatic namesake was ill-starred in love.
Long term v. short term
One final area which requires some discussion is the question of whether  advertising has its effects in the short or long term.
This is important at a theoretical level because mathematical analysis of advertising's apparent effects in the marketplace, as carried out by econometricians (see Chapter 9), has tended to suggest that the measurable effects of an individual burst of advertising decay very rapidly over quite a short (usually less than nine months) period.
It is rather difficult to reconcile this with the ability of major brands in heavily advertised markets to establish and maintain their reputations over many years.
There is — for me — no doubt that the dominant brand leadership of brands such as Hovis, Persil, Brooke Bond, Cadburys in the UK, and Jello, Tide, Hershey in the USA is compounded both of the effects of their current advertising and of that accumulated over 20, 30 or 50 years.
It is not easy to ‘prove’ this.
But I can offer three pieces of rather different evidence which seem to me to be highly convincing.
The first, and most general, is the willingness of companies to pay over the odds when they acquire other companies.
What appears in English balance sheets as ‘goodwill’ is, obviously, more than an attempt to capitalize just the accumulated effects of the advertising of companies acquired.
(It is, in fact, an attempt to capitalize the total marketing effect.)
Certainly, though, it demonstrates that the financial market, rightly or wrongly, is prepared to put a value, however crude, on the long-term effects of marketing activity.
The second piece of evidence lies in the field of attitude change.
I have already questioned the absolute relevance of attitude measures, but if they do measure some at least of the effect of advertising, some of the time, the general slowness of movement of these measures implies, at least, that such change occurs gradually as a result of the cumulative build-up of the message of the campaign.
For it to do this, it must have some long-term effect.
The third type of evidence is considerably more anecdotal and tenuous.
When a famous campaign is changed, it is still possible to carry out research on advertising recall for several years afterwards and find a substantial, sometimes even dominant, proportion of what is recalled being the old campaign.
This happened, for example, when the chimps were dropped from Brooke Bond tea advertising; there is still significant ‘recall’ of such ancient slogans as ‘Guinness is good for you’and ‘Persil washes whiter’; people have by now quite out-dated ‘favourites’from campaigns such as that for Heineken lager, and ‘tick-a tick-a Timex’is still remembered after over 25 years.
Individually, we probably all — even if we are not involved in advertising — have at least a small number of slogans or even whole ads which we remember readily, and sometimes even with affection, from a long time back.
Some, like Toshiba's' 'Ello tosh, gotta Toshiba?’ have become part of the language for a time.
Now I have already criticized recall and memory as a guide to advertising effectiveness, so I am clearly vulnerable when I adduce this sort of thing as evidence for long-term effects of advertising.
All I would claim is that given  the existence of this phenomenon of extensive, very long-term memory of the campaigns of successful brands, the onus is on the mathematicians to disprove the existence of any long-term effect: the fact that they cannot find such an effect, with the somewhat rudimentary apparatus at their disposal, is not enough.
Certainly, something is happening out there.
Conclusions
This brief chapter has been kept, deliberately, short and as untechnical as possible.
The subject is one of great theoretical complexity, in which even the so-called experts find it easy not merely to disagree but to disagree about what questions to ask.
From the debate as it has developed so far, various things seem to me to be clear:
Advertisements are used by people: it is very difficult for ads to use (=manipulate) people.
Ads work in several different ways: these may be more or less intellectual or emotional: they may also be more or less conscious.
In so far as advertisements ‘sell’ they generally do it more or less indirectly: rarely is an ad a direct (or the only) stimulus to purchase.
A large part of all advertising is designed (deliberately or accidentally) as ‘reminder’ or ‘reinforcement’advertising: it is not trying to change anything.
It is likely to be more difficult to change attitudes or behaviour through advertising than to reinforce them.
Consumers' use of ads is likely to differ according to their interest in the product field and the complexity and importance of a purchase in the product field.
The effects of advertising, where these can be identified, are not necessarily short term.
There is evidence for this both in the slowness of attitude change in response to advertising and in the long duration of memory of successful advertising.
The problem of how advertising works is largely a theoretical one, but its relevance to both agencies and advertisers lies in its importance for the assessment of the results of advertising campaigns.
At the moment, the main results of work on the problem have rather negative implications:
1.
Sales are clearly not due to advertising alone, and it is technically difficult to separate the effects of advertising from those of other marketing activity in order to provide an adequate measurement.
2.
Memory is an inadequate guide to advertising effectiveness though, other things being equal, there seems to be quite a good a priori case in favour of memorability.
3.
Attitude changes, too, are at best only part of the answer.
They can be difficult to find, and may follow, rather than precede, a relevant purchase.
4.
Clearly, if we are expecting our advertising to work in a particular way, against a particular sub-group of consumers, we should do our research in such a way that it will show up this sort of effect.
This sounds obvious, but it is by no means what always happens!
We will return to the problems of campaign assessment in Chapter 9.
7
Planning advertisements
Advertisements do not usually spring fully formed into the mind of an agency's resident creative genius.
Most advertisements, if they are any good, are the outcome of a process of careful, detailed and imaginative analysis, which leads to the formulation of an advertising strategy for the brand concerned.
This strategy should be agreed in advance between agency and client, before any advertising ideas are put forward.
If you are the client, you are, obviously, impatient to see some ideas.
It is very tempting, as has been pointed out in the discussion on choosing an agency, to go for the ideas and ignore the reasons for them.
This is a mistake.
If the strategy is not soundly based, there is every risk that what seems on the surface a good idea is, in fact, misdirected and misconceived.
It is, therefore, essential to develop an appropriate strategy for the advertising before starting to produce ideas.
Most large agencies have a special department usually called ‘account planning’, or simply ‘planning’, to develop the advertising strategy (see page 47).
In the majority, however, this is the task of the account executive, whose job it is to take the client's brief, ask the appropriate questions, and translate the brief into clear objectives for the creative team to work to.
Objectives and strategies
At this stage, it is important to distinguish between a variety of different types of ‘objective’, or ‘strategy’, or ‘intention’, or ‘role’ for advertising.
People in marketing have a tendency to use confused language and, in consequence, to set up requirements which, logically, cannot be met.
In this chapter, I want to distinguish carefully between marketing (as a whole) and advertising, and between the various types of statement of intent.
Marketing
Marketing objectives are specific targets set in terms of sales, profit, share, distribution, consumer penetration, re-purchase, etc.
Marketing strategy is the statement of the means by which the objectives can be achieved.
These means may (or may not) include advertising, as a major or minor element within the total marketing mix.
Advertising
The role of advertising within the marketing mix is the part it has to play in  the marketing strategy.
Because advertising is not the only element in the overall marketing mix (see page 5), advertising's role is almost certainly going to be to meet part only of the marketing strategy.
This may be anything from increasing brand awareness to improving specific aspects of the brand image.
Advertising objectives are more or less specific statements of what is to be achieved by advertising, in terms of(for example ) increased awareness, or improved scores on certain attitude scales.
Advertising strategy is a statement of how the objectives are to be achieved, in terms of creative content and media deployment.
For the creative department of the agency, then, there are specific creative objectives, to be achieved through the fulfilment of creative strategy.
It is easy to labour this point, but I have seen far too many advertising briefs which put marketing objectives (like ‘to increase our share of the market by 5 per cent’) into the advertising objectives, or even the advertising strategy.
This is misuse of language, and can be highly confusing.
Developing the strategy
The ultimate aim of the advertising planner is to develop an advertising strategy which provides the answers to two superficially straightforward questions:
Who do we want to talk to?
What do we want them to get out of our advertising?
In order to arrive at the answers, it is necessary to go through a more or less logical process of analysis, based on market research — whether published, or commissioned by the client, or (occasionally) commissioned by the agency — and on knowledge and experience.
What the planner needs to know can be set out in the form of a cycle of information and analysis — a cycle, because marketing and advertising are a continuous process, and knowledge gained from one advertising campaign can be used to develop its continuation.
The cycle can look like that shown in Figure 7.1.
Different agencies use rather different versions of this, but they all look broadly similar.
The terms used in this version cover the following general areas:
The marketplace
The market in which our brand competes: trends in sales, consumption, distribution; the state of product development; the level of competitive advertising and promotional activity; patterns of consumption — are there heavy or light users of the products and who are they? etc.
Figure 7.1 The planning cycle
The present
This sets out to describe the client's position within the marketplace: brand shares and trends in brand share; product advantages and disadvantages over competition — both in physical terms (laboratory test and blind consumer test) and in terms of consumer opinions and attitudes; planned and possible product improvements; recent marketing activity, in relation to that of competitors.
The future
This reflects, primarily, the client's objectives for the brand — what are the targets, in terms of sales, market share, consumer purchasing and usage?
But to these targets needs to be added an analysis of what must be achieved in order to obtain them, in terms of both the behaviour and attitude of consumers: and of more functional matters such as(for example ) greatly improved distribution — to put it in what is, from the agency's point of view, the most defensive way possible, it is too easy to blame the advertising when the sales force has failed to achieve the necessary levels of retail distribution to support the required sales.
The role of advertising
In practice, one should consider here all the different forms of communication of the product to the consumer, and allocate to each, and to sales activity, product development, market research, etc., their specific roles in meeting the objectives.
For example, although most retail grocery advertising in the UK used to consist of lists of prices, and consumers tended to expect it to do so, it is unrealistic to expect advertising to do the major job of communicating large numbers of prices, especially promotional prices, when this can be done far better by window bills and in-store display: there are few shoppers who analyse every available grocery ad before deciding where to  shop.
This fact was recognized in the early eighties, first by Sainsbury and then by Tesco: both chains ran distinguished — and successful —‘image-building’ campaigns alongside more limited, tactical price-list advertising.
Thus, it is possible to define the role of advertising for a product or brand as being (for example):
to increase awareness of the brand and its characteristics;
to encourage non-users to sample the product;
to maintain the loyalty of existing buyers, and to encourage them to use more;
to develop the belief among both users and, ideally, non-users that the brand is technically superior to competitors for reasons A, B or C;
to inform consumers, especially lapsed users, that the product has been improved or reformulated;
to generate requests for information; and, even
to encourage the retail trade to stock and display the product.
Advertising objectives and strategy
On the basis of this analysis, it is possible to develop specific objectives and creative and media strategies for the advertising.
I will come back to this in a moment.
Effects
Presumably, the advertising will have some effect on the market.
It is an essential element in the planning cycle to measure the effects of the advertising, as far as possible, together with those of other types of marketing activity, in order to take account of what has happened in the next phase of planning.
This is discussed at length in Chapter 9.
Planning and advertising: objectives and strategy
Objectives
Once the role of the advertising has been defined, it becomes reasonably straightforward to set objectives for the advertising, which will usually be rather more specific interpretations of the role statement, including where possible specific targets, measurable by specific research.
As I hope I have made clear already, the objectives have to be things which can actually be achieved by advertising —‘to increase sales’ is not an advertising objective, though it is something to which advertising can and should contribute.
The sort of objectives which are appropriate for advertising are objectives concerned with awareness and understanding of the brand, and with the attitudes and opinions people have about the brand.
(There are, of course, one or two very obvious exceptions to this general statement.
In direct response advertising, an increase in coupon replies, or sales, or the value of sales per coupon, is a valid objective: in retailers' advertising, an increase in customer  numbers ('footfall') is equally valid.)
Ideally, objectives should be quantified.
For an established and successful brand, the objectives might well be, to a large extent, ‘maintenance’ objectives: to keep a high level of awareness of the brand, ideally as one of the first two in its field spontaneously named by respondents to a regular survey (something often described in the US as ‘share of mind’); to maintain a high level of belief in the brand's superiority over its main competitor on certain key attributes of the product type; to encourage people to offer the product to their visitors.
For a new or growing brand, the objectives will refer to the same sort of aspects of the market situation, but will be more concerned with increasing awareness, in developing a favourable view of the product, and persuading new buyers to try the product.
Strategy
Setting the objectives, then, is at least moderately straightforward, though it can be made more complex by the addition of sub-objectives relating to secondary groups of consumers, and there is always room for argument as to how much it is realistic to expect to achieve.
The difficult part — at least before creating the advertising itself — is to evolve a creative strategy to meet the objectives.
This is a process which goes back to the two questions raised on page 66:
Who do we want to talk to?
What do we want them to get out of our ads?
Who do we want to talk to?
If you are a sales person, one of the important parts of the job is to know as much as possible about the people you are selling to.
The more you know about their fads and foibles, their strengths and weaknesses, the better you will be able to deploy your arguments to persuade them to buy.
With advertising, it is exactly the same.
The only problem is that instead of sitting across a desk from the one customer, you are talking to hundreds or thousands or even millions, in their homes or their cars or trains or buses.
All the same, you are not going to be talking to everyone out there.
You are talking to the one in a hundred, or ten, or whatever, who might buy your product.
And because it is just one in a hundred, that one is going to be different in one way or another, or he or she would not bother to buy.
How do you spot this person?
Well, if you consider that one in a hundred people in Britain means over half a million people, you are talking of a large group of people, who must have something in common to make them buy your product.
Is it possible to define what it is that they have in common?
If it is, this will make it much easier for the creative people: if they cannot actually find a typical individual customer, they can at least get a reasonably good idea of whom they are trying to reach.
This is where the market research which is analysed in the first three parts  of the planning cycle can help.
If you think about people in very large numbers, you can divide them into groups in a variety of ways: age groups, different sexes, marital status, numbers of children, where they live, what they do, how much they earn, how many GCSEs they have, whether they own a car or a colour TV, the colour of their skin…the list is, in practice, endless, especially if you add in (say) readers of Punch , or buyers of Beecham's pills.
If I say to you that the typical buyer of your product is the wife of a coal miner, living in Yorkshire, with three children under ten, with a council flat, no car but a colour TV, you can start to deduce a lot about her way of life and, perhaps, her approach to the sort of product you have to sell.
She is not likely to feel able to afford many luxuries, but she will want good, plain nourishing food and lots of it; she will welcome reasonably cheap ways of simplifying household chores; and every now and then she may want to splash out.
By knowing more about her buying habits and the things she owns, we can fill in the picture.
She is probably a price-conscious shopper (nearly everyone claims to be these days), but in her shopping this may be reflected in a reliance on branded goods bought at Asda, or private label from the Co-op.
Possibly, we may know more still about her: that she has always voted Labour, believes in capital punishment, and thinks multinational firms are manipulating the world; likes reading romances, does the pools regularly, and watches Coronation Street every week….
If we can build up this kind of detailed picture, it is much easier to begin to talk to our customers in the right kind of language, and the right tone of voice.
But we do not often have that much to go on.
Anyway, where do we get it from?
The sort of research that provides this kind of information can come from two or three sources.
It may come from a published or syndicated source, like Retail Business or Mintel , or the Target Group Index (TGI); or it may come from a survey you have carried out yourself.
It is likely that, whichever it is, it will tell you about the buyers of your product and its competitors only in rather broad terms — those of the basic demographics: age, sex, social grade, area, presence of children.
Possibly, too, in terms of readership of various papers and magazines and weight of TV viewing or commercial radio listening.
Only if you have done a very elaborate and expensive piece of research will you have gone beyond this to the sort of detailed description outlined above.
Most of the data will be readily intelligible.
The one that requires a little explanation is ‘social grade’.
The British are a peculiar people in having a class structure which is more complex and pervasive than that of any other western industrial country.
The class structure affects people's attitudes and behaviour significantly, so that it is important for advertising to know which class is being aimed at.
Unfortunately, it is not a simple concept, and is  difficult to research.
So various market research interests have put together a classification for research purposes which the majority of research firms now use, which provides a kind of guide to people's status in the community and their likely spending behaviour.
This  system is based on occupation, and people interviewed in market research are usually classified by the occupation of the chief income-earner (the head) in their household.
The classifications, and their definitions, together with their approximate proportions in the UK population, are as follows:
2.9% A — Higher managerial, administrative and professional.
15.0% B — Intermediate managerial, administrative and professional.
24.2% C1 — Supervisory or clerical and junior managerial, administrative and professional.
27.1% C2 — Skilled manual.
17.5% D — Semi- and unskilled manual.
13.2% E — State pensioners, widows, casual or lowest grade workers.
(Source: JICNARS.
National Readership Survey 1991–2)
Traditionally, the C2 and D groups were the so-called ‘mass market’, and they accounted for over 60 per cent of adults until the late seventies.
A steady upward trend in the overall status of the population, due to changes in employment patterns and to increasing prosperity, has substantially altered the picture.
The key large groups are now the C1s and C2s — who are often rather different in their attitudes and habits.
In this sense, then, the ‘mass market’ has partly disappeared.
The system is by no means an infallible guide to people's spending habits or even attitudes, but the combined efforts of the market research world have failed, so far, to come up with anything better.
One of the most promising directions, which has been pursued by some large advertising agencies, and which has been extensively talked about, is so-called ‘lifestyle’ research.
This usually involves, for a start, a very extensive survey which asks several thousand people about their attitudes to a variety of aspects of how they run their lives and about their purchasing habits.
From this survey it is possible, by means of complex statistical analyses, to divide people up into groups whose attitudes and purchasing habits appear to be broadly similar.
It is then, of course, possible to describe the typical member of such a group.
The best known of these studies, internationally, is the now well established Values and Life Styles (VALS) approach pioneered by the Stamford Research Institute in California, and licensed to various European market research agencies (in the UK, Applied Futures Ltd); a number of others have been promoted by different interests from time to time, notably the Europe-wide RISC studies.
From the creative user's point of view, the problem with ‘lifestyle’ approaches is that they attempt to generalize, and by generalizing they lose the fine detail that distinguishes habits and attitudes in any individual market.
A good example of a way round this is the use made by National Magazine Company, publishers of Vogue and Esquire , of the TGI 's lifestyle questions to construct cluster groups of both male and female populations on the basis of questions relevant to their readers' interests in fashion, style, shopping and so on.
These clusters, which have been made readily available to agencies, provide a very useful ‘shorthand’ for analysing and describing relevant markets or brands covered by TGI , since the data provide a direct link between brand or product use and media use.
Other magazine houses have used similar analyses.
By way of illustration, the two cluster groupings, and their percentage of the adult populations are set out in Table 7.1:
Table 7.1 The National Magazine ‘Clusters’.
Percentages of the adult population
The names given to the clusters are evocative and largely self-explanatory, but, to give a flavour of the material, here are short pen-portraits of two of them, from rather different parts of the socio-cultural scale:
Ritz with Glitz
Affluent, up-market, very fashionable: only the best will do.
They are active shoppers and visibly social, using their social life to forward their careers.
Meticulous about their appearance, their relaxation is active but not energetic.
They holiday in exotic locations.
Bullseye and Beerguts
These are the elderly lager louts: men who have opted out, in favour of an easy life, an understanding job and regular drinking in the pub.
Tabloid readers and armchair sports fans.
As can be seen, this sort of thing begins to provide a texture and context for thinking about a target group for a campaign, and helps to prevent the use of inappropriate stimuli.
It is still necessary, of course, once you have decided your target consists of the ‘Well Dressed but Not Obsessed’, or ‘Fast-lane  Free-stylers’, to take into account how people like that perceive your product or brand.
Cluster analysis is only a start.
By way of illustration, Table 7.2 shows how it applies to some brands in the men's toiletry field.
Table 7.2 Aftershave usage by cluster — men = 1991: selected brands (Index: average = 100)
Lifestyle studies like these are usually the source of the acronyms such as‘yuppies’, ‘dinkies’, ‘glams’, etc., that have been enthusiastically bandied about the media in recent years.
This type of analysis is helpful to agency creative people, but has practical limitations.
Ad hoc lifestyle studies (as opposed to TGI -based approaches) cannot always be related, without further major research, to established data about media.
It requires either a full repeat survey to identify the life style-groups again if any follow-up research is to be done, or else the creation of a sort of shorthand classification for research and analysis; it seems that different products tend to be best looked at in terms of rather different life style groupings, so that, ideally, each requires its own major survey — which rather loses the point of the exercise — and researchers have had some difficulty in replicating the results.
Conversely, of course, the TGI -based material described above can be justifiably regarded as inadequately precise from the creative planning point of view, even if it is extremely helpful for media planners.
Lifestyles are not, however, the only approach to segmenting consumers.
During the last 10 years, there has been considerable interest in so-called geo-demographic classifications, based on large-scale cluster analyses of Census data.
There are now at least half a dozen of these available in the UK, the best known being the pioneer, CACI's ACORN (A Classification of Residential Neighbourhoods).
ACORN divides the nation's households into 38 individual neighbourhood types, which — in turn — can make up 12 larger groups, ranging in size from 3 per cent to 18 per cent of UK households.
This classification can be linked to postcodes, as a valuable tool for direct marketing, and to product-use surveys such as TGI , as an aid to advertising target-setting.
ACORN's successors use similar techniques, but different detailed clusters.
All these systems, inevitably, suffer from erosion of their database, since the  Census is only taken every 10 years, and populations are not static.
There is no question, however, that geo-demographics has added a valuable new weapon to the marketing and advertising planner's analytic armoury.
Finally, a different and simpler approach, developed by Research Services Limited, is ‘SAGACITY’: this is a combination of occupational classifications and family life cycles, designed to reflect the different spending patterns of different types of family.
The whole area of classification is one which is regularly the subject of Market Research Society working parties, and from time to time provokes a rash of articles in the technical press, but at the time of writing there is little sign of any real breakthrough to a new and better system.
Meanwhile, the most useful descriptions remain a combination of the ‘traditional’ social grades,plus the other demographics (age, sex, etc.)plus media exposure (which can be obtained for most products and many individual brands from the Target Group Index ),plus any other relevant information about their behaviour in relation to the product concerned.
This means, then, that the sort of target group description the agency may want to develop for the advertising will be something like this (for a brand of ice cream):
young adults, of both sexes, aged 18–30, but not exclusively the unattached ‘post-teen’ group;
mass market: C1C2(D);
with money to spare for small luxuries;
may have tried our product or its direct competitor;
used to eating ice cream in-hand, out of doors;
convivial, with a sense of humour;
ACORN group D.
Or, for a chain of hotels, for bargain weekends:
adults, especially men, over 35, especially 45–60;
AB, C1, well off;
regular hotel users for business, at least occasionally for holidays;
probably acquainted with at least some of our hotels;
able to take a weekend away more or less on impulse;
attracted by the idea of second holidays and ‘getting away’;
ACORN groups I J.
‘Man at his Best’, the ‘Business Class’
Obviously, to even arrive at this sort of description, it is necessary to have found out by one kind of research or another, and by the added use of imagination, a lot about the sort of customers the advertising is trying to attract.
The process can, of course, be elaborated, on the basis of a suitably detailed marketing strategy.
If the strategy for Bovril Cubes is to gain sales at the expense of Oxo, the Bovril Cube target group will, inevitably, consist primarily of Oxo users.
If Oxo needs, defensively, to fight off Bovril's attack, Oxo's primary target group will be some or all of existing Oxo users: it will be a matter of agonizing argument and discussion to decide whether to go all out to keep regular, heavy Oxo users at all costs, or, instead, to concentrate on lighter — and therefore presumably more vulnerable — users.
What do they think about our product?
The process of identifying and defining the target group, and the research required to do this, will usually have provided a lot of information, too, about how the consumer thinks about our brand.
(If it has not, then we probably need to do some more research, to find out.)
The sort of picture that we need to have includes the answers to the following types of questions:
What do people use the product for?
How often do they use it?
Where do they buy it?
How often?
Do they buy one brand only, or several?
How do they judge between different brands?
(Taste, colour, smell, size, price…?)
What do they think is good about our brand?
What is bad about it?
And what about our competitors?
Have they even heard of our brand?
Is our brand actually any better than its competitors (a) on the basis of scientific tests?(b) when consumers try the products ‘blind’— without knowing which brand is which?(c) when they do know the brand?
That is a fairly brief ‘shopping list’, but a reasonably comprehensive one.
If you can answer all those questions, with a fair degree of confidence, about your product, you should have been able to decide what your brand's strengths and weaknesses in the marketplace are.
From this, it is a short, though sometimes difficult, step to deciding whether to build on its strengths or counter its weaknesses.
(This is part of the process of setting the objectives.)
It is likely, in general, that advertising can build on the strengths, but that it may need improvements to the physical product to eliminate the weaknesses.
It may be necessary, however, to tackle a weakness.
Allied-Maples, the present group title of what used to be Allied Carpets, built its reputation on aggressively-priced, high street carpet stores.
In the mid eighties, the group started to expand into out-of-town superstores that sold a full range of furniture, bedding and furnishings, as well as carpets.
This raised three different problems (or opportunities, as we say in marketing): overall, the quality of the stores was higher than expected by people used to Allied Carpets' promotional style; people were not fully aware of the extent of the offer — they did not associate Allied with furniture and beds; and, in a market where independent retailers are still the dominant factor, they had low expectations of  Allied's standards of personal service.
As part of a programme to overcome these problems, Allied ran a series of ads in local papers, each of which highlighted a facet of the business.
Three of these ads are shown in plate 12.
This campaign has not yet been applied to all Allied's large stores, but where it has run, sales have increased and research shows a clear improvement in consumer perceptions.
In practice, it is likely that you will be trying both to re-emphasize or reinforce at least some of your strong points,and to reduce or eliminate at least some of your weak points.
Probably, too, the way in which the eventual advertisement is perceived by the people to whom you are advertising will depend on their present or past experience of your product.
In other words, different groups of people will get different things out of the same advertisement.
Judging from reported research, the advertising campaign for Radion detergent, especially the launch commercials, ranked highly, among most consumers, as being offensive, brash, crude and unpleasant.
But the brand quickly gained a significant share of the fiercely competitive market.
Clearly, for those who found they actually did suffer from smelly clothes — evidently a lot of people — the ads struck an immediate and powerful chord.
A particularly good example is the TV campaign for Ariston — the one that goes ‘On…and on…and on’.
According to the agency (which may have its tongue firmly in its cheek) the technique of their commercials is based on research by the Japanese video game firm Nintendo, and the ads are designed to have an almost hypnotic effect.
They even use Nintendo soundtrack music.
Again, in research terms, this campaign is heartily disliked by many: but to some, it evidently sells.
What do we want them to get out of the advertising?
By now, we should know who we want to talk to, and what they think of our product.
We also know that they may react in a slightly perverse way to our advertising.
How, then, can we go about defining our strategy in the hope of getting them to react in the right way — the way we want them to?
Here, again, a definition is in order.
The critical point about an advertising strategy is that it is a guide to making ads.
It is not an advertisement.
It is merely a statement about the desired results of the advertising, in terms of what the advertising is to communicate.
You do, in practice, see a lot of advertisements which appear as if someone has written a strategy and then put it in the advertisement as it stood.
Without a lot of luck, this is unlikely to work.
Why not?
Quite simply, because people do not react ‘logically’ to ads.
They attend to them erratically, remember them badly, perceive them selectively.
If we send them that well-known telegram ‘Send reinforcements.
Am going to advance’, they are unlikely to get anywhere near even ‘Send three and fourpence.
Am going to a dance’.
They might — conceivably — end up with a picture of Doris Day singing Ten cents a dance from the film Love Me or Leave Me .
(If, like me, they are old enough.)
If you think about how people perceive things — with any of their senses and process them in their minds, you immediately realize that the human mind works to a very large extent by association, and by a more or less impenetrable system of mental shortcuts — just try playing word association games.
Good advertising, it seems, is a means of second-guessing this process.
If you see an ad which makes you really stop and take notice, someone has succeeded in getting through to you.
When you find an ad incomprehensible, they have failed — probably.
If you then remember that the agency's creative people are — at least in theory — especially good at getting into other people's minds through a combination of words and pictures, it becomes a little clearer that while an advertising strategy may be a statement of intent about the communication of an idea to a target group, the interpretation of that strategy by the creative group may contain none of the words of the strategy (except things like ‘the’ and ‘and’).
Yet, if you show people the ad, they will tell you just the things that the strategy was looking for.
Then, given that the only way of being sure that your ad is communicating what your strategy says it should is to show the ad to people and ask what it tells them, it follows that the best way to write down the strategy is, as far as possible, in the language that consumers will use.
Hence the rather long question that makes up the sub-title of this section.
So how do I write down my strategy?
Different agencies use different methods for actually setting down strategies, but an increasing proportion insist on using ‘consumer language’, expressed in terms of the intended or desired reactions or responses to the advertising.
Probably the classic statement of this approach is that used by the J. Walter Thompson ‘T-Plan’, as described by Stephen King in Developing New Brands , where responses are divided into responses from the senses (what is perceived about the brand), from the reason (what is believed about the brand) and from the emotions (what is felt about the brand).
A typical set of responses, for the recently launched Persil washing-up liquid, might be:
From the senses
Persil washing-up liquid.
It cleans lots of dishes — really white.
It's very easy to use.
From the reason
Persil washing-up liquid comes from the people who make Persil.
It will get my dishes really clean, just as Persil does with my washing.
From the emotions
It's nice of the Persil people to come up with a washing-up liquid.
I'm sure I can trust it — it'll be quite like an old friend.
The problem with this way of putting down the strategy is that the sense/reason/emotion division is difficult to handle in practice, and there is no clear guide to the balance required between the three categories.
At the same  time, there is continuous pressure from creative people for simplicity in the briefs they are given and the creative brief, clearly, needs to set out the strategy in a way that is intelligible to, and usable by, the creative team: if it isn't, it's useless.
For creatives, then, the strategy needs to be clear, brief; but also stimulating.
It also needs to be backed up by simple guidelines, and supported by detailed product information: there is no question that the best and most effective advertising is based squarely in a complete understanding of the product.
In the last resort, when you are faced by a strategy, it is worth asking yourself whether you can imagine an ad based on it.
If it is full of contradictions, or if it is too vague, this is very difficult.
Even if you are not at all‘creative’, it is worth applying the test.
Creative briefs
Many agencies have now arrived at a very similar format for creative briefs, which aims to condense and simplify the creative requirements into a single-page format — which may be supported, in turn, by a great deal of back-up information
A typical creative brief, written to this type of format, is this one for Scholl:
CLIENT:
Scholl
BRAND:
Footcare (range)
DATE:
17/9/90
TIME PLAN:
Internal review 9/10/90 Final revisions 15/10/90 Present to client 22/10/90
CAMPAIGN REQUIREMENT
A magazine campaign, primarily for women's magazines.
Colour pages/half pages — but consider possibility of small-space b/w adaptations.
Adaptable to communicate specific product benefits for several individual products.
TARGET AUDIENCE
Primary:
Existing users of at least some footcare products, especially competitive brands.
Secondary:
People who are relatively health-aware, and may become more sensitive to foot problems — actual or potential.
Primarily a female target, both as users and purchasers, but some conditions (athlete's foot, e.g., show a strong male bias — the campaign cannot be too female-oriented.
Familiar with Scholl, but inclined to see the brand as very problem-specific, and also as a bit old-fashioned.
Likely to neglect  their feet — even when they know they have problems.
ADVERTISING TASK
To raise the profile of Scholl as the experts on footcare, with a range of products that can solve and treat every problem, and prevent further problems.
To build on the Scholl heritage, but to make the brand up-to-date and caring, rather than purely curative.
BENEFITS
Specific products cure/alleviate/prevent specific problems.
Problem relief leads to positive good feelings for your whole body.
Scholl alone has a complete range, to deal with all footcare problems.
POSITIONING
Only Scholl has the expertise to provide a comprehensive, effective, high-quality range of products to care for your feet and deal with all common footcare problems.
Using Scholl footcare products will put new life into your feet.
PROPOSITION
If you use Scholl products, your whole body will come alive again.
SUPPORT
The proven efficacy of individual Scholl products.
The Scholl brand reputation ('Dr Scholl').
The comprehensive Scholl footcare range.
The importance of ‘happy feet’ to overall physical and mental well-being.
BRAND PERSONALITY
Bright, modern.
Friendly, caring.
With a degree of humour.
GUIDELINES
The campaign needs to achieve a (difficult) balance between ‘corporate’ Scholl and selling individual products.
There should be a common campaign feel and, probably, format, but individual ads should usually be focused on a single problem and its Scholl solution.
MANDATORY INCLUSIONS (LEGAL, ETC.)
Clear, consistent Scholl branding
Specific medical claims must be supportable within the Code of Practice.
Two elements in this brief require a little further discussion and clarification.
Benefits
These are basically of two kinds: those which are generic to the product category (clean clothes; a delicious, easy-to-cook meal; a safe place for your savings that gives a good rate of interest; fast, easy, reliable driving); and  those which are specific to our product.
These may be partly a superior performance on the generic benefits (quicker, more thorough, cheaper, safer…) and partly based in brand values such as status, security, fashionability, form, ostentation, reassurance.
The task of strategy definition is to identify, precisely, the package of benefits that will do the best competitive job of presenting the brand to its target audience.
These benefits need, as far as possible, to be backed by supporting evidence — the ITVA (see page 126) will want it, even if no one else does!
Positioning
This is a definition of how the brand should best fit into its competitive market.
It should be true to the brand (of course!), competitively powerful, and, as far as possible, unique.
It is, in fact, what the brand stands for.
A good recent example is the TV launch campaign for First Direct (whatever you may think of an execution that can best be described as controversial).
The key benefit here is 24-hour banking, with no need to visit a branch there aren't any.
The positioning is that of a modern, accessible, caring, and extremely good value banking service, that is quite different in character from the traditional high street banks.
In a market where the high street banks' advertising has for years been devoted to trying to humanize an essentially depressing sub-retail experience, the campaign was, to say the least, refreshingly different.
It was targeted, obviously, at a minority with sufficient confidence and sophistication to buy into the concept, and it certainly succeeded, to a point.
The key response being sought was, presumably, ‘Here's a really sensible way of running my finances: after all, I hardly ever go to the bank anyway.
Let's find out more.’
A positioning statement has to be reformulated, in turn, into the brand proposition: a translation into something nearer consumers' language, around which the advertising must be developed.
The proposition is not intended to be an advertising slogan or headline, but the clearest propositions are likely to come close to this.
A strategy set out in this format does not guarantee good advertising: that depends on the ability of the creative team, helped by the rest of agency account group, to produce a good idea; on the ability of agency and client to recognize it as such: and the team's combined ability to turn it into a real, working campaign.
What the strategy does do, is to formalize and focus the analysis in a way that gives everybody concerned the essential basis for developing and judging good advertising — the two aspects that take up the next two chapters.
8
Creating ads
Creativity
I do not think anyone can tell you how to create an advertisement.
It is possible to tell you — broadly — what ought to appear in an ad, except that you can leave out (for good reasons, of course) such apparently essential details as the name of the product or a picture of the pack.
But ultimately, good ads are imaginative ideas.
Having ideas is a pretty inscrutable process — rather well described in about 600 pages by Arthur Koestler in The Act of Creation — and is a very personal thing: different people who are good at it go about it in different ways.
What is worth remembering, though, is that once you have got the idea, that is by no means the end of the story.
The idea has to be made to work, commercially, in the right advertisement format — be it a large or small print ad, a poster, a TV or radio commercial.
Ideally, it will need to be capable of working in all these media and of being extended.
Ideas that can be developed beyond a single campaign into a campaign that will run for years are really worth their weight in gold.
Persil washed whiter, in one form or another, for at least 60 years, taking on new angles of development as a campaign as technical developments led to product improvements and new competitive situations.
As the ITVA's rules on comparative whiteness claims in detergent ads have tightened, the (by now) several Persil products have not always been able to use this theme, but its development over such a long period was an astonishing piece of consistency by client management and virtuosity by the agency.
Corresponding to these divisions between idea and execution, and advertisement and long-running campaign, there are, in fact, two rather different types of creative skill involved.
The more or less genuinely ‘creative’ skill of producing the initial idea has to be balanced with the development skill of making it work.
The best agency creative people can do both, but much of an agency's creative department is likely to consist mainly, in practice, of ‘developers’ rather than‘creatives’.
The problem, for the agency, is to recognize and exploit the distinction, without frustrating the desire of all the department to be allowed to have the original, creative ideas.
Ultimately creativity — defined as the ability to have ideas that sell — is what all agencies claim to be selling.
Their problem is that they — and their clients — find it quite difficult to recognize, and almost impossible to turn on  to order.
Much of what passes for creativity is flashy or fashionable, or relies on advertising industry in-jokes.
So, are there any rules?
There is an American agency which, according to one of the trade papers, has the following statement about how it goes about making ads:
Rule 1.
There are no rules.
Rule 2.
There may be exceptions to rule 1.
Ultimately, I think all the ‘rules’ that exist are, in fact, not guides to making ads, but to deciding whether the ads might be any good.
And judging ads, or deciding which are the good ones, either before or after they have been run, is the subject of the next chapter.
However, because they are usually put forward as essentially rules for creating ads, it is probably best to discuss them in this chapter too.
There are, also, a few more fundamental rules, of both language and design and sound, which certainly need to be considered as an ad is put together.
While one cannot produce rules for having advertising ideas, some guidelines for, as it were, the physical construction of advertisements can be proposed — if only to be ignored.
The problem is that the ‘well-constructed’ or ‘textbook’ad is liable to be extremely boring unless it embodies a really good idea, and that it is possible for a skilled creative person to bend the ‘rules’of construction in such a way as to make a moderately good idea look or sound much better.
First of all, then, some general ‘rules’ which may apply to ads in all media.
Some, as you will see, I do not altogether agree with.
After that, I will go on to talk briefly about individual media.
Curiously, most of the rules seem to have been conceived for print media: there are few pieces of TV and radio ‘folklore’ of this kind.
General ‘rules'
1.
Every ad should embody a clear, straightforward, proposition
In other words, it should be offering the potential buyer at least one, possibly only one, clear reason for purchase.
In its extreme form, this is an expression of the Unique Selling Proposition, or USP, which was developed as a philosophy by Rosser Reeves of Ted Bates in the USA.
Very simply, the theory behind this is that any product has some characteristic which can be developed so as to make it unique in its class.
Ideally, it is a major feature of this type of product, and one for which the advertised brand is actually superior: but it could be some general characteristic which, by getting in first and appropriating it to itself, the brand can make its own.
Many of the best slogans — Colgate's ‘Ring of confidence’, ‘Persil washes whiter’, ‘Oxo gives a meal man appeal’, above all, perhaps, ‘Guinness is good for you’— are simple statements of USPs.
The problem with USPs, it seems to me, is that while they can undoubtedly be very powerful and succinct statements, they are very limiting.
Most brands, especially in fields other than the packaged goods for which the  theory was developed, are potentially far more complex than the USP theory suggests, and a USP approach limits the opportunity for giving the brand a genuine personality.
Similarly, a USP based on a physical characteristic is extremely vulnerable, in these days of increasingly strict advertising controls, to successful competitive product development, which would render the key claim untenable.
As we have seen, in recent years Persil has found it increasingly difficult to sustain its traditional whiteness claim — which it was allowed to make 30 years ago whether it was true or not.
(It usually was, in fact.)
The fact remains that it is undoubtedly important for an ad to have at its core a more or less straightforward main benefit that is being offered to the consumer.
It is, however, a matter of judgement as to how explicitly and vigorously this is presented.
The physical benefit of Oxo is, I suppose, that it is a very easy and acceptable way of making gravy or flavouring stews and casseroles.
Their highly successful current TV campaign, however, relies almost entirely on the relationships between the members of a distinctive, but quite ordinary, family in which individuals just happen to put Oxo into the meals they produce.
The physical benefit is implicit in everything, but hardly explicit at all, and the benefit actually communicated is emotional.
2.
Say what you have to say in as few words as possible
While this maxim applies especially to press, it can be extended to other media, too.
At its best it leads to the best sort of poster — those for Guinness, Polo, Benson & Hedges — where hardly any words are needed.
At its worst, it produces the sort of fractured English which has full stops in the middle of very terse sentences.
Like this.
All staccato.
Ignoring grammar.
And difficult to read.
It seems to be assumed by many advertisers that this sort of thing makes it simpler for the (presumably illiterate) public to take in, but I have never seen any evidence whatever to prove that it is better than, or even as good as, writing in slightly more formal English.
The other side of the argument, that long copy is not only possible but often desirable, is most strongly put by David Ogilvy, founder of Ogilvy & Mather, and probably the greatest living English (Scottish, actually) ad man.
His argument derives largely from direct response and direct mail advertising, where he is adamant that long copy, full of information, readably presented, is essential.
I do not, myself, believe that it is impossible to write short direct response ads: there is no doubt, however, that there are plenty of highly successful very long ads in this field.
What is more questionable, however, is whether it is possible to extend the direct response approach indiscriminately.
It seems to me that this is largely a reflection of the consumers' need for information.
Long copy can work, for example, for durables, especially cars, for financial services and products (you need both information and reassurance), and for slightly unfamiliar holiday products like Club Mediterranée.
The process is taken to its limits by Epson's distinctive and witty campaign for computer  printers.
It is less easy to see it working for low-information products like, say, custard powder — though the popularity of recipes in food ads suggests at least one justification for longer copy even here.
Interestingly, some of the relatively up-market brands of spirits — The Macallan, Glenmorangie — have been talking at length recently in their print ads.
For me, the length of copy is largely determined by the complexity of the message to be communicated — as well, of course , as by the limitations of space or time.
In general, words should not be wasted: they should be used if they are needed.
What is more, there is no harm in writing English.
It is only fair to say, in conclusion, that the short versus long copy debate has gone on since at least the twenties.
3.
There is no place for humour in advertising
This was an obiter dictum of a great American copywriter, Claude Hopkins, and strongly supported by David Ogilvy.
Hopkins went on to say that nobody buys from a clown.
It is easy to see his point, especially on the basis of the USA direct response market in which he mainly worked: Americans, far more than Europeans, expect to be sold a product, in advertising as anywhere else.
The only problem is that to make it a meaningful rule it would be necessary to find a way of drawing a line between humour (forbidden) and wit (encouraged).
The real problem, though, is that the basis of Hopkins's argument is demonstrably untrue.
It is untrue in selling, where any visitor to a street market like London's Petticoat Lane will see humour being used to sell, very effectively.
It is untrue, too, in advertising, where there are plenty of examples of successful use of humour.
Hamlet cigars, Cadbury's Creme Eggs, Heineken, the telephone service, Persil liquid, Ferrero Rocher are all recent examples of successful, humorous advertising.
An article by David Stewart-Hunter of Saatchi reviewed the available (limited) research, and discussed examples of both successful and unsuccessful humour, before arriving at the inevitable conclusion that you can't generalize about it.
When it works, it works.
Even, for example, for financial products, where the Leeds Permanent Building Society's long running TV series with George Cole as Arthur Daly is clearly effective.
The one real contra-indication to the use of humour is for campaigns which are to be used internationally.
Except for very basic slapstick, humour travels uncertainly.
4.
Give the consumer credit for some intelligence
This is a ‘rule’ with which I do wholeheartedly agree.
Granted you may be advertising to a sector of the market which does not have a university degree or even two GCSEs, you still have to recognize that few of them are illiterate morons.
Many of them are likely to have a great deal more sharp, down-to-earth commonsense than you have.
Research shows very clearly that people  recognize when they are being spoken down to, and they resent it.
If they resent it, they are not going to buy your product.
An extension of this is that people do not like being insulted.
They like being flattered, or congratulated, or encouraged: they certainly do not like being put down.
The assumption that they do not know how to run their house properly, or how to feed their families, or manage their money, is likely to lead to rejection.
Nowadays, too, the suggestion that a woman's role consists entirely of slaving over the cooker, the kitchen sink and the washing is certain to irritate a significant number of people, though it is still a real enough situation for the majority of women.
5.
Be original
To succeed, advertising has to attract attention.
It can do this by using specifically attention-getting devices — enormous headlines in the press, rolls of drums, whistles or other unusual sounds on TV or radio, flashing lights on TV or cinema — but these are likely to be artificially imposed in the context of an ad.
It is far more desirable to develop a style of advertising that fits the brand and has a relevant built-in attention-getting effect — in other words advertising that is original and unusual, not just technical fireworks.
The effects may be visual or verbal, in sound or music; they may be obtained by trick photography, by the use of Quantel computer trickery, or by clever selection of elements of sound or picture: Ariston's use of a Nintendo-style soundtrack to achieve an (allegedly) hypnotic effect, a rash of commercials using operatic arias, the use of music by Hamlet cigars, Rutger Hauer in the Guinness campaign, the talking animals in the Electricity commercials.
Certainly, originality is desirable.
There are, however, two caveats.
First, originality for its own sake is even worse than the unattached attention-getting device: it can actually detract from the product and the message of the ad.
Secondly, with long-established products it may put off loyal users if you start messing about with ‘their’ brand and what they believe it to stand for.
For brands like this, originality may lie in very small adjustments to an established formula.
Campaigns like Howell Henry's First Direct TV launch are widely criticized — I think rightly — for being so obsessed with being noticed that the message that is supposed to be communicated almost disappears.
Print advertising
The ‘long copy’ debate is basically a print debate, though it can apply to radio and, to an extent, TV.
Other ‘rules’ are more specifically print rules.
1.
Put ‘key’ words in headlines
Someone once worked out that there were about a dozen words which appeared more often than any other in ad headlines, and concluded slightly illogically — that any ad would be better if it had one or more of them  in the headline.
These are words like ‘new’, ‘save’, ‘win’, ‘best’, ‘gain’, ‘buy’, ‘now’, ‘try’.
Useful words, certainly, but surely not essential?
By all means use them when they are needed or appropriate, but there is no call to construct a headline especially so as to include one or more of them.
2.
Put the promise in the headline
(Or the ‘proposition’.)
This is good advice, but, again, not essential.
If you have a strong proposition to put to the consumer, it certainly makes sense to draw attention to it as strongly as possible, and the headline might be the right place to do it.
Equally, however, it might be perfectly reasonable to use a headline that encourages the reader to read on to find out what the proposition is.
(Yes, readers can read: it is only a matter of getting them to want to.)
A special case where the promise — and, indeed, the price — usually does appear in the headline is in direct response advertising of the ‘offer’ type which is so prevalent in the Sunday colour supplements.
You rarely see a direct response ad which does not put a clear offer — and the price — in its headline.
It clearly works as a formula, and it is reasonable to assume that alternatives have been tested and found inferior.
3.
Keep the headline short
(This applies, too, to copy on posters.)
This makes good sense, as a headline is largely a device to put part of the message across and lure the reader into reading the rest.
But long headlines can work perfectly well, if they are appropriate.
4.
Lay the ad out logically
A good deal of research has been done to show how most people tend to scan advertisement pages in newspapers and magazines.
In general, they tend to follow a more or less logical sequence, starting at the top with a headline (assuming it is there) and ending up in the bottom right-hand corner.
Once you have discovered this fact, it is rather easy to produce ‘formula’ ads.
In the late sixties there was a joke among London agencies that all J. Walter Thompson press ads had a headline (sometimes, greatly daring, reversed out of the illustration), a squared-up half-tone illustration, a few lines of copy, and a pack shot in the bottom right-hand corner.
Very logical, very simple, and ultimately very sterile: but easy to read and take in, if you wanted to.
It is, obviously, extremely easy to get stereotyped in layout: it is the art director's job to avoid this, without doing excessive damage to the way the reader will want to take in the ad.
There is a tendency in much recent magazine advertising, especially for young adult target groups, to make layouts very busy and ‘bitty’.
This is in line with the editorial style of the magazines, and with design fashions, but it certainly doesn't make for easy reading.
If, having read this, you pick up a magazine targeted at younger teenagers — for example, one of the pop music or video games magazines — the layout is so  ‘reader-unfriendly’ that it seems clear that the criteria for ‘correctness’in a layout need, at least , some re-evaluation for this target audience.
Perhaps all one can really say about layout, in this sense, is that you have to remember that in Europe and America we read from left to right and top to bottom, in that order.
In Arabic, it is different, and in Chinese or Japanese different again.
There is no real point in doing Chinese layouts for Western audiences.
They will just get lost.
5.
Reversed out copy looks good
Yes, it does: and that is why art directors love it — though it has only been fashionable for about 20 years.
The only problem is that it can be terribly difficult to read — and you do want them to read the copy don't you?
There are, I suppose, two simple rules about reversing out.
First, always do it out of a dark tone, preferably a uniform one.
Second, never do it in type of less than about 10-point; and even this is really too small in newspapers.
6.
Double page spreads are best
All art directors like to do colour double page spreads in magazines.
They look super in the portfolio: far better than all those grotty 10 cm doubles that sold so many army surplus sleeping bags.
So the temptation to use them, which can best be resisted by the media group, is great.
The problems of using them are, too, quite large.
It is notoriously difficult to design a DPS that really works as a whole without getting lost somewhere in the gutter between the two pages.
The problem is, quite literally, how to bridge the gap and tie the whole thing together.
It is very easy to lose half a letter of the headline, or a key element of the illustration, unless both typographer and art director are very careful; and it is very easy, too, to find you have produced two separate, incomplete pages of advertising with no real link between them.
7.
Only a full page will do
Actually, very often, a full page is not the best size to use.
This is, again, a media argument almost as much as a creative one, but there is a lot of evidence, mainly from direct response, that cost-effectiveness decreases over a certain size of ad.
Certainly in broadsheet media like the Daily Telegraph , a 35cm × 4 col space is likely to be every bit as good as the far more expensive full page, not least because it is set into news matter, rather than merely facing it.
Small spaces can certainly be made to work.
They need strong headlines and very selective copy.
They usually have to have small, drawn illustrations.
There is very little room for waste or error.
If anything, they need greater attention to detail.
8.
Photographs are better than illustrations: pictures are better than words
We are told — usually by un-bought artists — that we live in an increasingly visual culture.
Perhaps we do: I thought we had already had eyes for several  million years.
What this is taken to mean is that people find it easier to interpret and take in pictures than words.
This may be true, but I doubt if it is, just so long as the words are right.
Certainly, it is no justification in itself for ruling out ads consisting entirely of words.
Photographs are, certainly, an idiom we are now all used to.
They tend to have a quality of immediacy and interest and they are, generally, believed.
But although techniques exist for playing elaborate tricks with the camera, photography, as used in ads, is generally a very homogeneous medium.
A photograph is a photograph.
So an illustration may offer far wider possibilities for the art director to achieve special effects and a distinctive style.
It is just a question of knowing when to use it: not, I would think, for food, or, usually, cosmetics; but illustration appears to be more successful than photography for fashion, and it can clearly be used for most other types of product.
Film
Most of the great advertising folklore is, as I have said, print-based.
TV is a post-war medium — and commercial TV is less than 40 years old in Europe — while cinema advertising required the stimulus of TV to bring it alive.
In theory, film is the most powerful advertising medium, because it can successfully integrate words and sounds and pictures to achieve its effect.
It follows, therefore, that the most successful film advertising is likely to be that which best integrates audio and visual elements.
1.
Music is critical
Not all commercials have music, but most do, even if it is only background music bought from a library of such material.
In the early days of commercial TV, lots of ads were written as jingles composers such as Johnny Johnson in the UK made a fortune out of them and the best were sung by kids and ad people all over the country.
Famous voices sang them: who could forget Bing Crosby crooning ‘We're going well…you can be sure of Shell!’?
I think the use of music in commercials is getting subtler.
Certainly, it is trying to create atmosphere rather than just a memorable sing-along tune.
Thanks to Bob Payton, formerly of JWT and now proprietor of a popular restaurant chain, agency creative people are far more aware of the value of music, in this pop-dominated world, in talking to specific generations.
Thus, ads targeted at 40-year-old housewives started to use hit tunes first from the fifties and now the late sixties.
With a revival in fifties and sixties pop music, this has now gone further, to the use of hits of this period to sell to the under 25s: the Levi's 501 commercials of the mid-eighties, with songs by Sam Cooke and Percy Sledge, are now classic examples.
Recently, too, there have been a number of commercials using operatic arias, mostly by Puccini, and this trend was endorsed by the 1990 World Cup's choice of Nessun Dorma as its TV theme music.
While this has coincided with a revival of interest in  opera among the ‘chattering classes’, I'm not at all sure that it means a lot to the average person, except, simply, as dramatic music.
Music, obviously, can make a mood, build familiarity and memory, make associations for a brand.
I must confess, though, that constant use of ‘The Four Seasons’ by several different advertisers has undermined my enjoyment of Vivaldi considerably!
2.
Quick cuts are readily understood
TV commercial production styles have developed rapidly, often in advance of film or TV programme techniques.
In particular, the speed of cutting from one scene to another has accelerated considerably, so that commercials from the late fifties or early sixties now look incredibly slow.
This technique has moved — to an extent — into TV programmes and film, and agency TV producers and creative groups tend to assume, automatically, that quick-cut films are understood and followed by everybody with complete ease.
Since research into commercials consistently shows that a substantial proportion of viewers have difficulty with this type of commercial, this seems to be a mildly over-optimistic assumption.
The tendency has been heightened and intensified by the advent of techniques derived from pop videos — a language with which agency creative people are very familiar, but which can be opaque to anyone over about 25 — and sophisticated computer graphics.
Much of the time, this does not matter, because the speed of cutting does nothing to obscure the storyline of the commercial, but occasionally it can lead to total confusion.
It is, too, generally clear that younger audiences find it easier to follow quickly-moving  commercials .
It could, therefore, be the case that, in future, the TV audience will gradually catch up with the TV commercial producers' instincts.
Certainly, recent suggestions from the USA that commercials are (in some sense) just as effective when they are abbreviated from 30 to 20 or even 10 seconds could be taken to confirm this.
The evidence, however, is slim, and the logical conclusion — the two-second or five-second commercial — seems far away; while so-called ‘subliminal’ advertising, using flashes of picture or words lasting only fractions of a second, is not only totally unproven as a technique, but banned in most countries where advertising on film is available.
3.
Get the brand name in early — and often
Alec Monk, formerly international advertising controller at Nestlé, refused to approve any commercial in which the brand name failed to appear in the first seven or eight seconds, and in which it was not repeated several times.
The results appear, to me at least, very mechanical: the formula obstructs creativity excessively.
There is, however, a fundamental truth embodied in this ‘rule’.
Too many commercials, especially those following the well-loved technique of building suspense before revealing the brand name, run the risk of losing their viewers long before the brand is identified.
To spend  hundreds of thousands of pounds on remaining anonymous is gratuitous folly.
4.
The consumer likes to identify with the commercial
It is a reasonable assumption that people will find it easier to accept a product if it appears in a context into which they could fit themselves, being used by people whom they could — or would like to — resemble.
Hence all those ‘slice-of-life’ commercials and cleaned-up kitchen sink dramas, so loved by the Procter & Gamble school of advertising.
Hence, too, what Sam Rothenstein, then creative head of Masius, once called ‘The wonderful world of telly ad-land, where 30-year-old mothers have two teenaged children’ and every suburban semi has the space and furnishings of a Tudor manor house or a film star's Hollywood mansion.
Certainly, for household products, it makes sense to put them in a household setting.
Once you have done that it makes sense, again, either to make the household as credible (average, ordinary, pleasant?) as possible or, for the sake of effect, as zany, improbable, and perhaps Addams-like as you can.
It is, however, probably a considerable over-simplification to believe that simply by creating a familiar situation in which to demonstrate a product, you automatically win any Brownie points.
It seems far more important to me to provide an effective and clear demonstration of those virtues of the product that you are trying to put across than to lose the proposition in the attempt to set up a credible context for it.
This is particularly so in the UK where the social class implications of accent, furnishings and behaviour are so complex that it is rarely if ever possible to produce a domestic situation which is really widely acceptable, in the fullest sense of the word.
5.
TV is ideal for demonstration
Yes, of course it is.
But this does not necessarily mean that a physical demonstration of the product in action is the only way to use TV for a demonstrable product — the Vauxhall Astra ‘dog’ commercial, in which the proud owner treats the car as a pet, and it reacts appropriately, is, in effect, a demonstration commercial, but the demonstration is done obliquely and with humour.
This illustrates, too, the other key point about demonstration: it does not have to be done every time by the sort of presenter you can find selling vegetable slicers in Selfridges' basement, as a straight, face-to-the-camera spiel.
In short, TV is great for demonstration.
But demonstration is rarely enough both to sell a product and to establish a brand.
To do this, you need to give the demonstration an extra, memorable, distinctive dimension that can separate your product from all the other demonstrations on TV.
6.
TV is extremely expensive
This is not just a media point, because producing commercials is a very expensive business.
A 30-second UK-produced commercial can cost anything  from £5000 to £300000+ to produce, and there is no guarantee that expensive commercials will be any better than cheaper ones.
There are, in practice, ways of cutting costs — up to a point — but it is difficult to produce a commercial you can be proud of for under around £60000 — £70000 in the UK today (1992), and costs of over £150000 are common.
This means that, if you wish even to try the effects of TV in a small area, you have to be sufficiently confident to make a quite substantial investment.
The most important consideration in controlling costs is to look for ideas that will be inexpensive to produce — not to try to produce a Ridley Scott Barclay's Bank epic on a shoestring.
During 1983–84 concern began to grow among both agencies and advertisers that production costs were getting out of hand.
After an initiative by JWT, a committee was set up under former Treasury mandarin Sir Leon Pliatzky to examine production practices and to recommend action to control cost inflation.
This committee reported in early 1987 and its recommendations are summarized in Chapter 11 (page 132).
7.
Cinema commercials must entertain
A strong and consistent recent trend in cinema advertising by major advertisers — as opposed to local stores and restaurants — has been for films to be more or less entertainment, as well as commercial.
Much of this has been done by alcohol advertisers, such as Bacardi and Gordons Gin, but there have been plenty of others.
The greater flexibility of the 60-second format has encouraged the trend, and the fact that the cinema audience is known to be there expecting to be entertained is a powerful incentive to provide what it wants.
The point about ads as entertainment is, surely, that they are only any use if the entertainment embodies or springs from a commercial, selling message.
The primary purpose must, always, be to sell the product.
Radio
In the UK, radio is still very much a poor relation in the advertising business.
For many years, only Radio Luxembourg provided a commercial service, and this was clearly geared to a teenage audience.
As a result, radio advertising is still underdeveloped and, perhaps, inferior in quality to that in the USA and other countries with a longer, stronger tradition.
I say ‘perhaps’ because it is very difficult to put one's finger on the difference.
Arguably, it lies in the fact that the very best American radio ads are genuinely original and imaginative, and these hardly exist in the UK.
It is, also, true that the worst UK radio material is still very amateur, while the majority of US radio ads are, at least, professional.
The notable exceptions to this are mostly found in work done by Mel Smith and Griff Rhys-Jones.
So, are there any rules for radio, specifically?
I think, perhaps, only two:
1.
Remember it is not TV
Some years ago Radio Luxembourg carried out a series of presentations to  agencies on the subject of ‘visual transfer’— a term used in the USA for the more or less observable fact that most of the TV audience recognize TV commercials from their soundtracks, and that, therefore, using the TV soundtrack, or something close to it, on radio can greatly enhance the coverage and frequency of a TV campaign.
This is, obviously, one way of using radio.
But not all radio campaigns are in support of TV, and all TV ads are designed for an additional sense: sight.
Inevitably, the use of the soundtrack as a radio commercial involves some loss of effect, and it seems to me that in general a radio commercial is going to have a much better chance of achieving its desired effect if it is created from scratch.
Certainly, it may be an adaptation of a TV or press campaign, but it should be specifically a radio treatment.
2.
Radio means repetition
Certainly, a radio campaign has to involve frequent spots, in order to build its coverage.
This means that, at least for some listeners, a commercial will be heard many times — but these listeners will be few.
However, given current UK time costs, it is unrealistic to believe that many listeners will hear a given commercial many times.
It is, therefore, I suggest, a mistake to create radio commercials that are likely to need many hearings to achieve their effect.
Certainly frequency will be higher than for any but the heaviest TV campaign, but it will hardly be dramatic.
Conclusions
I cannot tell you how to create an ad.
A design school can, up to a point, teach you about layout.
A competent English teacher may have taught you how to write.
The good copywriters of the old school used to wander round council estates with tape-recorders talking to people in their homes to find out how they talked: market research, in the form of group discussions, now provides part of the same service.
Really, though, learning to construct good ads is a question of looking at ads, analysing what makes them work, and learning by example: it is observation, experience and practice.
It is also the ability to extract from outside advertising elements of music, or pictures, or language, that can bring new inspiration, and new steps forward, to the common currency of advertising.
Having the ideas is merely a matter of having ideas.
Some people have lots.
Some do not.
Most imitate other people's good ideas, which is why so much advertising looks the same.
Having good advertising ideas depends, above all, on being steeped in knowledge of the product.
The best ideas grow out of the product and are intimately linked with it.
It is very difficult — though not impossible — to make good ads without this close relationship with the product.
The product, in itself, however, is not necessarily enough.
To be effectively creative, you need a breadth and depth of visual and verbal references that can provide the raw material for the kind of mental associations that lead to  really creative ideas.
Roget's Thesaurus and a set of back copies of Zoom and Creative Review are not enough for this: creative people need, ideally, to have wide and varied interests, and a high level of curiosity about almost any subject under the sun.
One final point.
Film advertising ideas are usually presented to clients in the form of a storyboard — eight or more drawn pictures pasted down on a board with the written commentary set out beneath.
Tony Abraham, chair man of Lansdown Conquest, says, to my mind quite rightly, that if you can draw a commercial accurately on a storyboard, it is a poor commercial, because the film camera should be able to do things no pen or paintbrush can.
Every medium has its own unique quality, and every ad should be uniquely tailored to its medium.
9
How to judge advertisements
Everyone is an expert on advertisements.
They may know nothing about media selection, or how to produce a TV commercial, or what it costs to buy a 20 cm × 5 cols space in the Finchley Advertiser .
But they do know a good ad when they see one.
Do not believe a word of it.
Just pause to think, and you will realize that if you show the same ad to five different people there is a very fair chance that you will get five different judgements on its quality.
There are two very good reasons for this.
The first is that an advertisement is, at least in some sense, an artistic creation: people's judgements of art are virtually always subjective, and vary widely from person to person.
I happen to like at least some pictures by Mondrian: you may respond to them by asking why anyone should get paid for drawing coloured squares.
The other reason is that there are at least some rules for judging advertisements, but most of these are based firmly in the objectives which the ads are trying to achieve: if we do not know what the objectives are, any judgement we may make is without a real foundation.
There are, though, three or four fundamental criteria for judging advertisements which can be applied more or less universally.
These are:
Does the ad make me stop and look at it?
Is there an original unusual idea in it?
Does it work as a piece of design?
Is it relevant to the product?
Is it easy to understand?
These are all questions which can be asked — and answered — without knowledge of the purpose behind the advertisement.
However, the critical questions are specific to the particular ad, and they are the ones that really matter.
They are:
Does this advertisement fit the strategy?
Will it work?
It is only the answers to these questions that can really enable you to judge an ad, although it will certainly be good supporting evidence if the answers to the earlier questions are favourable.
Basically, you can assess ads at two  stages: before or after they have been run in the media —('pre-testing' and ‘post-testing’ are the trade terms).
Pre-testing advertisements and strategy
It has already been pointed out that one of the reasons for setting an advertising strategy is to assess the effectiveness of the advertisement.
Advertising must be designed to communicate certain ideas to certain types of people.
It does not matter if it communicates totally different ideas to other types of people.
This is not relevant.
So when the chairperson does not like it, or cannot understand it — or never sees your advertising — and your advertising is designed to appeal (say) to factory supervisors or teenagers, you can treat this judgement with the appropriate degree of (polite) contempt.
If you have set a strategy on the lines described in Chapter 7, the way to begin to judge whether you have a good advertisement is to go to your target group, or at least a few of them, and find out if the ad affects them in the way you intended.
This procedure is, I must admit, a limited one, and it is vulnerable to criticism.
All the available methods of doing the job — within a reasonable cost — are artificial, in the sense that there is really no very feasible way of reproducing the circumstances in which people see the advertisements.
People see advertisements out of the corner of their eye as they drive along a road or look through a newspaper or magazine; they catch a glimpse of half a TV commercial round their wives' or husbands' broad backsides as the biscuits are brought in during a commercial break.
Even if they do as much as glance directly at an advertisement, they rarely stop and read it carefully, making notes as they do so.
But, in contrast, they may partly see the ad in this way a number of times during quite a short period.
One of the main ways in which ads work is through this almost insidious process of being partially noticed many times; short of actual tests in the market (see below) there is no way of imitating this process.
What has to be done, then, to discover whether the advertisement is in line with the strategy, almost inevitably involves a form of cheating.
The simplest way of getting an answer is to show the advertisement to a number of individuals selected from the target group, or to a group of them, and to get a discussion going about the ad.
This needs to be done skilfully, and is usually done by trained researchers, who are adept at getting people to talk and at avoiding asking leading questions — because that is not merely cheating, it will lead to you deluding yourself: in this type of interview people are only too eager to tell you what they think you want to know.
From this kind of research, you can find out a great deal about your ad and your product.
The sort of questions it can answer are, for example:
Is the ad interesting?
Is the ad intelligible?
Is it liked or disliked?
(It is not disastrous if it is disliked, but there need to be very strong compensating factors.)
What does it tell them about the product?
What will it taste or smell like?
What will it cost?
Is that good value?
Do they believe this, or question it?
Who do they think the product will appeal to?
What sort of people will use it?
In what circumstances?
What sort of shops will sell the product?
What kind of feelings do they get from the ad — cheerful, serious, sad, confident?…
Might they try the product?
Or try it again?
All these questions can help you decide whether the ad is right or whether it needs changing.
This is, therefore, particularly helpful to the creative people who produce the ads, as they can get very detailed and constructive ideas about how to improve or modify the advertising.
This type of research can be done on a small scale.
You need a minimum of two group discussions (but more are better, and essential if you have a complex target group), or 20-odd individual extended interviews.
This research can be set up and carried out very quickly by a competent research agency, and will cost (1992 prices) some £1200 per group or £110–125 per individual interview.
These British prices are somewhat lower than those to be found in Continental Europe or the USA, but have risen towards European levels in recent years.
Pre-testing advertising impact
What this sort of research will not have told you is anything about the advertising's ability to stand out and attract attention when it appears in the chosen media.
This is something that you may feel a need to be sure of, and it is quite possible to devise tests which will give at least a good indication of the likely impact of the ad in these terms.
There is, however, a theoretical problem.
It is perfectly true that an ad is useless if no one notices it.
But it is by no means true that an ad which everyone notices is necessarily good — it may be noticed for reasons which are totally irrelevant to the strategy.
And, furthermore, the ways in which people take in messages from ads are often almost subconscious.
(This is not to say that you can deliberately reach people by advertising ‘subliminally’, merely that it is quite possible to get a message out of an ad without really being aware of it.)
In addition to the question of impact, the qualitative research so far described has the disadvantage — in many people's eyes — of not being on a large enough scale.
Most managers are happier with numbers and measurements than qualitative judgements, and there is, certainly, some risk that a small-scale piece of research will turn out to have been done on a sample of people who are rather atypical of the desired target audience as a whole.
What you gain in depth of information you lose — to an extent — in reliability.
Nonetheless, very considerable experience of using groups for this kind of research shows that they do tend to produce very consistent results, even where different researchers cover the same problem.
Nonetheless, to cover these two gaps in the knowledge provided by qualitative small-scale research, there are a number of techniques available to provide more quantified information about people's responses to advertising.
For print ads, these are all variations on the basic concept of a ‘folder test’.
In a folder test, a selection of about half a dozen advertisements, including the ad to be tested, is put in a file folder.
This is given to the research respondents to look through.
After they have had a reasonable length of time to browse, the folder is taken back and they are asked a series of questions about the ads.
Typically, these questions will include the following:
What products can you remember seeing ads for?
Then (for each product remembered) what did the ad tell you about the product?
Can you describe the illustration?
What else can you remember about it?
In addition, a selection of specific questions about one or more of the products may be asked.
From this sort of questioning, it is possible to draw conclusions about the impact of the ad — was it the first or second mentioned by most people, or did no one mention it at all?
Did they remember much detail about it, or merely that it was there?
Did the things they told you about the ad or the product correspond at all to what you hoped they would get out of it?
Did they describe your ad very well but ascribe it to a competitor's product?
Here, again, the situation is artificial, and the questioning some way removed from the real world.
If you think about it, it is pretty unlikely that, if you yourself were reading a magazine, even if you looked quite hard at an ad, you could give a very detailed description of the ad even quite soon afterwards.
What is more, because people's short-term and long-term memories operate rather differently, they may well remember something quite different three days later: and the chances are that in the real marketplace it is the longer memory that matters.
Further, the explicit memory may then be more or less irrelevant.
What is likely to matter most when someone is buying your product is a quite vague general impression that it is familiar and that they have heard good of it somewhere: not an explicit memory of an ad.
So, although this type of research produces what may be comforting numbers, and can provide reassurance that, in some sense, your ads will be noticed, you need to be rather careful in interpreting the results.
The other available forms of pre-testing for print ads by means of survey research are all elaborations of the folder test — for example, an ad can be inserted into an actual magazine rather than a folder to provide something nearer to the real world.
There are, too, a number of experimental ways of  carrying out research into magazine ads.
Typical of these is the use of hidden cameras linked to some form of eye-scan monitor so that a reader left in a waiting room with a magazine can be watched, to see how the magazine is read and which bits of a particular page or ad are most carefully looked at.
For filmed commercials, the standard type of quantified pre-test involves showing a group of commercials in a break in a short film show to which an appropriate sample of people are invited.
After the film show a set of questions  similar to those used for the press folder test are asked.
In addition, in some systems which have operated from time to time in the UK and elsewhere, there is a procedure whereby people are asked attitude questions about the product before the show and after it, and given the opportunity to select the test product (from a list) as a prize or gift.
The testing system then provides measurements of changes in attitudes ('attitude shift') and the product choice ('preference shift') as a result of the film being shown.
A further elaboration of this technique is the use by the respondents of computer-linked handsets that can be simply manipulated to show their response throughout the commercial: they can be asked simply to indicate an overall favourable or unfavourable response or to reflect some more specific description of the film —‘exciting’, ‘funny’, ‘tasteful’, etc.
This technique can be used, also, as part of a smaller scale, group-based pre-test.
The output is a set of charts showing how reactions fluctuate through the film.
At present, the difficulty lies in understanding how this relates — if at all — to the advertisements' effectiveness in the marketplace.
In itself, the cinema-test technique is as good — or bad — as folder testing for press ads: it has the same clear limitations.
What makes it both attractive to users and even more misleading is that the promoters of the technique tend to use a number of methods to produce ‘norms’ for, in particular, ‘preference shift’, but also for various attention measures.
These ‘norms’ have been shown to have very little relevance to the commercial's subsequent marketplace performance, even if they are derived solely for the particular brand being advertised, and it is by no means clear what is actually being measured: it is certainly not the effectiveness of the commercial in the marketplace.
Preference shift measures, too, are heavily influenced by the ‘news’ content of the advertisements, to the exclusion of other persuasive elements.
‘Post-testing'
The obvious test for an advertisement is ‘does it sell?’(or ‘does it sell more?’).
Unfortunately, it is very rarely that this question can be answered precisely.
It is unusual, except in the special case of direct response or direct mail, for the advertising to be the only influence affecting sales.
And even when it appears to be so, the level of sales is in itself a quite complex measure.
It is easy, for example, to say that an advertising campaign failed to increase sales.
But it may have succeeded magnificently in preventing sales from falling.
In any event, although a sales measurement is certainly the most desirable way of assessing advertising, it is not informative: it provides no clues as to how the advertising is achieving its success, or how it might be improved.
To use advertising properly, it is important to find the answers to these questions.
Measuring sales effects
1.
Direct response
The simplest way of testing an advertisement's sales effect is by using a direct response ad.
In direct response, you can test different ads, different space sizes, different media — at least in theory.
In practice, it is more difficult, because the effectiveness of advertisements falls off with frequency of exposure in a particular paper, so you have to be very careful that you are comparing like with like.
The one absolutely clear test is between two ads in identical positions in the same publication, on a ‘split run’ basis.
Even with direct response, it is still not going to be clear, without a long series of tests,why the winning ad is best.
2.
Area tests
It is usual to test an advertising campaign against another campaign, if possible, since this at least gives a reliable standard of measurement.
Unfortunately, this is not as easy as it sounds.
In principle, it is quite straightforward.
You select an area of the country in which you run different advertising from the advertising you run in the rest of the country.
You then compare your sales performance in the two areas — usually in terms of the percentage change on the previous years — and you have a measure of which campaign is the more successful.
The problems are of two kinds.
First, it can be very difficult to find media in which to separate off an area like this: it can be done readily in TV, cinema, poster or local newspapers, but is more difficult in national newspapers or magazines.
Second, the market environment can differ sharply from one area to another, for example, in terms of consumer attitudes to the product, or the competitive situation, or your own sales force's ability.
It is important to be sure that your results are not distorted by such factors.
In the UK, and in most European countries, it is difficult to overcome these problems.
In the USA, where there is a wide choice of local markets, it is much easier, and experience there has shown that much more reliable results, for all forms of market testing, can be obtained by using a number of markets simultaneously, rather than just a single test.
3.
Other considerations
In any event, it is unwise to try to measure the sales results of advertising in isolation from other market factors.
In particular, the activity of competitors is important.
If you are spending less of your market's total advertising  money than you have market share, and a major competitor is spending significantly more, it is highly probable that you will fail to gain sales.
This is not the fault of the advertising content.
It is the fault of your budgeting.
Similarly, if you are spending money on advertising and your competitors spend nothing but cut their prices substantially, you are likely to suffer.
Again, the advertising is not to blame.
Other measurements
A number of other types of assessment can be made of advertising in the market-place.
1.
Impact measures
These correspond closely to the ‘folder test’ type of pre-test.
Gallup (in the UK) and Starch (in the USA) used to run so-called ‘reading and noting’ surveys regularly, in which readers of a magazine are taken through the last issue and questioned about every page — whether they looked at it at all; read some of it; read all of it; etc.
This is also applied to all advertisements.
The results are presented as a series of measures: ‘page traffic’(the percentage of people looking at that page), ‘noting’(percentage seeing the ad), ‘reading’, etc.
The corresponding TV measure, very widely used in the USA but little in the UK, is a telephone survey of the ‘24-hour recall’ type.
People are rung up, asked if they watched a particular TV programme yesterday, and questioned about their recall of the commercials that appeared in it.
A rather more general type of assessment, in the same area, is the awareness survey.
Here, after a campaign has been running for some time, a sample survey is used, in which questions are asked about the brands in the market in question:
What brands of (soup, etc.) have you heard of?
What others?
Have you heard of any others on this list?
What brands have you seen advertised lately?
and so on, to establish what media the ads were in, what they said, and similar questions.
This type of survey provides a good guide to a build-up of recognition of a product, and some measure of what the advertising is achieving.
2.
Strategy measures
The most useful — if expensive — measure of the effect of advertising, however, is the measurement of changes in people's attitudes to the product.
This can provide a good indication of what the advertisement is achieving in terms of communication — what people are getting out of it.
The technique is simple.
Before any advertising is run, you have a ‘benchmark’ survey, in which questions cover key attitudes to the product.
Some time — probably three to six months — after the advertising starts, a second survey repeats these questions, and changes are plotted.
After a series of such  surveys, developments begin to show, and changes in the emphasis of the advertising can be planned.
A currently popular but expensive variant of this technique is the continuous tracking study.
This technique, particularly associated with the Millward Brown research agency, involves a continuous survey with the results accumulated on a rolling four or eight-week basis, so as to relate changes in awareness and attitudes very precisely to changes in your own and competitive brands' advertising activity.
Millward Brown use their own proprietary system of analysis — a form of mathematical modelling — to translate the data for each individual brand into a so-called ‘awareness index’; and many of their clients have fallen into the tempting habit of using this single number as a measure of the effectiveness of a commercial or campaign, rather than taking the trouble to make a more detailed study of the data underlying the index.
There is now a sometimes acrimonious debate in progress in the market research journals, in which the various participants are questioning, on the one hand, the methodology by which the index is calculated and, on the other, its meaning in relation to the advertising.
This argument will run for some years.
3.
Econometrics
Econometrics is the science of mathematical analysis of economic phenomena.
As applied to advertising, it can, in theory, be used to separate out from a product's sales the effects of different aspects of marketing activity, so as to assess the contribution of advertising.
Great claims are made for the technique, by the few people who are selling services of this kind.
Econometrics relies on statistical analysis, chiefly of a kind called multiple regression, which is designed to establish correlations (and — hopefully — the causal sequence) between sales and advertising, price changes, promotions, competitive activity, etc.
…Once this can be done, the ‘model’ of the market so created can be manipulated in order to try to assess the likely effect of different levels of advertising expenditure or different patterns of spending — heavy bursts or lighter-weight ‘drip’patterns for example— on sales.
Fairly unsophisticated versions of this type of procedure are not new, and there is at least one commercial service in the USA, the Hendry Corporation, which has marketed a budget-setting system based on this type of analysis for many years.
In the past 20 years, however, there has been considerably more activity and publicity for econometrics in the UK, leading to often vigorous debate in specialist magazines such as Admap .
This debate has been, for the most part, concerned with the degree to which the (undoubtedly) rather crude models used by econometricians can be used for fine tuning of one aspect of the marketing budget, on the basis of figures which critics regard as of dubious significance.
To my mind, the major contribution of econometrics to our understanding of advertising so far has been to establish the relatively marginal effect of advertising expenditure level changes in comparison with price changes: typically, price movements relative to competition seem to account for as much as 70–80 per cent of the changes in brand shares in a market.
(This should not discourage us from advertising.
Cutting prices is a very expensive pastime.)
The best demonstration of the present scope of econometric analysis in advertising is provided by the biennial IPA Advertising Effectiveness Awards competition and the winning case histories published by the IPA under the series title Advertising Works .
As will be seen from the six volumes produced so far and — no doubt— their successors, many (not all) of the winning entrants use econometrics to establish that advertising is responsible for a specific sales effect (or part of it).
This is fine and dandy, as far as it goes.
To those of us working at this particular neurotic coal-face, it is very cheering to know that (at least in a number of prize-winning cases) advertising does work.
Indeed, some of the cases show that different amounts of advertising ‘work’ differently.
The problem, it seems to me, is to go much beyond this.
Yes, I can reassure management that it is worth spending money on advertising, because I can demonstrate, with good numbers, that it produces results.
Perhaps, I can then proceed to manipulate these numbers, and use the findings to put forward more precise proposals as to the level of budget, or the way in which the budget should be deployed — in different media, over different periods of time, etc.
I am still, however, none the wiser as to how and why my advertising works.
I am still confined, for the most part, to knowing that if I throw advertising money at the market, sales will be higher than if I do not.
(Just occasionally I may be able to say with reasonable confidence that a particular advertisement or campaign is quantifiably better at generating sales than another.
The Beecham Croup's AMTES experiments tend to show, indeed, that qualitative differences between advertisements or campaigns are likely to be far more important than quite large differences in advertising weight.)
What is needed is a means to link the essentially mechanistic — though technically quite tricky — process of econometric analysis to other information from the marketplace about responses to advertising.
To my knowledge, only one major attempt to do this has been published in the UK.
This is work done by the market research agency Millward Brown in conjunction with Leo Burnett and Cadburys.
Millward Brown are pioneers and — to an extent — specialists in tracking studies (see above); and they have linked information on awareness from these studies to a model of advertising decay rates based on the Adstock concept, developed by Simon Broadbent of Leo Burnett, to develop a model that attempts to link advertising expenditures and awareness to market share.
This is, obviously, a fairly limited model in its own right: further, the published reports seem to me to include sufficient logical uncertainties, and the model to require so much manipulation to deal with each individual case, to raise considerable doubts about its real value.
The attempt, however, must be applauded as a genuine effort to go beyond the sterile and largely one-dimensional business of finding mathematical relationships between sales and advertising.
There is, obviously, quite a lot of work being done in the relatively straightforward field of identifying advertising's effect on sales through econometric methods, though it is still largely confined to about half-a-dozen large agencies and a similarly limited group of client companies.
Its value is still constrained by the wide gap that exists between most econometricians and most managers, whether in client companies or the agencies.
Econometricians are not, in my experience, very good at translating their findings into terms readily understood by those without at least A-level mathematics and statistics: those who are running their own consultancies also have an understandable reluctance to go into the full details of their equations and the modifications that may be required to fit equation and data more closely together.
So far, therefore, the findings have tended to be of more obvious value to the accountant than to those responsible for planning advertising.
Econometrics appears to help in determining budgets, and in the deployment of media expenditure — but when an econometrician tells me I should adopt a ‘drip’ pattern on TV rather than a ‘burst’pattern (see page 115), I want to know why .
And the answer to my question, to be useful, should not be ‘because my calculations show that this is so, and it will save your client £X to do it’, but, ‘because the way your market works is thus; and your advertising — or at least the campaign you are running — affects it so’.
We are nowhere near that yet.
One further caveat.
We all now have personal computers, of increasing power and sophistication, on our desks, and there are already proprietary do-it-yourself econometrics and expert system kits available on the market.
In the present state of the art, the temptation to use these without — at the very least — first having had some academic training in econometric techniques should be resisted.
There are lies, damned lies, and statistics, but there are no lies more damned than those created by statisticians who don't know what they're about.
In the first edition of this book, I wrote that the use of econometrics in advertising was roughly at the stage before the square edges of the first wheel were rounded off.
Some 12 years later, we are still, I believe, trying to get our mind round the concept of the axle.
So, could you judge?
Certainly, it is not as easy as it looks.
The techniques exist to answer some questions, but not all.
No one can predict the sales success of an ad, and it is often difficult to measure the success even afterwards.
What you can do, though, is use research to improve your advertising, by understanding how people react to it.
That alone is a very valuable exercise.
10
Media: where the ideas can be seen
A wealth of choice
Every advertisement has to appear in some advertising medium or other, even if it is only a roadside sign or a newsagent's window.
The range of media available in a sophisticated industrial society is very wide, both in terms of different types of medium — print, film, indoor, outdoor — and in terms of individual media of each type.
In the UK, there are 12 national daily newspapers and 11 national Sundays, and hundreds of local papers; 15 commercial TV stations (but at present only one national network, using two channels), over 80 local radio stations and two semi-national; there are about 2000 consumer magazines, which can be divided into a number of different categories by audience and interest group, and over 4000 trade and technical magazines; around 1650 cinema screens, mainly in two large national chains, carry advertising; there are numerous poster sites, ranging from ‘supersites’ down to ‘Adshel’bus shelters, not to mention illuminated signs, bus sides and cards inside buses and London underground carriages; then there are theatre brochures and sports programmes, football grounds, racecourses and other sporting venues; at least two firms operate ‘truck posters’, and you can put ads in or on taxis; not to mention direct mail, and electronic media such as Prestel.
There is even an enterprising individual who has put ads on cows grazing beside the London to Brighton railway line, while sandwich-boards and street criers are perhaps the oldest media of all.
Then there are balloons, ‘blimps’, milk bottles, lorry sides…and so on.
Within all these media, too, there are choices to be made: choices of size, of position, of timing, frequency and duration of appearance; choices between colour and monochrome.
No wonder specialist media departments and even media buying businesses have had to be established, and a vast body of research into every aspect of media has been undertaken.
On the face of it, it is a business ripe for computerization, and, indeed, a great deal of work is done with computers to analyse media research data and make the construction of media schedules more effective.
There are few definitive answers, so that the skill, experience, judgement and negotiating skill of the media people remain vital ingredients in a successful advertising campaign.
In this chapter, I want to set out, as far as possible, the key elements in planning a  media schedule.
Inevitably, this will involve looking from time to time at individual media, as each has its own characteristics, requirements, and available research resources.
However, as far as possible, I aim to keep discussion of the peculiarities of the main media to the more specialized chapters which follow, and to confine the discussion in this chapter to reasonably broad principles.
Where do you start?
Usually, in practice, you start with a budget.
As we have seen (Chapter 2), it is not the ideal way to start, but it is a fact of life, and the size of the budget does, to a significant extent, serve to set limits on the opportunities open to the media planner.
£50000 does not go very far in TV, except on one or two small regional stations; it is quite difficult, as the cigarette companies find, to spend £1 million plus on a brand without using TV at all: if you only have a few hundred pounds to spend there are few press media in which you can consider full pages or even moderately large sizes.
Even with a substantial sum, the money available can buy you very different amounts of contact with the public: in conventional media analysis terms of coverage of adults and opportunities to see (OTS) an ad, £300000 could buy you, nationally, in early 1992, the ‘campaigns’ in the main media which are shown in Table 10.1.
Table 10.1 What £300000 can buy: adults, national, end-1991
Money, then, is a limiting factor.
The other limiting factor is the creative one.
Decisions about which (broad) media to recommend are basically joint decisions between the creative and media groups in the agency — albeit with, usually, a strong voice from both client and account executive.
Certainly, if the creative team has strong views on which medium to use, and can justify this by demonstrating a really effective approach using that medium, it can help to cut a lot of corners.
The inter-media decision
The first decision that has to be taken, then, is which medium — or combination of media — to use.
In taking this decision, there are eight main factors to be taken into account:
the money available;
the creative group's preference and past experience;
the client's preference and past experience;
the target audience;
the type of product;
the activity of competitors;
the likely reactions of the retail trade;
the apparent relative effectiveness of the available candidate media.
Each of these factors can, and usually does, act as a limiting factor, so that when each has been taken into account the major decision may be reasonably clear, even if not conclusive.
This will, however, still leave open the possibilities of using ‘fringe’ media to fill in gaps in the campaign or, indeed, of making an imaginative use of an alternative medium which would otherwise be discarded.
1.
Money
This has been briefly discussed already.
It is probably fair to say that you cannot really hope to run an adequate national TV campaign in the UK for less than about £750000; or a national poster campaign for less than £250000.
Beyond these very broad constraints, however, there is almost limitless flexibility: you can do almost anything on a small-scale, trial, or regional basis.
2.
Creative preference
Again, there is no real need to comment — except that it is the media planner's job both to discourage the creative group from trying to produce massive, spectacular ads when the budget is minimal, and to keep them aware of new ideas and ways of using the media.
It is the media department of the agency that is constantly exposed to the approaches of media salespeople, who may well be offering interesting new ideas — occasionally.
The sort of examples that have appeared in recent years include, in a variety of media, the following:
the use by Trusthouse Forte of L-shaped and U-shaped ads in national newspapers as a means of increasing the impact of their line-drawn hotel ‘street’ campaign;
the use of a series of different posters on electrically-changed poster sites to tell a story;
the spectacular supersite poster: a car stuck to a poster site by Araldite adhesive;
topping and tailing TV commercial breaks;
the use of posters in and around agricultural markets to target farmers;
series of posters on LRT escalators;
large-scale ‘teaser’ campaigns on TV.
3.
The client's preference
The client, whose money it is, has the final say.
If a particular medium is wanted, the agency has to listen.
The client is right very often, but sometimes can be demonstrably wrong — there is not enough money to do a proper job, or the medium reaches the wrong target audience.
Then it is the agency's job to argue — rationally, I hope: there are plenty of facts available about media audiences.
Most brands, in fact, come to an agency with a history of past advertising, perhaps in a variety of media.
From this, it may be possible to determine clearly which media work best for the brand, and this, obviously, must influence any new plans.
(Though you have to remember that an ‘unsuccessful’ medium may just have been misused in previous attempts.)
4.
The target audience
The target audience is, of course, a primary consideration.
If you are advertising to teenage girls, you do not use Woman's Weekly (which has the oldest readership of the four big weeklies) or buy TV spots during News at Ten .
However, decisions are rarely as simple as that.
A housewife audience can be reached (for example) through TV, daily or Sunday newspapers, women's weekly or monthly magazines, radio, local newspapers, posters….
5.
Type of product
The type of product can often dictate, to an extent, the media to be used.
The context of the particular medium, and the atmosphere it can create, can affect responses to the advertising.
Some media refuse, or are legally not allowed, to carry ads for certain products.
A newspaper, because it is a ‘news’ medium, may seem appropriate for a sale or a new product's launch, where a magazine might not.
Most grocery store advertising in the UK appears on Wednesday or Thursday, in advance of the major grocery shopping days of Friday and Saturday, but for groups of smaller, local grocers, like Mace, which have a through-the-week shopping pattern, advertising on Monday or Tuesday, or even on Sunday, makes sense.
Family products tend to be advertised, if possible, on TV; women's products in women's magazines.
There are still few general men's magazines in the UK, though male readers dominate specialist sectors like motoring and sports magazines, so it can be difficult to get wide coverage of an exclusive male audience, should you want to, without putting your ad into a rather specialized editorial context.
6.
Competitive activity
There are, basically, two philosophies about competitors' media selection: to compete in the same media, because ‘we must be seen to compete’ or  because it is the only really possible medium or (even) because ‘they must know something’; or to try to avoid the competition and to ‘dominate’a reasonable alternative medium.
(This idea of media ‘domination’ is an important one which you will certainly meet again.
Like most advertising jargon it is a slight misnomer, since it almost always means, at most, that your advertising is the main advertising at that time, in that medium, for that product category.
It can be taken to extremes, as when Woolworths took every ad in the Daily Mirror , or Fisons every ad in The Times .)
7.
The retail trade
The reactions of the retail trade are hardly vital to the success of the advertising — if the salesforce is competent.
However, the promise of TV advertising can still be a potent influence, and certain of the daily newspapers and TV contractors can provide a merchandising service which can be quite effective in stimulating some sectors of the retail trade — notably the confectioner/newsagent/tobacconist group.
On a rather higher level, one or two monthly magazines such as Vogue and Good Housekeeping can do a good merchandising job in department stores.
8.
Relative effectiveness
This is, really the $64000 question, and the one where the evidence is least helpful.
The reason for this is quite simple.
As has been made clear in Chapters 6 and 9, no one is really agreed as to how advertising works; or how, and by what research means, to demonstrate that it has worked.
It is, therefore, extremely difficult,a priori , to demonstrate that a single medium is successful, let alone that one medium is superior to another.
No one has devised a research method, short of market trials, that can compare different media — and even such tests have their pitfalls.
That said, it is more or less generally accepted that TV is the most powerful medium available, being capable of building awareness and understanding of a product's advertising more broadly and faster than other media.
This, however, presupposes that there is enough money available to do a proper job on TV.
Beyond this there is little agreement, and the women's weekly magazines, for example, have argued strongly in recent years that their particular editorial qualities and high coverage of a female audience make them a superior medium even to TV for many products in, particularly, food and toiletry fields.
The fact is, as we shall see, that different media do tend to be rather better for different things — you cannot get a lot of information into a 30-second TV commercial, for example.
The technical problem facing the media planner is, in fact, rather more dramatic.
Media costs are usually assessed in terms of‘cost per thousand’: the number of pence (or pounds) it takes to reach an audience of 1000 (adults, housewives, men under 45 or whatever) with a given ad or campaign.
The  trouble is that what is measured differs from medium to medium, and, therefore, cost measurements differ almost completely between, say, TV and posters in what they are costs of.
In TV, the cost is based on TV Ratings (TVRs), which are the percentage of households in which the TV is turned on to ITV at the time the ad is run; in press, the cost is per thousand readers (or, occasionally, circulation) of the given publication; in cinema, it is based on audience sizes; in posters, on people passing the poster and, therefore, able to see it.
Comparing these different measures is an advanced case of adding apples to oranges to cows — which makes the table on page 105 a highly misleading and dangerous animal.
One medium or several?
The objective of media planning is to ensure that a reasonably large proportion of the target audience (this is called ‘coverage’) sees the advertising a sufficient number of times (this is called ‘frequency’).
Obviously, it is a matter of judgement just what coverage, and what frequency to aim at — especially when you remember that the type of ‘reach’ being measured differs from medium to medium.
Common sense says that it is unlikely that one exposure to an ad will have any effect.
Research by London Weekend Television, however, has shown that light ITV viewers, who can be expected to see a given commercial very few times, are just as likely to recognize it as those who should have seen it several times.
While this is not measuring the effectiveness of the advertising, merely memory of it, it is possibly indicative.
Research on visual memory, moreover, shows that recognition of pictures, after one quite short exposure, is normally very high over quite a long period.
It is generally accepted — but only as a rule of thumb — that an average of two-and-a-half to three OTS (opportunities to see) is a fairly minimal level for a burst of TV advertising.
(This is equivalent to some 200 TVRs, for a coverage of 70 per cent and, therefore, an OTS frequency of 2.9, since OTS is equal to TVRs divided by coverage.)
It is only fair to say, though, that work by some econometricians (see page 103) has suggested that optimum rates of TV advertising require far less frequency than this, at least for well-established brands.
For press campaigns, which at least appear to be cheaper, a rather higher frequency of contact is usually aimed at: five, six or more OTS.
The need to use more than one medium, though, arises more usually from considerations of coverage, or from the nature of the campaign.
It may be, to take the latter first, that a TV commercial needs to be supported by a rather more informative press campaign.
Or that the campaign has two objectives: an information and persuasion job, to be done in TV or press, and a reminder job which may best be done in posters.
As far as coverage is concerned, this comes out of the definition of the target group and the media available to reach it.
There is a continuous debate in media circles, for example, about how to reach light ITV viewers, who tend  to be concentrated among better-off, and to an extent younger, people.
If your target audience includes a substantial proportion of light viewers, but your campaign is on TV, you may need to supplement TV with suitable press or perhaps cinema advertising to reach this group.
Similarly, while your prime audience may be, in demographic terms, the cinema audience, the size of the audience and the frequency of cinema-going are sufficiently low for you almost certainly to need to supplement a cinema campaign with selected press, probably magazine, media.
Which leads, inevitably, to the question: what is a desirable level of coverage, and how should this relate to frequency?
Assuming a reasonable sum of money is available, I believe that, in general, coverage is the first priority, but that it is reasonable to start preferring frequency once coverage tops about 65 per cent of a ‘difficult’ target audience or 75–80 per cent of an ‘easy’one.
(Men under 30 are ‘difficult’, C2 housewives aged 25–50 are ‘easy’, for example.)
It is, however, very much a matter of judgement how far it is desirable to pursue coverage at all costs.
Clearly a public service campaign must, within reason, aim for virtually complete coverage.
Few commercial campaigns can justify aiming far above 85 per cent unless, of course, they define their target audience as (say)‘readers of Vogue ’.
The intra-medium decision
Intra-medium decisions — where to put the ads within a chosen medium or media group — allow for a rather different form of judgement, and have available rather more coherent research standards.
The decisions involved are of three kinds:
the choice of publication or radio/TV station;
the choice of size or length of spot;
the precise choice of position in the medium.
1.
Choice of individual medium
This type of choice depends chiefly on the cost effectiveness of the individual medium against the target audience or, in the case of TV and radio, the relative importance to the brand's objectives of different regions of the country.
Data from readership surveys make it possible to measure cost per thousand readers for most major publications, not merely against the adult population as a whole but against sub-groups of the population.
This can most readily be done with the aid of a computer, and if your agency does not have the facilities, several of the media owners and one or two computer bureaux have suitable programs available on a fee basis.
Usually, the media planner attributes importance weightings to different demographic groups in the population, and the computer is asked to rank media or groups of media against them in order of cost per thousand.
The process can be extended to provide different ways of achieving specific targets of coverage and frequency against a given group of people.
A typical cost-ranking might look like those in Tables 10.2 and 10.3.
On the basis of this type of analysis, the planner can then apply his or her judgement — of the suitability of individual publications for the product, and of the type of deal that it might be possible to negotiate — to select the final mix of publications.
The cost-ranking is a guide to scheduling, not a tablet of stone.
Table 10.2 A cost-ranking for all women aged 18–35
Table 10.3 A cost-ranking on a specialized target group
As far as TV areas are concerned, the question is, basically, one of marketing priorities and objectives.
Does the client wish to support strengths or bolster weaknesses?
The problem is complicated by the fact that costs per thousand vary sharply by station, and it is especially expensive to advertise in the large London area.
There is a long-running debate as to whether money for a national campaign should be allocated according to the proportions of  a national rate card, or on an ‘equal-impact’ basis.
The latter appears to make more logical sense, but concentrates funds excessively into London.
An added complication which increases in importance from time to time, is the tendency for both ITV contractors and media buyers to negotiate ‘share deals’, in which the advertiser obtains a discount for giving a particular contractor a disproportionate share of the TV budget.
2.
Size and length
Here, obviously, creative considerations are important, but in press, particularly, there may be considerable flexibility.
What the planner has to do (always within the budget) is balance the benefits offered by the medium's rate card structure against the increased effectiveness that a larger size of ad may offer.
In general, rate cards are constructed so that the larger the space or the longer the commercial, the lower the cost per column centimetre or per second.
However, if a double page spread (DPS) is 75 per cent more expensive than a single page, or a 40-second TV spot is 33 per cent more expensive than a 30-second spot, is the resulting ad going to be 75 per cent or 33 per cent more effective?
The fact is that there are, as so often, no clear rules.
There is, buried in some agencies' archives, material — usually based either on reading and noting research (see page 100) or on direct response returns — which shows rather clearly that over a certain size — somewhere around 35 cm × 6 cols in a broadsheet newspaper — diminishing returns begin to set in.
Indeed, I am not absolutely sure that it has not been proved that in terms of pure cost-effectiveness a space such as a 4 cm double is the best you can buy — the only trouble is that you need an awful lot of them.
Similarly,a priori one would expect the same effect in TV, possibly over about 30 seconds.
There is, furthermore, at least some limited evidence to suggest that most commercials do not need to be as long as they are in order to communicate at least the more fundamental elements of their message.
In practice, all the major media have certain ‘standard’ sizes which are far more popular — and thus easier to buy — than others.
There is limited choice for the national advertiser in cinema — 60 seconds is more or less standard, though 30-second spots are used; in magazines full pages, DPSs, halves and quarters; in newspapers full pages, and, depending on whether the paper is broadsheet or tabloid, 35 cm × 6, 25 cm × 4, 15 cm × 2 are very widely used sizes: on TV, 30-second spots dominate, with 20-second and 10-second spots becoming more popular; in posters, 4-sheets are still most common.
The press media are, of course, potentially most flexible, and a receptive editorial attitude can offer media buyers and their creative groups plenty of scope for imagination.
Company magazine has actually run competitions for the most unusual and creative space bought in the magazine.
The possibilities of series of ads, teasers, inserts, fold-overs, unusual shapes, stick-on coupons, are — at least in theory — endless.
3.
Position
Different positions in different media attract different sizes of audience, in different moods.
On TV, you can get ratings for every minute of every programme (but it is always history: you have to guess whether history will repeat itself).
In the press, occasional reading and noting surveys show the relative importance of different parts of the editorial matter, but these data are much less systematically available.
Posters are now graded according to the OSCAR system, which covers over 90 per cent of roadside posters.
For cinemas, you have to guess at the popularity of a given programme: it is, however, possible to buy PG or 15 or 18 only and, now, individual films, while you can also buy an Audience Delivery Plan, guaranteeing a number of admissions.
In most media there are premiums charged by the owners for ‘fixing’ ads in particular positions, and individual positions carry premium prices: TV is divided into peak, pre-peak, off-peak, etc., time, and into as many as seven categories by some stations, quite apart from special ‘packages’; magazines charge extra for the covers, for certain key editorial spots, sometimes for righthand pages; and so on.
If you want to ‘fix’ every ad in a campaign, you can pay 20 per cent or more over the basic rate-card cost, especially if you fix in premium positions.
This is an extravagant way to behave, though it may be justified: no one knows for sure.
Usually, a media planner will aim to buy a mixture of different positions.
Some peak-time or prime editorial to ensure coverage, plus off-peak or special time packages such as guaranteed TVRs or run-of-paper space to build frequency.
The buyer's ideal position is to buy at run-of-week or run-of  paper rates, but to have sufficient ‘pull’ either through the size of the budget or the closeness of the relationship with the media sales agent concerned to achieve good times and positions regardless.
Schedule building
As the media planner works through the available choices, a media schedule begins to evolve.
This is the formal listing of what ads are to appear and where.
Schedules are handy reference points, ways of showing clients what they are getting for their money, and the bases on which the media people actually go out to buy time and space.
Schedules are generally constructed over a year, which is usually the client's short-term planning cycle, but may be for a single seasonal burst.
The first consideration is the timing of the campaign during the year.
This is, normally, a marketing decision to be taken in conjunction with the client, based on the seasonality of sales of the product and of competitive activity.
Normally, clients will want to support strong seasonal sales, but if, as sometimes happens, market seasonality has been created by promotional activity, it may make sense to try to even out the cycle by advertising in the low season.
If there is no major seasonal consideration, it will usually make sense to advertise at periods when the advertising market is normally ‘soft’— January/  February and July/August — since it is then possible to buy good positions and spots at more favourable rates.
The seasonality of advertising is the first consideration, either because the budget is too small to spread over a full year, or because even a very large budget could be weighted towards certain times of year.
Assuming a budget which does not allow for year-round spending, the next major consideration is how to divide it up.
The fundamental alternatives are to advertise in bursts of, perhaps, three weeks at a time, or on a more spread-out, ‘drip’ basis.
Most agency people prefer to use bursts, with the idea of concentrating expenditure in such a way that the target audience will become more thoroughly aware of the advertising and may, even, come to remember a lot of the detail.
Conversely, some econometricians have argued that it is more cost effective to use a ‘drip’ system, advertising more or less continuously over a long period at a very low weight.
It would be much easier to begin to resolve this argument if we knew more about how advertising works, and if we could be much more sophisticated than we are about how to relate target audiences and purchasing patterns to advertising.
As it is, all that can really be said is that the collective wisdom, such as it is, of the agency business favours bursts in most circumstances.
There may, however, be a better case for ‘drip’ advertising for very long-established, regularly purchased brands.
Certainly for the launch of a new brand, or of a new campaign for an old brand, there can be little doubt that an initial burst pattern offers the best chance of building awareness among the target audience.
The burst problem is, of course, particularly acute for brands using TV, where three weeks of national advertising at 100 TVRs per week can cost £600000, and three weeks is a very short time.
With press media, it is possible to spread the same money over a much longer period, especially if monthly magazines are used, since monthlies accumulate their readership of as many as 10 or 11 readers per copy over quite a long period.
Similarly, poster campaigns usually last at least a month, and frequently three.
It is, of course, possible to schedule a campaign in a series of bursts through the year, if the cash is available, and major bursts can be interspersed with minor ones — or the gap between TV bursts can be filled by using print media in the intervals.
A further consideration that needs to be taken into account is the use of advertising to the retail trade.
Usually, this needs to be scheduled in advance of the main consumer advertising to inform the trade of what is going to happen.
Once these broad principles have been decided, the media planner can then begin to put the schedule together.
For TV, he or she will have to analyse the scheduled programmes both of ITV and BBC to determine which ITV programmes appear to be good buys, and which will be poor ones, in relation to the rate card.
Usually, as has already been pointed out, a mixture of peak and other time will be bought against a target level of TVRs.
In the press, he or she will be selecting the publications and the sizes of ads to go in  them; the days of the week on which the ads are required to appear; the positions particularly wanted.
For reference, these are put into a media visual, which, at the planning stage, will look something like the schedules in Figures 10.1 and 10.2.
These two schedules are, in a way, extreme cases.
The first covers only five weeks, for a specific product, and involves very specific sizes and dates.
The second is a multi-media, schematic plan for a large advertiser, in which bursts of advertising have been blocked in as a basis for more precise, detailed planning at a later date.
At the planning stage, TV campaigns are usually indicated purely by a timespan and a TVR target.
This can be disconcerting for clients who want to know how many spots they are getting.
If you think about it, this is a naive question, since it would be possible (in theory) to construct a TV schedule to get 100 TVRs by using 100 spots which each achieved one TVR or by using four spots each of which achieved 25 TVRs.
You cannot judge a TV campaign's weight by the number of crosses on a visual.
(The same, actually, is true of a press campaign, but there is no reason to simplify, since the appearance of an ad in a particular paper at a particular time is determined, whereas the actual TV buying pattern needs to be left flexible.)
Once the basic schedule has been drawn up and discussed and agreed with the client, and the budget committed, the media buyer goes out and buys the campaign.
In fact, options or at least verbal commitments will have been obtained already for some special buys which are wanted, but nothing will have been the subject of a formal order to any of the media before this.
As the campaign is bought, the buyer will be negotiating with the individual media to achieve special deals, either on price or position in the media — or, indeed, both.
As the orders are made out to confirm the buyer's telephone conversations with the media salespeople, copies are passed to the agency's traffic controllers to ensure that the control system is able to get the required material to the media on time.
Most larger agencies now use one or other of several available computer systems to aid the whole planning and scheduling process, to print out orders, and to pass details to their traffic controllers.
Evaluation
As well as planning and buying the schedule, it is the job of the media people to check that everything has appeared as it should, to negotiate redress where the media are in error, and to assess, retrospectively, what has been achieved — this is, of course, essential for TV, where the medium is bought, as it were , sight unseen, and it is the media department's job to guess the ratings of the slots they buy into: if they guess right, they will achieve better ratings, and a better cost per thousand, than originally planned, and assuming the advertising does the job it is meant to, the clients' sales should achieve at least a very small extra boost.
For TV, the BARB service (see page 134) provides detailed ratings for every TV station for every programme and commercial break.
From this, the      media people can extract the ratings achieved each time a commercial appears — and a close eye can be kept on what competitors are doing.
Figure 10.1 A short-term press schedule, at planning stage
Figure 10.2 A complex multi-media visual, at the planning stage
In press, the media group should obtain voucher copies of all magazines, and examine copies of all newspapers, in which their ads appear.
It is necessary to check not merely that the ad has appeared, but that it is in the right place, and that it has been properly reproduced — the quality of printing can vary markedly, and this may well be the fault of the publication: in this case, some redress is due.
A further area for the media group to check is the loss of circulation due to strikes or other problems: during the continuing difficulties that beset Fleet Street in the early eighties it became standard practice for papers affected to provide a rebate for lost circulation.
Posters are far more difficult to monitor: in the past, agencies used to have their own teams of inspectors, but this is no longer done, and the only real check on the presence and condition of posters is a regular service run for the past 10 years by the Poster Advertising Bureau, which reports on the level of damage to posters, as a stimulus to the contractors to take care of their sites.
For the advertiser who is concerned as to whether he or she is getting a good deal from an agency or media specialist, companies such as Media Audits provide a service that compares the buying performance of different advertisers and their agencies in similar markets and media.
Recently, too, a number of advertisers have started to ask for ‘second opinions’ on media planning and costs, usually by using a competitive agency's media department to ‘shadow buy’the identical campaign.
Conclusion
Media is a complex, quite technical part of advertising which requires its own blend of skills.
It requires an analytical and reasonably numerate mind to develop cost-effective plans; it requires a rapport with the creative group to achieve the best match of material and medium; it requires aggressive negotiating skills in order to achieve the best possible positions and discounts, so as to make the maximum use of the client's money; and it requires a great attention to detail.
It is a field that is full of mythology, but also of research; but the research tends to be compartmentalized between individual media, so that it is difficult to find meaningful material covering a combination of media in any very useful way.
To be sure, surveys of readership ask some (very basic) questions about ITV viewing or ILR (commercial radio) listening, but this is really only paying lip-service to the existence of the inter-media problem.
Since individual media are competing with one another this is, perhaps, hardly surprising; but where much of the research is done under the auspices of joint committees representing agencies, advertisers, and media it is slightly frustrating that so little seems to have been achieved.
11
Television
The structure of commercial TV in Britain
As an electronic medium using the airwaves, TV has necessarily been subject to governmental and inter-governmental controls on the frequencies that may be used and the coverage allowed to each transmitter.
This means that airspace had to be rationed and licensed, and pirate TV is not a very viable possibility.
In spite of the limitations imposed by TV's greed for bandwidth, the past 15 years have seen considerable developments in the shape of the TV business and in the number of channels available to viewers with the right equipment.
Also, because of the licensing system, which restricts access to the medium to a quite small number of programme contractors, the government in the UK finds it necessary, from time to time, to mount a new competition for the existing licenses.
(This system has, however, been effectively outflanked by satellite — see below.)
As a medium, therefore, TV is subject to a variety of pressures — commercial, political and technological — that have the potential to generate considerable changes; and because TV is such a powerful medium, these pressures ensure that it changes almost as much as other media that are less constrained by technological straitjackets.
The UK pattern is paralleled by the experience of most of Continental Europe, even though the actual systems may vary, and have different historical roots.
The basic structure of commercial TV in the UK has remained set since its introduction in 1956.
Fourteen contractors, under the control of what is now the Independent Television Commission (ITC) are responsible for programming and for advertising sales for the original ITV Channel, ITV1.
Apart from small areas of overlap, there is no direct competition between contractors in any region except London, where the franchise is split between weekday and weekend (Friday evening to Sunday evening) contractors.
During the eighties, three significant developments occurred.
In 1983, TV-AM was launched, as a national morning programme on air from 6.30 am to 9.30 am, broadcasting on ITV Channel 1.
In November 1982, Channel 4, also a national service, was launched, in competition with the second BBC channel, BBC2.
Unlike TV-AM, which had its own advertising sales force, time on Channel 4 was sold regionally by the ITV1 contractors, and in the morning by TV-AM.
Finally, the late eighties saw the launch of satellite TV services, initially by Sky and then by the ill-fated BSB, which was taken over by Sky to  form BSkyB when BSB succumbed to financial difficulties less than two years after going on air, in late 1990.
BSkyB — as it is now — took advantage of relatively low cost communications satellite technology to open up a service that the regulators (national or pan-European) had failed to anticipate.
In addition to ITV1, Channel 4 and BSkyB, there are also cable TV services which can, in theory, provide a very wide range of continental channels, as well as the full range of UK-originated and UK satellite services.
Cable has been slow to develop, as the necessary infrastructure has to be installed, and the British do not — mostly — live in the large apartment blocks that most readily lend themselves to cable.
Only 2.5 per cent of homes — 25 per cent of those ‘passed’ by a cable service — had cable installed by mid-1992, compared with 11 per cent penetration for orthodox satellite TV.
Further considerations affect the future of TV advertising in the UK.
First, there is a steady background pressure, from a variety of quarters, to finance some or all of the BBC's television services through advertising.
It seems unlikely that there is sufficient demand for commercial time for advertising to take over completely from the TV licence system that finances the BBC: at £77 per household (1991–2 cost), the licence brings in approaching £1500 million, compared with total TV advertising expenditure in 1991 of £1974 million.
The second key factor is the audience fragmentation implicit in the growing number of TV channels available, allied to the spread of video recorders.
With over 60 per cent of households owning a VCR and virtually 50 per cent with at least two TV sets; with 11 channels available via BSkyB's Astra satellite, and over 10 per cent household penetration; and video film rentals running at over 500 million per year; the use made of a fairly stable total screen time per viewer is becoming progressively more diffuse.
This fragmentation will be further increased if and when a proposed new national commercial Channel 5 is added to the available terrestrial TV services: this is due to happen by 1995, but there are doubts about its viability, and the precise format will remain unclear until a contractor is appointed, after a non-decision by the government in late 1992.
Finally, technical developments in TV broadcasting and receiving equipment mean that it is rapidly becoming inevitable that, for a time at least, most TV stations will be broadcasting in two formats, to take account of the new so-called high density TV (HDTV)— always assuming that standards for the system can be agreed.
The 1991 ‘auction'
The apparently set commercial format of ITV in the UK was rudely upset during 1991 by a novel — and pretty ill-thought-out — scheme dreamed up by the government to distribute new licences for ITV1.
A brilliantly opaque bidding system, requiring a combination of cash tenders and programming prospectuses, diverted the managements of established and would-be contractors for the best part of 18 months, leading — eventually — to a re-allocation of licences in November 1991, to take effect from January 1993.
This exercise was perhaps most illuminating in the way in which it showed up the nerve (or lack of it) of the existing contractors’ managements; and the results demonstrated the inherent impossibility of combining apparently objective cash criteria with inevitably subjective judgements of quality.
In the event, four contractors — Thames (London weekday), TVS (Southern), TSW (South West) and TV-AM — lost their franchises.
Two brave (or extremely well-informed) firms, Central and Scottish TV, put in minimal bids, but turned out to be unopposed.
Nearly everyone (except the winners) was unhappy.
The result of the process is that the map of ITV regions in the UK (Figure 11.1) has not changed, but we will have to get used to calling TSW and TVS by different names (Westcountry and Meridian, respectively), and TV-AM becomes GMTV.
Thames is replaced by Carlton.
More important is the possibility, after 1994, that one contractor may bid to take over another, and outside investors have the chance to buy into the contractor companies, opening the door to possible foreign ownership of some of the network.
It seems unlikely, however, that the basic geography of the network will change, since a whole range of marketing data and infrastructure — market research panels, sales force organizations, etc. — are based on the regions.
As can be seen from the map, the regions vary considerably in physical size and — even more — in population and relative wealth.
This is amply illustrated by Table 11.1, which shows the basic statistics for each station, including the 30-second average cost per thousand for 1991, which suggests that a customer in London is judged, by the market at least, to be more than three times as valuable as a customer in Ulster or Border regions.
(In terms of spending power, this is, of course, hardly logical — but the laws of supply and demand do not always produce common-sense effects).
The basis of commercials on TV
TV time in the UK is primarily sold on a ‘spot’ basis, but forms of sponsorship, familiar in the United States, are beginning to become available.
A proportion of ITV programmes on both ITV1 and Channel 4 are available for sponsoring, and BSkyB is even more active in supporting its sponsors than current ITV practice allows.
Commercials are shown in ‘breaks’ of about two minutes which occur at roughly 20-minute intervals during programmes: they are not bunched into blocks of 10 minutes or more, as occurs in some continental countries.
When commercial TV was introduced in 1956, time was sold in units of 7, 15, 30, 45 and 60 seconds.
Since about 1982, however, time has been ‘decimalized’, and the standard units are now 10, 20, 30, 40 and 60 seconds.
Although 30 seconds, traditionally the most popular format, still accounts for the largest single share of commercial airtime, 20-second commercials are increasingly popular, and there has been a general tendency over the years    for the average commercial to get shorter.
This is both a natural response to cost pressures and a reflection of research findings that encourage the belief that shorter commercials (up to a point) are more cost-effective — in spite of pricing structures that make shorter commercials more expensive in terms of cost per second.
Figure 11.1 Simplified ITV area map, ignoring overlaps
Table 11.1 The TV regions
In addition to simply buying shorter spots, a growing number of advertisers are experimenting with how they use short spots.
‘Topping and tailing’ a commercial break is an increasingly popular practice.
How TV time is sold
TV time on ITV1 is marketed by the individual regional contractors through their own sales forces and marketing teams, who maintain close contact with agencies and major advertisers.
Some years ago, TVS absorbed Channel TV, covering the Channel Islands, as this small market proved not to be viable on its own.
More recently, TV contractors have begun to emulate radio stations in establishing joint sales operations.
STV and HTV, for example, have a joint sales company called TVMM, LWT and TVS cooperate through Laser, Yorkshire and Tyne-Tees in MAS, while Anglia, Border and Central are sold by TSMS.
A more significant change has been the separation of sales of ITV1 and Channel 4: Channel 4 has been responsible for its own sales from January 1993, and this has introduced the first genuinely competitive element into national commercial TV.
The TV contractors publish their rate cards, usually twice a year, but sometimes more often.
These rate cards can be quite complex.
They start by dividing the day into a number of segments, which may be described by name —‘peak’, ‘pre-peak’, ‘post-peak’, ‘daytime’, etc.,— or, more frequently, simply by numbers.
Each segment then has a basic cost rate for a standard spot, in each of the time lengths allowed.
Costs are related to a standard 30-second rate with shorter commercials carrying a ‘weighting’, so that a 20-second spot costs 80 per cent of a 30-second spot.
Beyond these basic costs, most stations offer a number of ‘packages’ such as run-of-week, or based on numbers of TVRs, where they may run your commercial at any time they like, as many times as they like, so long as your eventual cumulative audience reaches an agreed figure.
These packages are cheaper than the basic time cost, since they take away the advertiser's control over when the ad is to appear.
Correspondingly, there are added costs for fixing spots at particular times.
In addition, some stations may, according to the state of the market, either offer extra ‘support’ spots to buyers of sufficient peak time; or insist on buyers taking unpopular ‘support’spots as well as the peak spots they want.
Going beyond these general ‘offers’ most stations offer special rates to genuinely local advertisers and for brands being advertised on TV for the first time.
They also provide special rates for test market launches, and these rates may be supplemented by a (limited) programme of marketing assistance — mailings to retailers, subsidized market research facilities and so on.
However, the restrictions imposed on these special rates tend to limit their usefulness for many advertisers.
The rate card is not, in practice, fixed.
There is usually a formal system of discounts, for advertisers spending over a certain level with the station, and perhaps even for early booking, and whenever a station has time to sell which it fears it might fail to dispose of it is possible for the buyer to negotiate on the price.
This is one reason why TV buyers may wish to keep part of their budgets flexible beyond the time when they might usually prefer to commit themselves — they may, of course, find that they cannot buy the time they want, but this is a risk they may be willing to take in order to get a better price.
With TV, especially in the major areas and London in particular, a very heavily sold market, the contractors have in good years been less willing to deal.
Some have been accused — rightly or wrongly — of preferring not to sell all their available time rather than to reduce their price, and most areas now follow a practice which can only really work in a seller's market —‘pre-emption’.
This curious misuse of language means that if you book a spot at anything less than the top rate, some time in advance, the station can re-sell it, at a higher rate, to anyone who wants it, at any time before the cancellation date.
I have heard several attempts to justify this method of doing business but none which succeeds in avoiding the suspicion that this is a highly opportunistic — though by now, after several years, established — version of having your cake and eating it.
TV time is bought well in advance, and is subject to a standard cancellation date — of eight weeks — beyond which the advertiser and agency cannot back out of the commitment to advertise (though in practice an agency may, in an emergency, transfer the time to another client or a different brand).
How a TV commercial is produced
The script
As we have seen, the decision to use TV is a joint one between (in ) the creative and media groups in the agency, a decision which then has to be endorsed by the client.The first stage in the process will involve the production of a script, and perhaps a storyboard, for discussion between agency and client.
At this stage, the discussion is limited to the ideas, the words of the script and a general idea of what the visual will look like.
The agency probably has not discussed the commercial with a production company, though they may well know which company they would like to use, and have a reasonable idea of the likely cost.
Once the basic script has been agreed, the next task for the agency is to develop it into a finalized pre-production script.
Before this can be done, agency and client may agree to do some research to assess the likely consumer reaction to the commercial and to iron out any problems (see Chapter 9).
For this exercise, a script plus storyboard may be sufficient, but it may be found more desirable to produce an ‘animatic’.
This is a sort of ‘semi-film’, made by shooting the pictures of a specially drawn storyboard with a rostrum camera, which makes it possible to produce an almost moving picture with varying lengths of focus, to which can be added a recorded soundtrack.
The whole can be made to look quite convincingly like a commercial.
Indeed, from time to time animatics do, in fact, get used for actual transmission — apparently without any drastic ill effects.
ITVA clearance
Before they can be transmitted, all TV commercials have to be approved by the Independent Television Association, ITVA.
This is to check that they do not infringe either the Television Act, which places some special restrictions on TV advertising, or the ITC Code of Advertising Practice (see Chapter 16).
In addition, the ITVA has some criteria of its own, being stricter than either the Act or the Code in its judgement of the admissibility of some statements of apparent fact or of ‘knocking’ copy.
In certain product fields, their standards of proof or competitive claims are extremely high —‘whiteness’ claims in detergent ads are a particularly strict example.
Because of the risk of rejection by the ITVA, the vast majority of commercials are first shown to them at script stage, and the discussion and negotiation that goes on in the majority of cases takes place on scripts alone.
Since the ITVA can, however, approve a script and then reject a film on the  grounds that it does not conform to the script (or the letter of the script), the agency and the production house have to be very careful how they interpret the outcome of discussions with the ITVA.
Persuading the ITVA to see the agency's point of view on a controversial film is not impossible: it is, by general consent, a very reasonable body.
It does like scientific proof, where possible, of product claims, but will also accept the findings of consumer research where this is relevant.
You can, too, win a straight argument with them if you have a sound case.
For the industry, it is probably fair to describe the ITVA as a sort of benevolent despot, though it can be (and is) criticized for being excessively cautious in its judgements.
Production
Once the script has been agreed, the agency selects the production company to produce the film.
This will be done on the basis of past experience of the company, its skill at producing the type of film which is planned, observation of its work for other agencies, and, to an extent, its cost quotation.
The first thing the production company and the agency have to do together is to plan the production and produce an estimate of the production costs.
These will include everything involved in making the film — studios, actors, music, props, costs of finding and getting to locations, processing and editing, production of bulk prints for the TV stations.
To this, the agency adds its estimates of the repeat fees for the artists involved, and its commission.
The resulting estimate will look something like that shown in simplified form in Figure 11.2.
It is increasingly common practice for clients to request tenders to produce a commercial from more than one production company — usually three — as part of the necessary process of controlling costs.
Producing the estimate involves, already, a number of decisions and a lot of work by both the agency producer and the production company.
Decisions have to be taken on the types of film technique to be used; locations; casting; music; sets; and any special requirements.
Out of the substantial number of TV production companies available, some can be found who specialize in any of a number of areas, either of product type or of technique.
If you think of the variety of commercials you see on TV, there are many different things you can do in commercials: animation; live action, used in perhaps the majority of commercials; puppetry; mixed live action and animation; computer graphics and picture modification; a variety of special effects.
Similarly, there is now available a fundamental choice between shooting on film or video.
Video is — generally — cheaper, and sometimes quicker, though the end results are likely to be less polished.
It is, therefore, more suitable for cheaper, straightforward commercials, while film may be preferable when quality, style and mood are important.
Some films have to be shot on location: you cannot create a moving ‘face’ out of several thousand people for a British Airways commercial in any other way.
However, others, with apparently convincing exotic locations, can be wholly shot in the studio, with the aid of sophisticated scenery effects, often    using a moving matte technique to achieve verisimilitude.
Photographing food, especially in close-up, involves very controlled and precise technique — and the constant services of an expert home economist to ensure the availability of the products involved, in exactly the right state.
Most products — and even people — require special techniques to ensure that they look right on the TV screen.
In the USA, some tricks have been banned by consumerist pressures for ‘truth in advertising’ but mostly these are not prevalent in the UK.
Figure 11.2 Extracts from a TV production estimate
Casting
Just as there are production companies and cameramen specializing in different techniques and styles and product fields, so you can get actors and models who specialize in specific areas.
Very often a film involving a close-up of hands will have used a special ‘hand model’ in place of the actor appearing in the rest of the commercial.
Similarly, there are a number of actors who specialize in doing the commentary or ‘voice over’ on commercials: some of them can do a variety of voices and accents very convincingly, but others become extremely recognizable and, in effect, boringly over-exposed.
The choice of actors and voices is, obviously, a critical part of making a commercial.
There are few rules about this.
Clearly, the creators of the script start with a reasonably clear idea of the sort of people they want, and they should be able to describe them fairly accurately.
The problems arise quickly, though, when the cast are, as so often, essentially stereotypes.
It is one thing to find a group of ‘typical teenagers’ but the ‘average family’can be extraordinarily difficult to put together.
It may involve the agency's casting team (which may be a specialist in a large agency, but is usually the creative group head and the TV producer in a small one) in seemingly endless poring over directories of actors, and actually seeing a large number of them before a decision can be made.
Perhaps the most difficult decision, where it might be appropriate, is to use the face (or the voice) of a celebrity or, in particular, a TV, radio or film personality.
Sometimes a commercial is deliberately written round a particular character, because he or she seems an absolute ‘natural’ for the product, but there is always the danger of a personality taking over a brand completely.
This has not prevented a number of very successful examples in recent years: Fry and Laurie for the Alliance and Leicester Building Society, Hale and Pace for Clorets, and — more surprisingly — Dudley Moore for Tesco are just a few examples, while Maureen Lipman's ‘Beattie’ character practically became British Telecom for several years.
A further consideration in casting is cost.
Celebrities, of course, cost money.
But even ‘unknown’ actors can become expensive over time.
A new contract between Equity and the IPA came into force during 1979 which meant that ‘repeat’ fees — the fees paid to an artist for each showing of a commercial — were increased fourfold, so that repeat fees for one actor for a fairly heavily used commercial could reach £20000 a year.
The change caused agencies to re-think their attitude to TV commercials, and led to an increase in animation and product-based films using trick photography.
It has also produced an increase in films shot overseas, with foreign casts.
Finally, the possibility exists of ‘buying out’ an actor's repeat fees for a single payment — something Equity frowns on but can hardly prevent.
This contract was revised in January 1992.
The main change concerned repeat fees which are now based on the audience, measured in TVRs, for each commercial, rather than on the number of times it is shown.
Locations
Selecting locations is another time-consuming and difficult process that can spend or save a great deal of money, given the number of people involved and costs of travel, hotels, refreshments and all the other incidentals.
The fashion for exotic locations thrived during the early sixties, but has diminished as economic realism and improvements in studio techniques have respectively discouraged the wilder flights of fancy and provided generally acceptable substitutes.
It requires a lot of hard talking to go abroad to film these days: the main justification is for filming out of season — this is sometimes essential, but can often be avoided by good planning.
It can be quite difficult, however, to arrange to film next year's ice cream commercial this August, in order to be sure of sunshine and leaves on the trees, because decisions on products to be advertised might not be taken until the end of the current season.
Obviously the main justification for location shooting is for outdoor work, but, given the costs of set-building, it is often realistic to film indoor material in a ‘real’ house — it is a moot point how ‘lived-in’it ought to look: studio sets do tend to look like studio sets, but real houses are often too run-down to provide the slightly artificial air of super-tidiness which many commercials strive for and which at least some consumers seem to respond to.
Irrelevant details, like a full wastepaperbasket or a cobweb on a beam,can distract attention from the message of a commercial, and research exists to prove it.
Filming
The main thing which strikes any inexperienced observer on a commercial shoot is the large number of people and the small amount that seems to happen.
The number of people is, to an extent, a function of union rules, but some of them have real jobs to do.
As far as making the film succeed is concerned, there are really only three who matter, apart from any actors.
They are the director, who comes from the production company, is in charge of the whole operation, and is the real expert; the lighting cameraman, whose job is highly skilled and is exactly what it sounds like, and whose expertise will totally influence the visual texture of the film; and the agency's producer (or creative group head) whose job is to ensure that the director fully covers the brief, and to make any awkward decisions that may be needed.
(Also, from time to time, there may be the client, whose job it is, in general , to keep quiet  and watch his or her money being spent.
If this seems a brutal judgement, it is a realistic one.)
The sound track
The sound track of a commercial is usually recorded separately from filming, though some words may be recorded during filming in order to achieve lipsync.
The track will consist, typically, of a combination of words, music and sound effects (which appear in scripts as ‘SFX’).
Music, as discussed elsewhere (page 88), can be a  major factor in the appeal and success of a film, and the choice of music can be exceedingly difficult.
From a production point of view, it can either be obtained ready-made from a music ‘library’, or be specially recorded — whether it is music composed for the commercial or an existing piece.
Obviously, a special recording offers the opportunity of achieving precisely the right effect, but is considerably more expensive, even in these days of synthesizers, than library material.
It is easy, too, to waste money unless you have either a musician or a music expert in the agency team.
Judging from my agency's research, music is becoming an increasingly sensitive issue among consumers: they are very quick to criticize uninspired music selections as inappropriate or boring, and in some categories (perfume, for example) the wrong music can kill a commercial stone dead.
Sound effects, too, are usually library material, or produced by one of a small group of specialists who know precisely how to reproduce, for example, the sound of a caterpillar dancing in a bowl of bird seed.
Words in commercials come in two forms: ‘live’ or ‘voice over’.
‘Live’ voices are the voices of characters as they appear in the commercial — though they may, in fact, be recorded separately.
A ‘voice over’ is the ‘commentator’or other disembodied voice that tells you what is going on — or, usually, to go out and buy the product being advertised.
Recording voices is, basically, a simple matter of work in a studio.
The critical problem, of course, with TV commercials is that of time.
The time taken by each set of words has to be very exactly calculated, and a large part of the skill of a voice-over expert lies in the ability to fit a set of words into a precise length of time while still getting the required clarity and intonation.
Clarity, it should go without saying, is virtually obligatory in commercial sound tracks — something too many producers of jingles appear to forget.
The results
One day's — or two days' — filming will produce a great deal of film footage.
This first becomes available, as soon as it has been developed, usually the next morning, as ‘rushes’— the uncut record of all the filming.
That is why you have someone with a clapperboard at the start of each take: to make it possible to find everything in the whole length of film.
The next stage is to cut precisely to the right length and to link it up with the sound track.
At first, the two parts of the film are simply run in parallel, not fully joined, in a form known as a ‘double-head’.
At this stage, it is still possible to change either part independently without reprocessing.
Once this has been discussed and agreed by the client, the film goes back to the laboratory to be married to its sound track and to have its ‘opticals’ added and ‘grading’of the print carried out.
Opticals are all the special effects used to change scenes in films.
The simplest way of changing scenes is, simply, to cut: but this is often rather drastic, and risks breaking up the flow of the film.
Hence, there are a battery of effects —‘fades’, ‘wipes’, ‘dissolves’, and variations on them — designed to enable the film-maker to take the viewer through the film in the right emotional and psychological frame of mind.
Grading is the technical process of ensuring that the colour tones of each sequence in the film go accurately together to produce the desired effect.
Sometimes different sequences may need quite marked adjustment using filters and other devices to achieve the right harmonious effect.
The development of sophisticated computer techniques has added a whole new dimension to this ‘post-production’ stage of commercial-making.
It is now possible to add or remove elements, and modify whole sections of the commercial, by means of computer systems such as‘Paintbox’— a system that contributed greatly to Peter Greenaway's feature film Prospero's Books — or ‘Harry’.
The result of this processing is a ‘married print’— the final master version of the commercial.
(It is possible, but not essential, to have the intermediate stage of a double-head with opticals.)
Assuming that this meets the client's approval, all that is now needed is to clear the finished version with the ITVA (see page 126) and order and dispatch the bulk prints to the TV stations.
Although there are only 15 contractors, they have between them 50-odd transmitters, each of which needs two copies of the commercial (at least), so allowing for your own copies and back-up stock, you will need 115 or so bulks for a national campaign.
Costs…
Production costs, for all aspects of the advertising business, have become an increasingly major issue in recent years.
Statistics collected by the Advertising Association show that the cost of TV production has risen even faster in recent years than that of TV airtime.
As a result, TV production has become an issue both for agencies and advertisers.
The Pliatzky Committee (see page 91) spent some months examining the problem without arriving at any very clear diagnosis of the causes of rising production costs.
What it did, however, was to recommend a series of procedures, and to set out suggested working timetables, designed to enable agencies and production companies to control their costs more effectively.
How far, if at all, this has succeeded in slowing cost inflation has yet to be seen.
At the end of 1992 it is probably a reasonable generalization that the  average 30-second commercial, including the cost of bulk prints, but not of repeat fees (see page 129), would cost some £65000–£70000 to make.
It is not difficult, however, to exceed this, for good— or bad — reasons.
…
And quality
Arguably, the best reason for exceeding this fairly meaningless average cost is quality.
It is frequently argued by agencies that the ‘production values’ are critical to the success of the commercial.
This usually means, in essence, the combination of quality of photography, sets, editing, opticals and — in general— attention to detail.
I think it is important here to be absolutely clear about ‘quality’ as it is, certainly, a vital characteristic of most advertising: it is, above all, the agency's creative department's job to achieve a level of quality appropriate to its work.
‘Quality’, of course, has two meanings in relation to creative work: the quality of the idea, and the quality of its execution.
The quality of the idea, surely, is the paramount consideration: what is then needed is — at least— a sufficiently good execution to communicate the idea effectively.
Some very good ideas can be quite cheap to produce.
It can be argued — I think reasonably — that the better the idea, the more justified are attempts to execute it to perfection.
Commercials are often produced which depend principally on being pretty for their effect, in the absence of an idea.
This is, really, a cop-out, and can be an expensive one.
Ultimately, arguments about quality are usually arguments about how far it is necessary to go to achieve the communication objectives.
In many cases, I do not believe that the return from spending an extra £5000 or £10000 on producing a commercial — rather than on showing it — can easily be justified.
Sometimes it can: I have seen it happen, and it is usually with the better commercials.
I am not arguing for shoddy commercials.
What I am arguing in favour of is simple, cheap solutions, where this is possible.
I know my colleagues in the creative department do not agree.
Sometimes, they are right.
The difficulty, as so often in advertising, is to know when.
This is a matter of experience — there is no substitute for it.
It is fair to say, however, that consumers, especially younger consumers in the UK, are sharp-eyed and critical of shoddy commercials.
In particular, they respond badly — at least in research — to dubbed foreign-made films.
Whether this actually has an adverse effect on sales is unproven.
Following the Pliatzky Committee's report, the ISBA published a very practical guide for its members, describing the process of making a commercial and detailing much of what is involved.
Timing
From the original brief to air-date, making a commercial is a lengthy process.
As a general rule of thumb, you need to allow something over three months, and that leaves little room for any consumer research to pre-test the concept  or the commercial.
It is, however, perfectly possible to write a commercial on Monday, shoot it on Tuesday, do the post-production on Wednesday and have it on air on Thursday: for large retail clients, at sale time, this is not that uncommon!
TV research
Research into TV commercials divides into two main fields: research into audiences and audience characteristics, and research into commercials' effectiveness.
Audience research can be divided into three different areas.
The most frequently visible research is into the size and composition of the audience for specific programmes and commercial breaks, as a guide to the planner in selecting spot times and in evaluating what the schedule has achieved; there is also research into the viewing patterns of the TV audience, to provide the basic data from which cumulative audiences and viewing frequencies can be calculated; and research into audience behaviour and attention — when the research says that they are watching your commercial, what are they actually doing?
Head counting
The basic head-counting audience research used by agencies is that done by BARB (Broadcast Advertising Research Board), a joint body combining advertisers, agencies, the ITV contractors and the BBC.
BARB's product has recently been upgraded to take account of the changing marketplace and the increasing use of computers by agency media departments.
The system is now geared to be accessed on-line, typically through a specialist systems house, such as Donovan Data Services (DDS), and the thick weekly two-volume printed reports familiar to all TV buyers and planners for many years are no more.
The ‘new’ BARB collects data from 4435 households, in an increased nationally representative sample set up and administered by RSMB and AGB Research.
Each house has a sophisticated meter attached to its TV set, which records exactly what is being played (or played back on video).
In addition, separate handsets ('peoplemeters') are used to record who is watching.
These meters provide minute-by-minute data on viewing — or at least on what is being played on every set that is switched on.
But although they add information as to who is present, they still don't tell the computers what everybody is doing.
Work by Peter Collett, an Oxford academic, has shown clearly that what goes on in front of the telly is, in practice, virtually anything.
This research has recently been widely re-publicized in an anti-TV campaign by the Newspaper Proprietors' Association (most of whose members, it was quickly pointed out, use TV aggressively to advertise their own papers).
A further, recent complexity has been added by the widespread use of video recorders.
By mid-1992, 65 per cent of UK ITV households had a VCR.
While the BARB meters can record whether the VCR or an on-air  programme is being watched, there is no way of telling whether people watching a time-shifted programme are cutting out the commercial breaks — or, indeed, what programme they are watching.
The spread, too, of remote controls — again, in over 40 per cent of households — enables people to ‘zap’ commercials or whole commercial breaks.
The practice is quite widespread, but no one has achieved any very reliable estimate of its scale, let alone a trend.
Yet further complications to TV audience measurements are added by multi-set households (55 per cent of ITV homes have two or more sets), and teletext (Oracle, Ceefax).
According to the National Readership Survey in 1987 nearly 40 per cent of adults claimed to ‘skip’ ads in normal TV viewing ‘almost always’or ‘quite often’, and 20 per cent said they ‘almost always’did so when watching a recorded video programme.
The obvious conclusion to be drawn from this is that precise numbers of TVRs accumulated by a campaign according to BARB, predicted at the planning stage, or promised in a package by a TV contractor, have a significant built-in factor of error: precision is mythical.
It is, even, a bit of an act of faith comparing two concurrent campaigns' performance.
Nonetheless, such is the business world's trust in statistics that analysis of the ratings is done in massive detail, and the results treated like holy writ.
BARB's research shows that the average individual watches around three and a half hours of television per day (and has done so for at least the last 10 years), just over half of this being ITV.
There are, of course, variations by the day of the week, and by the season of the year — though the August trough is still over three hours a day, and the December peak under five hours.
Within this overall pattern, too, there are wide variations in the amount of viewing done by different people, and in the proportion of ITV viewing in the total.
And, of course, there are very considerable differences in the proportion of people viewing at different times of day: in general , ITV ratings double between 5 pm and 8 pm, which is usually the peak viewing time.
ITV ratings for individual programmes can run from under one — less than one per cent of adults viewing — to 40 or 45, and occasionally even higher.
Detailed analysis of the BARB data makes it possible to develop the next, valuable set of information.
These are the data which tell the planner how to go about accumulating an audience, and what is needed to achieve given levels of reach and frequency (see page 109).
Because of the way the audience is made up, and because of different people's viewing patterns, it requires a very heavy campaign to get anywhere near 100 per cent coverage of the audience.
A more typical, fairly niche campaign burst would achieve coverage of perhaps 70 per cent, spread over 30 spots and yielding total TVRs of some 150–200.
This gives an average rating per spot of only 5–6, and an average OTS of some 2.5 — but a range of OTS from one or two (the majority) up to around 10.
This make-up of the audience will be, in fact, as shown in Figure 11.3.
Clearly, your commercial is going to have to achieve some kind of miracle  if it is to avoid boring the pants off the heavy viewer and still have some impact on the light viewer.
Data of this kind, to enable media planners to assess their schedules' reach and frequency, are held by AGB, who run the BARB service.
The new BARB service offers the agency the ability to carry out a very wide range of detailed analysis — arguably to the point where the analyst becomes totally overloaded with data.
A package of analyses under labels like FACETS, REACT, QUASAR, QUARTZ, etc., enable the media planner to identify in detail the demographic make-up of the audience to any spot or programme, either at individual or household level; audience reach and frequency build-up (see Figure 11.3); detailed spot by spot TVRs, by region, for defined audiences; analyses of own and competing brands; spending by region, daypart, day of week, etc.; the performance of individual TV stations; and so on.
The whole can be made available in terms of‘live viewing’— the audience seeing the programme when it is transmitted — or ‘consolidated viewing’, which adds in the people who record the programme and view it later on their VCR.
Finally, in contrast to the weekly availability of pre-1991 BARB, it is now possible to get top-line viewing data overnight.
Figure 11.3 The build-up of a TV audience
The empty armchair
An obvious extension of head-counting research involves taking the fact that a TV set is switched onto ITV, and finding out whether anyone is actually in front of it watching it.
Research has shown — as might be expected — that  ‘natural breaks’ in programmes allow people to go to the lavatory or brew up a cup of tea rather than watch the commercials.
In particular, between-programme breaks tend to favour this, since they are usually longer.
Equally, TV is — though intrusive — not necessarily anywhere near a completely dominating presence.
People read, knit, iron, drink, talk, play cards, make love, build matchstick models of the Queen Mary …all in front of Coronation Street or News at Ten .
Unfortunately, there is no systematic, regular measurement available of attention to TV commercials (or, indeed, to TV programmes), so there is no reliable quantification of the ‘attention factor’, and our knowledge of how it varies by type or audience or time of day (or any other variable) is fairly rudimentary.
Work done by J. Walter Thompson in the sixties, and some more recent experimental work by a number of researchers suggest that attention does vary by programme type, and 24-hour commercial recall actually varies by individual programme.
A survey by TABS under the title Cost per Thousand Adults, Or Cost per Thousand Empty Armchairs indicates the reason for interest in the subject.
Does it work?
This subject was discussed at greater length in Chapter 9.
Here, it is sufficient to point out that there are a number of ways of researching a commercial.
It can be done before it appears on the air, either in a private room or in a theatre, to a large or small audience; it can be done after it has appeared by personal interview or (as frequently in the USA) by telephone.
Similarly, you can set out to assess what the commercial communicates about the product advertised; or simply whether key details are remembered; or whether people like it.
All you have to do, with any of these research methods and findings, is to decide which answer (if any) tells you the most about whether the commercial is any good.
For discussion of this, see Chapter 9.