

ONE
ARRIVING
IT IS midnight on the coast of Christmas Island in the Indian Ocean, two hundred miles south of Java.
The November moon is in its third quarter and the tide is coming in.
Behind the narrow sandy beach stands a sheer cliff of coral rock, seventy feet high.
On its vertical face, clinging beneath overhangs, jammed three or four deep into cracks, are a million scarlet crabs.
In places, they are so crowded that their bodies touch and the cliff seems to have been painted crimson.
These crabs are found nowhere else in the world.
They are large animals with glossy rounded shells five inches across.
All are females, each with a huge mass of brown eggs bulging beneath the semi-circular flap on her underside.
They are about to spawn.
A month ago they, together with the males, left the burrows on the floor of the forest inland where they had spent most of the year and began a long march to the coast.
Then the vast size of their population became dramatically apparent.
There were about one hundred and twenty million of them.
They moved mostly in the early morning or the evening, for they dry out easily and cannot withstand the full tropical sun.
But when the sun went behind clouds, and particularly after a rain shower when the undergrowth was moist, they travelled during much of the day.
Nothing deterred them.
In places their traditional routes cross roads made by the people who now live on Christmas Island.
Thousands of the marchers were inevitably crushed beneath the wheels of the traffic but still, day after day for two weeks or so, they kept coming.
When they reached the coast, the males excavated burrows and there mated with the females.
The males then returned inland, but the females had to wait in the burrows for a further two weeks while their fertilised eggs matured.
And now the moment to release the eggs has arrived.
The crabs have climbed down the cliffs, for their eggs must be deposited directly into the sea if they are to hatch.
But this is not without hazard.
Although the crabs' distant ancestors came from the sea, these are land crabs.
They breathe air and they cannot swim.
If they lose their hold on the rock or are swept away by the waves, they will assuredly drown.
As the tide reaches its height, the width of the beach is reduced to a few yards.
The females move down from the cliffs, across the shingle to the breakers, scrambling over one another in their anxiety to get to the water.
Soon the sea is fringed with a moving scarlet carpet of glinting shells, grappling legs and craning stick-like eyes.
When at last the waves sluice over them, each shakes her body convulsively so that the brown eggs swill away in the water and, with a touching gesture of apparent exultation, lifts her claws above her head as if waving a salute.
At either end of the beach, where the sea beats directly on the face of the cliffs, the crabs have a harder time of it.
So great is the traffic between those striving to clamber down to the sea and those who, having spawned, are attempting to get back again, that many cannot reach the water.
They are thus compelled to release their eggs while they are still high on the rock and a brown rain of spawn falls sporadically from as high as twenty feet.
In the confusion, many crabs lose their foothold, tumble into the water and are swept away.
Each one of these females sheds about a hundred thousand eggs.
The waves and the water beyond have become a thick brown soup.
As the sky lightens in the east, the crabs leave the water's edge and are on their way back to the forest.
Only a few stragglers remain on the shore.
Here and there, limp bodies float in the shallows and great expanses of the beach are covered with a layer of brown grains that are not sand but eggs.
The extraordinary laying is over for another year and the crabs' progeny, abandoned, must now look after themselves.
Huge numbers of the hatchlings are immediately eaten by the fish that swim in shoals around the reefs.
Moray eels squirm right to the water's edge and greedily gulp down the feast.
As the survivors are swept out to sea, so the larger fish, trawling with open jaws, sieve them from the water.
They are helpless, drifting wherever the currents and tides take them.
They feed by collecting tiny particles from the water.
Periodically, they moult their thin transparent skins, changing shape as they do so.
But they cannot assume their final adult form and breed unless they reach land.
The vast majority of them never do so.
They die unmated and without progeny.
Most years the entire spawning is lost.
But then, about one year in six, some fortunate swirl in the currents brings them back to the island where they first fell into the water a month earlier and at a high tide in December, a horde of tiny crablets no bigger than ants suddenly emerges from the waves and marches valiantly up the beach and on inland to restock the forest.
The land-crabs' breeding strategy is extravagant and wasteful but successful.
The multitudinous hazards that face their young — the predatory fish, the vagaries of the currents, the absence of islands over vast areas of the surrounding ocean — are met and ultimately defeated by sheer numbers.
But the cost is stupendous.
Each female lives for about ten years and    produces in all about a million eggs.
Almost all of them will die within a few weeks of being shed.
But if only two of this million reach adulthood, then the land-crab population of Christmas Island will be maintained.
This profligate recipe for survival is used by many animals of many kinds.
A single female cod can produce six million eggs in one spawning.
On land, insects use the same strategy.
A female fruit fly, simply because of her tiny size, can hardly be expected to produce eggs in numbers to rival a cod, but even so, she can lay two thousand in a season in batches of a hundred at a time.
The really big egg-producers, however, are the simpler animals that live in the sea, such as corals, jellyfish, sea-urchins and molluscs.
And champion of them all, whether on land or in the sea, is almost certainly the giant clam.
That can produce one thousand million eggs in one gargantuan splurge.
And it may perform this stupendous reproductive feat annually for thirty or forty years.
There is, however, an alternative to this extravagance.
A female, instead of manufacturing the maximum number of eggs that can be created from her bodily reserves, may produce rather fewer but give each one a better chance of survival by supplying it with food in some way, so that it is sustained during its first difficult days.
Some animals place this food within the egg as yolk.
In simpler creatures, granules of it are distributed evenly throughout the egg; in a frog's egg, it is concentrated at one end; and in a bird's egg it initially fills the greater part of the shell.
So generous is this bequest by birds to their young that a chick needs no additional food from which to build the flesh and bones and feathers of its infant body, and it still has enough energy left over to break its way out of the shell.
Insect eggs, however, contain very little yolk.
Instead, the females may help their young by placing their eggs where the minute hatchlings will find food just as soon as their heads emerge from the egg capsule.
A butterfly sticks them on the leaves of the particular plant that her caterpillars eat; a blowfly on the dead flesh that her maggots will relish; and some wasps, for the sake of their young, become body-snatchers.
The Ammophila wasp, which lives in the open desert lands of the American mid-west, when breeding time comes starts digging a burrow.
A favourite site is a bare patch of earth where the surface has been baked into a crust by the harsh sun.
She breaks through it by using her head like a pneumatic drill, pressing her hard sharp jaws on to the soil and vibrating it by trembling her wing muscles.
Once through the crust, tunnelling is easier and she brings out loads of sand, clutched between her forelegs.
When the tunnel is finished she scours the bushes and fields nearby for caterpillars.
As soon as she finds one she paralyses it, using her long sting as though it were a hypodermic syringe loaded with anaesthetic.
Then she flies back to her burrow, carrying the immobilised caterpillar beneath her.
Laboriously, she drags it down into the tunnel and there, in the dark, she lays a single egg on the inert body.
One burrow may eventually contain as many as half a dozen of these paralysed prisoners, each doomed in due course to be eaten alive by the wasp grub that hatches upon it.
When the hole is fully stocked, the Ammophila seals it with a plug of sand made firm and smooth by hammering it with a grain of gravel held in her jaws.
Several thousand species of wasp around the world provide for their young in this way.
Oxybelus, rather smaller than Ammophila, supplies her young with flies.
Having seized and anaesthetised one, she does not withdraw her sting but flies back to her burrow with the fly still impaled behind her like a sausage on a stick.
Pepsis, a giant among wasps with a six-inch wingspan, lives in South America and grapples with bird-eating spiders as big as a man's hand.
After paralysing them, she amputates their legs to make the job of transport a little easier.
The burrows of these robber wasps are usually concealed so skilfully that few other animals are able to find them and rob them.
But eggs, particularly those with large stores of rich yolk within them, are excellent eating, and many other animals steal them if they can.
So many parents invest a great deal of time and energy in protecting them.
Several species of birds — caciques and oropendolas in South America, for example, and weaverbirds in Africa — habitually build their nests close to those of ferocious wasps which many animals take care to avoid disturbing.
Oddly, the wasps pay no regard to the building birds, but they will attack any other creatures that dare to approach either their nests or those of the birds.
A Mexican fly, Ululodes, lays her eggs in batches on the underside of twigs.
Having finished, she descends a little way down the twig and then lays another batch.
But these are different from the first.
They will never hatch.
They are a little smaller, club-shaped and covered with a shiny brown fluid which neither hardens nor evaporates, but remains liquid for the three or four weeks it takes the eggs higher up the twig to hatch.
If an ant, searching the twig for food, so much as touches the barrier of infertile eggs with its antennae, it recoils violently and may even lose its footing and fall.
For a minute or more it cleans itself frantically.
Only then does it run off to look for other food — elsewhere.
Most reptiles, having buried or concealed their eggs in some way, abandon them, but a few stay beside them and will valiantly defend them  against robbers.
King cobras curl around their pile of eggs, encircling it with their coils, and crocodiles stay alongside their nest of decaying vegetation for the two months or so that it takes the eggs within to hatch.
Birds have no alternative in this matter.
They have warm blood and so do their young inside the eggs.
If the eggs are allowed to cool, once they have started to develop, the chicks within will die.
So usually one or other of the parent birds must stay with the eggs for most of the time.
They warm them by pressing them against brood patches, areas of skin naked of feathers which a bird may develop specially for the breeding season or have permanently on its breast concealed by the long feathers growing around them.
Chilling is the commoner danger, but in deserts there may be a risk of over-heating and that can also be lethal.
So the blacksmith plover in the savannahs of East Africa will stand over its eggs, shadowing them with outstretched wings, to allow what wind there is to blow over them; and in Australia, a jabiru stork will collect water in its beak to spray over the eggs if they get dangerously warm.
The megapodes, a family of birds that lives in Australia and the western Pacific, have developed particularly ingenious techniques of incubation.
Their simplest method is that used by one of them, the scrub-fowl, which lives in the north-east of the continent.
Some individuals dig pits in carefully selected sites on a beach where the sun warms the eggs during the day and the sand retains the heat to maintain their temperature overnight.
In one place, the birds carefully deposit their eggs in clefts of black rocks which have the same property.
On one or two Pacific islands, the scrubfowl have discovered places where volcanic heat underground performs a similar service for them.
Yet others, living in the rain forests inland, rake up fallen vegetation into mounds fifteen feet high which keep their eggs warm by the heat of decay.
The most complex of their techniques is that used by the mallee fowl in the open scrub country of southern Australia.
During the winter, the male digs a hole in the sandy earth about four feet deep and fifteen feet across and fills it with vegetation.
On its summit, he excavates a bowl a foot or so deep.
This will hold the eggs.
When the first showers of spring have thoroughly moistened the pile, he covers the whole structure with sand.
The vegetation within, protected from the dry air, begins to decay and the mound starts to warm.
The female, so far, has played no part in this work.
She has been feeding intensively in the neighbourhood, building up in her body the reserves from which she will produce her eggs.
When she is ready to lay, the male clears away some of the sand on the top to expose the rotting vegetation, the female lays a single egg in it, and he covers it over    again.
The male now carefully monitors the temperature of the mound by prodding his beak into it.
At the beginning of the season, when the vegetation within is actively fermenting, it may overheat.
Then he will kick away some of the sandy blanket to allow heat to escape.
As the weeks pass, fermentation and the heat it produces starts to dwindle.
But the sun has now become more intense.
So in order to prevent it raising the mound's temperature too high, a thicker layer of soil has to be heaped over it to shield its interior from the sun's rays.
As the height of summer passes, the method must change again.
Chilling, not overheating, has become the danger, so the male opens up the mound during the day to make the most of the waning sun, and covers it over again at night to retain what warmth it has.
With these methods, varied so expertly with the changing season, the male mallee fowl manages to keep the temperature of his incubator very close to 34°C for several months.
Throughout this time, the female has been laying eggs, one at a time.
If there is plenty of food about, she may do so every other day.
If times are hard then she may only lay once a fortnight.
Each time she does so, the male has to dig down to the buried vegetation and cover it over again.
He clearly regards the management of the mound as his own particular responsibility and expertise, for if the female comes to the mound to lay at a time when opening it might cause a dangerous fluctuation in its temperature, he will refuse to do so and drives her away.
By the time the season comes to an end, the pair and their incubator may have managed to produce as many as thirty-five chicks.
Eggs begin to develop as soon as they are warmed to, and maintained at, the correct temperature, so each egg laid by the mallee fowl starts developing as soon as the female deposits it in the incubator.
Their egg is an unusually large one for their body size and has a generous yolk.
As a consequence, the chick when it hatches is very fully developed and able to dig its own way up through the sand.
After a couple of hours rest, it runs off into the bush to find food for itself, and after only twenty-four hours it is able to fly.
By the time the female lays the last egg of the season, her first chick will have already emerged and left.
Eggs hatching over a period like this presents no problems for the megapodes.
Nor does such staggered hatching cause any difficulties for such birds as eagles which build inaccessible nests in the tops of trees where their young can remain in safety until they are able to take to the air themselves.
But many ground-living birds would be in great difficulties if their chicks hatched at markedly different times.
Their chicks initially are too feeble to fly and they are unable to find food for themselves.
Their parents must lead  them away from the nest site to other areas where they can collect food and find hiding places.
This would be difficult to do if the chicks hatched at different times and were thus at different stages of development and strength.
So a female quail does not begin to incubate her clutch of a dozen or so eggs until it is complete, and that may not be for a fortnight after the first was laid.
In this way, all her eggs begin developing at the same time.
However, with such a large clutch it is difficult for her to maintain all her eggs at exactly the same temperature.
Those at the side of the nest may not be quite as warm as those in the centre.
Furthermore, she has to turn the eggs regularly to prevent the membranes within them from adhering to one another or to the shell.
So as the time for hatching approaches, all the eggs may not be equally ready.
To put things right, the unborn chicks begin to signal to one another.
If you put a doctor's stethoscope to an egg at this time, you may hear clicks coming from within.
The neighbouring eggs can also hear them.
If they have not yet reached the clicking stage, the sound stimulates them to speed up their development.
That this is what happens can be demonstrated by playing recordings of the clicks to one batch of eggs and so inducing them to hatch well before others of the clutch that have been kept individually and in silence.
All in all, nesting time is a particularly demanding and dangerous period in a bird's life.
The eggs, even before they hatch, require great care, reducing the time a parent bird can spend finding food for itself and keeping it sitting on the ground or in the branches of a tree where it is exposed to much more danger than it would be in the air.
For most birds, however, these risks and labours are inescapable.
But not for all.
The female cuckoo has, notoriously, found a way of avoiding them altogether.
She induces others to look after her eggs.
The European cuckoo bamboozles warblers, dunnocks and robins.
The act is done quickly.
The female alights on the rim of a stranger's nest, picks up one of the eggs in her beak, flies off with it and then swallows it.
She returns immediately and drops in a replacement of her own.
Speed is important to prevent the parasitised birds from catching sight of the intruder and becoming aware of the deception, for then they may desert the nest altogether.
The cuckoo has no time to settle low in the nest and her egg often falls a little distance.
It does not break even if it lands directly on other eggs because its shell is twice as thick as those of the host bird.
The cuckoo is able to produce an egg at such short notice because she has retained it in her body for up to twenty-four hours after it has been encased in shell and is ready for laying.
She is therefore able to expel it just as soon as the chance arises.
This brings an additional advantage.
Retained within  the warmth of her body for this extra period, the chick within the egg has already begun to develop.
What is more, the incubation it needs is in any case one or two days less than that needed by its hosts' chicks, so the young cuckoo stands a good chance of appearing before the legitimate chicks do.
If it does, it will hunch its back and push out the other eggs.
In most cases the cuckoo's egg looks very like its hosts' eggs.
Were it not so, the legitimate parents might detect the substitution and throw it out.
Although the cuckoo is a bigger bird than the reed warbler or any other of its regular hosts, its eggs are unusually small in proportion to its size, with the result that there does not appear to be a great discrepancy between them.
Not only that, but each cuckoo pigments her eggs so that they roughly match those of her host.
So female cuckoos that habitually parasitise pipits lay spotted eggs, while those that choose redstarts in continental Europe lay plain blue ones.
The European cuckoo is the most famous bird to behave in this irresponsible fashion, but it is by no means the only one.
The cuckoo family is very large, with a hundred and thirty different species distributed world-wide, and of these nearly half do so.
And there are brood-parasites — as they are called — in other families too.
In South America, cowbirds of several different species parasitise over a hundred different kinds of small perching birds; in Africa, weaverbirds, whydah birds and honey-guides all exploit the loyal parental responses of others.
The trick, clearly, is a very profitable one if you can get away with it.
And it is not only birds that do it.
The habit is even more widespread among insects.
Ammophila, the caterpillar-hunting wasp, has to keep a close guard over her paralysed prey.
She may, for example, lay it down for a few seconds while she opens the entrance to her hole.
In that brief time, a fly may dart in and lay its own egg on it.
This will hatch quickly and eat both Ammophila's own egg and the caterpillar that was provided for it.
Cuckoo-bees make their way into the nests of other kinds of bees and leave their eggs there to be tended and reared by others.
Some do so secretively, creeping in quietly among the swarm of busy workers, quickly depositing an egg in a waxen cell alongside those belonging to the builders and slipping out again unremarked.
One species, Nomada, ingratiates itself with the colony it parasitises by producing a special perfume that the host bees find particularly attractive.
Another, Sphecodes, battles its way into a colony, killing any individual that opposes it.
In all these instances, the cuckoo-bee grub, like the cuckoo-bird chick, kills the rightful infants and eats the food-store intended for its victim.
So unhatched eggs, whether of insects or birds, crabs or reptiles, are threatened on all sides.
The most extreme way of protecting them is for the mother to carry them around within her own body.
The male guppy, a small South American fish, has a pair of fins on his underside modified into a gun-like tube through which he fires small bullets of sperm at the female's genital opening.
Those that strike their target are absorbed by the female and fertilise the eggs within her.
There they also hatch and develop, sustained by the yolk with which she has endowed them.
As they grow, they swell and darken, giving her a black triangle on her abdomen just in front of her anal fins.
Eventually she releases them.
Each babe emerges folded in two, head to tail, the size of a small tea-leaf, and swims away to hide in the leaves of the water plants.
Among the pipe-fish it is, surprisingly, the male who becomes pregnant.
When they mate, the pair intertwine their bodies.
The female extrudes eggs which stick to the underside of the male.
The skin beneath them gradually swells until eventually the eggs are seated in little sockets and he carries them until they hatch.
This hardly counts as internal fertilisation, but the sea-horse, a shorter relative of the pipe-fish that swims with its body held vertically and not horizontally, has taken the principle of male-brooding considerably further.
Three or four days before mating, the male develops a pouch on his belly.
When courtship starts, he brings his belly close to that of the female and the two coil about one another.
Within five seconds, the female squirts several thousand eggs into his pouch and the two separate.
His sperm ducts empty into this pouch so that the eggs are quickly and efficiently fertilised.
The pouch-lining then becomes soft and spongy and secretes a nourishing fluid which the babies absorb.
Two weeks later, he starts a series of shuddering contractions and tiny miniature sea-horses shoot out from his pouch.
They may go on appearing for twenty-four hours until eventually he has given birth to a thousand or more babies.
Such fertilisation within the body is unusual among water-living animals.
Most of them simply release their eggs and sperm and rely on the surrounding water to bring them together.
But animals that mate on land cannot do this.
For them, fertilisation within the female is the rule.
Retaining fertile eggs within her body long enough for them to hatch there does not require major anatomical or physiological changes, so it is not surprising that all the major groups of land-living animals contain species that produce live babies.
The only exception are the birds.
This is, presumably, because the extra load of several growing chicks within a bird's body would make flight difficult if not impossible for her.
Even insects, which for the most part lay numerous tiny eggs, neatly packaged in tiny sculptured capsules, in one or two instances produce their young alive.
The female bot fly holds her eggs in her oviduct until they have hatched into maggots.
Then she injects them into the nostrils of an unfortunate sheep where they quickly start feeding on the membranes lining their host's sinuses.
The female tsetse fly retains her young for even longer.
She nourishes them with a special fluid which exudes from a nipple on the wall of the pouch in which her larva lies.
It breathes through a pair of tubes that it projects from her genital opening.
It even sheds its coat periodically, and by the time it is born, it is able to pupate immediately.
This technique brings its own limitations.
Lavishing so much care on the offspring, cherishing them until they are well advanced in their growth, inevitably reduces the number of young that a female can produce.
Not for the tsetse fly the hundreds deposited as eggs by a house fly.
The female tsetse can bear only one baby at a time and in all her six month life, she can produce no more than a dozen.
But the success of her strategy is only too evident to anyone who travels in the areas of Africa inhabited by the tsetse.
The greenfly, another live-bearer, has evolved a way of overcoming even this limitation.
During the summer, when there are plenty of food plants in leaf, she produces eggs that, without any attention from a male, are already fertile.
They are all female and since they too are also reproductively sufficient unto themselves, they can do the same thing as their mother even before they have left her body.
So in effect, the female greenfly gives birth to her children and her grandchildren simultaneously and the offspring of a single pregnant female can, within a few hours, smother a rose bush.
The amphibians have also taken to the habit.
Most frogs lay eggs coated in jelly and then abandon them, but some rear their eggs in pouches on their back, in their throat sacs or hold them back in their oviducts.
Among the reptiles, the distribution of the technique seems particularly arbitrary.
Boa constrictors bear live young but pythons don't; rattlesnakes and chameleons do, but cobras and iguanas don't.
Typically, the reptilian egg is laid on land and is encased in a shell to prevent its liquids from evaporating, but those eggs that are kept within the female until they hatch have either very thin shells or no shells at all.
All reptile eggs contain a considerable amount of yolk in them, but many of these live-bearing reptiles have developed a way of supplementing it.
The eggs become loosely attached to the wall of the female's uterus and blood vessels develop on either side of the contact so that the young are able to absorb sustenance from their mother's blood.
In this way, the mother provides her baby with more food over the period of its development than she would be able to  pack into a single egg, and what is more, she can do this over a long period instead of being compelled to produce it all at one moment.
The mammals have their own special and characteristic way of fuelling their developing young.
Mamma is Latin for ‘breast’ and mammals produce milk.
Those that evolved in the southern hemisphere, the marsupials, start to do this when their babies are very young indeed.
Bringing them and the milk together, however, is something of a problem.
Antechinus is a tiny Australian marsupial the size and shape of a mouse.
The young emerge from their mother's birth canal only a month after conception.
They are no bigger than grains of rice.
They have strong fore-legs, though their back legs are hardly developed at all and are little more than buds.
These tiny pink wet morsels of flesh wriggle their way forward along the underside of their mother's belly through her bristly hair towards a group of a dozen nipples.
These are partly shielded by small flaps of skin on each side which form a corridor and may help to guide the babies towards them.
The journey is not a long one, a few centimetres only, and the babies quickly find a teat.
As soon as one does so, its lips close around it, giving it a firm hold.
There the litter will remain, imbibing milk and growing rapidly for five weeks.
Towards the end of this time, the mother looks as though she has a bunch of pink grapes on her underside and clambering about the branches or running over uneven ground not only becomes awkward for her but looks distinctly uncomfortable for her young.
But other marsupials live in a way that would make such an exposed method of transport positively lethal.
The bandicoots and the wombats are both diggers, excavating long burrows in search of their food.
Unshielded babies clinging to teats would soon be brushed off.
The females, however, have their nipples enclosed not by flaps of skin but within a deep pouch.
What is more, the mouth of the pouch faces backwards so that when the female digs with her forelegs, the earth flies safely past her young as they steadily imbibe their milk within her pouch.
The yapok, a South American marsupial, is a swimmer.
That way of life might also seem to threaten the lives of her young.
But her pouch has a muscle around its mouth which contracts like a draw-string and shuts so tightly when she goes into the water that her young are in no danger of drowning.
The biggest and most famous of all living marsupials, the wallabies and kangaroo, are of course leapers.
A young kangaroo would stand little chance of staying on board its mother as she bounded over the land if all it had to cling to was a nipple.
The kangaroo's pouch, however, is a deep bag that opens just beneath her chest.
A baby within it is in no danger of being thrown out no matter how energetically she bounces.
But this arrangement      means that the baby, when it first emerges from her genital opening has to make a marathon journey.
From genital pore to the lip of the pouch may be nearly eight inches.
She does nothing to help it.
Its forelimbs have tiny claws on them which assist in grasping its mother's hairs and it moves determinedly forward with a movement rather like a swimmer's crawl, turning its head from one side to another with alternate strokes.
Since neither its eyes nor its ears are sufficiently developed to be functional at this stage, it probably finds its way to the pouch by smell.
Once it has found a nipple, the tip swells in its mouth so that the young is not able to let go even if it wanted to.
After a month or so, its head has developed sufficiently to allow it to open its jaws.
Now it can detach itself and move about within the pouch, but it will remain dependent upon her milk until it is eighteen months old.
As it grows, the composition of its mother's milk changes to meet the changing needs of its developing body.
After about nine months, the baby starts to clamber out of the pouch and hop about at its mother's side, though still returning when danger threatens or when it wants a drink of milk.
A month later the youngster has left the pouch for good, but it still suckles, poking its head into the pouch and grabbing a teat.
This is the more remarkable since by this time, its mother may have already given birth to another tiny baby that has made its way to the pouch and is fastened on to a teat imbibing milk of a quite different composition.
The mammals of the northern hemisphere have a quite different way of going about things.
Milk is still a vital food for their babies, but the young do not emerge from their mother's womb to take it until they are much more developed.
The mammalian egg contains no yolk whatever, but even so, the females are able to nourish their young very effectively within the womb.
They use a system similar to that developed by some of the live-bearing reptiles but one that is enormously more efficient.
The embryo grows a pad, the placenta, which becomes attached to the wall of the womb.
This absorbs nutriment from the mother's blood and conveys it by way of a tube, the umbilical cord, into the body of the baby.
With such an effective way of victualling her young, the mother is able to retain them within her until they are so big that their sheer size makes them a burden and the mechanics of getting them out of her body becomes a real problem.
Mammalian babies, when they do finally emerge into the outside world, still need their mother's milk to complete the building of their highly complex bodies and they may continue to suckle for years.
Even though mammals lavish such care and attention on their young, they still have the same two options open to insects and fish, crabs and  reptiles — whether to concentrate their energies on producing as many young as possible and then let them fend for themselves, or whether to restrict the numbers to very few but look after them carefully.
One of the American marsupials, the Virginian opossum, practises the first strategy.
She produces as many as twenty-two babies in a single batch.
As soon as they emerge, they face their first hazard, the race through their mother's fur to her pouch.
She has only thirteen nipples.
The first thirteen babies to claim them have won the first of their competitions.
All the rest will die.
The largest litter produced by any placental mammal is even more than the opossum's — thirty-two.
That feat is performed by a rabbit-sized relative of the shrews, the Madagascan tenrec.
But if the measure of fertility is the number of young that are produced in a season, then the record is held by Microtus, a tiny meadow mouse from North America.
Not only may she give birth to as many as nine babies at a time, but she may have as many as seventeen litters in a breeding season and she is thus capable of producing a hundred and fifty young a year.
Microtus makes her nest underground in a burrow, so she can safely bring her young into the world when they are still at an early stage of their development, and then within a few hours, start on the business of producing the next litter.
Her babies' eyes are not yet open, their ears not yet sensitive.
They are naked of hair and unable to sustain their own necessary body warmth.
But their mother is free of their weight and bulk and she can run into the world outside the burrow to gather food and so continue producing the milk that they need.
Many other burrow-livers such as rats and rabbits produce their young at a similar early stage.
So do strong aggressive animals which are well able to protect their babies even if they do not deposit them in a den deep underground.
It is those mammals that live more persecuted harried lives that have taken the possibilities of placental development to its ultimate.
Surface-dwelling rodents like guinea pigs and agoutis, in contrast to their burrowing relatives, can run almost as soon as they are born, and the calves of wildebeest, born while the herd is on migration, can stand up and trot after their mother within five minutes of dropping to the ground.
So millions of lives are launched in a multitude of different ways hopping from a pouch, tumbling from a womb, clambering out of a capsule, hammering open an eggshell or falling into the sea, scattered wholesale like seeds.
Some will have vastly better chances of survival than others, but for all, the next few months will be the most hazardous of their lives.
TWO
GROWING UP
CHILDHOOD is an urgent time.
For parents, it is only too long a period of encumbrance and handicap during which they are saddled with young who demand continual feeding, who reduce their freedom and regularly expose them to danger.
For children, it is too short a time during which they have to build their bodies to the strength and size of an adult and learn all the skills they will need to survive without help.
Few infant mammals grow as quickly as an elephant seal pup.
Within minutes of slipping out of its mother's body and freeing itself from its glistening birth membranes, it finds its mother's nipple and is drinking her milk.
And what milk!
It is twelve times as rich in fats and four times as rich in proteins as the best Jersey cow's milk.
The elephant seal mother produces this liquid by transforming the blanket of blubber that lies beneath her skin.
And the baby converts it straight back to blubber.
There is no time now to spend on the lengthy process of building flesh and bone.
That can be done later.
Its mother is in such a hurry because she is out of her element.
She has been compelled by her ancestry to leave the sea and come to these beaches to breed, for seals are descended from land-living mammals and although their limbs have become efficient paddles and their bodies are streamlined for swimming, unlike whales and dolphins they have not yet evolved techniques that enable them to give birth at sea.
They can only do so out of water.
But while she is on the beach with her pup, she cannot feed.
The sooner she gets back to the water, the better.
The pup guzzles her milk so steadily and so hungrily that it swells almost visibly.
At birth it weighed about 40 kilos.
Within a week it puts on another 9 kilos.
It lies beside its mother occasionally disengaging from the teat with creamy milk dribbling from the side of its mouth, while she takes a rest and perhaps shifts on the sand to offer her other teat.
Neither of them, for this brief period, have anything else to do except to transfer fuel from one to the other.
The beach where they lie is a crowded place.
It may be on one of the islands that surround the Antarctic continent or perhaps in Patagonia on the South American mainland.
At the beginning of the season, it was claimed by a huge male.
He is the biggest of all seals, growing up to 14 feet    long and a weight of two and a half tonnes.
The pup's mother was attracted to the beach by his presence.
So were as many as a hundred or so other females and now he lies surrounded by them, on guard and ready to do battle with any other male that tries to raid his harem.
These battles are a source of danger to the pup.
When the beachmaster is angered by a serious challenge, he thunders across the sand, humping and heaving his huge body with surprising speed and taking no notice whatever of what lies in his way.
Pups get crushed and killed.
Even if a babe and its mother manage to shuffle out of his way in time, the two may be separated and then the pup, while trying to find its way back, may be attacked and badly bitten by other females, irritated at being disturbed.
As many as one in ten of the babies born on this beach will die here.
After three weeks, the youngster has tripled or even quadrupled its weight.
But now, suddenly, its food supply is cut off.
Its mother has given it all the time she can spare.
She has lost most of her blubber and she is starving.
She must get back to the sea to feed.
Laboriously, she heaves her way across the sand, down the beach, into the breakers and swims away.
The pup must now look after itself.
If it is extremely fortunate, it may become a double-suckler by finding a female whose pup has just died and who is still producing milk.
In that case it will continue to grow until it becomes a gross and bloated two hundred kilos or more.
Having gained weight so rapidly, the abandoned pup then begins to lose it as it uses its blubber to develop the organs of its body.
That takes time.
The black furry coat with which it was born and which helped it to keep warm during its first days is now sloughed off, revealing the shorter shiny coat which is more suitable for a swimmer.
Its globular shape slowly elongates.
It stays on the beach for a further six to eight weeks.
It may find a few crabs or other invertebrates on the shore to nibble, but otherwise it eats nothing.
Nonetheless, it slowly continues to get stronger.
Then at last it hummocks its way closer to the sea.
The waves lap around it, the deepening water lifts its body from the sand, and it is away.
Its brief childhood is over.
The crowded conditions into which the elephant seal pups are born are, if anything, a disadvantage to them, but other young animals rely on great numbers for their safety.
Gulls nest together in tightly packed colonies but not because there is a shortage of suitable sites.
That is clear because they often do so when there are areas nearby that are equally suitable which they leave entirely vacant.
They do so because they and their chicks are much safer in a crowd.
Chicks, squatting on the ground in the open, are in constant danger of attack both from the ground and the air.
The colonies of black-headed gulls  on the coasts of northern England are raided by foxes.
Ten thousand birds and an equal number of chicks constitute an enormous quantity of meat.
But the size of the local fox population is governed by the amount of food available, not in times of plenty such as this, but in times of scarcity when the nesting gulls have gone.
So there are only a few foxes in the neighbourhood of the colony and they can only raid the margins of it.
Chicks in the centre are virtually safe from them.
Even those near the edge stand a better chance of survival than if they had been in a solitary nest far away in a place where local foxes can consume everything that is available.
Raids also come from the air.
Marauding birds such as herring gulls will grab and swallow a chick if they get a chance.
An adult, by itself, will be hard-pressed to repel a determined attack on its young, but in a massed colony, outraged parents join together and surround an intruder in a cloud, shrieking angrily, diving on it and harrying it in a continuous attack.
The herring gull has only a small chance of grabbing a nestling in the face of such opposition, and no chance whatever of sneaking up on an unguarded chick unnoticed by adults.
Even with these defences, however, the losses in a colony from a variety of different causes are immense.
At one of the major colonies of black-headed gulls in northern England, researchers found that it was a good year if fifteen per cent of the eggs that were laid produced fledged young.
But even that was a better success rate than among the nests that were built away from the colony.
In one year over three hundred of such solitary nests were monitored.
Not one of them produced fledged young.
Gulls travel for miles all over the countryside and the coast collecting their food.
They fill their crops and then fly back long distances to feed their young.
But other animals, particularly those that produce many babies at a time, find it more practical to take their young with them when they forage.
Baby shrews are born in litters of half a dozen or so.
They are extremely active little animals and after a couple of weeks, as soon as their fur is grown and their eyes are open, they start to supplement their mother's milk with insects and other invertebrates that they find for themselves.
Their mother has a major task in keeping track of them all.
If the nest is disturbed and she decides the family should flee, the youngsters behave in an extremely disciplined way.
One will seize the fur at the base of its mother's tail and grip it firmly in its jaws.
No sooner has it done so than another baby joins on behind in the same way and within a few seconds, the entire litter has formed a caravan behind their parent.
Fast though they run, they all keep in step, so that the whole group looks more like a snake gliding through the undergrowth than a family of young mammals on an outing.
So resolute are they at keeping hold of one another that even if you pick up the mother, her babies will still hang on to her in a wriggling furry rope.
Once they start foraging, of course, they scatter.
But at the slightest hint of danger they join up instantly and dash away like an immaculately trained line of dancers making their exit.
Ducklings at a similarly early stage in their lives also follow their mother as she leads them away on food-finding outings.
Indeed, they have a psychological mechanism in their brains which impels them to follow the first large moving thing they see after they emerge from their shells, even if it is not their mother.
This reaction was first observed and understood by the great Austrian naturalist, Konrad Lorenz.
He called it ‘imprinting’.
Among mallard young, the period during which this process takes place is both precise and limited.
It is between thirteen and sixteen hours.
If during this time the ducklings see little but green rubber boots beside them, then it will be green rubber boots that thereafter they will try to follow, as many people who have raised waterfowl will testify.
This imprinted beacon is not always a visual one.
Wood ducks nest in holes in trees.
There in the darkness, the chicks can see very little of their parents, but they can hear them and they will follow the sound that they first hear during that crucial imprinting period for the rest of their duckling days.
Nor are ducks the only birds to imprint on their parents in this way.
Lorenz did his pioneering work on grey-lag geese, and rails, coots and domestic chickens also respond in the same fashion.
In fact it is likely that the process operates in all young birds that leave the nest very early in their lives and need to follow their parents.
Ostrich chicks are also among them.
The male ostrich is polygamous.
He has a senior wife who lays the first egg in the scrape he makes in the ground for her.
She will deposit as many as a dozen eggs there.
But he also mates with several other young females who take turns in coming to the nest and adding their own contributions to the clutch that he is incubating.
As a consequence, he may find himself with as many as forty eggs in his charge.
It is just as well for him, therefore, that all the chicks, when they hatch, have firmly planted in their minds the notion that they must follow those two massive three-toed feet that are the first large moving things they see.
But the infancy of these chicks is to be more complicated than most.
From the beginning, they are beset by dangers.
Formidable though he is and obedient though his followers may be, the male has difficulty in defending several dozen youngsters.
Hawks may swoop down from the sky and carry one off.
Jackals may slip in and grab a straggler.
Soon only a small fraction    of his original flock is running around his feet.
As he leads them about, he may well meet another male who also has an attendant troop of young.
If he does, the two males often quarrel.
The dispute may become so vigorous that one of them is driven away and flees, striding away over the plains at great speed.
His flock has no hope of keeping up with him.
For a moment there is indecision among them.
But then, once again, they catch sight of a pair of tall scaly three-toed legs and the dominant cock suddenly acquires a bigger flock of babies.
Whether he deliberately sought them is not clear.
It is possible that he was simply protecting the feeding territory for the benefit of his own offspring.
It is, nonetheless, advantageous for him to have his flock increased in this way.
If a predator does succeed in grabbing a chick, there is less chance that it will be one of his.
So the aim of all parents — the propagation of their genetic line — is furthered.
Whatever the motivation, these amalgamations may happen several times during the months that he cares for the flock.
He may end up with as many as sixty youngsters from several different broods which, because they hatched at slightly different times, are of several different sizes.
Such large assemblages of young in the charge of only a few adults is known by the French word for a nursery — a creche.
It can be a very convenient way of reducing a parent's problems.
The female eider duck is abandoned by her drake just as soon as she starts incubating the eggs.
She usually builds on the shores of an estuary and there she sits devotedly, seldom leaving the nest.
She does not feed at all.
By the time the eggs hatch, she is very hungry indeed.
As soon as the chicks are mobile, she leads them away from the nest and down to the shore.
Unless hers is the first brood of the season, she finds there a large flock of other ducklings supervised by one or two adult females.
These usually include non-breeding birds.
Her young quickly join this creche and start dabbling for small crustaceans and tiny molluscs.
Now she too has a chance to eat.
But there is nothing here for her.
Her favourite food is mussels which she can only find in deeper water.
After a few days, her hunger becomes so great that she goes away to feed, leaving her young in the charge of others.
The flock her young have joined may number a hundred.
Some eider duck creches have been counted over five hundred strong.
The attendant females are known as aunties, though nannies might be a better term, for although these birds are successful breeders, they may be quite unrelated to the majority of their charges.
If marauding gulls appear, the aunties sound an alarm and the young cluster tightly around them.
If the gull has the nerve to dive at them, an auntie may even grab it by the feet and pull it down into the water.
Chicks in creches need no more from their aunties than protection.
They are well able to collect their food for themselves.
But mammal babies cannot be so independent.
They need milk from an adult and they need it regularly.
Although human mothers, in some places and at some times, hand over their babies to others to suckle, all other mammals provide their own babies with most, if not all of their milk.
Even so, some mammal parents still find it worth while to deposit their babies in a creche.
In the chilly windswept plains of Patagonia, you may find a burrow about the size of a large rabbit hole.
Listen, and you may hear scuffles inside.
Watch from a few yards away and you will see an elegant rodent, about the size and shape of a hare but with long stilt-like legs, step daintily towards the hole, nose lifted warily.
Locally the people call this animal a mara.
Zoologists term it the Patagonian cavy for it is related to guinea pigs or cavies of the Andes.
If, as is likely, this one is a female, she will suddenly whistle a call and out of the hole come a dozen youngsters which bustle eagerly about her, groping with their muzzles for her teats.
She skips and twists among them, sniffing their hind-quarters, until at last she finds the two she seeks, her own young, and leads them away to the shade of a bush and there lets them suckle.
All this time, her mate has been standing by, watching the proceedings.
If another pair arrives while his mate is with their young, he chases them away, charging at them with his neck outstretched.
After about an hour, her two babies scamper back to their den, she rejoins her mate and the two walk off to resume grazing, perhaps a considerable distance away.
But it is not long before another pair appears and summon their own young in the same way.
If the creche is a big one, and some contain as many as twenty infants, then one pair of the adults is likely to be in attendance at virtually all times of the day.
They keep an eye on the youngsters and, with the experience and wisdom of their years, will whistle warnings if they sense danger so that all the babies can bolt down the communal burrow to safety.
But the adults never go down themselves.
Initially one of the females dug the den and soon afterwards, beside its entrance, gave birth to her two or three well-developed babies.
They, on their own initiative, crawled inside.
Thereafter, as many as a dozen other females will have added their own babies to the creche in the tunnel in the same way.
Although each mother does her best to restrict her milk to her own young when she visits the nursery, the other babies who surround her when she arrives are so importunate that this is not easy.
But the mara's problem is simple compared with that faced by a mother bat.
She may have to find her young not from a dozen but from a million.
Every year, female free-tailed bats in Mexico leave their mates and fly eight hundred miles up to the southern United States.
They are pregnant and seeking nursery accommodation of a particular kind.
If their babies are to thrive, they must have a cave that is warm, humid and with a temperature that varies hardly at all between day and night.
And if the parents are to get all the food they need, it must be in an area where there is a great number of moths and other insects flying at night.
There are not many caves that match this exacting prescription.
In the whole of the American southwest, there are no more than a dozen or so.
But there are a great number of bats and the caves can in consequence become very crowded.
Several of them contain in excess of five million bats.
One, Bracken Cave in Texas, holds over twenty million.
Inside one of these caves, the air is suffocating with the choking stench of ammonia rising from the layer of soggy droppings that carpets the floor.
The heat from the mass of bodies packed within keeps the temperature around 100°F.
Venture inside and you would be wise to wear a respirator to filter off the stench, and clothing that will protect you from the steady rain of droppings and urine that falls from the ceiling.
The easiest time to see the bats' creches is at night, for the females do not carry the unnecessary load of a baby when they fly out to hunt.
Instead they park them in a special nursery area, packed tightly together so that the loss of heat from their bare bodies is minimised.
You may not recognise these creches at first sight.
They look like parts of the wet glistening rock wall which are an unexpected shade of pink.
Look closer with your lights and you will see that these great patches are naked babies, like small shiny plums, packed together two thousand to the square yard.
It seems impossible that any mother would be able to find her own babe from among such a throng.
And until recently, no one thought that she did.
A female was believed to come back after a night's hunt and give her milk to whichever baby grabbed her teat first.
Now by capturing mothers with suckling babies and making genetic tests on them both, researchers have proved that this is not so.
A returning female alights within a few feet of where she last left her baby.
It is unlikely to be in exactly the same position, even if she could find it, for during the night there is a great deal of jostling among the youngsters and any one of them may have moved about eighteen inches or so.
As she lands, she calls for several seconds and her baby answers.
It is difficult to believe that, among the tumult in the cave, either mother or baby would be able to recognise one another 's voices, but bats are famous for their skill in disentangling the echoes of their high-frequency squeaks and using them as a way of navigating.
In comparison with that ability, the problem faced by  the mother now is simple.
Individual calls vary greatly.
Slowed down to the frequencies that suit our ears you can hear that they differ in volume, length, pitch and frequency and include squeals and yelps, grunts and trills.
When mother and child recognise one another 's voices, they try to move closer together across the rock.
But that is not easy.
As she elbows her way through the massed youngsters, they press around her, trying to snatch a drink of milk.
Her nipples are in her armpits, so she keeps her wings close to her sides as far as she can and lashes out with her feet and bites those that pester her.
Even so, some manage to grab her teat and snatch a drink as she passes.
There is such a commotion that, as like as not, she will fail to reach her baby and will have to fly off and start again.
When at last the two do meet, she lifts her wing and her baby nuzzles into her armpit to drink.
For five minutes it feeds, she shifting it gently from one nipple to the other.
The meal over, she takes off again and flies to another part of the cave where there is less pandemonium.
There she suspends herself by her feet and takes a well-earned rest, having done her best to ensure that her single babe, in spite of everything, has received its proper milk-ration.
If a young animal is one of a litter or a clutch, it cannot rely on such solicitude from its parents.
Many birds deliberately favour some of their young in a way that helps to match the number of babies they rear with the abundance or scarcity of food.
Owls, like most birds of prey, start incubating their eggs as soon as they are laid with the result that the chicks hatch at different times.
There may therefore be a considerable difference in size between the oldest and the youngest.
The first to hatch is inevitably stronger and more vigorous than those that hatch later.
When its parent arrives at the nest with food, it pushes the rest out of the way and gets fed first.
If there is plenty of food in this particular season, then all the chicks will get fed.
If not, the youngest and the smallest will go hungry and before long die.
Its emaciated body is then promptly eaten by its elders so no meat is wasted.
However heartless and unfair this may seem to human eyes, the end result is more likely to achieve the parent owl's purpose of successfully launching a new generation.
Feeding all the chicks equally in a poor season might well lead to all of them dying for lack of adequate nourishment.
This way, at least one has the best possible chance of survival.
The task of finding enough food for their offspring dominates the lives of most parents during the breeding season.
Sometimes and in some places, the labour is so time-consuming that even the most hard-working of parents cannot manage it unaided.
In Florida, scrub-jays tackle it as a family team.
They live in oak scrub, harsh country that is poor both in food and in nest sites.
It is not only the      breeding pair that occupies the territory around a nest.
Several young adults hatched there during the last two breeding seasons live there as well.
They assist their parents in feeding their new younger brothers and sisters and in defending them from predators such as snakes.
The majority of these helpers are young males.
The young females tend to fly off and look for mates elsewhere.
If the group is really successful and energetic, they may be able to expand the family property.
Eventually it may become so big that one of the young sons may be able to set up on his own in one corner of it.
He will then be in a good position to take over much of the rest of the property when his parents die.
But about half of these helpers will never breed.
Their lives have been devoted to the welfare of the next generation — not, it is true, to their direct descendants, but to their younger brothers and sisters and therefore potentially to their nephews and nieces.
This sort of cooperation within families is much more widespread than was recognised until recently.
Moorhens, wrens and woodpeckers all include species that, in some circumstances, behave in this way.
Ten to fifteen per cent of all the birds in Australia do so as well.
And so do some mammals.
Marmosets, tiny monkeys that live in the canopy of the South American rain forest, have a very hard time raising their babies.
They have to be constantly on the move, seeking the fruit and insects on which they live, but their babies, usually twins, are particularly large and have to be carried piggy-back until they are quite old.
Their mother inevitably expends a great deal of her energy in providing them with milk and the task of carrying them as well is too much for her.
So for a lot of the time, their father takes on the job.
But even he needs help, for it is not easy to grab an insect or pluck a dangling fruit if you have a couple of half-grown babies on your back.
So some of the young of the pair stay with their parents for several years and take turns in transporting the new infants.
Father even allows quite unrelated youngsters to join the family group if they will take on some of the work of baby-carrying.
As a result, there may be as many as nine adults in one of these family parties.
But only one female and male among them breed.
The male does sometimes mate with one of the young female helpers but this, for reasons we do not understand, never seems to result in pregnancy.
Elephants also collaborate in looking after their young.
All the adults in a herd are female.
Their leader is the oldest and wisest of them.
The rest are her sisters, daughters and grand-daughters.
The bulls lead more or less solitary lives outside the herd.
The birth of a calf is a great event in this community.
The females, young and old, crowd around the newcomer, rumbling murmurs among themselves, caressing it with their trunks and helping to free it from its birth membranes.
The baby is able to walk after an hour and to keep up with the herd when it is on the move, but it is nonetheless very unsteady on its feet and needs continual help.
Climbing up a steep bank or trying to extricate itself from a mud hole is likely to produce squeals of distress from the infant and the adults nearby will rush over to see what is wrong.
As time goes by, the mother seems to become a little blase about these shrieks for attention and lets the still enthusiastic young females fuss over the infant.
The baby continues taking its mother's milk until it is at least two years old.
Just as a human baby may draw comfort from sucking a dummy, so occasionally a baby elephant will sidle up to a young female and suck her milkless nipple.
The adult seems to enjoy the experience just as much as the baby does.
Should a youngster become orphaned at this early stage in its life, one of its aunts, if she is in milk herself, may allow it to suckle alongside her own baby and, in effect, adopt it.
Like so many baby mammals, young elephants spend a great deal of their time playing.
They engage in butting matches; they chase one another around the great moving pillars of their aunts' legs; they wallow ecstatically in mud.
Watch them doing so and you can have no doubt that they are enjoying themselves hugely, just as human children do in a playground.
But play has a serious and valuable purpose.
It is a way of learning.
One of the first things an infant elephant has to discover is how to use its trunk.
When it is only a month or two old, the long dangling object in front of its face is obviously a puzzle to it.
It will shake its head and observe how this curious appendage flops about.
Sometimes it trips up over it.
And when it goes down to a water hole to drink it crouches down and awkwardly sips with its mouth.
Not until it is four or five months old does it discover the remarkable fact that water can be sniffed up into a trunk and then, if you blow out, you can hose it into your mouth.
And that discovery, of course, leads to a whole new set of possibilities for games.
Lion cubs too play games that help them master the skills that will be essential for their success in later life.
As their mother lies dozing, one of them will suddenly pounce on the black tassel at the end of her twitching tail, using the same kind of actions it will need to pounce on a small prey animal in years to come.
They fight with one another, too.
Even when they are only a few months old, they have claws and teeth quite long and sharp enough to damage one another.
But before they start on their game, they signal that this is not to be a serious quarrel by walking in a stilted exaggerated    fashion.
Then when they strike out at one another, they keep their claws sheathed.
As they get bigger, so the lessons become more realistic and more serious.
A lioness, having caught a gazelle, may not kill it but drag it back alive to her cubs and give it to them so that, crippled though it is, the cubs may have a little practice in how to bring it down.
A mother otter will bring a half-dead fish and give it to her young to play with in a pool so that they may practice the dives and swoops that are needed to be a successful underwater hunter.
As infants grow, their bodies not only enlarge but change both in shape and colour.
Many will have been wearing a special costume for their childhood which has given them particular concealment.
Fawns have dappled coats that match the broken light of a woodland floor.
The downy chicks of terns and gulls are so patterned that they are almost invisible crouching on shingle.
Both adult birds and their young stake everything on the effectiveness of this camouflage.
When an intruder approaches, the parents fly off and the chicks sit tight no matter how close it comes.
The young of the European wild pig, unlike their parents, are striped.
They behave in a different way.
It seems that they have no confidence in their invisibility.
If they are disturbed, they and their parents bolt together.
Their juvenile costume, therefore, probably has another purpose.
Perhaps it is a distinctive signal which ensures that the parents do not eat the piglets but treat them with the restraint and solicitude due to babies.
The young of the emperor butterfly fish that live on coral reefs seem to use this system too.
Initially, they have ultramarine flanks patterned with white concentric lines — totally different from their parents which are spectacularly dressed with alternate parallel stripes of yellow and blue.
In this way the youngsters make it clear that they are not yet mature enough to be considered rivals for territories or breeding partners and are allowed to feed on the reef beside their parents for the several months that it takes them to grow to maturity.
So childhood approaches its end.
For some, such as elephants, and lions, the process is a gradual one, as the youngsters drift farther and farther from their parents and become less reliant on them for food.
For others, the transition to independence is only too sharp.
Young albatrosses on the Leeward Islands spend many days flapping their wings to exercise their muscles and develop their strength, but when they launch themselves into the air, they have to get it right first time.
Many do so, and with their aeronautical skills improving visibly with every wingbeat, they set off across the sea, climbing steadily.
Others are not so successful.
Flailing their wings inexpertly, they drop to the surface of the sea.
There, tiger sharks have gathered, as they do each year awaiting this sudden abundance of food, and they rise with their jaws agape to seize them.
Some of the youngsters are engulfed in a single bite.
Others, struggling to get air-borne again, are driven backwards by the bow-wave of the surging sharks as they break the surface.
They peck valiantly at the monsters' pointed snouts, frantically paddling with their feet and beating their wings.
One rises.
The shark catches it by its feet, but as it tries to get a better grip the young bird is released and flaps into the air over the shark's back.
Before the shark can turn to make a second attack, the young albatross manages to make just enough height for its feet to clear the water.
It has survived the first crisis of its independent life.
The young free-tailed bats must also eventually leave their nursery.
While they were there, inside the cave, they were comparatively safe.
There, less than one in a hundred died.
But when they take their first flight into the outside world, their losses begin.
In the sky above, bat hawks circle, hover and pounce.
On a tree-stump beside one cave-mouth, a raccoon sits swatting them down with its paw, munching the little bodies and discarding the skinny wings onto a growing pile on the ground beside it.
As the sun sinks, the young bats stream from the cave-mouth like smoke and set off on the first stage of their long journey south.
Ten million bats are born each summer in Bracken Cave, Texas.
Before a year has passed, seven million will be dead.
Such are the perils of childhood.
THREE
FINDING FOOD
ANIMALS have to kill to feed.
They cannot, like plants, build their bodies from nothing more than minerals drawn from the earth and gases extracted from the air.
They must eat plants.
Some consume them directly; others do so indirectly by eating the bodies of plant-eating animals.
Neither plants nor animals welcome being eaten.
So finding food, for an animal, can be a demanding and continuing trial.
Some plants, most notably grasses, can be consumed without much difficulty and with few penalties, but a surprising number defend themselves.
That becomes only too clear if you find yourself hungry in a tropical rain forest.
You are surrounded by the most varied and abundant assemblage of plants in the world, so there, if anywhere, it should be easy enough to collect a vegetarian meal.
But the trunks and stems around you are armed with savage spines and hooks.
Roots are laden with poison.
Leaves are studded with stings.
You realise then, well enough, that making a meal of plants can demand both skill and knowledge.
Plant-eating animals, of course, have both.
Woolly monkeys live very largely on leaves and they spend hours every day sitting high in the canopy, a hundred feet or more above the ground, plucking leaves and cramming them into their mouths.
But they do not do this carelessly.
They inspect each leaf, turning it over, sometimes smelling it, rejecting this one, selecting that.
They are compelled to do this because most of the forest trees protect themselves against molesters with a poisonous sap.
The poison develops a little time after the leaf has sprouted, so the monkeys can avoid the worst of it if they eat only the youngest leaves.
But even then, they cannot avoid it altogether and after a while, their digestions can no longer tolerate it.
So they move off that tree and settle on another of a different kind.
Its leaves too will have their own toxin, but since it will be chemically a little different, the monkeys can take another course of their meal there.
Some plants have more virulent poisons.
The North American milkweed, if it is damaged, exudes a milky sap.
As it oozes from the wound, it solidifies and so repairs the injury.
It also protects the plant in a more general way for it has such a bitter taste and is so poisonous that most animals will not eat the plant.
Cows and deer and horses leave it well alone.
But some insects have found a way of eating the leaves.
Beetles, landing on    one, immediately cut through the mid-rib.
The latex, flowing to the site of the wound, drips harmlessly to the ground and the beetle then munches the leaf tissues beyond the cut which the latex cannot reach.
Some species of caterpillar not only sever the veins in this way, they also gouge out a circular trench on the underside of the leaf and then feed only within this protective moat.
The caterpillars of the monarch butterfly, surprisingly, are able to feed on milkweed without taking any of these precautions.
Together with a very few other insects, they have developed an immunity to the poison.
This remarkable biochemical achievement brings them considerable rewards.
Since most other animals avoid milkweed, the monarch caterpillars usually have the leaves all to themselves.
They also store the poison in their tissues and so themselves inherit its protection, for birds find the caterpillars just as distasteful as grazing animals found the milkweed.
Since the caterpillars have very bright distinctive colours, the birds quickly recognise that they are inedible and leave them alone.
The molecules of poison remain unchanged and potent, even after the caterpillars have reconstructed their bodies and turned into butterflies.
Since they still have the milkweed's toxin within them and, like the caterpillars, are vividly coloured, they too are left alone by birds.
But things are not always made so difficult for vegetarians.
Sometimes plants actually encourage animals to feed on them.
They need to have genetic material, pollen, transported from one individual plant to another and they are prepared to sacrifice a substantial proportion of it as food to those that will do the job.
To advertise the fact, they surround the pollen and the anthers that produce it with the vivid petals of a flower.
The bumble bee has developed complex machinery for collecting pollen.
The hairs on its furry body are covered with microscopic hooks which pick up the slightly sticky pollen grains as the bee busies around the flower.
When it flies off, it starts to tidy itself up, sweeping its fur clean with a bristly comb that fringes the lower half of each hind leg.
Having done that, it reaches one leg across to its equivalent on the other side, removes the accumulated pollen from the comb with a stiff brush that sprouts from the end of the leg and transfers it into a deep bowl lying on the outer surface of the opposite thigh.
This is hedged around by a palisade of long bristles.
The bee then kneads the pollen into these baskets with its middle legs, moulding it around the slender peg that projects from each of them, so that when it flies back to its nest after a successful trip, it has a brilliant yellow button of food attached to each thigh.
Anthers, in most flowers, release their pollen by splitting lengthways and allowing it to shower out.
Those of the nightshade, tomato and several other plants, however, do so through a small opening at the tip, through which the pollen falls a few grains at a time.
This is far too sparing for a bumble bee.
When one lands on such a flower, it seizes the clumped anthers with its six legs and then vibrates its muscles so vigorously that its whole body shakes with a loud buzzing noise and pollen pours out of the anthers like salt from a vigorously-wielded salt cellar.
Some of this pollen is inevitably brushed off when a bee visits another flower, but bearing in mind that only a few grains are needed to bring about cross-fertilisation, and that a bee on a single journey may collect two million, it is clear that the price a plant pays for this transport is a very high one.
Pollen grains, which consist largely of precious genetic material, are quite demanding for a plant to produce and many flowers offer, either in addition or as an alternative, a payment that is considerably cheaper for it is nothing more than sweetened water, nectar.
They manufacture this liquid in nectaries that are usually located in the farthest depths of a flower.
There the nectar does not evaporate as quickly as it would if it were in a more exposed position.
Neither does it lose its sweetness by becoming diluted with rain water.
Such a placing also ensures that insects coming to feed on it, even if they seek nothing else, are dusted with the pollen that the plants require them to carry.
Bees collect nectar as well as pollen, sucking it up with their long tubular mouthparts and carrying it back within their stomachs to their nest, there to store it in their combs as honey.
The limitation of this sort of food, from an animal's point of view, is that it is only available during the short season when a plant is in flower.
So nectar-feeding butterflies in their adult form can only be active during the summer and bees must work frantically hard, gathering what pollen and nectar they can while it is available, and storing what they do not need immediately, to nourish their colony through the barren season.
The honeypot ants of central Australia have a similar storage problem.
They solve it by using some of their numbers as jars.
These specialised workers, known to entomologists as repletes, never leave the nest but inhabit galleries six feet down in the red earth.
When workers which have been out foraging return with crops full of honeydew and nectar, they feed it to a replete, which swells until its abdomen, once no bigger than a grain of sand, has swollen to the size of a large pea.
Its tiny head and legs project from one side but it can no longer crawl about.
All it can do is to cling to the roof of its gallery and there hundreds of them hang in rows.
When the dry season comes and food is scarce, the active workers of the colony visit this    living larder and caress the repletes with their antennae until they regurgitate droplets for them.
Most animals living in lands where there is a flowerless season and lacking a storage system can only treat pollen and nectar as summer supplements to their menus.
In South Africa, little rock mice collect nectar from — and pollinate — some species of Protea which obligingly bear their flowers close to the ground and facing downwards.
In Madagascar, geckos lap nectar from palm flowers.
In Europe, blue tits collect it from the crown imperial fritillary, the only European plant known to be pollinated by a bird.
Some species of fruit bat also sip nectar when it is available.
The plants that rely on them to do so only open their flowers at night.
They are pale in colour so that they are more easily seen in the darkness.
Because animals such as these feed on other things at other times of the year, they cannot develop specialised nectar-collecting apparatus, for that would make feeding on other substances difficult if not impossible.
In the tropics, however, flowers of one kind or another can be found throughout the year, so there animals are able to make pollen and nectar the mainstay of their diet and have evolved highly efficient organs to collect it.
Several groups of birds have done this.
The lories, a branch of the parrot family, have acquired a tongue with little papillae on its surface that can be erected to form a brush with which to sweep up nectar.
The hummingbirds in South America, and the sunbirds in Africa, are equipped in a different way.
They do not have a brush tongue but an extremely long one divided into two from its middle down to its tip.
It was once thought that the birds used it as though sucking up a drink through a straw.
In fact they lick up the nectar by flicking their tongues rapidly into the flower, in the case of hummingbirds as swiftly as thirteen times a second.
It is not in a plant's interest to provide copious and unlimited supplies of nectar.
Its purpose is better served if a bird, instead of making one visit and drinking deep, calls repeatedly every hour or so, day after day.
It will thus be dusted with successive batches of pollen as they mature and will deliver them to other flowers on different individual plants elsewhere in its territory.
Heliconia, a kind of wild South American banana, produces long hanging stems with lines of triangular spiky flowers on each side.
The flowers mature in sequence, starting with the oldest at the top.
Each produces only a few drops of nectar at a time.
The hummingbird which feeds on it must therefore visit many plants, one after another.
Once a nectary has been drained, it takes a little time to refill.
If the hummingbird comes back too soon, there will not be enough food to compensate for the energy it had to expend in getting there.
On the other hand, if it delays too long, a rival      bird may have collected the prize.
So a hummingbird that specialises in feeding from Heliconia has to patrol a whole group of plants, visiting each hanging spike of blossoms in strict rotation on a carefully timed schedule.
Nor is doling out rewards in tiny instalments the only restriction that a plant may impose in order to compel its pollen-carriers to provide the service it requires.
Pollen delivered to a plant of a different species is pollen wasted.
Far better that its messengers take it only to plants of exactly the same kind where the genes it carries will unite with eggs and form seeds.
So flowers keep their nectar behind locks to which only a small group or even a single species has the key, which is of such a specialised design that its owner finds it difficult if not impossible to use on any other flower.
Some South American flowers are shaped like curved trumpets.
Only hummingbirds with curved bills can drink from them and their beaks fit into them as accurately as a curved dagger sliding into its scabbard.
A Madagascan orchid, Angraecum, secretes its nectar in a green tubular spur a foot long that hangs from the lip of a star-shaped snow-white flower.
Only the bottom half-inch of this contains nectar.
When in the nineteenth century naturalists first examined it, they were mystified as to how any animal could feed on it.
Charles Darwin, when he was shown the flower by baffled botanists, confidently predicted that, bearing in mind the flower's colour and size, a night-flying moth would be its pollinator and that, unlikely though this might sound, it would have a proboscis a foot long.
Entomologists at the time said that such an idea was ridiculous.
Forty years later, just such a hawk-moth was discovered and to commemorate Darwin's prescience, it was given as part of its scientific name the words forma predicta .
But such obstacles are not sufficient to defeat every hungry animal.
Where there are locks there are lock-pickers.
Carpenter bees use their saw-jaws to cut holes in the sides of flowers to get at the nectaries.
A whole group of South American birds related to tanagers are known as flower-piercers, for they do exactly that.
The upper half of their beak has a hook in it with which they latch on to a flower.
They then use the shorter needle-sharp lower mandible to cut a slit into the flower through which they insert their tongue.
This, while nowhere near as long as a hummingbird's tongue, is quite long enough from this position to burgle the nectaries.
Later in the season, plants offer animals food of a different kind and for a different reason.
After their flowers are fertilised, their seeds develop.
These too need to be distributed, for it is better that the next generation should grow away from the parent plant, where they will not suffer from its shade or be deprived of sustenance by its roots.
Some seeds are light  enough to be blown away but bigger seeds can only be shifted by animals and once again plants produce special food as payment for the job.
The fig tree embeds its multitudes of seeds in globes of sweet pulp.
When one comes into fruit in the rain forests of South America, animals from miles away flock to it.
The figs themselves are hardly bigger than acorns, but there are huge quantities of them and all kinds of animals find them irresistible.
An atmosphere of carnival surrounds such a tree.
Irritations that occur between animals at other times are forgotten in the general feasting.
Woolly monkeys and howlers, spider monkeys and capuchins, tamarins and marmosets scramble around one another reaching for the fruit.
Parrots and macaws grab them with their beaks.
Toucans collect them one at a time, throwing them up in the air and deftly catching them at the back of their throats.
The seeds with which each fruit is packed pass down the banqueters' digestive tracts unharmed and are excreted, with luck, some way away.
The very digestibility of the fruit, however, may be a disadvantage as far as the plant is concerned.
Because fruit is not very nutritious in proportion to its bulk, animals that eat it must consume a lot.
If they are not to develop large unwieldy stomachs, they have to digest it quickly and get rid of the waste.
And that, indeed, they do.
Some fruit-eating birds can swallow fruit and only five minutes later squirt out the remains.
Consequently, many of the seeds land close to where the diners collected them and the plants' purpose is largely thwarted.
But some at least remain in the animals' stomachs and guts long enough for them to be carried away when the sated diners depart.
Some animals will tackle much bigger seeds.
The nutmeg, complete with its edible rind, is almost as big as a hen's egg, with a diameter of about two inches.
The green imperial pigeon, uniquely among birds, can unhitch its lower beak and expand its mouth not only vertically but horizontally and swallow a nutmeg that is slightly larger than its own head.
Seeds of such a size remain in its gizzard for a little time while the rind is stripped off them and then later, perhaps when the bird has returned to one of its habitual perches, the nutmeg is regurgitated and falls to the ground.
But the pigeon's adaptation to such a diet of large objects is so good that seeds only a little smaller than a nutmeg will pass right through the bird and be ejected together with a small quantity of droppings which will help them grow on the forest floor.
Seeds, of course, are much richer in nutriment than any fleshy coating.
They are packed with concentrated food to fuel the young plants throughout the first stages of their growth until they are able, with their  leaves, to manufacture food for themselves.
But whereas the plant makes the flesh of its fruit easily available to animals, it goes to great lengths to protect its seeds from pilferers, usually enclosing them in armour of some sort.
Animals, on the other hand, do not allow such a rich source of food to remain untapped.
Crows and tits hold small seeds in one foot and hammer them open with their beaks.
A hawfinch has such a powerful bill that with straightforward muscle power it can crack a cherry stone or even an olive pit.
The Brazil nut is one of the best protected of all nuts, but even that can be dealt with.
The agouti, a long-legged rodent that forages nervously on the forest floor, has chisel-sharp front teeth that can cut right through the Brazil nut shell and extract the rich kernel.
Even so, the Brazil nut does not lose the contest entirely.
The tree produces its nuts in groups that fit neatly together like the segments of an orange and are packaged in a box.
When the box falls from the tree and hits the ground, it splits open scattering the nuts.
If the agouti finds one, it is likely to find far more than it can eat at a single sitting.
It industriously collects them, stuffing them into its cheek pouches.
Then it buries those it cannot eat, one at a time, in different parts of its territory to be retrieved later when times may be harder.
But the agouti's memory is fallible.
It does not always remember where it has buried each one.
So in spite of the tree's failure to make its seeds totally impregnable, it has succeeded, at the cost of a percentage of its seeds, in getting some of them distributed.
Plants have another way, too, of deterring animals from destroying their seeds.
They pack them with poison.
Strychnine, one of the deadliest of all poisons, comes from the seeds of a tall evergreen tree which grows in tropical Asia.
Its fruit are about the size and colour of small oranges, and squirrels and hornbills feed on the fleshy pulp.
But both animals take great care not to crack any of the disc-shaped seeds.
Macaws, which specialise in eating seeds, have to deal with this problem very frequently.
The birds normally live in isolated pairs, but at some times of the year they congregate in great numbers on particular sites on river banks.
There they gnaw the soil.
They are not digging nest holes.
Nor are they indulging in some form of display.
Only recently has it been discovered that they come to these special places to gather specific minerals such as kaolin which neutralise the poison they have absorbed from the seeds they eat at this season of the year.
Just as seeds provide a rich feast to those that have the equipment to deal with them, so do their animal equivalent, eggs.
And special tricks and tools are needed to open them too.
The kusimanse, a dwarf mongoose from West Africa, confronted with a chicken's egg, will put its fore-legs over it and with a vigour that would not disgrace an American footballer, hurl it backwards through its splayed hind legs.
Sooner or later, this hits something and — sooner or later — it cracks.
The Egyptian vulture, finding a clutch of ostrich eggs, picks up sizeable stones in its beak and with a nod of its head, tosses them in the general direction of the nest.
What it lacks in aim, it makes up for with persistence and it too usually manages to break open one of the eggs.
When it does so, it has a bigger meal than it can manage by itself and many another animal comes to lap up the spilt yolk.
The African egg-eating snake has a most remarkable egg-opening tool.
Like most snakes it can disarticulate its lower jaw from its upper when confronted with a particularly large meal, but it does more than that.
The vertebrae in its backbone just behind its head have spikes on their lower surface which project downwards into its throat to form a small saw.
As the egg is pushed down its gullet by muscular contractions, this saw slits open the shell.
The yolk is squeezed out and the crushed shell, usually still held together by its membranous lining, is then neatly regurgitated.
Snails, from a hungry animal's point of view, present much the same problem as eggs, for they too are succulent morsels enclosed in hard shells.
But for the thirst snake of Guyana they are a favourite food and it has specially modified jaws with which to deal with them.
In particular, it has a lower jaw so loosely connected with the upper that it can be pushed forward like a long narrow spoon.
The snake grabs a snail and while holding it firmly with the teeth on its upper jaw, it pushes its lower into the shell opening.
Hooked teeth on the tip snag into the snail's body and with a twisting movement the snake neatly pulls it out and swallows it.
Birds also know how to deal with shelled molluscs.
The Everglades kite in Florida picks up snails and carries them off to a feeding perch.
There, grasping the snail firmly in the talons of one foot, it waits.
Eventually, the snail slowly and cautiously puts out its head — and is immediately seized by the kite's beak and, with a quick tug, jerked out of its shell.
Thrushes deal with the problem more vigorously.
They take garden snails, which have relatively thin shells, and holding them in their beak, smash them on a rock.
Wading birds collect great quantities of small molluscs from sandbanks and mud flats when the tide retreats.
Each can be extracted from its shell with a flick of the head.
Knot and dunlin collect them, as well as worms and insect larvae, by probing and ploughing through the mud with their bills and detecting the morsels they seek by touch.
This can be a dangerously exposed occupation.
Out on the flats there is nothing to hide behind and the    birds must keep a sharp look out for trouble.
Not surprisingly, therefore, they work in flocks so that there are always some individuals with their heads up, able to call an alarm the first moment their safety seems uncertain.
Redshank and ringed plovers also feed out on the flats.
They, on the other hand, seem to take more risks, for they operate singly.
Why should they forego the safety of the flock?
The answer concerns their food.
Instead of picking out creatures that are buried, they collect spire shells and crustaceans that lie on the surface and they find them by sight.
If these animals detect vibrations in the sand or ripples spreading across the shallow pools, they swiftly disappear into the mud where the redshank and the plover cannot see them.
If these birds foraged in groups, the actions of one would disturb the prey of another and together they would collect very little.
They are forced to work in isolation, even though it is riskier to do so.
Insects hiding on the trunks and branches of trees represent an equally rich harvest for those animals that know how to gather them.
Moths and bugs and spiders conceal themselves in crannies of the bark.
In British woodlands, the tiny tree-creeper collects them, clinging to the tree trunks with its long slender toes and curved claws, propping itself up with its stiff tail pressed hard against the bark.
This stance is best suited to upwards travel and the bird moves in a tight spiral round the tree so that no part of the bark is left unscanned.
Having got to the top, it flutters down to the base of another tree and starts all over again.
The nuthatch, on the other hand, in spite of being a slightly larger bird, is rather more versatile.
It does not rely on its tail and the downward pull of gravity to give it a secure grip.
Its toes are strong enough to hold it on the bark, no matter which way it is facing and it hops about in all directions with sure-footed nimbleness.
Both these birds eat only that which can be picked off the surface or tweezered out of the crevices.
There are other meals to be had that lie deeper beneath bark or in the wood itself.
These require different techniques and different tools.
Woodpeckers have a particular taste for beetle grubs.
They listen for them, cocking their heads to one side to catch the sound of the grub chewing its way through the wood which, since wood is its food, it does most of the time.
Once detected, the bird swiftly chisels a hole and then unreels its enormously long tongue.
This can extend for as much as four times the length of its beak.
It is stiffened by a slender bony rod housed in a sheath that runs from the back of the beak, behind the skull and over its top to the front of the face.
In some members of the family, it goes even further and coils around the right eye-socket.
In the American flickers, close cousins to woodpeckers, the tongue is so long that it extends  beyond the eye-socket into the upper beak, entering through the right nostril so that the bird can only breathe through its left.
Flickers use this amazingly long tongue to feed on ants.
They lubricate it with a saliva that is sticky so that the ants adhere to it, and alkaline so that the formic acid of their stings is neutralised.
There seems to be no better tool for extracting ants and termites from their nest than such a tongue as this, for birds are not the only animals to have developed it.
So have mammals.
Several groups of them specialise in this diet and each has evolved a long sticky tongue entirely independently: a marsupial, the numbat, in Australia; a distant relative of primitive antelopes, the aardvark in Africa; the pangolins of Asia and Africa which are covered in a mail of horny plates so that they resemble giant animated fir-cones; and the three very different ant-eaters of South America, the gazelle-sized giant of the savannahs, the squirrel-sized pygmy from the forest canopy, and the monkey-sized tamandua from its mid-storey.
How long it took the different ancestors of these very different animals to evolve such tongues we do not know for there is no fossil evidence of any antiquity to tell us, but it must have been several million years.
One animal, however, has acquired the ability to fish termites out of their nests very much more swiftly.
It may have even done so within the last few centuries, though no one can know for sure.
The chimpanzee has not waited for evolution to shape its body into a specialised tool.
It has used its intelligence and dexterity to make one.
It plucks a long grass stem, carefully strips it of any side leaves it may have and then pokes it down one of the entrance holes of a termite nest.
The worker and soldier termites attack it, as they will attack any intruder.
They clamp their jaws on it and hang on, martyring themselves for the sake of the colony.
The chimpanzee then pulls out the grass stem and picks off the termites with its teeth, smacking its lips with pleasure.
Insects can be gathered not only from their nests and tunnels, but from the air.
They, indeed, were the first animals to master flight and they did so some two hundred million years before birds managed to do the same thing.
Still today virtually all insects at some stage of their lives take to the air.
Termites and ants do it seasonally when the time comes for them to mate, disperse and set up new colonies.
And vast numbers of other insect species fly throughout their adult phase.
So, naturally, many insect-eating animals pursue them in the air.
During the day, swallows hawk for them at low levels.
At higher altitudes, swifts trawl for them with open beaks.
A pair of swifts with a family to feed may catch twenty thousand insects in a single day.
At night, frogmouths  and nightjars feast on them.
Many of these insect-feeding birds have a line of bristles around their beaks which at one time were thought to channel weakly-flying insects into the open beak but now it seems more likely that they do no more than protect the birds' eyes as they deliberately plunge through clouds of insects.
Bats, which invaded the skies even more recently than the birds, also exploit this massive source of protein.
The ten million adult Mexican free-tailed bats in Bracken Cave remove one hundred tons of tiny insects from the skies of Texas every night.
But flying insects have much more ancient enemies.
Almost as soon as they took to the air, other invertebrates — the spiders — started setting traps for them.
All spiders produce silk.
It is a liquid protein that they squeeze from little nozzles at the rear of the abdomen which hardens as it meets the air.
Any one spider can produce different kinds of silk from different spinnerets.
Some kinds are stronger than steel wire of the same diameter and are the strongest of all known natural fibres.
Spiders use it for all kinds of purposes — making egg-sacs, lining nests, weaving tents for their babies and as safety lines when they jump.
But their most ingenious use is in the making of insect traps.
It is the females who nearly always are the active hunters.
The bolas spider spins a single filament which she weights at one end with a drop of glue.
When she hunts, she whirls this around her head and releases it as an insect flies by.
If her throw is a good one, the thread entangles the insect and brings it down.
Another, the scaffold-web spider, rigs a whole series of sticky threads from the branches of a bush down to the ground and hauls each one so tight that if an insect, either walking on the ground or flying a little way above it blunders into one of them, the thread breaks and the victim, stuck to it with glue, is hoisted into the air.
There it hangs until the trap-maker hauls it in and consumes it.
Yet another, the gladiator spider, spins a small skein of silk and holds it between her four front legs.
When an insect comes near, she straightens out her legs and holds the net above her head and so entraps it.
The most complex trap of all, however, is the one that is the most familiar, the orb-web.
It is usually stretched across a flyway where there is likely to be a frequent passage of insects.
To construct one, the spider clambers up one side of the gap and lifts her abdomen into the air.
From one of her spinnerets, she extrudes a thin filament of silk.
So fine is it that even the slightest movement in the air will catch it and lift it.
As it floats away, the spider continues to spin until there may be as much as a yard of thread hanging in the air.
Eventually it may be so long that it reaches the other side      of the gap and becomes entangled in a leaf or a twig.
As soon as that happens, the spider stops spinning, turns round, pulls the filament tight and secures it on her side.
Gingerly, she crawls across this pilot line, trailing behind her a thicker, stronger thread.
Once that too has been firmly fixed, she starts to erect lines crossing the gap like spokes of a wheel.
On these she fixes a spiral mesh.
For this, she uses a thinner silk from a different spinneret.
As it emerges, it is given a continuous coat of glue.
When a length has been rigged between one radial cable and another, she gives it a twang with one of her legs and the glue breaks up into a line of beads.
As they form under the forces of surface tension, they drag the silk into little bundles within them.
So the filament is pulled tight.
But the thread now has great stretchability.
If the wind blows hard or an insect travelling at speed flies into the web, the bundles of thread in the glue globules unwind so that the filament can extend its length up to four times and still does not break.
And when the tension is released, it contracts again.
With the spiral in place, the trap is set.
The spider may wait for developments sitting in the centre of the web or she may retreat to the side and lurk there with one of her eight legs resting on a cue-line through which she will feel movements in the trap.
Winds may blow through the web, causing the closely-set mesh to belly outwards, but the web will recover.
If an insect blunders into it the owner will rush out, deliver a swift poisoned bite to her victim and then wrap it in bonds of yet a different silk and carry it away for consumption at leisure.
This complex and beautiful structure seldom lasts for more than one night.
Captures may damage it and the beads of glue exposed to the air may lose some of their stickiness.
Then the spider will roll it up and, so as not to waste the valuable protein of which it is made, eat it.
And the next night, she will spin it all over again.
All these small invertebrates — flying insects trapped in webs by spiders, larvae concealed in bark picked out by woodpeckers, molluscs hidden in mud gathered by wading birds, termites licked up by anteaters — all are harvested with little more than the effort expended by those animals that sip nectar and munch pollen, or gather fruit and chew leaves.
Animals that feed in these ways have a relatively easy time of it.
But not all meals are so readily secured.
The most nutritious of all foods, meat, comes from bigger backboned animals.
So meat-eaters have to be vigorous and athletic hunters.
To collect their food, they have to use a completely different set of strategies.
FOUR
HUNTING AND ESCAPING
SEA-LION pups seem safe as they lounge on a Patagonian beach, slowly building their strength and preparing themselves for their departure into the sea.
No large predator threatens them from the land, except for that ubiquitous hunter, man, and many of their beaches are, in any case, difficult to reach for they lie below steep cliffs.
And on the other side of the beaches, they are protected by the sea.
But the sea is not as secure a barrier as it might seem.
Every now and then, one of the tall waves thundering in from the open ocean carries within it a dark sinister presence.
As the crest curls over, the cascading water reveals the huge black and white flank of a killer whale, travelling fast towards the shore.
It surges up the beach, still supported by the water of the dwindling wave, and with one powerful beat of its great tail, it lunges into a group of unsuspecting seal pups.
As they scatter, squealing with alarm, the whale seizes a struggling pup in its jaws.
By now, the next wave is approaching.
The whale turns broadside so that it is lifted back into the sea.
As it swims away at speed, it jerks its great head upwards and sends the pup, still alive, spinning through the air.
No sooner does it fall back and hit the water than the whale flicks it into the air again with a blow of its tail or seizes it with its jaws and thrashes it on the water.
Why the whale should sport with the helpless pup in this way can only be guessed.
Maybe such a battering loosens the hide from the little carcass.
Maybe it is the jubilation of a triumphant hunter.
It does not last long.
Within a minute the pup is dead and swallowed.
Such swift and arbitrary death, due neither to weakness nor fault, but to sheer chance, is the fate of vast numbers of animals that every day are eaten by predators.
A grasshopper, slowly chewing a leaf-blade is suddenly struck by the clubbed end of a muscular tongue projected like a lance from the mouth of a chameleon; a field mouse in the twilight of an English wood, searching for seeds, is transfixed by the curved talons of a pouncing owl and may be dead even before its captor's beak begins to rip it apart; a lizard in the Arizona desert, stabbed by the hypodermic fangs of a rattlesnake, is paralysed as venom is injected into its veins and it can offer no resistance as the snake takes it in its jaws and swallows it head-first.
Some ants hunt in swarms many thousands strong, scouring the forest floor for centipedes and spiders, termites and scorpions, mice and lizards, indeed any small inhabitants of the rain forest floor.
Ants in both Africa and South America have, independently, evolved this way of hunting.
In South America, they form armies three-quarters of a million strong.
You may find one temporarily encamped between the buttresses of a tree or beneath a fallen log.
It has collected into a huge ball, two or three feet across.
The outside surface is formed by a lacy sheet of soldiers, their legs linked together, their huge jaws agape, ready to slice into anything that might interfere with them.
Within this mass, the smaller workers have in a similar fashion created chambers in which the pupae hang.
And at the heart of the community sits the queen.
She is almost an inch long, twice the length of any other individual in her army.
Her body glistens with a special polish for she is continually groomed by her servants.
Her head is large with a substantial brain many times bigger than the tiny knot of nerve cells that is all that a worker possesses.
And her abdomen is an immense egg-factory.
From it, during her life-time, she ejects eggs in an almost constant stream.
As each emerges, it is received by a worker and carried off to one of the nursery chambers, there to be carefully cherished.
Every morning, the majority of the soldiers leave the encampment and set off to hunt, forming a long brown column several inches wide that snakes across the forest floor.
At its head, the scouts advance excitedly.
Like all individuals in this army, they are blind and they search for their prey by tapping with their antennae.
As they scurry forward, they rub the ground with their bodies, laying down a trail of scent that others behind will be able to follow.
If the path leads over a steep bank or a log, workers will cling to one another to form a living ladder up which the rest of the column clambers.
If they traverse a patch of sunshine, the soldiers link legs and form a roof over the path so that the workers, who are less well armoured, are protected from the damaging heat.
After travelling for thirty yards or so from their encampment, the soldiers at the head of the column begin to fan out and start to hunt.
If they discover a grasshopper or a beetle, they swarm all over it, sinking their jaws between the joints of its external skeleton and dismembering it with surgical precision.
The fragments may be eaten there and then or tucked away beside the  column to be collected when the hunt is over and taken back to feed the queen and those who stayed back in camp to tend and protect her.
Day after day, the army pillages the surrounding forest.
Then the eggs the queen has been laying in such abundance begin to hatch into small grubs.
The pupae, too, are beginning to split and new adult workers and soldiers are emerging.
Now there are many more mouths to feed.
The neighbourhood has already been intensively plundered, so that night the queen stops laying and the entire community marches off, workers carrying the grubs.
After it has travelled a hundred yards or so, it bivouacs.
The following morning, a raiding party sets out into the new territory.
Each night for the next two or three weeks, the army makes another long march through the forest until the grubs, which have been feeding voraciously, are fully grown and begin to turn into pupae.
Then once again, the army makes a more permanent camp, the queen starts to produce more eggs and the month-long cycle is repeated.
Few animals can survive the sustained attack of this devastating army.
Wasps have one of the most poisonous stings of all insects, but their weapons are no defence against ants.
The soldiers race into a wasps' nest, driving the occupants out.
Some wasps will flail about, seeking a target for their stings, but to no avail for the ants are too small.
Those wasps that stay are killed.
Most fly away.
The nest is ripped apart and the pallid thin-skinned grubs passed back down the column for slaughter.
Even large animals such as tethered dogs may be blanketed by ants and die from the accumulated shock of ten thousand bites.
There is no sure defence against the ant army except to get out of its path as quickly as possible.
That, indeed, is the way in which most animals escape their predators.
But there are other ways in which even the most defenceless animals can improve their chances of survival.
On the open plains of east Africa, grass-eaters — zebra, antelopes and gazelles — manage to find protection, paradoxically, among their own number.
A gazelle, grazing by itself, is an easy target for a cheetah.
If it is to feed at all, it has to lower its head, so losing sight of its surroundings.
Those are the moments when the cheetah can creep slowly forward.
As soon as the gazelle lifts its head again, the cheetah freezes.
By such stealth, it can usually get within fifty yards of a solitary gazelle.
If it does, it has a very good chance of catching the gazelle for it is able to reach its maximum speed within a few yards, and then it is the fastest animal on four legs.
Sprint and jink though the gazelle may, there is nothing to deflect the cheetah from the chase.
Relentlessly, the gazelle is overhauled.
A sweep from the cheetah's      foreleg trips it.
A pounce, the cheetah's jaws fasten on the gazelle's throat, and it is quickly throttled to death.
But if the gazelle grazes in a herd of a hundred or so, its chances of survival are dramatically better.
To begin with, it is more likely to get an early warning of the cheetah's approach, for even when its own head is down grazing, other heads are up and scanning the surrounding country ready to sound an alarm with a snort.
At such a signal, the herd takes to flight.
The cheetah, forced to make its run when it is still some distance from the herd, may now spend crucial moments distinguishing its chosen target from among the confusing mass of racing bodies ahead of it.
And even when it succeeds, there is still a chance that after pursuing it for some way another gazelle passing in front will impede it and its first, tiring target will be able to escape.
Without question, a gazelle in a herd is much safer than a gazelle by itself.
The open sea, like the open plain, offers no hiding place either and many small fish, preyed upon by shark or barracuda, dolphin or tuna, adopt the same strategy as the gazelles, seeking their safety in numbers.
Herring congregate in immense shoals, half a mile across, containing many millions of individuals.
If a barracuda approaches, those on the outer margin of the shoal dart inwards, taking refuge among the silvery bodies of their companions so that the whole shoal bunches.
If the barracuda charges, the herring flee away on every side, creating a clear tunnel through the shoal.
If the barracuda presses its attack, then once again the great number of bodies darting in all directions make selecting a target difficult.
This indeed may be one reason why animals that find protection in these great aggregations are nearly always virtually identical in appearance, irrespective of age or sex.
Were a minority to have distinctive markings or shape, they would be easier to focus upon and catch.
If someone throws a number of tennis balls at you, it is easier to catch a single coloured one than to catch one that is identical with all the rest.
Even animals that normally live relatively lonely lives may find it safer to congregate when faced with a particular danger.
Puffins spend most of their time fishing out on the open ocean, but in spring, in order to nest and breed, they have to return to land.
As many as a million arrive within a space of two or three days on the island of St Kilda in the Scottish Hebrides.
With them come their prime enemies, the greater black-backed gulls.
They too are going to nest and they will rely on puffin meat to feed their chicks.
The puffins nest in holes on the steep grassy cliffs.
Within a burrow, they are safe from the gulls.
Standing by the entrance hole they are still in little danger, for they can duck inside for refuge if necessary.
Out at sea fishing, they are not easy to catch either, for they are swift in the air, moving on rapidly whirring wings.
Even if a gull out-manoeuvres them, they can escape by diving below the surface of the water where the gulls cannot follow.
They are, however, vulnerable when getting from one of these places to the other.
Leaving their nest-holes they have some way to go before the sea can provide them with a refuge.
And coming back from the sea, laden with fish for their young, they can only find safety in their nest holes.
So the black-backed gulls wait for them in the air in front of the cliffs, wheeling and circling on the up-draught created as the wind, blowing in from the sea, is deflected upwards.
They are quite capable of grabbing a solitary puffin in mid-air with their beaks or even beating it to the ground with blows of their wings.
The puffins' defence is to gather in a huge aerial wheel, half a mile across, that circles in front of the cliffs throughout the day.
Puffins leaving their homes join it immediately and travel round within it until they reach the seaward side and relative safety.
Those coming in from the sea do the same thing in reverse, leaving the wheel with a sideways dive when they are within a few yards of their nest-hole.
Though the gulls occasionally try to catch puffins flying within the wheel, they seldom succeed.
The number and density of flying bodies make it almost impossible for them to select and catch a particular individual.
Most of their victims are stragglers who, for one reason or another, fail to gain the safety of the wheel.
Not all the hunted are totally unarmed.
Although few have the physical strength to repel their attackers, even a relatively feeble animal can deter aggressors if it has chemical weapons.
Amphibians have moist skins and keep them so with slime produced from small glands distributed all over the body.
In many species, some of these glands are modified to produce poison.
The great cane toad has concentrations of them, forming wart-like lumps behind each eye.
If you pick the animal up, a white milky liquid oozes out of these patches.
A really big toad, if it is seriously irritated, can squirt a jet of poison and hit an attacker a yard away.
If its enemy is still not daunted and picks up the toad in its teeth, the poison acts so swiftly and powerfully on the mucous membranes of the mouth that the attacker drops the toad almost immediately.
It is, of course, better for both concerned if engagements of this kind can be avoided altogether.
Then the hunter does not waste its time on something it cannot eat, and the hunted saves its secretions.
So many poison-producing amphibians give vivid and unmistakable warnings that they have such defences at their disposal.
The fire-bellied toad normally prefers to remain hidden and its back is patterned and coloured in a way that    enables it to do so by blending in with its surroundings.
But if it is discovered and threatened, it twists its legs outwards and arches its back in such an extreme contortion that it suddenly and disconcertingly exposes its underside — and that is a vivid scarlet, a spectacular warning that its skin contains a burning poison.
The spiny newt of China goes through the same sort of contortions to warn off those that threaten it and adds a special deterrent all its own.
If it feels compelled to produce its poison, it does so instantaneously by forcing its ribs outwards with such vigour that they break its skin and rip open the poison glands.
The most lethal amphibian venom of all is secreted by tiny arrow-poison frogs that clamber about in the leaves littering the floor of the South American rain forests.
They have such confidence in their defences that they make no attempt whatsoever to hide themselves.
Some are vivid pink, others black and yellow, acid green or maroon with metallic blue spots.
One ten thousandth of a gram of their poison is enough to kill a man.
This very virulence, while providing excellent defence against most attackers, brings the frogs death at the hands of man.
Forest-living Indians catch them and roast them over a fire so that the poison drips from their skins.
The Indians collect it in pots and smear it on the tips of their arrows and blow-pipe darts.
So little is needed that one small frog an inch long produces enough poison to arm fifty arrows.
Few mammals have chemical defences.
The skunk is an exception.
It has glands just beneath its tail which produce considerable quantities of a most evil-smelling liquid.
You might suppose that a bad smell would not deter a really hungry hunter, but anyone who has received a full squirt from a skunk knows very well that it is almost unendurable.
The stench is so powerful that you feel — and sometimes are — violently sick.
If any quantity gets on your clothes, you might as well destroy them.
If it gets into your eyes, you may be unable to see for several hours.
Like the frogs, the skunk does its best to prevent tiresome confrontations by displaying vivid keep-off signs.
It is boldly patterned in black and white.
There are several different species in the Americas, each with its own distinctive combination of stripes and blotches.
All of them give you fair warning of their character by deliberately making themselves conspicuous and waving their bushy tails.
The little spotted skunk puts on a particularly impressive performance.
First it stamps vigorously with its front feet and erects its bristling tail.
If you walk closer, it does a hand-stand, hoisting its hind legs in the air and pointing its tail over its head towards you.
If that does not deter you, it drops back on all fours, turns its back on you and    squirts.
The jet can easily travel six feet.
If the wind is behind it, you can get more than enough standing twenty yards away.
Nor can you dodge these attacks by approaching obliquely.
The skunk has a pair of these glands and not only can it vary the strength of each jet according to the side from which you approach but it is even able to twist the nozzle of the gland so that the spray shoots out at an angle.
So effective is this defence that nothing hunts skunks — and the skunks seem to know it, judging from the jaunty and self-confident way in which they bustle about their business.
To be effective, these warnings have to be understood by animals of all kinds.
Amphibians need to signal to mammals, insects to birds, mammals to reptiles.
The codes used have, therefore, an almost universal meaning.
A bold pattern of yellow and black is one of the commonest.
It is displayed not only by a species of arrow-poison frog but also by the fire salamander, moth caterpillars with stinging hairs, a little box-fish that discharges venom when attacked, a beetle that exudes a caustic liquid which blisters the skin, and bees, wasps and hornets with some of the most painful of all insect stings.
It is also the colour pattern flaunted by hover flies and clear-wing moths that visit English gardens alongside bees and wasps.
But these have no stings.
Their vivid colouring is a hoax.
By masquerading as poisonous insects, they avoid attacks from birds that might otherwise eat them.
Their resemblance to wasps is extraordinarily close.
The hover-fly only betrays its true identity, to the casual glance, by moving through the air in the jerky fashion that is characteristic of its family.
The moth's physical appearance is not quite as wasp-like but it adds to its disguise by making a buzzing noise.
This tactic of drawing attention to yourself when you have no deterrent to back up your threat, may seem a recklessly hazardous one.
And indeed, it is not universally successful.
Some species of birds have developed the ability to distinguish between model and mimic and will feed on the imposters.
Nonetheless, the strategy, on the whole, is a successful one, for such impersonations are abundant.
Tiger beetles, with red and black stripes, which have formidable jaws and readily use them, are mimicked by grasshoppers; ladybirds, which have black spots on their red wing covers and poisonous blood, by cockroaches for they, as far as many birds are concerned, make good eating.
A South American cricket is not only patterned like a wasp but adds a mime to give the impression that it is equally powerfully armed.
It walks on only five of its legs and holds the sixth out stiffly behind it so that it appears to have a sting projecting from the tip of its abdomen.
The caterpillar of a Costa Rican moth, in one of the most      extraordinary of all mimicries, has a pattern at its rear end that makes it look like a tiny viper.
But most animals, seeking to avoid attack from predators, use disguise in a quite different and more cautious way.
Alongside the brilliant arrow-poison frogs sit other frogs that are well-nigh invisible.
Their brown colouration perfectly matches the decaying leaves around them, their blotches and lines disrupt their outlines.
On beaches, vulnerable plover chicks, not yet able to fly, crouch low and motionless, the colour of their down so close to that of the pebbles around them that their major hazard comes, not from being seen and eaten, but from not being seen and trodden on.
In the far north, where the landscape is turned white in winter by snow, mammals like rabbits and birds like ptarmigan have to change from brown to white and back again when the snows melt in spring.
Insects are the great masters of disguise.
Bugs resemble thorns; butterflies, with wings closed, resemble dead leaves; moths look like patches of lichen.
Such disguises, when necessary, can be enhanced by posture.
Caterpillars of geometrid moths not only resemble twigs in the colour and texture of their skin, but they grasp a thin branch with their hind claspers and hold themselves up at an angle so that they look like twigs.
African tree hoppers gather in groups at the top of plant stems and together look like a spike of withered flowers.
One species of beetle in Brazil, when alarmed, immediately folds up its legs and flattens itself sideways, exposing its white underside and so takes on the appearance of a bird dropping.
And in order that its symmetrical beetle outline should not be given away, it stretches out a white flattened front leg to one side, suggesting that the dropping in question was a rather liquid one that has splashed.
But two can play at this game.
Just as the hunted may use disguises to escape from hunters, so the hunters may use them to lay an ambush.
The species of angler fish that lives in the Sargasso Sea is blotched and  betasselled in a way that matches the floating sargassum weed so closely that the angler is virtually invisible to the eye of a human being, just as it is to that of a small fish, a shrimp or any other marine creature that might drift through the surface waters of that stagnant sea.
Even such a perfect match would count for little if the fish had to wave its fins in order to maintain its position in the water, or if it were to move independently from the weed.
That does not happen.
Its front pair of fins are muscled in such a way that it can grasp the fronds of the weeds around it.
When the weed sways, so does the fish.
Insects in the forests of Malaysia visiting the elegant white flowers of an orchid, may walk straight into trouble.
One of the fleshy petals suddenly          moves and two hooked arms shoot out from its tip.
The orchid mantis's disguise is near-perfect.
It has shields on its body and flanges on its legs that exactly match the hue and surface texture of the orchid petals.
Neither the eye of an insect or a human is likely to detect the deception until the mantis moves.
And by then, for the fly, it is too late.
Some hidden hunters go further.
They bait their ambush.
The death-adder in the Australian desert is so accurately matched to the colours and shapes of the gravel that it is almost impossible to detect, unless a movement draws your eye to it.
And move it does.
The end of its tail is thin, pink and very mobile.
The snake makes it wriggle so that the apparently disembodied filament appears to be some kind of succulent worm.
A bird that thought so and decided to make a meal of it would quickly die.
In South America, a horned toad regularly attracts its prey by — almost unbelievably — waggling its toes.
Other hunters use objects as bait.
A small assassin bug in Costa Rica, having ambushed a termite and sucked its body dry, holds the husk in its jaws and loiters near one of the entrances to the termite hill.
When a worker, coming out of the nest, sees the corpse, its instinct is to pick it up and remove it, for that is part of its regular nest-cleaning duties.
As it goes to do so, the bug stabs it with its dagger-shaped mouth-parts.
Once again the assassin feeds and once again it uses the left-overs of its meal as a bait to attract another victim.
A single bug may catch ten or more termites in succession in this way.
In Japan, a few herons use bait in just the same way as human anglers.
One will stalk along the margin of a lake, picking up insects dead or alive, or small pieces of bread or biscuit dropped by visitors.
With a flick of its head, it throws them on to the water.
There they float.
Small fish soon rise to collect them and as they do, the heron neatly spears and swallows them.
Some individual birds do not use edible bait, but inedible lures, such as feathers.
This skill is, apparently, a recently acquired one, for only a small number of Japanese herons have learned how to do it, and the habit is spreading.
It is now being seen on ponds in the United States where fish are accustomed to being fed.
Just as camouflage is used by both sides in the contests between hunters and hunted, so is the technique of baiting.
Californian skinks, handsome little lizards, have conspicuous blue tails.
As one lies basking in the sun, it may be pounced upon by a hawk or even grabbed by a human being.
Almost invariably, when that happens, its blue tail drops off and lies wriggling on the rock with such vigour that the aggressor's attention is diverted to it, often for sufficiently long for the skink itself to slip free and escape.
It achieves this dramatic and disconcerting act of self-amputation    by suddenly contracting the muscles in its tail and breaking one specially fragile vertebra in half.
Having done so, it then regrows its tail, though it is not always as long as the original and internally it is quite different, for instead of bony vertebrae, it has only a tube of cartilage.
Butterflies are at risk from attack by birds.
One peck on the head will kill them.
But the hairstreaks have evolved a way of deflecting that fatal blow.
The rear ends of their wings are elongated into long tendrils which resemble antennae and are, indeed, more conspicuous than the insect's real antennae.
As they sit, they make these filaments move and flicker.
Birds are certainly deceived for they regularly attack, not the butterfly's true head, but its tail.
And having made the mistake a bird seldom gets a second chance, for the startled butterfly takes off, not in the direction the bird might have expected but, apparently, backwards.
So various and ingenious are the defensive techniques adopted by the hunted that, in some cases, hunters find it worth their while to work together in teams.
Cormorants are usually independent fishermen.
They dive beneath the surface and pursue fish with their eyes open, their wings clasped close to their bodies, beating their feet powerfully.
But on the Amazon in Brazil, the birds collaborate.
They gather together in a dense fleet a thousand or more strong, and paddle steadily towards an inlet or a small bay, splashing vigorously with their wings and feet.
The panic-stricken fish bolt ahead of them until a whole shoal has been herded together and trapped between the birds and the shore.
When the water is sufficiently shallow, the cormorants break ranks and start to dive, gathering great quantities of the fish with huge commotion.
Pelicans have developed an even more accurately coordinated technique.
Several dozen of them will gather together in a squadron.
As they paddle sedately forward across the water, they suddenly form a ring.
Then with the precision of a corps de ballet, they simultaneously dip their heads into the water.
If a fish, swimming within their circle, manages to escape from one baggy bill, it is likely to swim straight into another.
Even fish have discovered how to work in teams.
Striped marlin, one of the most ferocious and swiftest of hunters, often operate in groups of three or four.
When they discover a shoal of smaller fish, they will harry them on all sides, driving them into such a dense concentration that the technique has been called ‘meat-balling’.
Among mammals, lions habitually hunt in teams.
Individuals chase and pounce on their prey if a suitable opportunity occurs, but they have substantially greater chances of success if they work together.
This is usually done by the lionesses.
A group of them, maybe as many as half a dozen, will  slowly get to their feet from where they have been lying with the rest of the pride and, leaving the cubs and the males behind, walk off in a fashion which, although leisurely, has a grimly purposeful air.
They know the country around their home well and, doubtless, the habits of the game animals on which they prey.
As they approach a grazing herd of, say, wildebeest, they spread out in line abreast and begin the stalk.
Like the cheetah and other hunting cats, they crouch and freeze motionless if their quarry looks in their direction, moving only when they are unobserved.
Those at either end of the line usually advance rather faster than those in the centre so that a pincer movement develops.
They certainly pay close attention to one another 's progress, frequently glancing from side to side to check on each other 's position.
They are not as swift as cheetah and have to get considerably closer, usually to within twenty yards of their target, if they are to have a reasonable chance of overtaking it when the race begins.
As they approach this critical distance, either they are detected or one of them charges.
In either case, the herd bolts and the lions sprint towards them.
The lionesses on the flanks may well drive some of the wildebeest towards their companions in the centre of the line.
Whether they do so deliberately is a question that is still being debated.
Most lion-watchers have come to the conclusion that the effect, when it happens, is a fortuitous one and that there is no predetermined strategy by which one or more lionesses take the job of driving while others deliberately wait in ambush.
Each animal reacts individually to the movements of the prey and each benefits from the fact that her companions are doing the same thing.
Hunting dogs in Africa and wolves in North America also hunt in teams, snapping at the heels of an antelope or a moose, one taking over from the other until their victim is so exhausted that they can get a grip on it with their teeth and pull it down.
But as in a team of lionesses, it seems that there is no specialisation of role.
One particular wolf or hunting dog is not always the individual that takes the first grip on its victim.
In only one non-human species has such specialisation of role within a hunting team been demonstrated, and that is in man's closest relative, the chimpanzee.
In the Kenyan savannahs where chimpanzees were first studied intensively in the wild, the animals live primarily on a vegetarian diet of fruit and leaves, together with insects such as termites.
On rare occasions, these chimpanzees have been seen to kill and eat other animals such as young baboons and bushbuck.
Sometimes the capture is made by an individual without help from others.
Sometimes several chimpanzees may take part in      the hunt, but they do not seem to collaborate to any greater extent than lions or wolves.
But now a ten-year study in the West African forest of the Ivory Coast has revealed that chimpanzees there hunt regularly and do so in teams within which there are specialised roles, habitually taken by particular individuals.
Since it seems that the rain forest rather than the savannah was the chimpanzee's original home, hunting should therefore be regarded as being typical of the animal.
The forest of the Ivory Coast is thick.
The chimpanzees live in groups of sixty or so, though they move in much smaller parties.
Individuals may leave one party and travel with another.
Sometimes the parties will join.
At other times, the animals will disperse widely.
The parties communicate regularly with one another by hooting calls and, most dramatically, drumming.
This is a complicated gymnastic performance.
A male, after some preliminary hoots, suddenly takes a flying leap at one of the huge plank-like buttresses that radiate like fins around the base of some tall forest trees.
He grabs the top edge with his hands, thumps the face of the buttress several times with his feet and then does the same thing on the other side of the buttress with his hands before springing down to the ground.
The whole performance is enacted in one continuous movement and is followed by a series of screams.
At a distance, the leafy forest drowns the higher-pitched calls and all you hear are the rapid drum-beats.
It is easy to think that they are made by men.
Like the savannah chimpanzees, these forest-living animals eat fruit, leaves and nuts.
But at least once a week, they hunt for meat.
During the two months of the rainy season, they may do so every day.
Their prey are monkeys, principally two species of colobus, the red and the black-and-white, both of which are abundant in the forest.
A colobus weighs less than half a chimpanzee, so they can venture out on to branches that would break under a chimpanzee's weight.
They are also excellent leapers, capable of jumping from one tree to another.
Chimpanzees, on the other hand, usually only cross if the branches are so close that they can swing over.
Even if they are forced to jump, they cannot cover anything like the distances achieved by the colobus.
So in theory, a colobus should find it easy to escape from a chimpanzee.
The chimpanzees can only catch them regularly by working in teams.
The hunters are the half dozen or so experienced adult males in the group.
Between them, they have to take four quite different roles.
The driver is responsible for getting the troop of colobus moving through the canopy.
He may be the youngest of the team, sometimes even a young adolescent.
He does not chase the monkeys, but only keeps them from  settling.
The blockers — and there may be several of them — must take up conspicuous positions in the branches on either side of the drive, so preventing the monkeys from breaking out.
The chasers join in the hunt once the monkeys are on the move.
They must spring up the trees as the monkeys are driven into them and they are the ones that usually make the kill.
And finally there is the most skilled job of all that requires the most experience and judgment, the ambusher.
He is usually an old male who can anticipate which way the colobus will go and climbs a tree well ahead of them, so completing their encirclement.
He is always over twenty-five years old and, in any one team, is usually the same individual.
Before a hunt, the team assembles gradually.
It may be that the drummings by the males have served to communicate not only where each one of them is, but what mood they are in.
At any rate, the males leave their parties and come together in a posse.
The change in their behaviour is dramatic.
There is no more calling and hooting, no picking up of fruit or plucking of leaves.
They pace together through the forest in silence, scanning the canopy intently, sometimes stopping and listening for the calls of colobus.
It may take only twenty minutes or as long as two hours before they find the monkeys and are sufficiently close to them to launch an attack.
Suddenly, the driver runs up a tree, climbing swiftly, hand over hand.
He will, if he can, isolate one or two monkeys from the main troop.
Most of the chimpanzees stay on the ground as spectators.
The adult females bob and dance with excitement, standing upright, craning their heads back and forth to see just what is going on.
If one monkey is separated, the blockers dash up into the trees ahead to take up their positions, crashing through the branches in a way that is quite unlike their normal movements.
Now all is action.
The ambusher sprints ahead to find the place where he will hide in the leaves, while the chasers move in front of the driver and run along the branches trying to grab the monkey and chasing it towards the place where the ambusher sits hidden.
The colobus, driven forward between the blockers, is deceived into thinking that an avenue of escape lies ahead until suddenly the ambusher reveals himself.
The monkey hesitates, turns back and is grabbed by the catchers.
As they do so, they scream with excitement.
Their calls are immediately taken up by the whole team and the spectators on the ground so that the forest rings with wild and terrifying shrieks.
More than half these hunts are successful.
Some only last a few minutes.
If a particular monkey is chased and harried for as long as ten minutes, it may become so stressed that eventually it gives up trying to escape and sits to face its death without screaming or even resisting when the hunters    finally seize it.
Then it is torn limb from limb up in the tree.
Sometimes, it is taken to the ground.
There a scrum of excited adults, both male and female, surround it.
Two of the senior males of the group, whether or not they have taken part in the hunt, tear the body in two.
Each is then surrounded by other adults from the group.
In order of seniority, they are handed fragments or allowed to tear off pieces.
If the body is a small one, the younger hunters may not be given a share.
Adolescents and babes never get anything.
In the distance, the bereaved colobus still sound their alarm calls.
The chimpanzees, gnawing on the joints, ripping muscles from bone, occasionally squeal in irritation as they squabble, but for the most part, after the excited rushes and the yells of triumph, there is contentment.
A human observer may find the scene horrifying.
The limp body of the monkey is only too human in its proportions, the cries of triumph only too reminiscent of the yells of a hooligan mob bent on violence in a city street.
Some of us may see in these bloodied simian faces the image of our own hunting ancestors.
But if we do, we should also discern in them the origins of the teamwork and collaboration that we have brought to an unparalleled peak of complexity and that has brought us some of our greatest achievements.
FIVE
FINDING THE WAY
THE END of the day on the plains of East Africa is, by popular acclaim, a time of great splendour and beauty.
The sun, a huge scarlet disc, drops with dramatic speed behind rafts of clouds, staining them first gold and then red.
A hush falls over the landscape as the animals prepare for the coming of the night.
The herds of antelope cluster together a little more tightly; vultures and storks alight in the tops of trees to roost; baboons clamber up into the branches where they will be safe from prowling leopards.
But if you are travelling on foot, and particularly if you are without a light, this can be a time of real alarm.
As darkness spreads swiftly across the land, the track you have been following disappears into the gloom.
Soon the only things to guide you are the silhouettes of trees or rocks, black against an only slightly less black sky.
Unseen thorns begin to snatch at your clothes and rip your skin.
You can see so little as you blunder on that you are an easy target for any animal seeking fresh meat.
If you keep walking, and if the moon has not yet risen, you are likely very soon to be lost.
But not all mammals are as dependent upon their eyes as you.
In the thorn trees, bush babies, small furry primates, are emerging from their holes in the tree trunks.
Their large eyes are much more sensitive than yours, but they do not rely on them entirely.
They have another sense to help them find their way through the blackness.
As a male sets out along a branch, he leans over sideways, lifts one of his back legs and carefully expels a few drops of urine on to the sole of his foot.
Then he reaches back with his hand and rubs his foot with it.
That done, he leans over to the other side and does the same thing with his other hand and foot so that both his palms and his soles are anointed with his pungent urine.
From now on, as he goes about his nocturnal perambulations, he leaves a smelly trail behind him.
This warns any wandering bush baby from another group that this territory in the tree already has owners who will defend it.
It also proclaims his sex and particular identity.
Similar marks left      by females leave similar messages including information about their sexual receptivity.
But the long smelly trails snaking along the branches and renewed repeatedly every night, also mark out the main highways through the tree so that, if necessary, the bush babies can scamper along them at considerable speed in the pitch blackness.
On the plains, small rodents that have spent the daylight hours in the safety of their burrows, are venturing out under the cover of night to look for food.
They too have a network of trails winding through the sparse grass.
Sometimes these are long tunnels running beneath withered drooping stems, sometimes no more than faint dust-free tracks crossing patches of bare earth.
They too are given a special smelly identity, for their owners have scent glands in the soles of their feet.
Hyaenas, having spent the day skulking aimlessly in the thickets or strolling in a leisurely way across open ground, now become transformed into determined hunters.
As they set off across their territory in the darkness to look for prey, they leave pungent signposts.
Not only do they defecate communally in special latrine areas, but they ‘paste’.
Special glands beneath the tail produce a powerfully smelling white substance.
When they reach the borders of their territory, they take a few steps with lowered hindquarters so that long grass passing between their back legs rubs against this gland and acquires a smell that even a human nose can easily detect.
A hyaena's nose, however, is vastly more sensitive than ours.
We have smell-detecting membranes in our noses that are about the size of a postage stamp.
A hyaena's nasal membranes have a surface area fifty times bigger and the richness of the information they can gather is so great and varied that it is difficult for us to appreciate it.
With a sniff a hyaena can perceive not only the here and now but, simultaneously, a whole series of events stretching back into the past.
It can identify the brief passage of an animal that might have run across the ground in front of it several hours previously.
It can recognise the particular smell signature of each member of its group.
The pasted patches of grass must shine in the distance like lighthouses and the pack's trails, perfumed by their paws, must stretch ahead like lines of reflector studs down the middle of a motorway.
For mammals with such receptive and informative noses as hyaenas, bush babies and mice, darkness is little impediment in finding their way around.
Birds, on the other hand, have a comparatively feeble sense of smell.
Only one group use it to any marked degree in navigation.
Shearwaters and petrels belong to a group called the tube-noses, for their nostrils are protected by a pair of tubes which extend some way down the beak from its  base and these give them a much better perception of smell than other birds have.
It can hardly be of great value to them out on the open ocean where they spend the bulk of their time, except perhaps to detect the stench of a floating carcass on which they might feed.
But each year, they have to come ashore to breed.
They assemble in colonies many thousand strong and nest in long holes that they have either taken over from rabbits or dug for themselves.
By day, a colony of petrels or shearwaters is a quiet, apparently deserted place.
Some of the adults are at sea feeding.
The rest are out of sight within the holes, incubating their eggs or brooding their young.
There they are safe from the gulls or skuas that harry other nesting sea-birds.
The adults extract oil from the sea-creatures they eat and then regurgitate it for their chicks.
That in itself may be a messy and therefore a smelly business.
Most species also squirt the oil at intruders as a form of defence so that the ground around the nest becomes impregnated with it.
This combined with the smell of their droppings and the musky odour of the birds themselves, makes such colonies very smelly places and has led to the suggestion that the birds may use the smell to guide themselves back to it through the darkness of night.
A Manx shearwater colony has a particularly powerful stench.
The birds, when they come shooting in through the darkness, seldom land exactly beside their nest hole.
More usually, they come down with a thump a yard or so away.
They are then faced with dozens of holes closely packed together.
Identifying theirs from those that surround it would seem to be a baffling task in the darkness and some researchers believe that a bird is able to recognise the particular smell of its own burrow.
Others maintain that this is not the case and that the bird simply remembers the movements necessary to take it there from its regular landing place.
One or two other species of bird have developed a much more accurate technique of finding their way in the dark.
Swiftlets, tiny birds that live in South-east Asia and Australia, nest in caves.
Nocturnal birds, such as owls which depend upon their hyper-sensitive eyes to fly in the dimmest of lights, might manage to fly in parts of the cave near the entrance, but some species of swiftlet nest in chambers so deep no light whatever reaches them.
There owls would be completely helpless and grounded.
But the swiftlets fly fearlessly and unerringly through the blackness for they have another sense by which to steer.
As they enter their caves, they start producing a series of high-pitched clicks.
The frequency with which they make them varies.
In the spaciousness of a large chamber they may make only four or five a second, but as    they approach the rock walls and need to know exactly where they are in order not to crash into them, they increase the speed of the clicks until they are emitting as many as twenty a second and the sound becomes, to our ears, an almost continuous rattle.
The time taken by the sound of each click to bounce back from the rock to the bird, enables the swiftlet to judge just how far away it is from the rock wall ahead.
For this system to work, the click must be so short that its echo is heard before the next click is made and drowns it.
The bird must also know in which direction the echo-producing obstacle lies.
To do that, it assesses the difference in intensity of the sound in each ear and the infinitesimal difference in time that it takes to reach one ear before the other.
Clearly all this demands apparatus of great sensitivity.
But the swiftlet's technique is crude compared to that developed by bats.
They have refined every aspect of the system.
First, the pitch of the sound.
The higher it is, the smaller the surface its echo can reveal.
We can hear some bat sounds, particularly when we are young and our ears are sharp, but these are the bats' social utterances.
Those they use for navigation are so high-pitched that they are ultrasonic, far beyond the range of any human ear.
Some are so high that they enable their makers to detect the presence of a wire no thicker than a human hair stretched across their flyway.
Secondly, the intensity of the sound.
The louder it is, the more distant the object it can detect and the bats produce clicks which, if translated into frequencies that we can hear, would sound as loud as a pneumatic drill.
This, however, causes a major complication.
It is so loud that were the bats to hear it, their hyper-sensitive ears, tuned to detect the faintest of echoes, would be seriously overloaded.
This problem is dealt with by a muscle in the middle ear attached to one of the trio of tiny bones that transmits the vibrations of the ear-drum to the tubular organ in the skull that converts them into nervous stimuli.
As each click is made, this muscle pulls aside the bone so that the ear-drum is momentarily disconnected.
It is then replaced in time to receive the echo.
And this it may do more than a hundred times a second in perfect synchrony with the clicks of the calls.
Thirdly, the faster the clicks are emitted, the more up-to-date information the bat will receive as it negotiates the obstacles in the cave and dodges through the branches and creepers of the night forest.
Some bats can send out a stream of two hundred clicks in a single second, each lasting only a thousandth of a second and spaced sufficiently from the other to allow each echo to be heard.
Echo-location, or sonar as it is called, is only used by small insect-eating bats.
Nearly all the much bigger fruit bats rely on their large eyes to find    their way and in consequence, like owls, they cannot fly in caves where there is no light whatsoever.
The insect-eaters, however, get such an accurate picture of their surroundings from their sonar that they hardly use their eyes at all.
Indeed, these have become so tiny that they are of little practical use when flying.
There is another dark world where animals use sonar to find their way around.
Many great rivers — the Ganges and the Indus, the Amazon and the Yangtze — are so muddy that the animals swimming in them cannot see more than a few inches ahead.
A dolphin is able to produce sonar clicks by forcing air through special passages and sinuses in its head.
These are focussed into a beam by an oval, fat-packed organ, the melon, which forms a bulge on the dolphin's forehead.
This is, in effect, a sound lens and it produces a sonic-searchlight with which the animal scans the water ahead of it.
A dolphin can emit up to 700 clicks a second with this apparatus and from them is able to detect not only the presence of a solid object in the water but to deduce what sort of object it is.
It can distinguish between a tin full of water and one that is empty, between rock and flesh.
In the open sea, dolphins use this sense to find and catch fish, but in the turbid waters of rivers, fresh-water dolphins use their sonar for navigation.
Because it is so difficult to see in this dark environment, their eyes, like those of insectivorous bats, have become very small.
Those of the Indus and Ganges dolphins even lack lenses, so that their eyes can tell them little more than the difference between light and darkness, between day and night.
Fish in these muddy rivers also have problems in finding their way.
All fish can detect the presence of objects near them even if they cannot see them.
A long fluid-filled tube runs beneath the skin along the middle of each side of their body.
This is connected to the water outside by pores.
As the fish moves, so solid objects in the water nearby create slightly greater pressure in the water and this the fish is able to sense by means of their lateral-line system.
But many fish in these particularly turbid waters have additional navigational devices.
Some have fleshy whiskers half as long as their bodies which they project forward and wave about, like a blind person with a stick.
These whiskers are sensitive not only to touch but to taste, so the fish can tell what on the river bed in front of its mouth is worth eating and what is not.
Catfish, more than any fish, grow such whiskers in a most spectacular way, some species having as many as six sprouting from their upper and lower jaws.
A few fish, however, in both the Amazon and the Congo, have developed a sensing system that is used by no other group of animals.
They use electricity.
All living organisms produce electrical impulses on an infinitesimal    scale.
They are the medium by which messages are sent along the nerves; they are discharged whenever muscles contract.
But these muddy-water fish have developed banks of modified muscle tissue that generate electrical charges on a much greater scale.
The Amazon knife-fish is about eight inches long and very odd-looking.
It has no tail fin like those of other fish, merely a fleshy stump.
Nor does it have a dorsal fin on its back.
Instead it has one long ribbon-like fin that runs along its underside from close to its stumpy tail to its head.
By undulating this, it drives itself forwards — or, with equal ease, backwards.
Above this fin, buried beneath the skin, is a line of organs which emit a stream of electrical pulses.
Their voltage is very low — a mere three to ten volts of direct current — but the frequency of the pulses is very high, around three hundred a second.
In uncluttered water, these discharges create a symmetrical electric field around the fish which it can sense with a series of receptors in its skin.
A solid object, whether it is a rock, a fish or even a plant stem distorts this field and the fish can immediately sense the change.
It is as aware of objects behind it as in front of it, and when alarmed it can reverse backwards into its hole with a speed and accuracy that any motorist would envy.
There is one limitation.
If the fish were to bend its body as many fish do when they swim, the pattern of the electrical field would distort.
So all the fish that use this system, whether in the rivers of West Africa or in South America, keep their bodies as stiff as ramrods and have to propel themselves by undulation of their fins.
The electrical field also becomes confused if two fish using signals on the same frequency happen to meet, for one will interfere with the other.
When that happens, both fish immediately stop transmitting and then start up again with slightly different pulse rates.
The capacity to generate electricity has been taken even farther by one fish in the Amazon, the electric eel.
Like the knife-fish, it navigates by producing steady low voltage emissions, but it can also, with a different set of generators, produce massive shocks.
These it uses to stun its prey and the discharge is so powerful that it is quite sufficient to knock over a horse standing in the shallows.
So by exploiting touch, taste and smell, by developing special techniques of echo-location and electrical sensitivity, many animals find their way around in the darkness with great precision.
But for many others, including ourselves, the dawn and the return of the sun is a welcome relief from a time of enforced inactivity.
At last, we and they can use our eyes again and see where we are going.
Birds leave their roosts and take to the skies; monkeys jump away through the branches to find breakfast, and antelope    disperse once more over the open plains to graze, knowing that if danger comes they stand a good chance of seeing it before it gets lethally close.
Everyone sets off once more on their regular journeys around their familiar home ranges.
Few wander at random.
Nearly all have favourite places where they regularly sleep or drink or hunt and most move around along particular trails.
The African elephant shrew, a highly-strung insect-eating mammal the size of a mouse with a nose drawn out into a mobile trunk, depends for its safety on knowing its trails better than any hunter that might chase it.
It must be able to run full-tilt down any of its tracks, anticipating every hazard on the surface that might trip it up and leaning into familiar bends like an experienced racing driver going round a well-practised circuit.
So first thing every morning, the shrew trots round the course, clearing away any twigs or leaves that might have fallen across it with side-swipes of its delicate fore-legs.
Its knowledge of its home range, however, is not restricted to these tracks, even though it seldom leaves them.
In an emergency, it will take a short cut and plunge across a patch of land that it never normally enters in order to reach the safely of a bolt-hole.
This must mean that it is able to visualise the relationship in space of all these paths to one another.
It must have, in its memory, a map.
Such a mental picture, the more remarkable the more one considers it, is probably within the minds of most animals.
Gobies, small fish that live in tidal rock pools, prove in a particularly convincing way that they have such a thing.
One kind, Bathygobius, has the habit of leaping from one pool to another as the tide retreats.
Although much of the area around a pool at this time may be exposed rock, the gobies never land on it.
They know just where other pools lie and are able to judge their leaps with such accuracy that they always drop into one.
Presumably they acquire this knowledge when the tide is high and they can swim from one basin to another, and they are able to translate that information into a mental picture of their entire territory.
But not all animals, even on their home ground, can rely on such a well-learned map.
In the Sahara there are great areas of sand where there are no permanent landmarks from which to construct one.
The sand is so hot and dry that in many places no bush or clump of grass can grow to provide a signpost from which to take bearings.
Tracks get covered by wind-blown sand in minutes.
Scent trails are baked dry and odourless by the fierce sun.
This unpromising, bewildering country is the home of tiny ants, Cataglyphis.
They live in nests below ground where they are safe from sand lizards and insectivorous birds and that is where they stay during the  mornings.
But as mid-day approaches, it becomes so hot that the lizards and birds retreat into the shade wherever they can find it.
Now, for an hour or so, Cataglyphis can forage in safety.
Hundreds of them suddenly erupt from a tiny hole in the sand and start sprinting across the dune looking for the bodies of insects that may have collapsed from heat stress.
Each one searches along a zig-zag course.
Every few seconds, it stops, executes a pirouette with its head lifted and then dashes off in another direction.
Eventually, with luck, it finds and picks up a tiny insect corpse.
Now it must get back to its nest as quickly as possible before it too collapses in the heat.
It does not retrace the zig-zags of its outward journey.
Instead it runs in a straight line directly and accurately back to its nest-hole which may be as much as a hundred and fifty yards away.
Somehow it has measured and remembered the distance it ran on each stage of its outward journey.
Every time it lifted its head and pirouetted, it registered the new direction it was taking in relation to the sun.
All this information, compiled during a journey that may have lasted as much as a quarter of an hour, enabled it to deduce the exact course it had to take in order to arrive back at its nest-hole.
Incredible though this may seem, it has been proved experimentally that this is the method it uses.
Individual ants have been repeatedly followed with a trolley carrying a mirror that displaces the image of the sun as seen by the ant.
Individual ants, misled in this way, fail to reach their holes but go to a point in the desert that is displaced by just the amount that the sun's image was shifted by the mirror.
A worker bee also uses the sun in a similar way.
Having found a group of flowers bearing nectar, it is able, taking its cue from the sun, to fly straight back along a reverse bearing to its hive.
What is more, it is able to tell others what direction they must fly in order to get food themselves.
It performs a special dance, walking in a circle which it then bisects while vigorously waggling its abdomen.
If the dance takes place on a horizontal plane, then this waggled line will point directly at the food source.
That would be remarkable enough.
But the dances are normally performed on a comb in the hive where they hang vertically.
Here the bees use a convention they all accept, just as we all accept that our maps are orientated with their tops to the north.
In the bees' case, the vertical is understood to point towards the sun and the angle the waggle-line makes with the vertical represents the bearing, to the right or the left, along which the food source lies.
Furthermore, the intensity of the waggle indicates how far along that line the food will be found.
The disadvantage of the sun as a signpost is, obviously, that it moves.
Most of the journeys made by honey bees or Cataglyphis are so brief that its movement is not of great significance.
When necessary, however, bees are able to compensate for it.
Having found a food-source in the evening, they will fly straight back to it the following morning, still guiding themselves by the sun even though it is now in the east and not the west.
Nonetheless, the earth's magnetic field is a much more reliable guide.
It is never shrouded by clouds, it does not disappear at night nor does it move.
It is this unvarying ubiquitous signal that we ourselves use, of course, when we take our bearings with a compass.
Birds use it too.
The homing pigeon is extremely skilled at doing so.
The wild form of this bird, the rock dove, is not a great traveller and spends its life within quite a small home range.
But human beings discovered a long time ago that if the birds were taken away from their homes, they had an uncanny ability to return even across miles of territory that was totally unknown to them.
The Emperor Nero, two thousand years ago, used pigeons to send back the results of the Imperial Games to his friends and relations.
Modern breeds of these homing pigeons return so reliably and are so tame and amenable that they make excellent subjects with which to investigate the homing ability.
Careful experiments have made it clear that they take note of the geographical features below them and when leaving their home loft they circle above it as if refreshing their memory with one last look before departing.
To test whether recognising the land beneath is essential to them in finding the way, opaque contact lenses were fitted to their eyes which prevented them from seeing more than a few yards ahead.
The birds still found their way home.
There is good evidence that they take note of the position of the sun, but birds released on an overcast winter's day when the sun was invisible still returned.
But if, on days when they cannot see the sun, small magnets strong enough to drown the earth's comparatively feeble magnetic signals are attached to their heads, they get lost.
The earth's magnetism, it seems, must on occasion be their guide.
But how do they perceive it?
That is still not fully understood, but in recent years tiny particles of magnetic material have been discovered both in their skulls and their neck muscles.
Maybe it is these that enable them to feel within their bodies the contours of the earth's magnetic forces.
Many animals need to make long journeys over unfamiliar country during the normal course of their lives.
Some fish migrate every year over great distances.
The Atlantic salmon spawns in the rivers of Europe.
The rate at which the hatchlings grow varies considerably.
In the cold rivers of Scandinavia, where food is in short supply, it may take them as much as six or  seven years to reach a length of four inches.
In southern England, they may do so within a single year.
But when they have reached this size, they start to travel downstream.
The journey is a slow one for the tiny fish do little more than allow themselves to be carried by the river current.
To begin with they travel only at night and often they may not go much more than a mile.
Eventually, after several weeks they reach the sea and there they begin swimming in a more determined way, seeking food.
After several years, when they have grown to full size, they start to swim back to the rivers in order to spawn.
Their outward journey was comparatively easy.
The return is full of obstacles.
They have to swim against the flow of the river.
They may have to leap up waterfalls.
Yet, with very few exceptions, they succeed in getting back to exactly the same stretch of river where they hatched.
To achieve this, they use an extraordinarily refined sense of taste.
The nostrils of a fish are not involved in any way with breathing but are U-shaped tubes that contain receptor cells capable of sensing the taste of water.
Each river has its own unique mixture of dissolved minerals, decayed vegetation and the taint of its particular community of animal inhabitants.
The salmon can recognise this cocktail first in a generalised way in the brackish water of an estuary and then with increasing precision as they follow it into smaller and smaller tributaries until at last they reach the shallows where it exactly matches the prescription demanded by their nostrils.
Only then do they settle down to spawn.
Spiny lobsters spawn on the coral reefs off the Florida coast and around the Bahamas.
But when the first storm of autumn stirs the water, they leave their holes in the reef and assemble in large groups.
Then they form up into single file with as many as fifty in a column, each animal touching the rear end of the one ahead with its stick-like antennae, and set off briskly across the sandy sea floor, heading for deeper water.
Down there they will escape the buffetings of the storms to come and there too, where temperatures are much lower, their bodily process will slow down and so use less energy at a time in the year when there is little for these animals to eat.
Their navigational system may be simply an urge to move continuously into water that is minimally cooler, and they may also be able to orientate themselves from the direction of the wave surge and the pattern of ripples on the water-surface.
Travelling in queues reduces the drag of the water on any one individual, except for the leader.
It also gives them protection as they venture across the open plains of sand, where there are no hiding places.
If they are attacked by one of their main enemies, trigger fish, the column breaks and they form circles, pincers outwards, like pioneer wagon trains      crossing the prairies of the American Wild West, defending themselves against attack by Indians.
A similar urge to move to lower temperatures is probably the main cue for the bogong moth of Australia when it sets off on its migration.
The caterpillars in the spring feed on the grassy pastures of southern Queensland and New South Wales.
As the year warms into summer, they pupate and turn into small greyish-black moths.
Instead of enduring the summer's baking heat, they set off on a long journey up into the Australian Alps.
Every year they take exactly the same route as previous generations, for all are influenced by exactly the same topography.
Doggedly, they fly higher and higher up the flanks of the mountains towards piles of immense granite boulders that lie close to the summits.
And there they disappear into crevices to roost and rest.
There are not many suitable sites for this.
The first-comers naturally claim the best positions, deep in the cool darkness.
They pack tightly together until they cover the stone as closely as tiles on a roof.
Before long, the only vacancies are near the entrance.
Those moths that settle there will probably only stay for a day and then continue higher still.
Some may not find suitable lodging until they get 4,500 feet up in the mountain.
There they spend the summer in a state of suspended animation, sustained by the fat reserves that they accumulated when they were caterpillars.
Annual changes in the weather are also the stimulus for millions of birds to migrate.
Each autumn, almost half the species that breed in northern Europe start to move south.
The rich harvest of insects and frogs, fruit and small rodents which supported them and their nestlings, is coming to an end.
Temperatures are falling.
Some of the migrants may only go as far as southern Europe.
Others will continue across the Mediterranean, over the Sahara and on into southern Africa.
In the Americas, birds make similar journeys in order to escape the privations of winter.
Tiny hummingbirds fly down from New England into Louisiana and then take off on a non-stop sea-crossing of five hundred miles across the Bay of Mexico to the Yucatan Peninsula and the warm jungles of Central and South America.
The longest journey of all is made by the Arctic tern.
It may breed well north of the Arctic Circle.
When the chicks are reared, some go down the west coast of the Americas all the way to Patagonia.
Others fly over western Europe, the west coast of Africa to the Cape of Good Hope.
Then many continue across the Antarctic Ocean towards the South Pole where they find continuous daylight while their northern breeding grounds are covered by continuous night.
The journey, by either route, is at least twelve thousand miles and the birds fly non-stop, sustaining themselves by diving into the sea for fish as they go.
To make such journeys, birds use almost every sense we know of and probably some we have not yet identified.
Some birds certainly use their eyes to follow the geographical features they see below them and have a mental map by which they steer.
Many follow obvious features such as coastlines, ranges of mountains or deep valleys.
In this way, many birds ensure that they cross the Mediterranean at its narrowest point, the Straits of Gibraltar, or circumvent the sea altogether by travelling east into Asia across the Bosphorus and then down along the eastern shore of the sea by way of Israel.
Swans flying down from Siberia to Britain travel in family parties so the young cygnets compile such maps as they follow their parents.
They also learn the position of the wetlands that provide them with crucial staging posts where they can feed and rest before starting on the next part of their journey.
This parental guidance, however, cannot always be provided.
Consider the young cuckoo.
It has been abandoned by its parents before it even hatched.
But it too manages to find its way down to southern Africa.
If it has a mental map, it must have inherited it.
Some migrating birds navigate by the sun, just as bees and Cataglyphis do.
This has been demonstrated by experiments with captive starlings, using the technique of displacing the sun's image with mirrors.
Many small birds travel at night when they are safe from attacks by hawks.
They cannot therefore use the sun.
Instead they guide themselves by the stars, as has also been verified by experiment.
This accounts for the fact that on cloudy nights, when there are no stars to be seen, they tend to wander off course and may even get completely lost.
Other species that fly through both day and night must use both methods.
And without doubt, many birds as well as pigeons, are able to guide themselves by the earth's magnetism.
But how did such migrants ever learn that there was better weather at the other end of the globe or that hundreds of miles north of the African savannahs, for a few months, abundant food was to be had.
The answer seems to lie in the past.
At the end of the last Ice Age, some eleven thousand years ago, glaciers stretched across the middle of Europe and African birds had little difficulty in visiting their southern edges where, during the summer, there were rich flushes of insects and other foods but only a small resident population cropping them.
As the Ice Age passed and the earth warmed, the glaciers, year by year, retreated.
But still the habit of flying north for the summer persisted among the birds and it has remained to this day, even though the journey is no longer a few miles, but several hundred.
Perhaps the most mysterious and complex of all navigational feats begins in the Sargasso Sea, that near-stagnant patch of warm water in the western Atlantic between Bermuda and the West Indies.
There, at depths between 1,300 and 2,500 feet and in temperatures of around 20°C, eels lay their eggs.
These develop into tiny animals so unlike their parents that the connection between adults and offspring was not recognised until the last century.
They are transparent, shaped like the long slender leaves of a willow and without fins except for an undulating fringe around their margin.
These strange creatures are carried eastwards at a depth of about 700 feet by the great ocean-wide current known as the Gulf Stream.
It is usually said that they are quite passive at this stage.
Certainly the Gulf Stream is quite strong enough to carry them across the Atlantic to the shores of Europe.
It will transport an inanimate object like a log from one side of the ocean to the other in about ten months.
The odd thing is that the larval eels take around a year and a half to make the passage.
When they reach the edge of the continental shelf, in places several hundred miles from the European coast, they begin to change.
Their leaf-shaped body narrows.
They shrink a little in length and grow pectoral fins.
Soon they resemble a small adult eel, except that they are still transparent.
In this form, they advance on the coast of Europe.
They do not feed on the way.
Some swim into the Baltic, others pass through the Straits of Gibraltar into the Mediterranean and may even travel as far as the Black Sea.
And great numbers move into the estuaries of Britain and western Europe.
They now have an urge to seek fresh water and start swimming up the rivers.
Many males do not go far and remain in the lower reaches.
The females, however, continue upstream a considerable distance.
Some may even reach the higher valleys of the Alps.
They use the river banks as a guide and nearly always keep within a yard of them, so avoiding the main force of the river's current.
They circumvent waterfalls by wriggling through the sodden vegetation on the banks.
When they enter lakes, their sensitivity to the slightest movement in the water enables them to swim straight through into the feeder rivers.
After a few months in fresh water, they begin to eat again and grow.
Their bodies become pigmented and opaque, yellow on their back and sides.
For the next few years they stay in these fresh waters but even at this stage in their lives, their wanderings do not cease.
As winter comes and the mountain streams get cold, the yellow eels descend to lower, warmer stretches of the rivers.
When spring returns, they ascend again.
Their powers of navigation remain extraordinary.
Yellow eels have been caught in a Scandinavian estuary, tagged and released in another over a hundred  miles away.
They reappeared in their original river within weeks.
Others have been caught and left on the ground several hundred yards from a river.
Yet they wriggled away, heading directly for water even though a rise in the ground had to be climbed in order to reach it.
Eventually, one autumn, the time comes for them to spawn.
The males, now about 18 inches long, may have spent only three years in the rivers; the females in the higher reaches may have been there for as many as eight or nine and are three times as long.
But both are now heavy with fat.
Once more their bodies begin to change.
They turn from yellow to black.
Their eyes begin to enlarge, suggesting that soon they will have particular need of them.
They start to descend the rivers, resting on the bottom during the day and travelling mostly at night.
The urge to return to the sea is now so great that they will wriggle out of a pond and cross dew-drenched meadows if that is necessary to reach a stream that will lead them to salt water.
Exactly what they do when at last they reach the sea was unknown until quite recently.
But now biologists have charted some of their movements by persuading them to swallow tiny radio transmitters or inserting such devices beneath their skin.
This research has shown that they swim away from the European coast in a roughly north-westerly direction at a depth of about two hundred feet until once again they reach the edge of the continental shelf.
There, where the sea floor suddenly drops to three thousand feet and more, they dive down to about 1400 feet and swim off in a southwest direction.
This course certainly points them towards the Sargasso Sea and that indeed is where they are going.
We cannot be sure that they do so directly for so far no adult eel has been caught in mid-Atlantic.
This, presumably, is because they make the journey at very great depths, far below the reach of drift nets or trawls and since they are no longer feeding there is little chance of catching them on baited hooks or in traps.
Eventually, some six months later, they reappear in the Sargasso.
There they spawn.
That done, they die.
Why should they make this journey of three and a half thousand miles, just to lay their eggs and by doing so commit their young to make a similar journey in reverse to find their feeding grounds?
The answer, like the explanation of bird migration, lies in the past, though a much more distant one, for fish are a much more ancient group than the birds.
Fossils of eels have been found in rocks a hundred million years old.
These lived in the sea as many of their modern relatives still do.
At that time, the continents of North America and Europe were still close together and the Atlantic was no more than a narrow strip of sea between the two.
Some eels may then have discovered the richness of food to be found in estuaries and rivers and    started spending the main part of their lives there.
Since then, the forces of continental drift have continued to pull the two continents apart, widening the Atlantic, but the habit of returning to the sea each year to spawn has never been broken even though it now involves such an immense journey.
And what guides the eels on these amazing marathons?
The young cannot learn how to make their first long journey by following their parents as swans do, for no adult eels travel east across the Atlantic from the Sargasso.
Nor can the elvers have any memory of the smell of fresh water rivers, as salmon have, for none of them have been in one.
Perhaps they are carried eastwards by the Gulf Stream in spite of anything they themselves may do.
Maybe they even try to swim against it which might account for the length of time that passes before they reach European waters.
Thereafter, a physiological change may cause them to develop a preference for fresher water so they are lured up the rivers, just as spiny lobsters, at a particular time of the year, are drawn to lower temperatures.
And the return journey?
Experiments with captive eels suggest that they can navigate by the stars, just as some migrating birds can, and on the first stages of their journey away from Europe, when they swim near the surface, this may be the way they guide themselves.
But what happens at the edge of the continental shelf?
How, to start with, do they know that they have reached part of the sea where the water below them has suddenly become very much deeper?
One researcher has suggested that they may be able to detect the very low frequency vibrations that are created in the water by waves and reflected back from the ocean floor, an echo-location system similar in principle to that used, at the other extreme end of the frequency scale, by bats.
As they dive, so they once more encounter the Gulf Stream.
But it is unlikely that they are able to use this in itself as a guide.
No animal can know that it is in a current unless there is some stationary object, such as a river bank, to serve as a reference point.
Eels are not thought to go down to the abyssal depths of the Atlantic where they could get such indications from the sea floor.
Perhaps, instead, they get their reference points from the earth's magnetic field, just as pigeons do.
Finally, as they near the Sargasso, the imprinted memory of the particular taste of those strange waters may be sufficient to lure them to the very same semi-stagnant tract of ocean where they hatched, just as adult trout are led to their own birth-places.
But that is all speculation.
The fact is that we still have a great deal to learn about the skills that animals use to find their way around their own home ranges and to travel the globe.
SIX
HOME-MAKING
FEW PLACES have such a gentle and equable climate that animals living there never need seek shelter; and few animals are so well-armed that they do not welcome somewhere to hide from their enemies or a safe nursery for their young.
So many animals, at some time in their lives if not throughout them, need a home.
To create one, they become potters and plasterers, weavers and needleworkers, miners, masons, scaffolders, thatchers and sculptors.
These crafts are not necessarily the monopoly of any one group of animals.
Each species, within the limitations of its own anatomy and the physical possibilities of its surroundings, uses the technique most appropriate to its needs.
The simplest home of all, of course, is no more than a hole.
A branch falls from a tree, letting fungal decay into the heart of the trunk, and there is a home for owls and flying squirrels, lemurs, parrots and toucans.
A river with slightly acidic water dissolves its way into limestone, and there are even larger holes — caves — for bats and bears, even in some places and at some times, human beings.
But naturally occurring holes are in relatively short supply.
Most hole-dwellers have to excavate their homes for themselves and that can be hard work.
The piddock drills its hole into solid rock.
It is a small mollusc, the size of a mussel, that starts life as a tiny free-swimming speck of jelly.
This larva eventually settles down on a rock, usually chalk or limestone, and grows the two valves of its shell.
Chemically, these are largely calcium carbonate, but at one end the edges are armed with small hard spikes like the teeth of a saw.
The young piddock clasps the rock face with a muscular sucker called a foot, presses its saw teeth against the rock and starts to swivel back and forth.
The teeth bite into the stone as the animal, slowly, methodically and persistently, continues to bore inwards.
Within a few days, it has created a shaft so deep that it is out of sight and beyond attack.
From this secure position, it extends a long tube, its siphon, along the tunnel and into      the open water to suck in a current that brings with it minute particles of food.
Improbable though it may seem, birds also manage to dig into stone.
They have only one tool with which to do so, their beak, but this can be surprisingly effective.
The bee-eater's beak is slender and apparently delicate, a pair of slim forceps with which it plucks bees and other insects from the air.
Yet when the bee-eater starts to make its nest, it will fly repeatedly beak-first at the face of a sandstone cliff or the hard mud of a river bank until, by dislodging grain after grain, it manages to make a slight depression to which it can hang.
Thereafter it hammers away with great effect until it has excavated a narrow tunnel as much as three feet long.
Several species of bee-eater nest in colonies a thousand or more strong.
This may be because of a scarcity of suitable sites, but the great number of individuals present makes it possible for unmated young birds to help their parents in the labour of digging holes just as the young Florida scrub jays help their parents rear new broods.
Artfully and sensibly, the red-throated bee-eater of Nigeria starts its labours at the end of the rainy season when the ground is relatively soft, even though it will not be ready to lay its eggs for another three months.
Woodpeckers, accustomed to chiselling their food out of timber, have little difficulty in cutting out nest chambers in tree trunks.
They make such excellent roomy holes that often other animals, lacking the tools for carpentry but otherwise of a powerful disposition, such as owls and squirrels, will drive away the woodpeckers and claim the holes for themselves.
Reptiles also make tunnels.
The gopher tortoise that lives in the southwestern deserts of the United States needs one as a shelter in which to escape the worst of the mid-day heat and it digs into the sun-baked ground with slow ponderous sweeps of its armoured fore-legs.
These tortoise holes are often so long — up to forty feet — that judging from the tortoise's slow rate of excavation they must have been made by several generations and are probably several centuries old.
Small mammals too are great diggers.
Kangaroo rats and spring-hares use their holes, as the tortoise does, to shelter from the heat; hyaenas and wolves as nurseries; badgers and armadillos as dormitories in which to slumber during the day after foraging at night; and mice and rabbits as sanctuaries where they are beyond the reach of most of their enemies.
But holes with only one entrance can also be death-traps.
An animal sheltering in them can only too easily be cornered and many hole-dwellers take steps to reduce that risk.
Nuthatches, nesting in tree holes, habitually narrow the entrance by rimming it with mud so that nothing bigger than  they can enter, and even the probing beak of a magpie hunting for nestlings cannot reach the young within.
Most hornbills go even further.
When the female settles on her eggs, the male brings lumps of soil, moistened with his saliva, as she sits in the hole.
With this the two of them wall up the entrance until only a tiny slot is left open.
For the next few weeks the male passes food for his entire family through this hole until the female breaks the wall down and leaves the hole to help him collect the increasing quantity of food demanded by the growing chicks.
Once their mother has left, the chicks themselves rebuild the wall.
Only when they are fully fledged and ready to fly do they demolish it and leave.
Perhaps the best protected hole of all is that built by the female trap-door spider.
She is an inch long and digs a burrow six inches deep into soft ground.
She uses her silk to line the walls and also to bind particles of soil together into a circular lid three-quarters of an inch across.
She gives this a silken hinge and attaches gravel to its underside so that it will fall shut under its own weight.
Since it is made from local material, it exactly matches its surroundings and it fits so neatly with a bevelled edge that it is almost impossible to detect it.
Nor will the spider give away the presence of her home during daylight hours.
Only when evening comes does she lift the lid a chink and peer out, checking whether darkness has yet come.
When night does fall, she opens the lid and stretches out her two front pairs of legs.
If an insect walks by, she grabs it and instantly drags it inside the tunnel.
The weighted door slams shut and she consumes her prey in safety.
So secure is this home that once the female spider has built it, she never leaves it.
She even, on occasion, locks herself inside it.
As she grows, she must periodically shed her inelastic skin.
Immediately after doing so, before her new skin has had a chance to harden, she is particularly vulnerable, so before the event, she ties down the door from the inside with ropes of silk.
The males build similar holes, but leave them to visit the females and mate with them in their tunnels.
After that is over, the male slips out of the door and the female once again locks it with silk.
Then, confident that she will not be disturbed, she retreats to the bottom of the tunnel to lay her eggs.
Holes, particularly long ones, have another drawback.
They can get very stuffy.
Prairie dogs, rabbit-sized rodents with short legs and small ears that live in vast communities on the grasslands of the American West, dig tunnels that may be as much as ninety feet long with short cul-de-sacs on either side.
Each tunnel has two openings, one at each end.
That, in itself, helps.
But the arrangement is more artful than it might appear to be at first sight.
The two entrances are not the same shape.
One opens flat on the surface of the prairie.
The other is enclosed by a chimney of mud and stones    that may stand as much as a foot tall.
Wind moves faster a little above the ground than it does close to the surface, so a breeze blowing across the top of the chimney sucks out the stale air within the tunnel and draws in fresh air through the lower entrance.
You can easily demonstrate the efficiency of this system by lighting a harmless smoke candle close to the lower entrance.
The smoke is drawn gently into the hole and then, several minutes later, wisps of it emerge from the top of a chimney twenty yards away.
Digging holes, even holes with a relatively sophisticated design such as the prairie dog's, requires strength rather than ingenuity.
Building a home is a more demanding business altogether since it necessarily involves assembling the right materials, deciding on a layout and somehow fastening things together.
Mammals, by and large, do not tackle these problems.
Holes, it seems, give them all they need.
One of the few exceptions is the beaver.
Beavers live in the forests of North America and in many parts of Europe.
They feed on leaves and the living bark of trees.
To get what they need, they cut down saplings and even trees with trunks a foot or so in diameter, gnawing through the wood with their chisel teeth.
They need a home where they will be safe from hunting animals such as bears or lynx and they also need a place to store food for the winter when the land is snow-bound.
They get both by building a dam.
A newly-mated pair of beavers choose for their home a valley with a small stream running down it.
With a fine eye for the lie of the land, they select a particular point along the stream and then start to build their dam.
They ram sticks upright into the stream bed.
Across them, they drag thin saplings and then trundle boulders on to them to weight them down.
They dig mud from the banks and nudge that into the construction to bind the sticks, leaves and boulders together.
If the supply of suitable saplings near the site runs out, they will dig canals leading into the stream and float down their logs from farther away.
As the dam grows, they give its sides a slightly different character.
The up-stream side becomes steep and heavily plastered with mud to make it water-tight.
The down-stream side is more sloping and covered with poles laid parallel to the sides of the valley, so giving the structure the strength to withstand the pressure from the water that accumulates in the lake.
And at each end of the dam, they clear a spillway.
On the shores of the lake, or on one of the little islets that may form in the middle of it, they build their lodge, a great dome of sticks, poles, branches, reeds and mud within which they have their living chamber.
It is the dam, however, that makes this virtually impregnable for the only way into it is from the lake through a tunnel that opens underwater.
So only agile swimmers like beavers can enter it.
Securing the lodge is not the only function of the lake.
As autumn approaches, but while the trees are still in leaf, the beavers cut down saplings and sink them in the lake.
There they lie, hardly decaying in the near-freezing water.
When snow many feet deep blankets the land and the lake is covered with ice, the beavers are able to swim out from their lodge beneath the ice, retrieve the green branches and feed on them throughout the winter.
The maintenance of the dam requires the constant attention of the owners.
If there is heavy rain, the spillways must be enlarged to allow the floodwater to escape before the dam bursts.
And when the rain stops, the beavers may have to build them up again to prevent the level of the lake from falling so low that the entrance to the lodge is exposed.
Many of these lakes last for decades if not centuries and are used by several generations of beavers.
Ultimately, however, the beavers' lake, like any other, will fill with sediment and turn first into a swamp and then into a level green grassland.
No doubt human settlers, moving into these forests for the first time, were delighted and surprised to find such fertile meadows in the heart of the dense forest and built their homes beside them.
So the predilections of beavers centuries ago may well have determined the places where human beings have their towns today.
Placing sticks on one another in such a way that they engage and are not readily dislodged is a skill that is easy to underestimate.
You realise how subtle it is when you watch a beaver painstakingly placing a pole on its dam, being visibly dissatisfied with its position, removing it and tugging it into another, until it is at last convinced that it has been effectively deployed.
Birds possess a similar skill as you will discover if you try to dismantle even the untidiest and most apparently haphazard of twig nests.
Most of the elements interlock with one another.
Often there is a symmetry underlying the superficial irregularity of the twigs, a basic radial pattern or an equally deliberate criss-cross arrangement.
Although large tree-nesting birds — wood pigeons, rooks, storks or eagles — do only the minimum to soften the uneven surface of their platform nests, many smaller birds with delicate eggs fashion a cup in the centre of the nest which they line with softer material.
Most species have their own particular taste in this.
Thrushes use mud, the bearded tit likes flower petals.
The Australian honey-guide is so fond of hair it will pluck it straight from a horse's back or even a human's head.
North American house wrens favour sloughed snake skins and the eider duck grows special downy feathers on    its own breast which it plucks off with its beak to produce a soft and warming blanket that none of man's synthetic materials can equal.
Some birds are so small that twigs are too coarse a material for them to use as the main fabric of their nest.
Hummingbirds use spiders' silk, gathering it in their beak and flying away with it trailing behind them.
Their ability to hover enables them to construct their tiny cups on sites that are not even big enough for them to perch on — two crossing stems, perhaps, or even the tip of a leaf.
Exploiting the glueyness of spider silk, a hummingbird will prod it repeatedly at a selected spot until at last it sticks.
If the nest is a hanging one, then the bird will fly round and round the first threads, binding more around them to form the walls of the cup.
Often they add flower petals or tiny fragments of down or lichen to give the construction body.
If the nest is attached by one side to a leaf, its support is clearly lop-sided, in which case the hummingbird may weave small particles of earth into a long extension of the nest, dangling beneath, to act as counterweights and level it.
This gives the little nest additional stability and so reduces the risk of it being overturned by a gust of wind.
The Indian tailor bird also uses spiders' silk but in a different way.
It sews with it.
It creates a cup from living leaves, either from two hanging closely together or by twisting a single one into a curl.
Holding a length of silk in its beak, it then pierces a hole in the leaf and pushes the silk through it, tying a little knot in the end to prevent the thread from slipping back through the hole and then doing the same thing on the other side so that the two leaf surfaces are secured to one another.
To describe this as sewing is perhaps slightly flattering to the bird, for the silken thread is never used for more than one stitch at a time.
Other birds, however, can be said with accuracy to weave, for they create the fabric of their nests using exactly the same principles as human weavers employ when they interlace a weft thread between parallel warp threads to create cloth.
This technique has been discovered independently by two different groups of birds — the weaverbirds of Africa which are closely related to the European sparrow, and the icterids of the Americas which include such birds as the caciques and the oropendolas.
The fibres they use may be long creepers, thin rootlets, ribbon-like leaves such as those of grasses or reeds, or strips torn from broad leaves such as bananas.
Two basic skills are needed — knotting and weaving.
A knot is required in order to make the first fastening.
The bird ties it by holding a strip on to a branch with one foot and then, using its beak, passing the end round the branch, threading it through one of the turns and pulling it tight.
Sometimes the bird may wind the strip around not one but two parallel twigs.
Then the knot is made even more secure by threading the end between the two twigs and tying a series of half-hitches on each.
The fastening finished, the bird starts weaving.
The process involves no more than threading a strip beneath another one that runs across it more or less at right angles, and keeping on doing so at intervals with dogged persistence, pulling the strip tight after each threading.
Sometimes if the strip is long enough, the bird will reverse direction during this process so that the strip is looped back and woven parallel to itself.
This produces a particularly firm fabric.
With these two basic skills, bird weavers can attach nests that dangle from tips of branches or leaves and construct domed and compartmented dwellings of great perfection.
Some nests are given waterproof roofs by using particularly wide strips of leaves for the top half.
An antechamber may be built on to the main egg-chamber.
Some species also add entrance passages, long downward pointing tubes that make it extremely difficult for snakes or any other intruders to plunder the nest.
One of the most skilful craftsmen of all, Cassin's weaver-bird, constructs an entrance-pipe two feet long using very long narrow fibres that spiral downwards, some right-handedly and some left-handedly, so that the two interweave with one another and produce a fabric of remarkable uniformity and beauty.
Weaver birds reared in an incubator still manage to weave when they become adult, so clearly the basic skill is inherited, but it nonetheless requires practice to bring it to perfection and at first young male weavers may make comically ham-fisted versions — nests that are insecurely tied and fall off, others that are unevenly woven with some strips pulled tight and others left slack so that the result is misshapen.
The males' skill affects their breeding success, for the females examine these nests extremely critically when selecting a mate.
The hopeful male hangs beneath his creation fluttering his wings in order to draw attention to it.
If it is not of reasonable competence, no female will join him.
In such circumstances, he has to start all over again.
Since both sites and nesting material are usually in short supply in a weaver bird colony, he often laboriously unravels his first attempt and using its constituents weaves it all over again in the same place.
One group of birds has particular problems in nest-making.
Swifts are the most aerial of birds.
They spend months on end continuously on the wing, feeding by catching insects in mid-air, mating by coupling high in the sky and tumbling downwards interlocked for hundreds of feet, and presumably even sleeping on the wing.
But they cannot incubate their eggs in the air.
To do that they have to come to earth and sit on something solid.
That is not easy for them to do, for so extremely have their bodies become  adapted to life in the air that their legs are greatly reduced in size.
They are little more than delicate hooks hidden in their plumage and are so short that they are quite incapable of lifting the bird's body high enough to enable it to make a complete wing beat.
So swifts, if they land, find great difficulty in getting back into the air and when the time comes for them to make a nest, they are unable to gather leaves, sticks or mud in the way that other birds can.
The chimney swift of Asia manages to collect twigs by flying at a branch, seizing one with its beak and breaking it off by the sheer force of its aerial velocity.
It then glues these thin twigs to a wall using its own saliva as a fixative.
The American palm swift also produces a sticky saliva but makes no attempt to gather anything as substantial as twigs.
It builds its nest entirely from air-borne material such as cotton, plant fibres, hairs and feathers.
The African palm swift hardly bothers even with these and constructs its nest almost entirely from its saliva, moulding it into a tiny spoon-shaped structure, stuck to the underside of a palm frond.
When the palm leaf sways in the wind, it seems almost impossible that the single egg could remain in the tiny cup.
Indeed, it would certainly fall out were it not for the fact that the bird has not only glued the nest to the leaf, but the egg to the nest.
The nest is far too small for a bird to sit in.
Instead, the incubating parent has to stand astride it.
Nor can the nest accommodate the chick when it hatches.
The young bird has to perch upright on the rim while it grows its feathers.
The echo-locating cave swiftlets of South-east Asia also build with saliva, but they are more lavish in their use of it.
They have very well-developed glands in their throat that, during the breeding season, become greatly enlarged and produce saliva in considerable quantity.
Although the several species that nest near the mouths of caves incorporate feathers into their constructions, the one that inhabits the deepest and totally lightless parts of caves constructs its nest from saliva and nothing else whatever.
It will build this on a ledge if one is conveniently available, but it is perfectly capable of fixing the nest to a vertical or even an overhanging wall of rock.
The bird starts by flying persistently in front of its chosen site and repeatedly dabbing the rock with its tongue, laying down a curved line of saliva which marks the lower edge of the nest-to-be.
The saliva dries and hardens quickly and with repeated flights, the bird slowly builds up the line into a low wall.
As soon as this is big enough to cling to, the speed of construction accelerates and within a few days the wall has become a semicircular cup of creamy white interlacing strings that is just big enough to hold the customary clutch of two eggs.
Producing material from glands in the body is exceptional among birds, but among insects it is almost the rule.
Indeed the silk that we ourselves spin and weave into the most luxurious of all our fabrics is unwound from the cocoon that silk-moth caterpillars weave around themselves before they start the complex process of changing into adults.
They produce this silk not from spinnerets at the end of the abdomen as spiders do, but from a pair of glands in the mouth.
Producing it makes considerable demands on an animal's bodily resources and although the silk moth, encouraged by man's selective breeding, extrudes it in large quantities, most insects are rather more sparing in their use of it.
Ermine moths, for example, economise by constructing a cocoon that is little more than a lattice.
Ants, like moths, only produce silk during their larval stage, but this does not prevent them from using it for nest-building.
The green tree ants of Australia construct their homes from the living leaves of trees.
Squads of workers hold two leaves together, gripping their rims with their legs, while others dash to the nursery quarters.
There they pick up the little grubs in their jaws and carry them back to the building site.
A worker stimulates the grub to produce its silk by giving it a little squeeze.
Then it passes this living tube of glue back and forth across the junction of the two leaves until a white silken sheet has been created, linking them.
Bees too secrete their building material.
Flakes of a fatty substance are excreted from glands between the joints on the underside of the worker bee's abdomen.
It collects these flakes with the brush near the end of its hind legs and passes them forward to its mouth where it kneads them with saliva.
This material is now wax and with it the worker bees build combs that serve both as nurseries for the developing young and larders for honey and pollen.
A honey-bee colony, which may eventually contain up to eighty thousand individuals, is founded when a young queen hatches in an existing colony and emigrates, taking half of the workers with her.
They find a site for a new nest, such as a hollow tree (or a bee-keeper may provide them with one) and start immediately to build combs.
The cells of which these are constructed are astonishingly uniform in both design and dimension.
They are six-sided with walls that meet at exactly 120°.
This design cannot be dismissed as an automatic and inevitable consequence of building cells closely together, for bumble bees also make waxen cells and theirs are irregular bag-shaped containers, jumbled untidily together.
The honey-bee, in contrast, has developed a special, highly sophisticated skill by which it uses both the wax and the space within its nest in the most economical way possible.
Were the cells circular, there would inevitably be gaps between the walls of one cell and the next.
No matter how you pack snooker balls on a table, there will always be space between them.
The only shapes that fit together so closely that all their walls are common with those of their neighbours are triangles, squares and hexagons.
Of these three, the hexagon has the shortest total length of wall for a given enclosed area.
So building cells as hexagons saves building materials.
Nor do the bees make the cell walls thicker than is necessary to carry the stresses they have to bear.
The combs hang vertically with the hexagonal cells on them facing outwards and tilted slightly upwards from the horizontal so that the honey, before it is capped off, does not run out.
The bees work, not on a single cell at a time, but on whole sections of the comb.
Each cell wall is first laid down as a thick ridge.
The worker then reduces it to its proper thinness by putting its head in the cells on either side of the wall and shaving off layers from the face of it.
It then measures the thickness of the wall by pressing it with its mandibles and detecting how much it bends.
Since the temperature within the nest is kept constant and the composition of the wax is uniform, the degree to which the wall bends under the same force is an accurate measure of its thickness.
The worker builds to two different specifications.
Storage cells for honey and pollen are given walls 0.073 millimetres thick, and those that are to contain developing males, 0.094 millimetres.
In each case they vary by only 0.002 millimetres.
A bees' nest has only a single entrance, so air cannot be made to flow through it as it does through a prairie dog's tunnel.
Instead, the colony has to inhale and exhale.
When the level of carbon dioxide breathed out by the bees gets high in some part of the nest, groups of several hundred workers start vigorously fanning with their wings, so circulating the air around the combs and levelling out any imbalances.
If the temperature also rises above the bees' favoured level of 35°C, a group of workers position themselves near the entrance with their tails pointing outwards and then start fanning their wings so that the stale air is wafted out.
After doing this for perhaps ten seconds, the fanners beside the entrance stop simultaneously and fresh air is drawn back into the hive.
In this way the nest can, as it were, take three breaths a minute.
The bees also have other ways of maintaining an even temperature within the nest.
If it rises too high, the workers bring in not nectar but water, and deposit it in droplets and puddles around the cells containing the developing larvae, which are particularly sensitive to over-heating.
They then fan the water so that it evaporates and in doing so lowers the temperature.
If on the other hand, the colony gets too cold, as it may in winter, the workers eat    honey and use its energy to vibrate their flight muscles within their thorax without moving their wings, so generating body heat.
Wasps also make nests filled with combs of hexagonal cells, but they build not with wax but with paper.
This they make by chewing wood, masticating it with their saliva and then expelling it as a moist pulp which hardens as it dries.
The resulting parchment is both very strong and very light and with it, paper wasps can build very big nests indeed.
The combs do not hang vertically like those of honey-bees and they contain neither honey nor pollen, for wasps are not vegetarians but primarily carnivores.
The cells are filled only by developing young which the workers feed with pellets of chewed-up caterpillars or other bits of flesh.
The hexagonal cells, however, are built with a precision and uniformity that fully matches those of the honey bee.
A queen wasp herself selects the site for her colony.
Tropical species often use open sites, under a branch or even a large leaf.
The common European wasp favours a cavity — a tunnel dug by a field mouse or some other small mammal, a hole in a tree, or a warm place in the loft of a house — and there she fixes a stalk of paper to a point in the roof.
On the lower end of this, she constructs a small group of downward-facing cells in each of which she lays an egg.
These, when they hatch, provide her with her first work force.
Soon these young wasps are also busy, chewing wood, producing paper and building cells in which the queen lays more eggs.
Whereas the vertical combs of honey-bees have cells on both sides, the paper-wasp's horizontal combs have them only on the under-surface.
The way the wasp builders calibrate their work is also different.
Instead of planing the sides of the cell-wall under construction, the wasp extrudes the paper pulp along the line of the wall and then, working along the rim with its mandibles, it judges the angles and the thickness of the wall by continually touching the walls of the adjoining cells with its antennae.
As each comb is completed, rods of paper are fitted to it, extending vertically downwards, from which the next horizontal comb will be suspended.
If the nest is underground some of the workers gnaw at the soil of the floor, carrying it away cradled in their forelegs and dropping it outside.
If they come across pebbles too big to lift, they dig away beneath them so that the pebbles slowly sink, millimetre by millimetre.
When the great globular nest is complete there is often, therefore, a layer of gravel and little pebbles at the bottom of the chamber.
Other wasps build with mud.
These are the potters, the females of which make small jars in which they deposit an egg together with a paralysed spider or caterpillar to provide the hatching grub with its first meal of meat.
A female starts by gathering mud from a patch of wet ground.
As every potter knows, the moistness of the clay is very important and the potter wasp controls it very precisely.
If it is too dry, she regurgitates water from her stomach and moistens it.
She then kneads it with her mandibles and front legs into a soft pellet about half the size of her head and flies off with it to her building site.
This may be under a piece of tree bark, along a ledge of some kind or hidden on the ground among the undergrowth.
With scissoring movements of her legs and mandibles, she converts the pellet into a long glistening strip of clay and lays it carefully in a ring.
She works fast, adding one strip to the rim of the hardening strip below until she has built a small bottle, complete with an elegant out-turned lip to its mouth.
When she has stocked it with an egg and its immobilised meal, she seals the vessel with a bung made from one final pellet.
Birds also pot.
Swallows mix their mud with grass so adding to its strength, and pile pellet on pellet to build cup-shaped nests on ledges beneath house eaves.
These are so strong that, since they are usually sheltered from the rain, they can be used, after judicious refurbishment, year after year.
The rufous ovenbird, a South American species rather like a thrush in shape and size, builds on a very large scale indeed.
Its completed nest is the size of a football, domed with a slot-shaped entrance on one side.
Put your fingers inside and you will feel, not eggs, but a dividing wall.
The only way past this into the egg-chamber beyond is through a small hole high in one corner and neither your fingers nor an intruding paw or beak can negotiate the bends and reach through it.
But the most skilled and ingenious of all mud-builders are termites.
There are over two thousand different species of these insects, virtually all of them feeding only on dead plant material.
Most have bodies with a skin so soft, thin and permeable that if they are exposed to direct sunshine for any length of time they dry out and die.
So they spend their lives in darkness, and, having no use for eyes, are totally blind.
Some chew galleries inside trees or house timbers and digest the wood they excavate with the help of micro-organisms in their gut.
Others burrow away underground to retrieve fragments of dead plants from the soil.
Some make combs of their waste material on which they cultivate tiny fungal mushrooms.
Many can forage above ground at night but they laboriously shield themselves from predators by constructing covered run-ways, and thin crusts of mud all over the vegetation they are plundering.
And some masticate earth with saliva to produce a cement that sets as hard as rock and with it build some of the most magnificent and complex mansions to be found anywhere on earth except for those made by mankind.
The foundations of these buildings are laid down when a mated pair of king and queen termites crawl into a crevice in the ground, burrow downwards and start laying eggs.
The queen grows in size, and thereafter for the rest of her life continues producing eggs which hatch into workers and soldiers.
It is the workers who build the colony's home, burrowing out galleries deep in the earth and, above ground, raising great domes, towers, turrets and spires.
The air-conditioning of these buildings is of crucial importance to their inhabitants.
The communication between the members of the colony depends on a system of chemical exchange that is badly disrupted if the temperature rises too high.
If the air becomes too humid, fungus may germinate in their stores of dried vegetable food and ruin the crop.
Most crucial of all, the royal couple themselves, with their thin permeable skins, will die if the atmosphere gets so hot and dry that they lose their body fluids or if they are badly chilled, and this may mean the end of the whole colony.
But it is very difficult, if not impossible, to make the interior of these huge homes totally impervious to extreme changes in the weather outside.
The inhabitants, therefore, may have to move from one part of the nest to another to find the most comfortable conditions.
If the night is very cold or the middle of the day extremely hot, they may retreat to the galleries below ground level where the temperature does not vary so much.
In parts of northern Australia, where there are heavy seasonal rains, the ground becomes so waterlogged for part of the year that these downward migrations are not possible.
One species, however, has evolved a solution.
A colony builds a hill in the shape of a rectangular wedge standing fifteen feet or so high with its sharp edge at the top.
Each side may be ten feet across and the hill is aligned so that the thin edge of the crest points north and south.
This species, therefore, is known as the magnetic termite.
But the stimulus that leads the termites to orientate their building in this way has nothing to do with magnetism and everything to do with heat.
In the morning the colony may be very cold, for at night the temperature here can fall to within five degrees of freezing.
But one broad flank of the colony faces east and so catches the full warmth of the rising sun.
At this time the termites congregate in their eastern galleries.
As the sun rises and the day warms up, the outer surface of the hill may become so hot that it is almost painful to touch, but the full strength of the midday sun is minimised since all it strikes directly is the thin top edge of the hill.
As the sun sinks and the day cools, so the western flank is illuminated, the east is in shadow and the termites within can find just those galleries between the two that most suit them.
In sober truth, although all the magnetic termite hills in any one area stand parallel to one another, they do not always point accurately north and south.
There can be a variation of up to 10° either east or west.
The explanation of this is that the sun is not the only agent that affects the temperature of the colonies.
The prevailing wind, the shape of nearby hills and many other things also have an effect and make it more advantageous thermally for the hills to point slightly to one side or the other of magnetic north.
Since the termites are responding not to magnetism but to heat, they build accordingly.
This is not to say that these termites have no perception of the earth's magnetic field.
On the contrary, they and indeed most other termites certainly have.
Experiments have been made in which powerful magnets were placed around a nest to distort the magnetic environment.
The termites continued to build their hills with their crest pointing in exactly the same direction as before, but they did change the disposition of their elongated chambers within the nest.
It seems that the construction workers building galleries in total darkness get their bearings and coordinate their work by sensing the magnetic field of the earth.
Those termites that live in parts of the tropics where it is wet throughout the year have different problems.
In such places the abundant rains produce a tall thick forest beneath which the air is constantly warm and humid.
They do not therefore have to deal with great daily variations in these conditions.
Their main danger is that their entire home will become drenched and waterlogged.
So here termites construct circular towers with conical roofs, the eaves of which project outwards so that the rain cascading from the tower falls some way from its base.
Each additional storey may be given its own roof so that eventually the building looks like a Chinese pagoda.
The bigger the mound, the greater the need for air-conditioning and one of the biggest of all is built by an African species with particularly aggressive soldiers, known as the bellicose termite.
But this particular species has an additional need to control the temperature within its habitations.
Many other termites digest their unpromising food of twigs and vegetable detritus with the aid of micro-organisms in their gut.
The bellicose termite belongs to a group that uses a different digestive method.
They employ a fungus to do it for them.
The workers eat almost nothing but dead wood.
Although they absorb a little from their first meal, their droppings still contain a great deal of unextracted sustenance.
So they defecate in special chambers within the nest and on their manure cultivate their fungus.
Its hair-thin filaments permeate the manure, absorbing much of it, changing  the nature of the residue, occasionally producing tiny reproductive organs like white pin-heads.
After the dung has been processed in this way for about six weeks, the termites are able to eat and digest it, fungal threads, white knobs, residue and all.
The fungus that performs this service belongs to a group that live.s nowhere except within the nest of termites and each species of fungus-grower cultivates its own unique species.
The termites are totally dependent upon it, just as it is dependent upon the termites.
And it grows best within a very precise temperature range of 30–31°C.
However, the processes of decay in the gardens produce a great deal of heat.
So do the million and a half termites living in the colony.
They also impoverish the air by inhaling oxygen and exhaling carbon dioxide, as all animals do.
For a colony of fungus-growing termites efficient air-conditioning is therefore vital.
Their way of providing it is architectural.
Although the climate is much the same throughout the range of the bellicose termite, the soils are more variable and the species adapts the design of the nests to suit the position and strength of the local building material.
Some are massive domes six feet high, some are low mounds, and on sandy soils they are almost completely underground.
In one small area in Nigeria, each nest is a cluster of towers and minarets grouped around a central spire that may rise twenty feet high.
This particular version contains within it a cooling device of unsurpassed elegance.
The main part of the nest lies below ground level beneath the towers.
Six feet down, there is a huge circular cellar, ten or twelve feet across and two feet or so high, quite big enough for a man to crawl into.
Its hummocked floor is studded with shafts which descend a further twelve feet or more to reach the water-table.
Few termites are found down here.
Those that do come are small pallid workers, inching their way in long columns across the floor and down the shafts to collect the moist mud that is needed for further building work.
The scale of the structures around them is so huge they look like teams of porters marching over a range of hills to a mine.
In the centre of the floor stands a massive clay pillar.
This supports a thick earthen plate which forms the ceiling of the cellar and carries above it the central core of the nest with its tiers of nurseries, fungus gardens, food stores and, of course, the royal chambers where the king and queen live.
It is on the underside of this plate that the bellicose termite constructs its most spectacular architectural invention.
Rings of thin vertical vanes up to six inches deep, centred around the pillar, cover the ceiling like a diffusing grid in a giant lamp-shade.
In fact, they are not separate rings but one continuous spiral with its coils only an inch or.so apart.
Its lower edge is fretted    with holes, like lace.
Its sides are white with encrustations of salt.
This delicate structure made of hard dried mud, absorbs moisture through the ceiling from the nest above.
This evaporates from the surface of the spiral.
As it does so, the white salts are deposited.
But, much more importantly, the process of evaporation cools the air around and makes the cellar the coldest place in the entire building.
Heat generated by the fungus gardens and termites in the main part of the nest above the basal plate causes the air to rise through the passageways and chambers until it reaches the large spaces in the upper part of the nest and within the towers.
From this loft, a number of flues run downwards, close to the outside walls, leading eventually past the edge of the basal plate and into the cellar.
As heat continues to be produced in the core, so air in the loft flows down these flues, drawn by the coolness of the cellar beneath.
The external walls of the flues are constructed from a particularly porous earthen material, in places pierced transversely with tiny galleries that end very close to the outer surface so gases can easily diffuse through them.
As the stale air travels slowly through the flues, so carbon dioxide flows out and oxygen flows in.
By the time the air reaches the cellar, it has been refreshed and cooled.
With this ingenious structure, simple in principle but most complex in its architectural intricacies, the bellicose termite keeps its fungus beds permanently between 30°C and 31°C, exactly the temperature its precious fungus requires.
If the dimensions of such a nest were translated into human terms, with each worker termite being considered the size of a human being, then this amazing fortress would stand a mile high.
If we were to start on a building of such magnitude — which we have not yet attempted — it is easy to imagine the army of architects and engineers, the volumes of plans, the batteries of computers, the regiments of construction machinery we would require.
Yet these million or so termites build their equivalent working in a coordinated way in total darkness, each blind, tiny-brained insect knowing exactly where it has to place its pellets of mud to produce nurseries, supporting pillars, living chambers, gardens, flues, defensive walls — and that extraordinary spiral cooling vane.
As with so many of the buildings constructed by animal architects, we really have very little idea how they do it.