

1
1.
Introduction
I. Enforcing Law
Law may be enforced by compulsion and coercion, or by conciliation and compromise.
In the enforcement of regulation, a distinct aversion is noticeable to sanctioning rule-breaking with punishment.
Whether enforcement agents are concerned with air or water' pollution control, consumer protection, health and safety at work, housing, discrimination, wage and price control, or the many other areas of social and economic life now considered to be the law's business, writers have observed a style of enforcement which seems to be predominantly conciliatory.
Some, as a result, have complained that regulations are ‘poorly enforced’ and legislation is ‘ineffective’(Gunningham, 1974:56; also Freeman and Haveman, 1973; Zwick and Benstock, 1971), or that ‘a tradition of relatively weak enforcement prevails’(Bernstein, 1955:223).
Implicit in this stance is a conception that criminal law enforcement is properly a matter of compulsion, which leads, inexorably it seems, to a conclusion that regulation has failed.
The enforcement behaviour of regulatory agencies has been explained most frequently in terms of‘capture’ theory, according to which an agency is co-opted by those it seeks to regulate, incorporating and reflecting their concerns into its decision making in the interests of stability and self-preservation (e.g. Selznick, 1966).
The shift is a subtle one in which ‘the mores, attitudes, and thinking of those regulated come to prevail in the approach and thinking’ of many regulatory officials (Bernstein, 1955:83).
The processes of regulatory enforcement have not, however, been the subject of detailed enquiry.
In this book the enforcement of regulation is analysed in terms of two major systems or strategies of enforcement which I shall call compliance and sanctioning .
I shall also talk of a conciliatory style of enforcement as characteristic of compliance strategy, and a penal style as distinctive of sanctioning strategy.
The terms ‘conciliatory’ and ‘penal’are adopted from Black (1976) who discusses dominant styles of law which have counterparts in wider  and more pervasive forms of social control.
A conciliatory style is remedial, a method of ‘social repair and maintenance, assistance for people in trouble’, concerned with ‘what is necessary to ameliorate a bad situation’.
Penal control, on the other hand, ‘prohibits certain conduct, and it enforces its prohibitions with punishment’.
Its nature is accusatory, its outcomes binary: ‘all or nothing punishment — or nothing’(Black, 1976).
Since the characteristics of sanctioning and compliance strategies are pervasive themes throughout the book, it would be as well to preface the analysis with a brief exploration of some of their general features.
I propose simply to map out broad characteristics, though the analytical language of contrast tends to suggest categorical qualities which are unintended.
What may appear in their presentation as polar opposites are in reality shifting points on a continuum.
Central to a sanctioning strategy is a concern for the application of punishment for breaking a rule and doing harm.
Conformity with the law may be the consequence of this, but that is not the main issue.
The formal machinery of law is crucial to this concern, and exacting a legal sanction by means of the legal process is a relatively routine matter.
Enforcement agents who adopt a compliance strategy, however, are preoccupied with securing conformity to a rule or standard when confronted with a problem.
Compliance strategy seeks to prevent a harm rather than punish an evil.
Its conception of enforcement centres upon the attainment of the broad aims of legislation, rather than sanctioning its breach.
Recourse to the legal process here is rare, a matter of last resort, since compliance strategy is concerned with repair and results, not retribution.
And for compliance to be effected, some positive accomplishment is often required, rather than simply refraining from an act.
These differences are reflected in enforcement style.
A penal style is accusatory and adversarial.
Here enforcement is reflective: a matter of determining what harm was done, of detecting the law-breaker and fixing the appropriate sanction.
The primary questions are whether a law has been broken, and whether an offender can be detected.
If so, then the breach deserves punishment .
In a compliance strategy, on the other hand, the style is conciliatory and relies upon bargaining to attain conformity.
Enforcement here is prospective: a matter of responding to a problem and negotiating future conformity to standards which are often administratively determined.
Since such  standards are generally designed to prevent harm by accumulation, violations consist of rule-breaking which could lead to harm, as well as rule-breaking where actual harm is demonstrated (Reiss, 1980:30).
This makes retribution inappropriate.
If prevention of future misconduct occurs, it does so as a result of negotiation rather than the deterrence which (presumably) inhibits future rule-breaking in a sanctioning system.
A standard which has not been attained in a compliance system needs remedy .
The emphasis given to detection and punishment in a sanctioning system is linked with a special concern for proof of violation (Reiss and Biderman, 1980:297).
Decision outcomes tend to be binary and matters are ultimately settled by means of adjudication.
As such, the process is visible, and a central role in adjudication is given to a stranger.
In a compliance system, in contrast, there is much less concern for proving a violation took place; indeed widespread reliance on strict liability would make the question of proof relatively straightforward if matters ended up in court.
Detection is important, however, but rather as a means of monitoring compliance and of enhancing prevention; indeed the commitment to repair of a potential source of harm produces a concern for the effectiveness of enforcement procedures in securing conformity.
On the evidence of this study, the dominant conception of enforcement agents in a compliance system is a notion of efficiency: the attainment of a social goal at least cost to them and their work.
Punishment is an unsatisfactory operational philosophy because it risks damage to the ultimate end of enforcement, and control of the case does not remain in their hands.
Decisions in a compliance system are graduated in character (Eisenberg, 1976), and though in rare cases matters are ultimately settled by adjudication, they are normally controlled by the parties themselves in private, intimate negotiations which rely on bargaining, not adjudication.
Where enforcement relationships in sanctioning systems tend to be compressed and abrupt, compliance enforcement is marked by an extended, incremental approach.
There are implications in all of this for what are regarded as indices of success for enforcement officials and agencies.
Statistics of process, such as arrests and clearance rates are accustomed indices of organizational success in a sanctioning system.
In a compliance system, however, statistics of impact are more likely to be employed to display the organization's effectiveness in repairing harm.
What prompts a sanctioning rather than a compliance response is not who does the law enforcement so much as the sort of behaviour which is subject to control.
Where deviance has a categorical, unproblematic quality, a penal response is triggered.
Sanctioning strategies in fact generally tend to be associated with incidents of deviance.
The law-breaking is essentially a discrete activity, even though its consequences may be longer lasting.
It is momentary, closed (Mileski, 1971).
This isolated, bounded quality tends to make the deviance unpredictable and forecloses the possibility of a continuing relationship between enforcement agent and potential deviant.
In general, the more unpredictable the distribution and location of deviance, the more a sanctioning response is likely (Reiss and Biderman, 1980).
Where blame can be associated with the conduct, or where unco-operativeness (itself a blameworthy matter) on the part of the offender can be inferred, the response is also likely to be punitive.
Many forms of deviance, however, are continuing, repetitive, or episodic in character.
They are states of affairs rather than acts: unfenced machinery, substandard housing, adulterated food, a dripping pipe, drunkenness or vagrancy, where that which gives offence is readily regarded as a ‘problem’.
Such deviance tends to be unbounded in time, providing for a continuing relationship between enforcer and potential deviant, and the matter of blameworthiness is often questionable.
These sorts of rule-breaking are amenable to strategies of correction or control in a way that most forms of isolated crime cannot be.
Where the deviance provides for the development of social relationships between rule-enforcer and rule-breaker, enforcement is directed towards compliance.
Here enforcement is not the once-and-for-all response with the binary outcomes of a sanctioning system, but a serial, incremental, continuing process.
Compliance strategy may often involve highly elaborate and extended approaches, in which enforcement assumes a linear character.
Finally, victims of deviance also tend to hold different places in the two enforcement strategies.
Personal harm prompts a sanctioning strategy.
In a compliance system, in contrast, the victim is not necessarily a specific, readily-identifiable individual suffering obvious loss or harm, but a collective — often distant, diffuse, and indeterminate.
Reiss and Biderman (1980:298) have put it well:
Compliance systems appear to be concerned with victims in some aggregate rather than in a discrete or specific sense while penalty systems must deal with victims in the concrete since they constitute an element in their system of proof.
It is frequently difficult to speak, for example, of the ‘victims’ of water pollution.
In some cases downstream users may have to close their intakes, and anglers may be appalled at the sight of dead fish.
But when a pipe is discharging polluted water into a river which is largely an effluent channel, the only ‘victim’ may be the public, with the impairment to such amenity value as may remain.
II.
Enforcing Regulation
Compliance and sanctioning strategies transcend institutional arrangements for law enforcement.
It is tempting to regard the traditional criminal justice system, access to which is controlled by the familiar figure of the policeman, as typical of a sanctioning system of enforcement.
But where policemen deal with states of affairs or episodic deviance such as vagrancy, prostitution, or mental disturbance, they too adopt a compliance strategy.
Similarly, regulatory enforcement — on the evidence of water pollution control work, at least— is not, by virtue of low prosecution rates, simply an example of a compliance system.
The enforcement of regulation incorporates elements of sanctioning strategy .
Indeed, some forms of regulatory rule-breaking are dealt with by a penal style of enforcement at the outset, and in other circumstances a compliance strategy will subsequently yield to a sanctioning approach if the struggle for conformity is lost.
This suggests that law enforcement is more complex than some writers have assumed.
Yet what Environment and Enforcement shows is the essential similarity in the behaviour of those who enforce legal rules.
The regulatory enforcement agent in routine cases adopts a compliance strategy which follows a serial pattern, a loosely structured but none the less organized process relying heavily upon negotiated conformity, with a gradual increase in pressure being applied to the unco-operative.
In some cases the enforcement career may be rather compressed; in others, the business of enforcement may become very protracted, spanning months or years.
When confronted with an instance of deviance, the field man's instincts are to stop the pollution, identify its source, and negotiate for preventive or remedial measures.
A pollution does not provide an officer with the excitement, satisfaction, and possible prestige among colleagues enjoyed by policemen (Cain, 1973:32), but is a symbolic assault on ‘his river’, a serious blow to his careful tending of the environment to be healed as quickly as possible.
Similarly, the officer's conception of an emergency is something demanding instant action to correct a  problem rather than to apprehend a violator.
The place of the formal legal process — prosecution — is transformed in this compliance system from the public, occasionally dramatic, but quite conventional response in a sanctioning system to a rarity reserved for a small, highly selected number of cases.
In relation to the instances of prosecutable deviance which come to light, few pollutions even result in the initiation of the formal process by the taking of a statutory sample; rarely do they end up in court with conviction, sanction, and the attendant publicity in the local newspaper (see ch. 9, s.i).
And the drama is hardly ever played out in the Crown Court.
When prosecution for pollution does take place, it is in the magistrates' court, where it shares the stage with licensing applications and speeding motorists.
The threat of prosecution lurks, however, in the background of private negotiations, a threat to be unveiled in the face of unco-operativeness or intransigence.
Where enforcement in a sanctioning system is occasionally dramatic, securing compliance with regulation has little potential for drama.
It tends to be uneventful, its often prolonged sequence of steps suggesting enforcement by attrition.
The control of water pollution, for example, like other forms of regulatory behaviour, is an unobtrusive activity.
In contrast with the readily-recognizable policeman on the street, pollution control is conducted by agents who, bearing no insignia of office, are for the most part obscure and anonymous.
The work itself consists substantially of personal transactions between the polluter and field staff.
Their privacy and low visibility may be exploited by enforcers who, as a strategic consideration to secure compliance, can hold out the prospect of the ultimate sanction for deviance — the public display of the polluter as a defendant in court.
In this context, prosecution itself — and not the punishment imposed by the court — becomes for the regulatory agency the penalty for failure to comply.
However, the enforcement agent in a compliance system regards prosecution as a sign of failure, where in a sanctioning system it becomes visible evidence that he has done his job.
Compliance strategy allows justice to be done in the process of negotiating conformity, whereas in a sanctioning system justice is done (so far as the enforcer is concerned) when someone is let off (Reiss and Bordua, 1967:37–8).
One of the themes of this book is that strategies of control employed in the enforcement of pollution regulations are shaped by features inherent in the nature of regulation itself.
In particular, regulatory control is characterized by an ambivalence which has both political  and moral dimensions.
Regulatory agencies must operate in a political environment, for regulation is intended to preserve the sometimes fragile balance between the interests of economic activity on the one hand and the public welfare on the other.
Agencies are extremely sensitive to their political environment.
They find themselves operating between two broad publics or constituencies with competing views about the proper realm of government in regulating the economy.
These constituencies are a reflection of ideological differences and represent opposing positions on the fundamental political dilemma of regulation: the extent to which economic restraint by the imposition of legal rules is justifiable (Edelman, 1964:22 ff.; Freedman, 1975; Kagan, 1978:9 ff.; Murphy, 1961).
These constituencies are broader and more diffuse than mere pressure groups, though such groups may comprise their most visible and vocal components.
They are, rather, constellations of political ideas, currents of opinion, with interests in agency activity.
From time to time they surface to make regulation a topic of political debate.
These interested, shifting publics are the agencies' significant audiences.
I shall caricature the constituencies in pollution control as ‘environmentalist’ and ‘business’.
Those sympathetic to the environmentalist position accept the need for substantial expenditure on water pollution control.
They urge a fuller, more activist policy of enforcement, and advocate wider restraint on economic pursuits, in the interest of minimizing the harms which flow from unregulated activity, even though this may impose substantial costs and restraints upon productive enterprise.
Agency enforcement is often criticized from this perspective as scant and ineffective, with the agencies captured by the interests they seek to control.
Legal sanctions are regarded as impotent.
The business constituency, on the other hand, views much regulation as an unjustifiable intrusion by the State.
It proclaims the burdens of pollution control regulation, displaying industry as suffocating under costly yet trivial constraints.
At the same time it plays down the dangers of pollution.
Those sympathetic to industrial and agricultural interests seek a ‘hands off’ policy, with few impediments to productivity.
The business constituency not only wants to be as little burdened as possible with the costs of complying with regulation, it is also critical of what it sees as inordinate amounts of money being spent on pollution control by bloated, publicly-funded organizations.
The existence of these two adversaries reflecting incompatible interests poses practical problems for the water authorities, for while they have been established ostensibly to advance environmentalist values, and serve as a concrete expression of the belief that intervention is proper and necessary (for which they have been equipped with the criminal law), they find that their legitimacy as enforcement agencies is sometimes questionable.
Enforcing rules when caught between opposing public constituencies causes difficulties for agencies which must work within the framework of an ostensibly activist legal mandate.
Organizational self-preservation, as this book shows, makes it imperative for them ‘to manufacture the appearance of activity…the symbolic reality of impact, the fiction of real power…
‘. The resulting sense of vulnerability is the more acute because regulation implies a degree of tolerance about the activity causing concern, rather than its elimination.
From a social policy point of view the issue is not whether to allow pollution, but how much pollution to allow (see Ackerman et al., 1974).
Pollution control work, then, is typical of the many areas of social control characterized by goals of regulation rather than repression .
Regulation is a practical compromise between the benefits and harms of unfettered economic activity.
‘The real source of deviation in such areas’, writes Lemert (1972:55), ‘is not necessarily change in the behavior of the subjects of regulation, but may be the imposition of new rules which define existing behavior, or behavior consistent with older norms, as now deviant.
The object of so defining the behavior is to produce change, not to repress it.’
As soon as we talk of ‘regulation’ rather than repression, we admit the necessity of discretionary enforcement and open the way to controversy .
The moral dimension of the ambivalence surrounding regulatory control is most clearly exposed by regulatory rule-breaking.
There is a reluctance, prima facie, to regard a breach of regulation as morally reprehensible, since the conduct addressed is widely regarded as ‘morally neutral’(Kadish, 1963; also Ball and Friedman, 1965; Fuller, 1942; Yoder, 1978), in contrast with those behaviours which are the stuff of traditional criminal law.
This is recognized in the familiar distinction in criminal law between mala in se and mala prohibita .
Prohibitions are nevertheless crimes because, in Matza's words, ‘they elicit authorized state intervention, but they are different from other crimes in failing to self-evidently warrant intervention’(Matza, 1964:161).
Those crimes that ‘self-evidently warrant state intervention’ I shall refer to throughout as ‘traditional crimes’.
Yet to describe regulatory deviance as ‘morally neutral’ misses the  point.
‘Morally problematic’ might be more apt, for later chapters will argue that all rule-breaking is morally evaluated, with profound implications for enforcement.
Regarded in the abstract, pollution offences may not be treated as ‘real crimes’.
Most people, indeed, are unwilling to talk of ‘crime’ when they discuss breach of pollution regulations: this sort of language is considered appropriate only where clearly blameworthy conduct exists — where there is a calculated breach of regulation, or where the polluting substance concerned is widely known to be dangerous and there was carelessness or recklessness in handling it.
But when clothed with notions of gravity or blameworthiness — and setting is an inevitable component in the evaluation of conduct — any hints of moral neutrality are abandoned.
Moral ambivalence is probably associated with a number of other features which distinguish regulatory misconduct from breaches of the traditional code.
One is that regulation seeks to control economic life, yet it is this which is recognized as responsible for the material well-being of the community.
Another is the relative recency with which new values, untouched by the aura of the sacred, have been invented and proscribed (Sutherland, 1945; but cf.
Walsh and Schram, 1980).
Pollution, for example, became a problem suitable for regulation by the criminal law as a result of nineteenth-century industrialization and urbanization (Brenner, 1974).
In effect the law has encroached upon vast areas of activity.
A broad array of newly-defined prohibitions, often serving several conflicting social goals, has been grafted onto a criminal law concerned with traditional crimes — such taken-for-granted unacceptable behaviours as murder, rape, robbery, arson, and theft (see Diver, 1980; Thomas, 1980).
Furthermore, the definitions of these latter forms of deviance, the prototypical subject matter of police enforcement work, are located in legislation and its attendant case law.
In other words, the attributes of traditional crime are defined for the enforcement agency.
They have a general audience.
Regulatory agencies, however, are typically vested with a broad legal mandate which gives them discretion to establish standards marking out legally acceptable and unacceptable behaviour (see Lowi, 1979).
This presumably does not make the prohibitions any less morally problematic.
In Britain, ambivalence about regulatory rule-breaking has been displayed in the levels of sanction provided in the criminal law (see Carson, 1980b).
It is as if the legislature wishes both to compromise the criminalizing effect of conviction and to mitigate the impact of a  prosecution facilitated by strict liability (cf.
Friedman, 1967; Paulus, 1974).
While the penalties for water pollution offences are in theory more severe than most field staff believe them to be, they remain frail in comparison with those available to sanction traditional crime.’
Though regulatory law is in general framed to penalize leniently, complaints are sometimes made (particularly by enforcement agents) that the levels of penalty imposed are themselves derisory.
One of the two pollution control agencies studied reported, for instance, that in a recent twelve month period the average fine levied for pollution offences was £49 (unpubl. agency document).’
The harms which are associated with breaches of regulation also encourage a degree of moral ambivalence.
Harms which are the consequence of most traditional crimes are normally immediate and noticeable, and establishing a direct link between act and consequences is a relatively simple matter which facilitates enforcement.
While harm may sometimes be direct and visible in the regulatory arena, it may also be vague and amorphous, gaining in severity by accumulation.
Indeed, although regulatory offences in the abstract may be regarded as of minor consequence they may in certain cases have drastic results.
Similarly, the victims of pollution may be readily apparent in some cases, but in many others they may be dispersed and diffuse.
Some victims of regulatory deviance may be made remote by time, as in the case of air pollution, radiation, or some forms of occupational disease.
Here, each individual act or continuing infraction may not amount to a significant harm of itself.
It is in the aggregate that the damage may assume serious proportions, hence the emphasis given to preventive work in compliance systems.
The victims of this kind of deviance may be unaware in the absence of a perceptible physical threat that they are being victimized.
In this connection it is difficult, sometimes impossible, in pollution control work to establish a satisfactory causal link between event and harm.
Indeed, it is not even known whether some substances which contaminate water are harmful or not.
It is predictable that impetus for regulatory reform or pressure for crackdowns generated by moral entrepreneurs (Becker, 1963) often comes about only when victims become visible, for it is the impact of deviance which contributes to a judgment of its gravity (Schrager and Short, 1980).
It seems to be more difficult for human beings to apprehend the gravity of harms which take several years to manifest themselves.
Ambivalence poses the crucial problem of enforcement for regulatory agencies and their field staffs, because their authority is not  secured on a perceived moral and political consensus about the ills they seek to control .
The police, in comparison, enjoy a relatively secure moral mandate.
In pollution control work, however, there is none of the sacredness of the policing of the traditional code (Lemert, 1972; Manning, 1977), and it is more difficult to dramatize the threat of pollution than to portray the symbolic assaults on the community from criminals, addicts, vandals, and other sinister figures on the fringes of the moral order (Manning, 1980), notwithstanding the missionary zeal of some proponents of regulatory reform in the USA.
Regulatory deviance rarely possesses the emotive properties of many traditional crimes.
The latter also more regularly invite the attention of the press and therefore the organized resentment of the public.’
In the traditional code there is rarely any ‘good’ reason for a breach.
In regulation, however, there is a myriad of ‘plausible’ grounds for non-compliance or partial compliance.
The lack of a moral mandate threatens the regulatory agency's legitimacy as an enforcement authority.
Instead, agencies find they must tread a tricky path between the competing claims of state regulation and free enterprise.
As this book shows, the ambivalence, tensions, and dilemmas prompted by the opposing interests in regulation are continuously worked out in the day to day enforcement decisions of field officers.
Three other matters central to regulatory enforcement deserve brief attention.
First is the question of liability.
The relatively recent introduction of regulatory prohibitions has been associated with an extension of the law's conception of criminality to embrace a notion of social harm in addition to one of individual guilt, characteristic of traditional crime (cf.
Sayre, 1933).
This shift has been reflected in a desire to protect the public from the unanticipated consequences of everyday applications of science and technology and accompanied by the growing role of organizations as actors in society.
The sensitivity in the law to collective interests and the problems posed where the law has encroached upon complex technical behaviour have provoked concern about the difficulties of proving intent, particularly where organizations are involved.
These in turn have raised difficulties of evidence and proof in law which legislatures have attempted to circumvent by rejecting the traditional prerequisites of some degree of mental intent on the part of the deviant actor — the concept of mens rea — in favour of the ostensibly more easily managed notion of strict liability, permitting (in theory) legal enforceability of a prohibition without regard to the blameworthiness of the actor (Harvard Law Review , 1979; Jacobs, 1971; Paulus, 1974).
Here, again, we see the  focus upon ends characteristic of compliance systems, for ‘the achievement of the regulatory purpose is seen as the all-encompassing justification’(Allen, 1977:756).
In traditional criminal law much enforcement activity is given to establishing the existence of mens rea , creating the conditions for the application of legally defined blameworthiness, since it is this which is a prerequisite for the imposition of punishment.
Mens rea is not normally an issue in the case of pollution of watercourses when cause is to be established.
The law speaks of causing or knowingly permitting pollution, and the concept of cause has been strictly construed.
Secondly, mirroring the extension of the law's concern to notions of social harm has been a widening of the conceptions of deviant and enforcer to include not only individual actors but also organizations.
Theorizing and debate about law-breaking and law enforcement have been  premised on a model of the criminal actor as individual and on a conception of enforcement as practised by a uniformed and public police.
Regulatory control, however, is concerned for the most part with organizational deviance, and with many activities in which compliance does not reside simply in refraining from an act, but in positively doing something to remedy a state of affairs.
Much of a regulatory enforcement agent's behaviour is moulded by the fact that he is confronted with organizational activity, where the policeman is typically concerned with individuals or groups.
This dimension also has implications for deterrence theory: since organizations comprise many individuals of varying occupations, degrees of organizational responsibility, and access to deviant conduct, who, precisely, is being deterred, and how are they deterred, when a company is convicted?
Thirdly, regulatory agencies are specialist enforcement authorities, having a finite domain of control, consisting of particular behaviour and involving only a segment of the population at large, defined by the kind of economic activity subject to regulation.
Such a focused population is continuously open to control, and the population of deviants is potentially knowable (Reiss and Biderman, 1980:276) giving rise to an appreciation of potential violators as possessing unique identities.
The intimacy of the enforcement relationship is a characteristic of compliance systems where the control of a distinct population of potential violators is directed to ‘organizations or persons in organized activities [rather]than to individuals apart from them’(Reiss, 1980:31).
Such a personalized system of enforcement furthers the commitment to effecting remedy, inherent in compliance  strategy.
Police enforcement of the traditional code, on the other hand, is in theory not a matter for a mere segment of the population, and except where the police deal with persistent or ‘problem’ offenders, their target population is one made up of strangers, given to unpredictable deviance.
Left unremarked in the discussion so far is the irony of the place of criminal punishment in a system which emphasizes conciliatory control based upon compliance.
This irony prompts the questions which guided the research and which form the central problem addressed by this book:since those who are subject to regulation have good economic reason not to comply, how is compliance secured, given the frailty of the criminal sanction and its virtual disuse?
How is control effected where the law seeks to remedy a state of affairs?
What is the place of the formal legal process in regulatory enforcement ?
I take a crude conception of compliance as a starting-point, since it is clear that, in factory or farm, money has been spent in response to the existence of water pollution regulation.
The simple physical evidence of at least a measure of compliance is widespread.
Anyone who walks round industrial premises will find visible sign of pollution treatment facilities installed and maintained, often at considerable expense.
The efforts farmers have made to control their silage liquors or cowshed washings are equally evident.
How have pollution control officers managed it?
How is regulatory law translated into regulatory activity?
III.
A Research Perspective
The present essay is a piece of interpretative sociology in the tradition of the societal reaction school (e.g. Becker, 1963; 1964) and the dramaturgical approach of Goffman (e.g. 1959; 1961; 1963: 1967; 1970; 1971).
It makes particular use of the work of scholars who have conducted ethnographic analyses of discretionary behaviour in legal settings (e.g. Cicourel, 1968; Emerson, 1969; Manning, 1977; Reiss, 1971; Ross, 1970; Skolnick, 1966; Sudnow, 1965).
An account of the research methods employed is presented in the Appendix.
Regulation and its enforcement are treated as social processes.
What might be regarded as the ‘problem’ of pollution resides not simply in the physical environment but in social behaviour.
A ‘pollution’ is a creation of human judgment.
Emphasis is given to the fluid, adaptive, but essentially patterned character of enforcement  behaviour.
Legal rules are mediated by the intervening interpretative processes informing the actions of enforcement agents which give substance to the vague aspirations of statute.
Similarly, evaluations of polluters are treated as open to the application of various definitions for the purpose of enforcing regulations.
Thus, in presenting in Part II of the book a descriptive analysis of the routine work of field officers, the working definitions they observe in doing the job are stressed.
After all, pollution control is what field officers do every day in factories and farms (cf.
Kaufman, 1960:65).
The ways in which events and acts come to have meanings attached to them which serve as the bases for action or inaction by regulatory agencies, and the negotiating tactics employed in securing compliance are central topics dealt with in Part III.
A focus of the analysis here is upon the characterizations generated by enforcement agents of ‘polluter’ and ‘pollution’which inform the sequence of judgments comprising the agency's response.
To focus upon the processes of characterization is to draw attention to the definition of act or event, and interaction between potential deviant and enforcement agent.
Such interaction has implications for the future behaviour of field staff, for enforcement is organized to reflect the ways in which polluters define their behaviour and the ‘pollution’.
Control, in short, is regarded as a reciprocal relationship.
The enforcement relationship is accordingly presented as negotiated and symbiotic in character, since social control encounters, ‘those where reaction to deviance is central, involve degrees of mutual dependency, thus all rule enforcement is a matter of negotiation’(Manning, 1977:247, italics omitted).
In some circumstances interaction may prompt enforcement activity substantially independent of the definitions of the seriousness of the problem to be remedied.
The interpretative work of field staff, particularly the procedures by which they graft meaning onto the behaviour of polluters for the purpose of categorizing them for future decisions about enforcement, is, then, a central theme.
The perspective presented is one from field level, though it is one which recognizes that an agency's legal mandate is refracted by organizational constraints and demands.
Problems of order, control and freedom are, indeed, increasingly caught up in organizational processes (Manning, 1980:10).
My intention is to display pollution control work as individual and organizational activity  premised upon the appreciation of symbol and common-sense theorizing about  behaviour.
In a bureaucracy such as a pollution control agency, the organizing principle is administrative efficiency —‘an orientation to the expeditious attainment of the given objectives’(Blau, 1963: 264)— which reaches down to the field officer in the form of a number of imperatives about getting the job done in certain ways that have profound implications for his exercise of discretion.
The impact of bureaucratic strategies of control imposed on the enforcement job in a setting characterized by a high degree of personal autonomy is explored in Part II.
The analysis also pursues some of the contrasts between sanctioning and compliance systems of enforcement, using the now substantial literature about the policeman on the street to throw the behaviour of the pollution control field staff into bolder relief.
Anglo-American sociology of law has been imprinted with the emphasis given to the study of law enforcement and criminal justice systems in handling traditional crime and, despite the interest of a few sociologists of deviance in some marginal forms of deviant conduct, our present conceptions of criminal behaviour are heavily influenced by this emphasis.
The literature, in fact, has left regulatory misconduct, deviant organizational behaviour and organizations as the objects of enforcement activity virtually untouched, with the celebrated exceptions of Sutherland (1940; 1949), Clinard (1952, 1979) and Geis (1967, 1968).
But even among these writers the predominant conception of organizational crime is of individual traditional crime, in the form of the various kinds of dishonesty committed by corporations, rather than one of the violation of the host of criminally-enforceable regulations to which organizations are subject.
This is unfortunate.
To look at the enforcement of regulation may help refine some of the present conceptions of enforcement behaviour and organizational deviance, while regard for the enforcement of prohibitions may sharpen perspectives on the nature of traditional crime.
IV.
The Formal Organization Of Pollution Control 
The essence of regulation is a conception that law is the means by which some notion of the public good is to take precedence over narrow economic interests.
This is not a particularly novel view in law.
What is of relatively recent origin, however, is the creation of bureaucracies equipped with legal sanctions to regulate economic life.
Specially created to control a particular segment of economic  activity, regulatory agencies in general enjoy broad powers to set and enforce standards of conduct.
This book reports the control of one such activity, namely pollution discharged directly to watercourses, excluding trade effluents which are disposed of to foul sewer for purification at sewage treatment works.
It should be remembered, however, that the great majority of inland sewage works themselves ultimately discharge their treated effluents to open watercourses, subject to more or less the same kinds of constraint as other dischargers.
Pollution control is administered in England and Wales by Regional Water Authorities which were created by the Water Act, 1973.
These authorities are presided over by the National Water Council, set up at the same time to be a central co-ordinating body to give advice on major matters of policy (Times , 1978).
The task of the authorities is to manage all water services within a geographical area determined by river catchments.
The ten authorities acquired control of water services from a variety of other bodies including river authorities and local authorities, and are now responsible for all matters connected with the use and disposal of water: water conservation and supply; land drainage; amenity, recreation, and fisheries; and pollution control.
Each water authority has its own form of organization, administrative control, and territorial jurisdiction.
The responsibility for detecting pollution and enforcing regulations in the two water authorities studied rests with a policing section or inspectorate.
The authorities must therefore police themselves, a problem the more poignant since their own sewage works are often the worst polluters.
The authorities' legislative mandate, intended to give organizational activity a sense of purpose and direction, is framed in general terms and confers wide discretion as to the formulation of policy and its implementation.
The Water Act, 1973, speaks of a national policy for water, ‘the restoration and maintenance of the wholesomeness of rivers’, and ‘the enhancement and preservation of amenity’(s.1).
It goes on to specify a duty to take action ‘necessary or expedient…for the purpose of conserving, redistributing or otherwise augmenting water resources’ and ‘securing proper use of water resources’(s.10).
There is no more detail than this.
The principal offence, located at the time of field work in the Rivers (Prevention of Pollution) Act 1951, s.2, is committed if a person ‘causes or knowingly permits to enter a stream any poisonous, noxious or  polluting matter…
‘. The offence is in the main one of strict liability; indeed in the leading case of Alphacell v. 
Woodward (1972), the House of Lords endorsed a strict construction of the word ‘causes’.
The 1951 Act also provides for personal as well as corporate liability.
The penalties in force during the research for a breach of s.2 of the 1951 Act were a maximum fine of £200 for conviction on indictment, £100 on summary conviction.
However, if ‘the offence was substantially a repetition or continuation of an earlier offence’ and followed conviction for the earlier offence, the penalties were increased substantially.
On indictment a prison sentence of not more than six months was possible together with a fine; on summary conviction the maximum was three months.
Stiffer penalties for the principal offence embodied in the 1974 Act were awaiting implementation during fieldwork: these allow for a fine of £400 or three months imprisonment, or both, on summary conviction, and for ‘a fine’(without maximum) or two years imprisonment, or both, on conviction on indictment.
The legislation does not provide other forms of sanction — though agencies are prepared to employ sanctions of their own as part of the compliance process (ch. 7).
In this study I shall refer for convenience and anonymity to ‘pollution control agencies’.
It must be remembered, however, that what are described as ‘agencies’ are sections (albeit independent sections) of a much larger authority.
Also for reasons of anonymity, I adopt neutral terms to define the pollution control district officers, referring to them as ‘field officers’ or ‘field men’.
Their immediate superiors are described as ‘area supervisors’ or ‘area men’.
Headquarters staff are referred to as ‘senior staff’.
The research was conducted in two water authorities which when necessary I shall refer to as the ‘northern’ and ‘southern’authorities — adjectives simply chosen in the interests of anonymity.
In both agencies pollution control is administered from headquarters by an independent department.
The northern agency's territory is very mixed.
Many parts of it are extremely rural with farming the predominant industry; watercourses here are maintained to a high standard of cleanliness and relied upon heavily as potable supply for the many industrial cities elsewhere in the authority's jurisdiction.
Headquarters is located in a major conurbation where there is a wide variety of manufacturing industry.
Some of these works are small, some exceptionally large, sometimes employing thousands of people on one site.
Many of these are extremely old; many are run down.
Rivers in this area are mainly  comprised of domestic and industrial effluent, and many have been fishless in living memory.
There is plenty of heavy industry in other cities in the authority's areas, including coal mining and steel making.
Leachate and contaminated ground water from old industrial sites are major problems in urban areas where streams are small.
The authority's sewage works vary in size from those producing many millions of gallons of treated effluent a day to those serving a few houses in a rural area where the discharge may be the merest trickle.
In such a mixed territory it is no surprise to find that the quality of watercourses is often strikingly disparate.
Many are little more than effluent channels, while some, by an accident of catchment, contain water fit for potable supply.
A familiar feature in the northern agency's territory is the watercourse with headwaters of good quality which becomes heavily polluted downstream by the effluent from a sewage works serving a large town, or the discharges from one or two major industries.
In general, in the authority's industrialized areas the emphasis in pollution control is on cleaning up heavily polluted rivers.
Pollution control work in the southern area has had, in contrast with the northern, a relatively long history and tends as a result to emphasize the maintenance of already existing acceptable standards of water quality.
The southern authority area is dominated by a heavily populated conurbation.
There is a good deal of industry associated with the city, but for the most part it is not heavy industry.
Pollution control problems arise from the number and variety of industrial and manufacturing processes employed in industries set in an entirely urban environment, since domestic sources, with few exceptions, are efficiently treated in a small number of large sewage works.
Elsewhere in the southern authority areas there are a number of towns with light industry, much of which is modern, with effluents discharged to foul sewer rather than direct to watercourses.
In the headwaters of most rivers there are large tracts of agricultural land and a virtual absence of industrial discharges.
This provides for a supply of very good quality water to the main river, which itself is used as potable supply.
Many discharges, both domestic and industrial, are made into the tidal section of the main river.
Within each agency, the formal organization of pollution control is moulded by topography with river catchments determining the districts of individual jurisdiction.
The district is the basic geographical unit of pollution control and usually contains one or two river or stream systems.
In the northern agency, about half a dozen districts comprise a pollution control area.
Each district is policed by a field officer responsible to an area supervisor.
Each area has an administrative headquarters, usually located in one of the more important towns near the area's geographical centre.
In addition to the half dozen or so field officers patrolling the districts, some of the areas in the northern authority have provision for a small number of additional posts.
There may be one or two senior field officers whose job is partly to give administrative assistance to the area supervisor, partly to carry out routine pollution control work in their own districts.
These senior officers supervise the activities of the one or two assistant field officers also found in most areas.
This junior rank was introduced by the agency during the course of the research in an attempt to establish a training grade for field staff and as a means of relieving district officers of some of the simpler but time-consuming tasks of routine river sampling.
Field assistants, unlike the district men, are not responsible for any geographical part of an area.
Organization in the southern agency is less centralized.
It is subdivided into three geographical and administrative regions which are independent except at the highest level.
Fieldwork was conducted in two of the three regions, each of which has its own particular administrative structure.
In one region, a heavily urbanized area, the arrangements resemble the northern agency's internal structure, with an area supervisor directing a number of field officers each tending a discrete geographical district.
In the other region (a mixed area containing substantial rural zones) there are, in addition to the field officers, a number of senior and junior posts.
Here tasks are less clearly differentiated according to rank; men in all three grades would, for example, conduct routine river sampling.
In both agencies there are in effect four senior administrative positions with direct responsibility for pollution control work.
The most junior of these acts as a regional supervisor who manages the activities of area staff.
The three senior officials are generally involved in policy and planning issues and the management and co-ordination of pollution control operations.
The directors and deputy directors are key figures in the formulation of pollution control policy, and in decision making about the use of law in pollution control.
They are advised by and responsible to a committee of members of the water authority.
Both authorities have legal departments whose staff are, from time to time, called upon to offer expert advice where senior officials are  dealing with pollution control matters with a legal content.
Expert advice is most frequently needed when senior staff are considering mounting a prosecution (ch. 9) or when there are difficulties in connection with the issuance of a consent (ch. 2).
V. Postscript
Modern law, Lowi has observed, ‘has become a series of instructions to administrators rather than a series of commands to citizens’(1979:106, italics omitted).
Water pollution control shares with other forms of regulation a broad legislative mandate and an unspecified task of implementation.
A characteristically legal mode of social control — the criminal sanction for misconduct — is made available to govern a social problem with technological and economic dimensions.
The legislature creates a rather abstract mandate and an agency to implement it, while only defining explicitly the offences which give rise to prosecution.
And even then, the content and boundaries of the offensive behaviour are matters of administrative discretion.
Ironically, the power to prosecute is rarely used.
Legislative mandate and legal offence are linked by an unguided and pervasive administrative discretion.
It is as if the creation of a regulatory bureaucracy carries with it implicit powers to achieve agency goals.
The power to negotiate, which is central to compliance systems, is one which exists by implication only but one made possible because the law is not made concrete or specific.
Regulatory law is permeated with uncertainty.
2
2.
Setting Standards
I. Issues
The boundaries of regulatory deviance are drawn by administrative agencies: pollution, in other words, is an administrative creation.
The broad legal mandate of the agencies about water pollution control is transformed into policy by senior officials and given practical expression in the setting of pollution standards.
Standards ('consents') are licences to discharge polluting matter.
Pollution is in effect qualitatively and quantitatively controlled by the water authorities since standards are administratively negotiated.
Not only, then, do the agencies possess power to enforce the law, they actually determine the reach of the law, for (in contrast with the police) they exercise a real legislative authority, enjoying broad discretion to define what makes ‘pollution’.
In this sense the water authorities create pollution, as Becker might say (1963:9), by making the rules whose infraction constitutes pollution.
Definition and enforcement, a dual authority, are reciprocally related, a theme to be explored in this chapter.
For agency policy-makers the consent is an important tool expressing political and economic judgments about water quality.
Its central purpose, as the head of one the agencies put it, is ‘to produce a river which is suitable for the uses which are needed downstream — providing a potable water supply, for fisheries, just amenity.
We might even decide we just want an effluent channel.
…The consents are geared to produce the quality water you want in the river for the use you want downstream.’
For the water authorities in general the practical significance of consents is that many rivers are now substantially comprised of effluent already discharged subject to consent.
One of the southern authority's main potable supply rivers, for example, consists in dry weather of more than 50 per cent effluent; and another river flowing through a major city in the northern authority is over 90 per cent effluent.
Consents to pollute come in the form of emission or effluent standards which prescribe the temperature, amount, and kind of polluting matter which may be discharged from a particular source.
Dischargers are thus permitted to pollute by the water authorities — but only (in theory) up to those levels set out in the discharger's consent document.
A consent, however, is a movable threshold.
Once fixed it may subsequently be reviewed and modified by the agency in consultation with the discharger.
The pollution standards in a consent are defined locally by each water authority and are specific in application, with each consent negotiated on an ad hoc basis.
Standards are expressed quantitatively and each one is formulated not to contemplate exceptional circumstances, instead addressing pollution without regard to mitigating features, such as accident.
Simply by selecting those substances in impure water which are to be held potentially ‘polluting’(pollution parameters) and the point at which such contamination is to be regarded as ‘polluting’(pollution limits), together with temperature and volume restrictions, the agency establishes theoretically enforceable boundaries, exercising, in other words, power to control the potential level of pollution.
And since the water authorities are enforcement agencies they also control to a very great degree what may seem to be some sort of ‘real level ’ of pollution which comes to light in amount and kind — those events or incidents which are detected and processed, becoming statistics of non-compliance or even, in some rare cases, of prosecutions in annual reports.
In setting standards the water authorities, like other regulatory agencies, are confronted by two crucial problems.
First, pollution control means cost.
Since the cost of control usually returns few, if any, financial benefits to the discharger and has to be met by increased prices, dischargers regard pollution control costs as a burden to be avoided wherever possible.
There is no simple relationship between control and costs.
To make a significant impact upon a bad discharge is not necessarily very expensive.
But to make even a minor improvement to effluent which already consists of relatively good quality water may involve the discharger in very heavy expenditure indeed (see Kneese, 1973).
The power to define and enforce consents is ultimately a power to put people out of business, to deter the introduction of new industry or to drive away going concerns.
The second, related, problem in standard setting is one of the distribution of costs.
A tension between officials' perceptions of equity and efficacy is, for them, a familiar dilemma.
The conflict is between an essentially moral stance which prizes consistency and uniformity in the application of standards (similar discharges should be similarly controlled in degree and kind) and a utilitarian approach  concerned with effect on water quality, regardless (again, in theory, at least) of the means of the discharger or the demands fortuitously being placed unequally on similar dischargers (see generally Ackemman et al , 1974).
'…[The]load of polluting matter discharged should be controlled at all times to exactly the level that a river would accept without hamming river uses or the environment' (unpubl. agency document).
This is a recurrent dilemma in pollution control since efficacy insists that standards be tied to the setting of a discharge and settings vary enormously.
The weight to be given to the normally competing values of equity and efficacy is a persistent problem both in setting or reviewing standards and in enforcing them.
On one level the dilemma is between standards of general and of individualized application.
On another the conflict is sometimes portrayed as between older, established ways of handling pollution control and newer, more ‘scientific’ approaches in which environmental impact in its widest sense is the primary concern.
The utilitarianism of the scientist tends to view the principle of equity with a certain disdain because of its potential inefficiency: ‘Equitability can be the biggest millstone,’ said a senior officer with a special interest in consents.
‘Often it goes against technical judgments.
When it comes into play, some of the ultimate answers are not the best ones.’
In terms of formal policy, a shift in recent years has seen equity ostensibly yield place to efficacy.
In practice this should mean that the design of consents has been influenced less by conceptions about the similarity of discharges than by a scientific analysis of the impact a particular discharge may have on a particular watercourse and the polluting load that that watercourse can accept, according to agency plans for river quality.
Senior officials are firmly committed to the utilitarian view: ‘treating discharges alike in terms of…the quality of the discharge, as distinct from the effect on the environment’, said one, ‘is absolute nonsense.’
Yet senior staff and field men alike are aware of the fact that most dischargers are likely to be more sympathetic to an approach to standard setting and enforcement based on equity.
Apart from the moral preference that like should be treated alike, dischargers' commercial instincts argue that no manufacturer or producer should be placed in a more favourable position than his competitors.
The practical task, then, for a water authority setting or modifying a consent based on criteria relating to the particular watercourse becomes one of persuading a discharger disadvantaged by some criterion which makes sense in utilitarian — but not moral — terms of the force of the agency's position.
In some cases this is apparently not as arduous a task as it may seem, simply because dischargers find it extremely difficult to portray themselves as ‘similar’ to their rivals on more than a very few criteria.
An individualized approach based on a concept of efficacy can be sold to dischargers because it is ‘scientific’.
Equity can be played down:
‘I don't know if it should be that important if everything we do is based on good sound scientific principles, because if people perhaps in the same industry are situated in different places in the estuary, y'know, if one was to point the finger at the other and say ‘But you allow him to discharge such and such and you only let us do this’, then we should be able to turn round and say, ‘Ah yes, but you're discharging in a different place and the river quality in this different place needs different treatment.’
…I think you can only treat them similarly if all other things are equal, if they're discharging into the same sort of watercourse in the same sort of position.
Because obviously if you had one particular factory on the tideway and another producing an identical product and identical effluent in one of the tributaries, you couldn't treat them the same because they're patently different cases.’
On this ‘scientific’ view of standard setting, the design of consents to discharge polluted water is to be based on a dispassionate consideration of the amount and kind of pollution load any watercourse can bear.
The capacity of a watercourse and the tolerable limits of polluting effluent are calculated according to a mathematical model, which ideally should be applied routinely and objectively to all dischargers regardless of their means, the costs of treatment, their prior efforts, or the demands made of their competitors.
Field men, however, are constantly reminded that industrialists and farmers work on a principle of equity: they can readily discover the standards which their competitors must observe and may complain if they are being handicapped.
But the agencies prefer to avoid complaints wherever possible, and this encourages an administrative inclination for equity of treatment, even though‘scientific’ judgment may dictate otherwise.
Negotiating about standards, especially when there is some disparity between apparently similar dischargers, though an infrequent event, can be one of the field man's trickiest tasks.
The picture of an agency which dispassionately administers scientifically-designed standards is blurred further by organizational practices.
Later chapters will show that in pollution control work, standards are by no means treated as absolute proscriptions inexorably enforced.
The agencies display a sometimes considerable flexibility both in the standards set and in the enforcement policy  adopted, in recognition of the technical difficulties and costs of complying, the potential for error, and the stigmatizing effect of strict legal enforcement.
Furthermore, the processes giving rise to pollution sometimes produce erratic discharges in which effluents may become heavily polluting, and riverwater is also inherently variable in quality.
The result is that a degree of leeway is normally granted to dischargers, and a certain amount of pollution allowed to occur with impunity.
Such leeway is the means by which the enforcement agency adapts to uncertainty.
‘The present situation is that consent conditions are written as though they were absolute,’ a senior official said:
‘The time it goes over once in a lifetime — and you're a criminal.
So the practice has been to regard them rather unofficially as having been satisfied if there is compliance on about…three occasions out of four, or four out of five, or two out of three — practices are variable from one authority to another.
We've adopted a three out of four.’
Non-compliance with standards is thus organizationally sanctioned .
Though the consent may not be strictly enforced, however, it is significant as a benchmark for both dischargers and enforcement authorities.
It remains the criterion of pollution, despite its irregular enforcement; as such it creates a zone of officially tolerated ‘pollution’ which will vary as the standard and the setting of the discharge vary.
And it remains the legally enforceable standard of pollution if customary enforcement practices are suspended.
In a substantial proportion of cases dischargers normally display little or no objection to the standards imposed by the agency, as a result of preparatory work in negotiations conducted by the field officer together with, in more important cases, his area supervisor.
But where standards appear to a discharger to impose excessive demands he may exercise a right of appeal to the Secretary of State.
Although hardly ever employed, this right of appeal in effect confers bargaining power upon the discharger who seeks to counter administrative extravagance, since the agencies attempt to avoid appeal at almost all costs:
‘It's certainly true that if people suggest they will go to the appeal procedure then we will do almost everything we can to avoid that, which means in some cases we're letting people get away with something that you wouldn't let others get away with, simply because they're being difficult — well, not being difficult, they would be just exercising their rights.’
The desire to avoid appeal may partly be a reflection of the fact that standards have been selected by resort to the convention of established — but largely unexamined — practice which may be  difficult to defend in a formal arena.
Thus ‘you've got to be very sure of your ground, because you've got to get up, not in a court, but in an appeal situation, and give evidence’.
There is also a good organizational reason why agencies fear appeals: appeals introduce uncertainty (cf.
Kaufman, 1960:154–5) and threaten their control over the design of consents.
An appeal may establish a formal precedent which an agency might find undesirable, since standard setting is then taken out of its hands by people regarded as possessed of less expertise and possibly differing interests.
A principle informing negotiations about consents is to avoid the risk of creating a precedent on appeal injurious to the agency's interests, a principle of wide applicability, for to appeal and win — or even to appeal and lose — publicizes the possibility of remedy which itself is a threat to the agency's whip hand.
Appeal gives status and recognition to protest.
Ironically, recourse to precedent is a useful tactic for the field man to employ when negotiating about standards.
Reference can be made to standards usually set by the agency ‘in cases of this kind’, or attention drawn to practice in past cases.
But the officer must maintain a certain flexibility and be able to deviate from usual practice where necessary, especially to avoid the risk that an administrative convention may be established which can subsequently be used by others with conflicting interests as a resource in their own negotiations.
Obviously when the agency claims allegiance to an established precedent where its formal interests in pollution control or its organizational interests are served, it lends further support to the principle of equity.
Indeed, the principle serves administrative interests well, for if standard conditions designed to be equitable as between apparently similar dischargers are routinely applied, the discharger who wishes to appeal against the standards imposed in his case is probably in a weak position if the agency is able to show the Minister that the standards were those typically in force.
But in practical terms, the organizational imperative to avoid appeal means modifying demands in the course of negotiations if there is any suggestion that the agency might have to defend itself in an appeal: ‘we try to see’, said a senior officer, ‘there are no grounds for reasonable objection.’
II.
Procedure
Standard setting is not a large part of water authority activity because most dischargers have long since negotiated their consents, and a lack  of industrial development has depressed the number of new consents applied for.
More important in recent practice has been the review of consents already granted, a matter which has revived interest among agency staffing some of the major issues surrounding standard setting.
Consents tend not to vary greatly even between apparently very different effluents.
Limits are normally imposed on organic pollution and solids per unit of volume and often on ammonia, while industrial discharges frequently have an acidity or  alkalinity (pH) parameter.
Certain kinds of manufacturing processes attract specific parameters such as various metals, cyanide, phenols, or temperature.
In most cases the choice of parameters and limits is made by the officer in the field in response to an application from the would-be discharger, a choice which is routinely ratified by senior staff.
‘I just look at them,’ said a senior official.
‘I don't calculate them all.’
Once the field man and his area supervisor have settled upon the standards to be imposed, the consent is approved by the head of the agency and ratified by an advisory committee.
Staff senior to the area supervisor play an active part in shaping the standard to be set only rarely, in cases involving what a supervisor described as ‘very contentious issues: possibly major discharges from the Authority's own works or from industrial activity where there has been a history of wrangling and debate about standards from that particular section of the industry’.
Those very large industries which produce a substantial volume of effluent will also have their consents individually negotiated in recognition of the greater potential impact on the watercourse.
Otherwise, the usual approach is to apply the so-called ‘Royal Commission’ standards of twenty parts per million (p.p.m.) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and thirty p.p.m. suspended solids, with the addition of other parameters as appropriate.
It is done intuitively.
‘If we're talking about BOD or suspended solids, we have a feel for that…you make a ‘gut reaction’ decision.’
The choice relies heavily upon administratively established convention —‘normal ways’— as a device for help in determining any case at hand.
‘I think the first thing I tend to do’, said an area supervisor, ‘is…to look at the normal working standards normally applied and see whether they would be adequate to protect the river; and you then take into account the flow, the volume of the discharge or the rate of flow of the discharge and the volume.’
In the majority of cases the process is unexceptional:
‘It starts at [field]officer level.
The…officer will probably say ‘Royal Commission’, or whatever it should be, or something ‘long these lines to some industrialist.
The area  man'll look at it and say ‘You can knock them down’.
‘There might be oil from this site, we're putting oil on as well.’
Or,’ I think that one's a bit too strict.’
Or he would perhaps modify it.
And that's probably it.’
There are also tacit constraints upon standard setting.
Agency staff sometimes question themselves about a discharger's economic position and his capacity to comply with the parameters and limits which they would ideally like to impose.
But predictive judgments about ability to comply are founded not upon some dispassionate analysis of economic facts and figures so much as upon characterizations of a discharger's know-how and willingness to comply, derived from his occupation, size, experience, and reputation.
‘I think to myself ‘Well, has this company got the expertise to treat to this particular standard?’,’ said an area officer:
'’ Are they likely to be able to attain it and maintain it?
Are they, will they have the expertise?
Can they be trusted?’
Y'know, I mean there are companies and companies.
You expect that if you set a 10:10 standard on a [large well-known company]for a, say a pickle liquor, or something, if you did that they would comply because they're big enough and they've got the expertise, and so on.
If a company called Joe Bloggs and Company that were from a back street…came with a similar proposal and they obviously hadn't got two ha'pennies to rub together and certainly weren't gonna employ a chemist or anything like that, then…you would view that as a completely different proposition.
You would probably say ‘No.
We won't issue you with a consent at all.’‘
These remarks emphasize the central judgment of reputability.
The large, well-known company possesses ‘expertise’ and can be ‘trusted’, while the reference to employment of a chemist reveals that the small company lacking the attributes of wealth and competence is less able to comply, and implicitly untrustworthy.
In the absence of constant monitoring, trust is of crucial importance to an enforcement agency's detection and compliance processes.
Difficulties sometimes arise when the agency redefines pollution control policy for a stretch of water and, wishes to tighten existing standards.
Some of the issues typically raised during standard-setting negotiations surfaced in the following case from my field notes:
McDonald's' is typical of an old well-established firm which has been absorbed into a larger manufacturing group and modernized.
The company makes a wide range of bathroom ware and discharges its effluent into a fishless urban stream.
The authority's predecessor river board granted a consent some years ago with a number of parameters: 20 BOD, 100 p.p.m. suspended solids (relaxed from the usual 30), and various metals, including zinc, consented to the standard 0.5 p.p.m.
Laboratory analysis for the presence of various metals was not routinely carried out, however, until a couple of years ago, when it was suddenly discovered that McDonald's effluent contained 256 p.p.m. of zinc, a by-product of the glazing process.
[Water heavily polluted with zinc paradoxically looks particularly clear.]
The agency demanded that McDonald's take remedial measures.
Since then the firm  has managed to bring the amount of zinc in the effluent down to about 20 p.p.m., but the agency has made it clear that it has to go below that.
Dennis Blake, the area supervisor, wants to bring the zinc content much lower.
He and his field officer, Brian King, are working to a timetable of compliance.
After a slow start which prompted the field man to threaten to take a ‘stat’ Blake now considers the firm to be abreast of the schedule he and King have set.
Blake is satisfied that the threat of a formal sample was enough to put the wind up the company.
McDonald's meanwhile went over Blake's head to complain to the director of the agency about the demands being made of them.
The director, however, supported his staff; in fact, Blake said, he ‘put the fear of God in them.
You notice how they still turn white at the sound of his name.’
Later in the day during negotiations Blake will several times refer conspicuously to the director by name.
As we drive to McDonald's, Blake explains that the company can probably only come down to about one p.p.m. zinc, and only then if it spends a lot of money.
But it is technically possible.
He predicts that McDonald's will ask for a consent of ten p.p.m.
He says he will respond by asking for three, as a negotiating position, but is prepared to go to five.
He has written a letter to his director of pollution control, suggesting two or three p.p.m. which has been returned with the annotation ‘proceed as indicated’.
Blake is adamant that he will not allow McDonald's to go above five p.p.m.
To do so will effectively set a precedent for other dischargers who will soon discover that McDonald's is operating at an advantage.
McDonald's belongs to a federation of companies in the same business and the area man takes it for granted that the firm's competitors will soon hear about the relaxed consent and apply to the agency for similar leniency.
And if the agency subsequently has to treat other similar dischargers equally, Blake is concerned about a cumulative deterioration in water quality.
Blake has brought along a colleague who is an expert in the cleaning of various effluents to act as a consultant in the negotiations.
He discusses with Blake the various treatment methods for zinc which the firm might try, raising the possibility of a sand filter.
Blake is asked what a sand filter would cost.
He says he doesn't know, then volunteers two thousand to five thousand pounds.
This is a fairly typical response of pollution control staff who prefer to err on the side of caution, in the form of wide ranges, when asked to estimate costs of pollution control remedies.
Later that day, when involved in negotiation with the firm, the area man will adopt the lower figure for purposes of argument.
When I ask if the firm can afford it, he says it can, ‘because of the size of the company’, since it is part of a larger group.
‘It's a lot of money to me personally.
But it's nothing to a firm like McDonald's.’
We are met by one of the directors of the firm who takes us to a showroom for coffee.
Conversation is soon transformed into preliminary negotiation.
The director asks for ten.
Blake says how pleased he is with the firm's improved performance, acknowledging the considerable efforts and progress it has made.
But the legal requirement is 0.5.
[A consent, once formulated, can be portrayed for purposes of negotiation as a ‘legal requirement’.]
He is, however, prepared to recognize that it is unreasonable to expect McDonald's to make one p.p.m.
But he cannot go to ten.
Blake talks of fairness to other manufacturers and observes that a discharge of ten will give McDonald's ‘an unfair advantage’.
[He will say later, ‘If I'd relaxed the standard there I'd have had umpteen other people knocking on the door wanting to do precisely the same thing to save on trade effluent charges.’]
The director nods in agreement and does not seek to argue the point.
He has arranged for the agency staff to have lunch with the Managing Director and two experts in pollution control from the parent company who have travelled a considerable distance to attend.
In the meantime, we are taken to inspect the treatment plant, where King takes a sample of the effluent.
The engineer in charge reports that the firm has made great efforts recently to get some new equipment, but there has been a delay in delivery.
[This is a story which pollution control staff hear regularly.
In this case it seems not to be treated as a delaying tactic.]
We are then taken on a tour of the factory while waiting for lunch.
Blake and King  begin to complain to each other that they are now wasting their time, since matters are settled so far as they are concerned.
After the tour we are ushered into the board-room where a magnificent buffet lunch is laid out.
There is a splendid display of drinks.
We are invited to help ourselves.
Other directors join us, making a party of sixteen.
There is talk over drinks until the Managing Director arrives.
The pollution control men are not impressed with the lavish reception, King observing as he eats, ‘They're trying to buy us off now.’
Blake agrees: ‘They're trying to soften us up.
You enjoy it, but at the end of the day you have to ignore it.’
He goes on to mention the occasional embarrassing moments which occur when firms try to pass backhanders.
During lunch the Managing Director begins gently sounding Blake out, but the real business of the day does not begin until the table is cleared.
The Managing Director makes a statement in which he adopts the position already put forward by his colleague, who meanwhile supports the various assertions with evidence.
The statement culminates with a request for a consent to discharge ten p.p.m. of zinc.
Blake repeats his earlier position, summoning the notion of equity between dischargers as a bargaining tactic to support his case, which seems to win the tacit approval of some of the directors present.
For illustrative purposes, he uses the example of another similar manufacturer (whose identity, he reports, he must keep secret) who is able to conform to a one p.p.m zinc requirement.
After each side has declared its position, the negotiations are diverted to more technical questions about further remedies which might be tried, and then adjourned.
[The company, after persistent pressure from the water authority, was able, with improved treatment methods, to comply several months later with a standard of one p.p.m.]
III.
Enforceability
Though the agencies do not regard standards as strict limits, their enforceability is important.
From the field staff's point of view it is essential that the parameters in any consent should be clear and unambiguous.
They should at least appear to be attainable, for standards which can be met, if at all, only after massive expenditure might tempt an unwilling discharger to question them by appeal.
Unattainable standards, even though not appealed by a discharger, may still lead to practical problems of enforcement, since a continued failure to comply because of inefficient treatment plant or other ‘good’ reason which enforcement agents tolerate may suggest condonation by the agency of the continual breach of consent.
Indeed in some cases in which there is a persistent failure to comply and no apparent harm to the watercourse, agency staff tend to assume that the standards may be too tight, as a senior official suggested:
‘somebody who's not complying with consent conditions and yet is not having much effect on the river, it probably means the consent condition is not right to start with.
…‘This is I think one of the reasons that we can tolerate some non-compliance because some of the consent conditions are a bit too strict.’
In areas of regulatory control like pollution, where the law regards conformity as essentially a matter of scientific measurement, deviance is conspicuous.
While clear, uncomplicated standards are useful for an enforcement agent negotiating to secure compliance, economy in the design of standards is also important.
To be parsimonious in the use of parameters assists in the display of deviance; in a prosecution it aids a portrayal of guilt, as an agency head explained:
‘I always try and have as few conditions as possible in a consent.
…In a court it would be so easy if I was on the other side to get up and say that in respect of eight of the conditions ‘We complied and we only contravened the suspended solids condition and we're very sorry it was 30,000 p.p.m. but you're not gonna cane us for that are you, Mr Magistrate?
We've got eight of them right.’
…So the simpler the conditions the better, the fewer conditions the better.’
Yet the use of few parameters, if they are well chosen, can still be an efficient means of pollution control.
To have one or two strict parameters often means that other pollutants, which can remain unspecified in the consent document, are brought under control.
Or parameters which provoke the discharger's concern can be framed leniently, control being assured by the insertion of a much stricter parameter of more general application.
The issue of enforceability was given a poignant twist following passage of the Control of Pollution Act 1974 which made an inroad into the virtual monopoly of pollution control enjoyed by the water authorities.
The Act (much of which is not yet in force) requires publication of sample results and permits members of the public to bring legal action against a discharger who fails to comply with consent.
The agencies will have to have available for public scrutiny a register giving details of consents granted and results of effluent samples.
A source of particular vulnerability for the agencies is that in its reorganization of the water industry the 1973 Water Act gives them responsibility for the management of the great majority of sewage treatment works, which in many areas are themselves significant — often principal — sources of pollution.
The water authorities thus not only set and enforce pollution standards, they are major polluters themselves.
Yet the pollution control sections of the agencies are ultimately impotent to secure the compliance of their colleagues in sewage treatment, lacking recourse to the legal sanction (even if it were organizationally possible to prosecute fellow-workers).
Many sewage treatment works have been consented in the ritual process to the usual 20 BOD and 30 suspended solids standards, which they have regularly failed to meet.
While the agencies maintained almost total control over the enforcement of standards, a  control which could be preserved in the absence of publicity, this posed no problem: ‘A lot of the standards were set by River Authorities; and the works weren't capable of achieving [them]anyway,’ a senior official said.
‘But the former River Authorities knew this and shut an eye to it.’
After passage of the 1974 Act, however, the authorities had to contemplate the prospect that they themselves might be prosecuted for the polluting effluents from their sewage works.
The new-found public accountability has produced a quite dramatic protective response from the agencies, illustrating the familiar point that a previously unreachable ideal may be achieved if reduced within the compass of the practically attainable.
The agencies have simply embarked on a large-scale programme to revise consents both of their sewage works and of other discharges.
Where a discharger would consistently do better than his existing consent, standards have sometimes been tightened.
But where a discharger has regularly been outside consent, standards have been relaxed to accord with the existing performance in 95 per cent of samples taken.
Thus while standards were relaxed, this was accompanied by less tolerance of their breach, compliance being expected in 95 per cent, rather than 75 per cent , of samples: ‘exposing ourselves five per cent of the time’, as a senior man put it, thinking of his agency's sewage works.
The review was described by an agency director as
‘an attempt to span out 95 per cent of the quality of effluent at present discharged from the [sewage]works, taking out the fliers and the obviously bad discharges.
…This means in practice that one out of every twenty samples will fail to comply with the standard and the Authority will be at risk from somebody, some member of the public, prosecuting.’
This protective behaviour has occurred in reaction to the threat which publicity poses to the discretion with which the agencies would treat deviants — themselves and others.
‘We've learned in the last go it's the public accountability thing,’ said a senior official.
‘The legal thing can go out the window.
For the first time we've had to get our heads down and look at what we're doing.
…We bend over backwards to do the thing [properly]…but what happens in practice — do we mean it?
And in many cases we realize we don't.
We find a factory who's not met its standards eight times in a year, and what do we do about it?
Nothing!…
So one reason [for reviewing consents]is it doesn't make any difference to the river system; another is that it means we're not prepared to follow the thing through on a legal basis.
…It's going to be stupid when that booklet's published [giving details of sample results]— we'll get tons and tons of phone calls.
…What we're now trying to do is say the river will stand a temperature of 30C — if it'll stand it, don't let's bugger about.
It takes some sort of public document for people to get you out of a rut.‘
Adaptive action by recasting the rules was necessary to preserve administrative control and avoid the public embarrassment of the authorities.
Since financial, technical, and geographical constraints did not permit efforts to be made to bring their sewage works into compliance with the existing standards (even if time had been available), the only other means of demonstrably maintaining compliance was for the agencies to change the standards to fit the existing discharges.
For field staff, however, a review which led to the relaxation of a large number of consents appeared to be in direct contradiction to their efforts ostensibly to bring all dischargers into compliance —‘trying to fiddle the books for when the Act comes into force’ as a northern authority officer put it.
For many, the task of policing relaxed consents was a source of considerable professional embarrassment following their attempts to secure compliance with the former, stricter, standards.
For the pragmatic field officer, the exercise was purely cosmetic, not an effort to overhaul consents to place more rational demands (in terms of what a river could accept by way of pollution) on the discharger.
‘To my way of thinking,’ said an officer of wide experience, ‘this is just paper — it's only figures on paper, this is — to prevent the general public being able to prosecute the authority if a sewage works has the odd bad sample.’
IV.
Postscript
Pollution control standards are flexible markers of rule-breaking.
How strict or lenient enforcement agents conceive them to be may well affect their enforcement behaviour.
For example, working conceptions of cause may depend upon a judgment as to whether the standards breached were generally attainable at tolerable cost.
If they were, a violation may prompt suspicions of deliberate wrong-doing in the interest of financial saving.
Until recently, pollution control standards were treated as guides rather than boundaries.
They were a species of organizational rhetoric (now menaced by public access to the monopoly of enforcement), embodying compromise between conflicting values and recognition of the vagaries of the environment to be controlled.
Standards which cannot be attained by negotiation or legal enforcement may at least be achieved if made less demanding.
The threat of the 1974 Act was the challenge posed to agency control over the enforcement of regulatory deviance by publicity and a strict liability law.
By redrawing the  individual boundaries of deviance the agencies have sought to retain control.
Their response may be the occasion for added impetus to the ostensible shift from equity to efficacy as the guiding principle in the design of water pollution standards.
II.
Pollution Control Work
Three chapters are devoted to the setting and tasks of pollution control work.
Chapter 3 describes the staff, the nature of the job, and the skills and knowledge it requires, and adds further detail to the formal organization of pollution control.
How the organization impinges on everyday work is the theme of Chapter 4, which analyses the strains that arise when bureaucratic strategies of control are imposed on a job which demands a high degree of personal discretion at field level.
The descriptive analysis of pollution control work is carried through into Chapter 5.
Addressed here are the socially organized ways in which dirty water comes to be noticed and defined as a pollution, thereby creating a case about which an enforcement agent has to take some action.
3
3.
Field Staff
I. Officers
Most routine pollution control work is conducted by staff — almost exclusively men — in the field officer grade.
Recent expansion of pollution control activity following the creation of the water authorities in the Water Act 1973 has resulted in an influx of younger recruits whose backgrounds and conceptions of the job contrast to an extent with those of older, longer-established field staff.
While it would be imprudent to press distinctions too far, since the practical demands of the work impose their own priorities, field officers themselves are aware that there are virtually two generations of staff, each with a characteristic view about pollution control work.
The newer recruits who joined the water authorities after reorganization of the water industry are predominantly young men in their twenties.
They have enjoyed a higher level of formal education than their older colleagues, some of them possessing degrees in chemistry or biology from universities or polytechnics.
For some, working for the water authority was their first job; few have any substantial prior experience in industry ('working on the other side').
They are spurred by a marked sense of vocation: they are of the generation which grew up after the war when pollution came to be popularly identified as a serious problem needing urgent attention.
And they are ambitious: while the job is regarded as important and worthwhile, it is for them, only a first step in a pollution control career, even though the present organizational structure of the agencies provokes anxieties about the limited prospects of promotion.
The younger field men, doubtless reflecting their education in the natural sciences, tend to conceive of pollution as a relatively unproblematic phenomenon, as scientifically determinable, hence ‘obvious’.
For them pollution control work is a scientific endeavour.
Accordingly, the design of standards and the securing of compliance are matters for the dispassionate application of scientifically-derived principles; and the formal legal process is the primary instrument by which control is to be maintained.
Their stance is typified by one young officer's remark, when faced with a recalcitrant discharger, that  ‘all cases should be looked at as potential prosecutions’.
Heavy reliance on negotiating to solve problems will sometimes provoke the criticism from them that too easy-going an approach leads to inefficient enforcement.
Most of the older officers have worked in pollution control for several years and many have had a number of years experience in industry, which, they are quick to point out, affords them an ‘insider's’ sympathetic understanding of the difficulties and costs which arise in complying with standards.
In contrast with their younger counterparts, some of whom at least could hope realistically for the possibility of promotion, the older field men have little ambition, though they retain some sense of mission.
They have been passed by, and know it.
Some resent the emphasis increasingly being laid upon formal qualifications in the authorities' recruitment policies.
With no high level of education they lay claim instead to ‘experience’— an intimate familiarity with the way things have been done in the past — and ‘common sense’— a rich fund of practical knowledge about the job and its problems which inculcates a sense of the reasonable.
In an occupation depending heavily on the officer's craft, the value of education and ‘bookwork’ is dismissed.
A degree is no shortcut to the acquisition of the essential practical skills; experience is won by time and application:
‘I know today now there are some good degrees and goodness knows what for the job, but it doesn't mean to say you can do the job.
You might be able to learn it parrot-fashion out of a book or be able to put it on paper.
That's something I couldn't do.
I couldn't write my job down on paper.
It's about eighty per cent experience and the other twenty common sense.’
Some field men have been in the job long enough to have seen the protection of the environment become a matter of considerable public concern.
They, meanwhile, continue to work much as they have always worked.
For them pollution control is less the application of scientifically-determined standards, more the art of managing personal relationships, ‘a public relations exercise’.
While newer recruits prefer to pin their faith on an ‘objective’, ‘scientific’ conception of pollution standards which should — in theory at least— be rigorously applied, the older men, with relatively few exceptions, prefer to ‘be reasonable’and to ‘understand the polluter's problems’.
Rejecting the younger officers' professed greater commitment to prosecution as a ready sanction for deviance, the older staff claim they will negotiate whenever possible, contemplating the law as the ultimate response, resorted to with extreme reluctance.
The younger  men are sometimes accused of being too officious, too ready to throw their weight around:
‘They know they've got the law behind them.
And you've got the odd youngster who will go there and throw the book at somebody.
…And this gets their [polluter's]back up and they don't want to know you then.
But I find this with quite a few of the young ones.
This is the first thing they want to do.’
An authoritarian stance is taken to be evidence of the younger staffs lack of experience of the harsh realities of industrial and agricultural life which has denied them the appreciation of the ‘insider’.
Their approach is not simply regarded by the older men as a reflection of youthful zeal and an extravagant sense of mission, but as a means of adapting to the difficulties, as young men, of presenting themselves as possessed of legal authority (an interesting practical recognition of the importance of interaction in securing compliance).
After all, as an older man said, ‘It could be that some of these farmers don't want to be told by someone who's about twenty-two years old.’
The older men have witnessed many changes in the formal organization of pollution control which have had implications for their work.
They have had to come to terms with computer print-outs, data sheets, the use of electronic equipment, and biological sampling techniques.
Most significant for them has been the need to adapt to the much greater degree of bureaucratic organization which has followed the 1973 Act, the great landmark in their careers.
The character of the field man's work was fundamentally altered in ways unknown to younger staff.
Even so, a sense of vocation is noticeable among most field officers, even many of the older ones: pollution control is still conceived of and practised more as a calling than a job.
Indeed, it is the sense of mission, so far as the older officers are concerned, which produces resentment in the face of efforts to bureaucratize the job.
Despite the older officers' complaints, the level of job satisfaction — when they can set aside the paperwork and get out into the field — is high (cf.
Ross, 1970:38).
Each district is different, but each is tended with a considerable degree of commitment, field staff speaking fondly and possessively of ‘my patch’, ‘my stream’, ‘my trout’.
The nature of the task continues, despite bureaucratization, to provide for a significant measure of autonomy.
The view of pollution control as a practical art acquired by experience defines the particular qualities demanded of a ‘good’ field officer.
Fieldwork, nevertheless, involves the routine application of a wide range of technical and scientific knowledge.
An officer must know some chemistry and biology, and the local geology and  geography.
He must, in particular, be familiar with the science of water treatment and purification processes, and well acquainted with manufacturing and agricultural techniques in order to understand local industrial and farming problems.
Knowledge of the law relating to control of water pollution, beyond a broad conception of the pollution offences, however, is regarded as unimportant and is claimed by only a small minority of field men, because the job is done ‘by experience’ and the application of rules-of-thumb — not ‘by the book’.
As long as they know what kinds of acts or events might be prosecutable, they take the view that the arcane business of the law is best left to senior staff.
But the real job (rather than the ideal version articulated by younger men) is, as we shall see, much less about the application of science and technology to the measurement and control of pollution than the use of negotiating and bargaining skills to secure compliance.
Ultimately water authority staff prize personal qualities as an officer's most important attributes.
A substantial amount of a field officer's time is spent in creating and preserving good relations with dischargers of all kinds, even in the absence of pollution problems.
Officers are dependent upon their dischargers to do their job efficiently and must always think to the future when they may need the active co-operation of a polluter.
The art of managing personal relationships, and the ability to talk independently to people with tact, diplomacy, and persuasiveness are great assets.
Scientific knowledge counts for little in comparison, for it is the field man in the great majority of encounters who is the ‘front man’, the public face, of his agency (Goffman, 1959).
It is he who represents and transmits the policies of the agency to a predominantly reluctant community:
‘I think it's important that you should be presentable.
And you must have a way of being able to get on with people.
This is very important and I should imagine there's been more trouble, probably, with people representing the authority and being rather officious, and this has got no one anywhere.
…And I think you've also got to have people who do bear in mind that they're about one of the few parts of the authority that are in the forefront of the people and are basically representing the authority.
So you must be careful of what you say.
…There's more of public relations in this job than probably — that doesn't come down in print.
…I think the better you are at public relations the better you can do your job.
You might not be technically the best man on the job, but there's a whole back-up organization for this.’
[His emphasis]
Negotiating skill is more than simply being able to ‘get on with people’, it demands the art of managing an encounter with a polluter.
It is essential ‘to appreciate other people's points of view but to be able to swing them round to yours if necessary’, a social skill which must be practised in an extremely wide range of relationships.
To be able to do this creates a context in which effective bargaining can be conducted.
Dischargers are regarded as potentially difficult people.
Each is confronted with different problems, some more intractable than others; each is in a different economic position.
And the commitment of each discharger to pollution control will vary widely, depending not least upon the organizational status and occupation of the field man's contact.
All of this must be accomplished while the officer continues to do what he sees ultimately as a policing job.
If he is less than successful he may find that he has to work with an unco-operative discharger.
Good rapport cannot be assumed; it has to be cultivated and regularly tended.
The field man has to talk to people from a variety of backgrounds, in a variety of jobs.
‘They've obviously got to be able to speak to people at all levels,’ said a supervisor of his field men.
‘They've got to be able to talk to workmen, and get things done during pollutions — find things out.
You find an awful lot of things talking to Fred who works the filter press, y'know.
And at the same time you've gotta be able to talk to the managing director and have lunch with him and talk about what was on television and what the state of the country is and the economic situation and everything, you know.
So you've got to be able to talk to people.
You've not gotta be timid, y'know, because obviously people will try and browbeat you and intimidate you if they think they can.’
Part of the field officer's art is to display an understanding of each polluter's problems, and to resist the temptation to treat as routine demands which may prove to be extremely onerous, particularly for one in an economically vulnerable position.
It is not simply a question of the officer displaying an ability to be sympathetic in his demands, he must treat as many cases as possible on an individual basis.
He must always remember he is a ‘repeat player’(Galanter, 1974).
As one supervisor said,
‘You ought to be tactful and you have got to have initiative, because at times you have got to make decisions.
They might only be minor, but to the person you're talking to it's a major decision.
So you've got to take the initiative and be firm where you need to be with a company or with a farmer…and consider his needs, if they be economical, impracticable.
…I think it also helps if you've…got industrial experience so that you realize the problems of the industrialists.’
Another aspect of the craft to be mastered is the ability to conceal the conflicting demands of being a conciliator bargaining to secure compliance, while ultimately doing a policing job.
The officer must indeed be prepared to sustain his attempts at persuasiveness over a  long period of time, a matter which can pose problems, for he must be able to sense when a less conciliatory performance is warranted and a show of force, however discreet, would be appropriate.
On the other hand, a display of due respect which denies the possibility of being interpreted as deference may be necessary when dealing with senior officials in a large and powerful organization.
And if a conciliatory approach fails to work, the job must still be done.
Qualities of persistence and determination when confronted by the evasive or blatantly unco-operative now assume considerable significance.
These virtues are especially important given the solitary nature of the job, as an agency head emphasized:
‘The man in the field must be prepared to work on his own and work conscientiously.
He's gotta stick at it, y'know, because if…the discharger…[says]something unkind…you've gotta go back the next week, the next week, and the next week.
So I suppose you've got to have a little bit of a thick skin.….’
Finally, the solitude of the job also emphasizes a need for a high degree of personal integrity in each field officer.
‘He's gotta be honest’, said a supervisor.
‘That's vital because he's in a position of great trust.
He's operating his own hours.
We trust him to work.
We trust him to do the mileage he says he does.
He's going into industrial premises: he's great possibilities for fiddling and taking hand-outs, pinching industrial secrets and passing them on.
It's limitless.
So honesty I think is absolutely vital.
You've gotta be able to trust the man.’
Agencies are not, however, without various strategies of control over field staff (ch. 4, s. ii).
II.
Doing the Job
Pollution control work is varied and unpredictable.
Field staff operate in a range of environments each of which create distinctive kinds of task.
In an industrialized urban area the job, especially in the northern authority, is essentially one of cleaning up heavily polluted rivers, but in rural areas, where there are fewer sources of pollution, field officers are more concerned with preserving high standards of water quality.
The degree to which pollution is defined and tolerated will vary markedly, depending on the character of the officer's territory.
However, although the problems posed by a densely populated industrial area will differ in degree and kind from those in a large rural catchment with a scattered population and little industry besides farming, the fundamental approach is the same.
The job is essentially a form of policing, though in keeping with a  compliance system of enforcement, tasks such as surveillance and prevention are emphasized.
The formal processes of the law, indeed, do not loom large in the field officer's routine activities.
It is recognized that the everyday work of monitoring and negotiating is itself an expression of the agency's legal mandate, and the legal rules about pollution may occasionally be invoked as part of the process of securing compliance.
But it is rare to initiate the formal process.
Yet the image of policing persists:
‘I'd say in a way that basically it's a form of a policing job.
You are trying to police without wearing helmets.
You are policing rivers is about the simplest way of explaining quality control.
…You are seeing where pollution is and you are policing.
And the point is that wherever you go you tend to keep your eye open and not wait for something to crop up; you do tend to say ‘'Ello, ‘ello, ‘ello, What's this?
Where's it come from?
What does it mean?’…
If you're describing it, say, to laymen…you've got to make the point that you are controlling.
…You really must put it over that it is your job to know every wretched pipe anywhere on this river system…that it's your job to know what is going on, who is doing what.’
These remarks emphasize the role of surveillance in pollution control, for enforcement is conceived of as a matter of prevention as much as of responding to rule-breaking.
In a typical week, the field man will spend much of his time in routine inspection and monitoring by sampling river water, industrial and farm discharges and occasionally groundwater supplies.
He will also regularly look over pollution control installations in his district to ensure their satisfactory operation and maintenance.
General preventive work is equally important.
Staff must inspect sites for which planning applications have been submitted in order to assess the implications for water pollution of any building or other development.
The licensing of tip sites for the disposal of solid waste requires similar inspections.
Trivia must also be attended to: drains unblocked, obstructed pipes cleared, leaks looked after.
Frequently the officer will engage in specific preventive work: issuing warnings to dischargers about risks being posed; offering advice about essential remedial measures; supplying information about grants which may be available; and suggesting consultants.
This is often a time-consuming but indispensable part of the field man's job since the work demands that he both preserve existing relationships with key people in farms and factories in his district and seek out and cultivate new contacts.
The enforcement relationship is symbiotic (Manning, 1977:136–7): officer and polluter depend upon each other for information and assistance (ch. 6, s. iv).
Being on good terms with dischargers is  essential for the field man to do his job efficiently: it allows him access to property whenever necessary, enabling him to carry out inspections, and to raise matters which might otherwise be sensitive.
A good working relationship also enhances an officer's intelligence system, more effectively bringing to his attention knowledge of pollutions for which the discharger or his neighbours may be responsible.
In the first few years in a district the officer learns about his territory as thoroughly as possible.
It is his  responsibility — his ‘patch’— and, like a policeman (Rubinstein, 1973; Van Maanen, 1974), he must know it intimately.
He will be expected to live in it, or at least close by.
The field man's mental map of his territory is one structured by rivers, factories, and farms.
He must know the origins, courses, and confluences of all rivers, streams, and ditches, the rates of flow in dry and wet weather, and the uses made of the water.
Topography adds another dimension to the subtle geography of territory, for the field man must also be aware of the contours of his patch, its slopes and catchment areas.
He needs to be acquainted with the exact location of every industrial discharger, their manufacturing processes and wastes, and, in particular, the nature, volume, and flow of effluent.
He must also know where farm effluents discharge and — most important of all in view of the volume of pollution they cause — where the sewage treatment works outfalls are.
A few polluters with ineffective treatment processes discharging effluents into otherwise clean rivers can make a patch ‘difficult’.
Hidden watercourses also pose problems; thus if he has an urban patch, the officer must know where the foul sewers and any culverted watercourses run (a formidable task in some cities), as well as the nature and source of any discharge into the watercourse.
Knowing the territory means acquiring a sense of the distribution of pollution by identifying the sources of trouble, potential and actual.
This is another part of the catalogue of essential knowledge which officers, like the police, employ to refine their intelligence systems, assisting control by efficient discovery and detection.
‘You should learn your river and your places like the back of your hand,’ a senior officer said.
‘I mean I used to.
I could have at one stage recited to you every discharge from [the estuary upstream for fifty miles]on the north bank of the river, in order.
Because the only way you do your job is to get on your honkers and walk round the pipelines and know where everything is and which are polluters, and which ones go up and down.
And you've got to get there at night and at weekends to find out what really goes on, and whether they are meaningful in terms of pollution.’
Field staff regard their work in intensely practical terms.
Pollution control is about action in the field and getting results.
Anything else is secondary.
For this reason office duties are disliked and paperwork despised as ‘dirtywork’(Hughes, 1971:343 ff.) which diverts time and energy from ‘real’ pollution control work, making one accountable for matters which have little to do with law enforcement.
But such work must be done, and field men put in several hours each week in their area offices, writing reports, keeping records up to date, drafting letters, answering the telephone and communicating with colleagues in the field and staff at headquarters.
Every few days each officer can expect to take his turn on the office duty rota which will keep him away from the field for a complete day.
Every few weeks he will have to spend a weekend at home near a telephone on call to handle any emergencies which crop up in the area.
The following extract from my field notes — warts and all — recording a day's work described by the field officer concerned as ‘typical’ of his district may help convey a picture of a pollution control officer's job in an urban industrialized area (rural officers are usually under less pressure of work).
Many of the points touched on will be elaborated in subsequent analysis.
The notes were taken early on in the research when I was chiefly concerned with documenting pollution control work, thus they should suggest something of the nature of the job — routine tasks as well as special problems — which an officer can encounter on a summer's day.
The notes are reproduced in almost the exact form in which they were scribbled (any editing is to preserve anonymity):
I arrive in the area office on Tuesday afternoon, having spoken that morning with the area supervisor at headquarters.
I meet Kevin Griffith and Don Barry, both of whom view me rather suspiciously.
They ask me about the research, its aims, methods, etc.
I make arrangements to meet Griffith in town the following morning.
G. first samples the City's major sewage works effluent.
In the hot weather the works has been having some trouble in staying in reasonable control of its effluent.
The authority is keeping a close watch on it with samples every day.
Derek Andrews should be sampling but G. stands in during Andrews' holidays.
One sample is taken of the effluent, with both downstream and upstream samples of the river.
G. visits a couple of pollutions which have been giving trouble in the last week or two.
The first is in a park in town.
It is a small ditch which emerges from under gardens backing onto rows of houses.
There is a small amount of water in it, but hardly any flow.
‘You can see what the problem is’, G. says.
It is very clear.
Lumps of excrement and sodden pieces of toilet paper lie in the water in a state which suggests they have not been broken down at all.
G. doesn't know where it's coming from, but waves a hand in the direction of the houses, suggesting a pipe may have been wrongly connected, or a sewer has broken.
An example of the detective work which pollution control involves.
He is unable to do anything and we move on.
The next problem is an ice cream pollution in another small ditch.
Again there is low  flow, although there is rather more water.
There is a foul smell coming off the water, which, although cloudy, does not appear too dirty.
The pollution had occurred a week earlier.
G. had traced it to an ice cream works employing about six men.
A complaint had been received — the works hadn't reported a pollution.
When confronted with the pollution, G. says the manager claimed it was an accident, that a vat had tipped over  accidentally and the ice cream had disappeared down a drain.
(Ice cream, like milk, is extremely polluting.)
The man was extremely hostile and aggressive.
G. decided not to take a stat for this reason, though there was every reason to, as he acknowledged.
G. says he thinks the man is lying, that the vat went over not by accident but because the ice cream was not up to standard and pouring it away was the most convenient way of getting rid of it.
G. agrees that the offender has probably escaped prosecution because of his violent and aggressive demeanour which made G. think first of his personal safety.
G. takes a sample in the ditch, which shows clear signs of sewage fungus, with its tell-tale grey strands waving in the water.
We go to the city canal, reaching it through an aluminium works.
The works is closed down, like many of the city factories, for the holidays.
Some men are still present, however.
G. and I trek round to the sampling point for the discharge to the canal for the cooling water, which is when we see the plant is closed.
By the sampling point there is an iridescence on the water which regularly fans out, indicating a seepage of oil.
An oil tank behind with a three foot bund wall all around in which more than a foot of mobile oil stands.
G. assumes that somehow the oil is escaping into the canal.
He decides he must do something about it and goes off to find the works engineer.
A youngish man, the engineer seems a little concerned at the news.
We go back to the site.
Discussions about how best to check the flow.
G. wants the embankment dug up so that the pipe can be examined.
The engineer says he wants to drain the oil out of the catchment tank as there's no point in doing anything as costly as G.'s suggestion to begin with.
G. accepts his suggestion and leaves, observing that he will be back fairly soon to see what sort of progress has been made.
We go off to another site, reached by a quarter mile trek along the main railway line.
A large depression in the ground with a watercourse in which a certain amount of sluggish water stands.
There is a heavy oil scum on the surface at one end, which has collected naturally.
G. doesn't do anything, the purpose of the visit being to see what conditions are like.
We visit the river near the city centre.
A purely urban river, rising in the south of the city…flowing through the centre into the main river.
We disappear through a locked door in the wall.
I find myself on a small brick platform about twenty feet above a man-made, well-bricked channel which follows a straight course through the factories and warehouses.
The water looks clear and has long green weeds waving in it.
G agrees the water looks good and says it's a Class Two river,’ except when it rains, when it gets all the run-off and also lots of foul water from the foul sewer overflow.
Although the river is only one to two feet deep G. says he would not walk across because the current is too strong and bottom too slippery.
He's fallen over in it before now.
He doesn't take a sample but examines the water gushing through a drain from under the road, just where we've entered the river culvert.
Looking up and downstream I can see lots of discharge points which would rapidly raise the level of the river in wet weather.
To a food manufacturer's in another part of the city and the adjacent brook.
G. takes six samples in various parts of the works.
Some are very inaccessible and he has to wade through thick mud to get at them.
G. suspects that there may be sugar being discharged into the water.
His liaison man at the manufacturer's is the works chemist.
C. complains that he's not as helpful or responsive as some of the other people he has to deal with in other factories.
He doesn't see or talk to anyone from the works this visit.
By now G. is no longer suspicious of me but turns out to be a lively, talkative, and intelligent man.
…He explains that the day so far has been pretty typical.
As he does so he stops the car because he sees water in the road which is coming from a site on the left  hand side.
We go onto the site which is a ready-mix concrete works.
The water has been used to wash lorries down.
It collects in a pool near the gate, thence it trickles down the road.
It is heavy with suspended solids.
The canal is at the bottom of the road.
The water seems to dry up on the road without getting too far.
G. takes no action.
Instead we walk along the canal bank 350 yards looking to see if there is a discharge point into the canal from the works.
We cannot find one.
Back in the car G. repeats that the day has been typical except we haven't been called up on the radio and he's been called up twenty-nine times in the last month.
At that moment the radio transmits G.'s call number, informing him that there is a pollution at a motor manufacturing works.
We arrive at the works and call in at their pollution control offices where they have a small full-time staff looking after pollution in the works.
The works is enormous, employing many thousands.
A youngish man deals with us, taking us to the shop floor where camshafts are made.
He explains that some cutting oil has been noticed in a culverted drain under the shop floor.
He responded by blocking off the pipe, which leads directly to the river, and by calling the authority's pollution control office.
Entering this part of the works I notice two or three prominently displayed boards alerting employees to the phone numbers of officials who must be contacted when a pollution occurs.
We enter the factory itself.
Lots of machines very heavy, rather noisy.
We inspect the drains via three manhole covers and establish that the oil is coming from a certain area in which there are a number of cam-cutting machines.
The factory's pollution control officer is clearly demonstrating his concern to G. G. is also concerned, because the company had a similar pollution two weeks earlier which the local paper had headlined ‘WHEN THE RIVER…
RAN WHITE’.
The cutting oil emulsifies in water and looks the colour and consistency of milk.
It needs a massive dilution before the colour goes.
The local citizens of the area through whose grounds the river flows are pretty sensitive to pollution from the company.
The local paper is also sensitive to the water authority…it sees the authority as inefficient and costly.
It printed a [bleached out?]picture of the river in its white state which over-emphasized the width of the river in a very misleading way.
The company man puts a green tracer dye in a couple of machines, but none appears in the drain.
It seems to be a leaking machine, not a negligent pollution — as the previous one had been when workmen emptied oil down the wrong manhole.
(This was part of the holiday cleaning-up.
G. observed that although holidays mean a shut-down in industrial activity, they can lead to plenty of pollutions because of the cleaning that goes on in the factories.
Many of the workers there are either ignorant or careless about where they tip their waste.)
That evening G. is phoned by the company and told the problem is solved and the leaking machine located.
G. warns them he'll be round in the morning, to ensure, he says, that they keep making the effort to do a good cleaning job.
G. is pleased with the  response at the company — not only do they report as soon as possible when they've got a pollution, they let him know about the progress they make: ‘I've got them so well trained now they'll be phoning half an hour before they have a discharge.’
III.
Getting your Wellies Wet
Since the dominant conception of pollution control work is utterly pragmatic, doing the job is regarded as the best way of learning the job (cf.
Van Maanen, 1973; Wilson, 1968).
‘Common sense’ and ‘experience’, the officer's greatest virtues, cannot be taught, it is believed, but have to be acquired by being thrust almost immediately  into the daily round.
So complex and unpredictable is the work that to articulate any formal course of instruction which would remotely address the variety and nature of the problems routinely encountered is thought hardly possible.
Though one of the agencies has developed a number of guidelines about procedure to be followed in certain circumstances (see ch. 8, s. i), there are no standard manuals of field officer practice.
‘You let them learn a lot of experience through themselves,’ one of the older officers said.
‘They gain more experience by tackling the job themselves.’
The novice is dumped without ceremony into the field.
‘It's the sort of thing you've got to start, go into, regardless of what qualifications you've got,’ said a recent recruit.
‘…You get your wellies wet, so to speak, and you pick things up as you go along.’
The technical parts of the job — the sampling procedures, the use of chemicals and equipment — can be learned by going around with a more experienced officer for a week or so.
Office skills — the ability to draft letters, to write reports, and in general to manage the bureaucratic demands — can be acquired in time from the area supervisor.
These are, however, regarded as merely technical or clerical abilities.
The pragmatism of field staff places much greater value on what a man can do in the field: his practical knowledge, his capacity to make decisions on the spot, his ability to talk to people.
Fieldwork brings an indispensable first-hand contact with problems: ‘You can't do our job in an office.
I know one or two of them try and work it on the phone…but I like to go out and have a look and know what's going on.’
These real arts of the field man's work can only be acquired over a long period, and they must be practised and refined by an officer on his own in the course of his work.
The chances of learning directly from others are restricted.
Opportunities to observe how the novice's area supervisor or other, more experienced, colleagues handle negotiations or use their discretion are limited and usually confined to the bigger pollutions or more intractable problems.
If experience is gained from others it comes vicariously through informal contact in the area office.
Otherwise the officer learns by his mistakes: ‘[you learn]from experience.
I mean I've made one or two balls-ups before now.
I try not to make the same mistake twice.’
But this all takes time; for many, variety and the unexpected encourage the feeling that they are always learning.
The area office plays a prominent part in what a field officer is able to learn of the job.
Whether a field officer works from his area office (in  the southern authority) or from home (in the northern), contact with colleagues will normally be in the office, which he will visit every day, even during those occasional hectic days out in the field when he has to catch up on his sampling schedule.
Most field men call at the office first thing in the morning to collect files, planning applications or other paperwork, and to pick up clean sample bottles or other equipment.
Most staff return to the area office in mid-afternoon with samples to be sent off to the laboratory.
This is a time to catch up on urgent paperwork and swap stories with colleagues about the events of the day.
The office is the main forum for the exchange of experience, knowledge, and ideas.
It is the site for regular meetings of all field staff with their area supervisor, at which problems can be aired, and official policy directives transmitted to the field.
It is the place where the new recruit is most likely to learn about the ‘typical’ and ‘difficult’kinds of cases.
Knowledge about the particular problems exercising his colleagues has a practical importance if, as sometimes happens, an officer is called out in an emergency to a pollution in another man's patch.
It also has a broader value as a means of acquainting the newer recruits with ‘normal’ ways of dealing with problems.
But what an officer will know of his colleagues' districts compared with his own will tend to be particularistic — of salient pollution problems — set in the context of an undetailed and generalized apprehension of the kind of patch a colleague looks after.
In other respects a field officer will not claim familiarity with another district unless he happens to have worked it himself in the past.
Perhaps the major influence in the development of a distinctive office culture, and for that reason an important contributor to a field officer's learning, is the area supervisor.
In some circumstances the supervisor is in a position to visit his own views about policy and practice onto his junior colleagues, since he is the channel through which information and recommendations are transmitted up to senior staff and policy directives are funnelled down.
Each area office is recognized to possess a special character which emanates from the personality and style of the area officer who presides over it.
Conversations with both field and headquarters staff revealed a tendency to identify certain area offices and certain area men with a particular approach to negotiation and enforcement: ‘the people at X office’, ‘the officers in Y area’, or ‘Eddie Osborne's people’ describe in agency language an enforcement style which was in some way distinctive to the area.
A familiar feature of learning is a tempering of views.
Many of the younger recruits are regarded by older hands as extremely idealistic, a quality deemed more vice than virtue since too passionate a commitment to controlling pollution leads to aggressiveness in dealings with dischargers.
Everywhere the novice looks he will see pollution.
But sober reality will soon dampen the fervour of the most ardent.
The typical new recruit regards himself, a supervising officer said, ‘as a knight in shining white armour, which I think everybody starts off as.
But after about six weeks it gets rubbed off a little bit when you find out the practicalities of the job rather than the, y'know, the theory.’
Experience, it is believed, leads to sound judgment, held to be a significant virtue in a field officer, for it is the field man who is the agency's gatekeeper.
It is he who defines and selects those cases which demand action.
The officer, an area supervisor explained, is
the man who's actually called out in the middle of the night and stands in the pouring rain with his mac on directing operations.
He's the one who gets the feel as to whether the company really are trying…or not.
And it all comes over in hard black and white in his report to me, and I've really only got what he says to go on, in that sort of case.
If it's a one-off affair in some yard, the chances are I'll probably never ever go there, I'm really completely reliant…on his reaction.…’
To acquire soundness of judgment is essentially a matter of absorbing a sense of the norms operating in the agency which guide discretion at field level.
Field staff, like other legal actors, make decisions in a context of what is ‘normal’ for ‘cases of this kind’(Emerson, 1969; Sudnow, 1965).
Learning how to categorize cases for the purpose of decision-making in pollution control may, however, be a lengthy process, since the solitude of the job and the absence of any formal training restrict the field officer's access to the agency's fund of knowledge about different types of case.
The subtle acquisition of a sense of the agency norms —‘the normal working standards’— is suggested in the following description of how an officer learned the rules about when to take ‘a stat’:
‘I think after you've worked about a year in the job you find that you start off by seeing pollutions.
You think ‘I'll take a stat of that,’ and you find that when it's considered it's a fairly minor one, although it's strictly an offence and it doesn't comply…it's way out of the normal working standards.
It's illegal, in other words, but it's considered a fairly minor one, so we don't prosecute.
And after you've taken several of these you think, ‘Well that's not a very bad one, I don't think I'll take a stat.’
So you tend to gradually come round to the view that unless it's causing very bad visual pollution, or you've had a run of complaints about it, then you tend not to take a stat.’
In effect, newly-recruited staff learn the normal working standards from their colleagues in the area office, and from their supervisor, who is in a position to exert some control over disparate individual views.
The area office is the agent's only source of regular contact with colleagues, and a setting for the transmission of a shared system of norms of pollution control work.
The office culture consists of a kind of folklore involving ‘the selective preservation of the ideas that have proved worthwhile’(Shibutani, 1961:465), in part about ‘normal’ cases and in part about the most ‘difficult’problems and the ‘worst’offenders.
In time, despite the independence of a far-flung inspectorate, newcomers are socialized into orthodox ways of doing the job, in which attitudes emerge and expectations develop in the cause of helping the work go smoothly.
The folklore provides a version of past history on any case or class of case to which an officer confronted with a problem may turn for a solution, whether it be one of choosing the ‘proper’ negotiating stance, making the ‘right’decision, or placing the ‘correct’interpretation upon acts, events or characters.
IV.
Reorganization
The reorganization of the water industry following passage in 1973 of the Water Act centralized and enlarged the structure of water pollution control in England and Wales.
The result was the creation of large-scale public bureaucracies designed for the efficient regulation of water use.
For enforcement agents the consequences of reorganization, with its greater degree of bureaucratic control, have reached down to the field and begun to change the character of the job.
Younger officers regard the change with a certain indifference.
On the one hand they hear the criticisms of their older  colleagues and their nostalgic accounts of ‘the old days’.
On the other hand, they appreciate that the job has had a number of new tasks grafted onto it, adding to its scope and variety.
Some of the changes, indeed, reflect their own personal preferences for a ‘scientific’ approach; science is an aid in their mission.
‘I think it's developing into a profession because it's more technical,’ said one young officer.
‘The days of the old inspector walking the river banks are dying out rapidly, I think.’
Most of the more experienced officers, however, regard the consequences of reorganization with dismay.
They resent the inroad  being made into their autonomy which suggests impugned competence and a downgrading of status (cf.
Prottas, 1979:155), and they dissent from the implication that pollution control can be done in an office, rather than on the river bank, talking to polluters and doing ‘real pollution control work’.
The ‘feeling of freedom of action’(Blau, 1963:126) is what field staff most prize in their job, a feeling largely responsible for the high degree of job satisfaction they enjoy (cf.
Crozier, 1964:204–5; March and Simon, 1958:95).
The practice of their calling is now under threat.
The growing demands to satisfy the appetite a greedy organization — the wider, more highly regulated sampling programme to be followed, the increasing numbers of reports and data analyses to be produced — are held to be unwarranted interference from headquarters, irrelevant impediments to the practical business of pollution control work.
Many field officers are preoccupied with the increasing amount of time which must be spent in the office with paper —‘keeping the organization at bay’, as one of the more critical men put it.
‘We get a lot of planning applications,’ said an older inspector.
‘We always had them, but not the numbers that we get today, nowhere near.
And you get silly, what I call silly things.
They want figures for computers and…information to put on the computer, and this, that, and the other.’
According to the more experienced officers, the incessant demands for paper from headquarters divert them from more pressing tasks and display an innocence among senior staff about the nature of the job, a view the more firmly held in the knowledge that few senior men have ever worked in the field themselves (cf.
Wilson, 1978:122 ff.).
While regarded as able and industrious, senior staff are also thought to be remote, invisible, and above personal contact.
Links between headquarters and field are becoming more and more depersonalized and bureaucratic: important decisions with major implications for field staff, like those to do with prosecution policy, are made ‘up in fitted carpet land’, where officers never tread.
And when a decision comes down, it comes down unexplained to an officer who must continue his relationship with the polluter.
Centralized control by headquarters has forced field staff to yield some power over the routine disposal of cases.
In the past the officer was free to a considerable extent to exercise his discretion as he pleased.
In the interests of efficient enforcement his practice was to negotiate a solution to a problem privately, and at all costs to be patient.
Now — but only to a limited extent — the officer has lost some discretion in handling routine cases.
The change is probably more apparent than real, but what seems to be an inexorable narrowing of the officer's range of effective discretion is demeaning to his sense of personal authority.
Before reorganization, said an older officer,
‘you were allowed to work on your own initiative.
In the old days, if you had a district…that district was yours.
And my predecessor — even the [area supervisor]— wouldn't come in the district without letting you know where he was going.
…But now you never know who's running around in your district.
…You don't know what the higher-ups are doing.
It was, if you like to put it that way, it was a status that it was your district.’
Some of the older men are also alarmed at what they see as a move away from conciliatory enforcement.
‘Things were different in the old…days,’ said an officer in the southern authority.
‘You had to have a cert, dead cert, iron case before any prosecution case came up.
…I don't remember a prosecution case in the old days.
We always used to get it done through friendliness and chatting to people.’
Another consequence of reorganization apparently detracting from job satisfaction has been a depersonalization of relationships within the organization.
While field men still enjoy much the same degree of contact with their immediate superiors (the area supervisors), senior staff are now distant and unseen.
In ‘the old days’ field officers (at least in the southern authority) enjoyed a high degree of personal contact with their superiors and were subjected to few demands from headquarters:
‘In the old days the agency head knew every one of his staff.
He knew their Christian names.
…You don't see that today.
…You've lost the personal touch with the higher management.
…Trouble with going back to the old days, the [agency]was more or less a family concern.
You knew everybody.
Everybody knew you.
You go to [headquarters]now: if I go in there somebody says ‘Have you got your warrant card?
Do you work here?’
I been working here before some of 'em were born!
It makes me seethe a bit when they say ‘You don't work here, do you?’
They know very well I don't.
I work a part of the river they've never seen.’
Reorganization and the bureaucratization of the job have, in the view of some experienced field men, brought about a lessening of commitment, even of demoralization.
One of the most vocal critics of reorganization, an officer of more than 20 years' standing, deplored what seemed to him to be an essential transformation in pollution control work.
The younger staff ‘want overtime or they want call-out money, or God knows what’, he said,
‘while a lot of the older staff, the older side of the staff, I think a lot of them are getting browned off with it.
…The loyalty to the job's been knocked out of you.
…I've noticed  this since reorganization.
It never used to be like this before.
…It's this bureaucratic idea they're trying out that's getting the older staff browned off.’
The dismay among field staff about the change in the character of the job was neatly reflected by a printed statement posted on the wall in one area office, which nicely contrasted bureaucratic sentiments with blunter language about practical realities:
THE OBJECTIVE OF ALL DEDICATED EMPLOYEES SHOULD BE TO ANALYSE THOROUGHLY ALL SITUATIONS, ANTICIPATE ALL PROBLEMS PRIOR TO THEIR  OCCURRENCE [sic ], HAVE ANSWERS TO THESE PROBLEMS, AND MOVE SWIFTLY TO SOLVE THESE PROBLEMS WHEN CALLED UPON.
HOWEVER…
WHEN YOU ARE UP TO YOUR ARSE IN ALLIGATORS, IT IS DIFFICULT TO REMIND YOURSELF THAT YOUR INITIAL OBJECTIVE WAS TO DRAIN THE SWAMP.
V. Postscript
Pollution control work is not regarded by its practitioners as a scientific enterprise in which a dispassionate discretion is informed primarily by technical concerns.
Instead it is an art in which personal qualities are most important.
The enforcement agent in a compliance system has a wide variety of roles to fulfil.
He may sometimes be consultant and analyst; sometimes investigator and policeman; but he must also be negotiator and judge; inspector, educator, and public relations representative.
This is because compliance is the end of enforcement and its effective attainment requires a constant display of helpfulness and reasonableness.
While the economic and legal implications of their activities are occasionally recognized, field men's discretion is shaped by the imperative to ‘get the job done’.
In doing the job they receive little formal guidance from legal rules or administrative policy.
But this is not to suggest that their behaviour is unpatterned.
Instead, ways of doing the job are broadly guided by some vaguely interpreted principles about what the organization's legal mandate is supposed to be and organized by the experience they acquire from their membership of an enforcement bureaucracy.
Their work is practical; their knowledge concrete and particular.
4
4.
The Job
I. Autonomy
Unpredictability is an enduring feature in the world of the police and other ‘street-level bureaucrats’(Lipsky, 1976; Prottas, 1979).
In such occupations autonomy is cherished as a means of adapting to an uncertain environment.
Like the policeman (Bittner, 1970; Wilson, 1968), the pollution control officer enjoys considerable autonomy in his work as a matter of course.
His occupation is solitary, inconspicuous, and largely free from direct supervision, leaving him at liberty to choose, within the constraints of his sampling programme, how he does his job.
As a reactive enforcement agent (see ch. 5, s. iv) the field man has no idea what will happen during the day — what complaints, what reports of accidents, leaks, or spillages will be telephoned into the area office.
As a proactive enforcer a field man must always be prepared for the unexpected.
In sampling and inspecting water quality he is his own agent to decide where and when he goes to pick up a sample.
Establishing priorities in the sometimes confused jumble of things to be done is another expression of the officer's autonomy.
In the absence of pressing problems he improvises his activities, working the case he wants to work.
The field man exerts substantial personal control over the handling and disposal of any case.
The preservation of such control is important to the officer's own notion of efficiency.
He typically determines the nature and level of the demands to be made of a polluter.
He normally decides when an encounter with a discharger is appropriate and the kind of negotiation to conduct.
He alone ‘really knows’ the problems.
So much of the enforcement task is carried out in private negotiations between officer and polluter that the field man is in a position to be adaptive in the demands he makes, reflecting the exigencies of any particular case.
Only in exceptional circumstances — a major effluent, a polluter who is proving difficult, or a discharger who is powerful or well known — is the officer's area supervisor likely to take a personal part in the proceedings.
Like other enforcement agents, the field man is gatekeeper to the  apparatus of control.
He is the person in direct contact with the real world of dirty rivers, the first stage decision-maker who normally controls his supervisor's access to ‘problems’ and ‘troublesome’incidents: ‘If we don't mention the fact to anyone higher-up, no-one ever knows.
It's as simple as that.’
The descriptions, definitions, accounts, and assessments received by the agency are his.
Indeed, the higher a case proceeds in the organization, the more officials rely for their knowledge of ‘the problem’ upon a version constructed by field staff and substantially transmitted by the written word (cf.
Ross, 1970:58–9).
Senior staff depend very heavily therefore upon the man in the field, as one of them acknowledged:
‘There's no doubt about it in my mind that pollution control is done by the [officer]on the ground.
Everybody else in any organization, from the laboratory technician to the scientist to the director general, is there to support the man on the ground.
If the man on the ground doesn't do his job correctly, the job probably falls down.
Nobody else can do pollution control.
We're all here to support him to some degree.
He is the sort of the roots in the ground, the bloke that really matters.…’
The field officer's sense of autonomy derives from the fact that being allocated to districts on a geographical basis designed around river catchments gives him a personal territorial jurisdiction over which he presides.
One or two of his colleagues may know something of his patch if they have covered for him when he was unavailable, or if they have previously worked it before being transferred elsewhere.
His area supervisor will also be acquainted with it, but will possess a detailed knowledge only of its conspicuous problems.
In effect the field officer is the major repository of the agency's knowledge of each district.
His sense of autonomy is also enhanced by his invisibility to others — he has no insignia of office, no uniform, or marked vehicle — and by the mobility essential for the efficient patrol of a district which will be geographically large (if rural) or complex (if a more compact urban location).
The field man spends much of the day in his car.
It is his own private vehicle, and, as such, can be made inconspicuous when he so chooses.
It serves as a means of transport, a temporary office for writing notes and making records, a refuge in bad weather, a place to eat lunchtime sandwiches, and a store for the equipment: the sample bottles, sampling buckets, boxes, crates, chemicals, inflatable booms, ropes, leggings, boots and waders, and various other pieces of protective clothing.
It is out in the district that the real work is done.
Here the field man is on his own.
While his job lacks the other features of the policeman's work which lead to social isolation (cf.
Skolnick, 1966:49–51), the  pollution control officer is, like the policeman, a loner.
Though he will frequently be engaged in discussion and negotiation with water-users and others, when it comes to making decisions and taking action the field officer is on his own.
The job, accordingly, is one in which qualities of initiative and the ability to make decisions on the spot are prized — just as a policeman must be able to ‘handle a situation’(Wilson, 1968:31).
After all, pollution is mobile; the field man who hesitates risks losing his evidence.
Relative invisibility and freedom from direct supervision liberate field staff from some of the constraints found in other occupations.
An officer who wants to take it easy, for example, or run personal errands can do so with virtual impunity.
Again, American experience suggests that field staff, like the police, could also be the target for gifts or bribes which polluters may make.
The field officer, after all, has the power to make a discharger spend a substantial sum of money.
Though the topic is, of course, one particularly difficult to research, very little evidence emerged that attempts were made to co-opt field staff in this way.
In one case a field officer inspecting a large garage which had been causing problems with an oil discharge was given an extensive tour of the premises and an offer of (unspecified) help with his car (this case, together with the lavish hospitality of the McDonald's case described in Chapter 2, were the only examples of an inducement, however vague, being made in my presence).
Conversation with field staff would, very occasionally, yield instances of efforts which polluters had made to have colleagues accept small items, such as a joint of meat, drinks, or a free meal.
The most striking example of an (unsuccessful) attempt at bribery was described by an officer who was offered a free choice of goods from a manufacturer's showroom if he would pour away a formal sample he had just taken (see s. iii, ch. 6).
None of this is surprising.
Field staff, with few exceptions, possess a considerable sense of vocation and idealism, and display a commitment to their ultimate goal of the protection of the environment.
Pollution control work also differs in important respects from routine police patrol work.
The field man has to suffer less of the unpleasantness involved in policing.
He is rarely out at night and is largely free to organize his activities so that in bad weather, for example, he can catch up on paperwork in the dry and warmth of the office.
The work is rarely dull or nasty, like police patrol, and consequently field staff are not normally impelled to engage in the policeman's ‘easing’ practices or taking of perks to mitigate tedium  and unpleasantness (Cain, 1973:36–7).
Routine tasks can be easily interspersed with something more interesting.
The nature of the job, indeed, is such that tedium is shortlived.
Its unpredictability, freedom, and diversity are its appeal.
Even the humdrum tasks are varied enough to militate against a sense of monotony.
One officer who had also worked as a trade effluent inspector remarked on ‘the variety and the flexibility and freedom that this job gives you as opposed to trade effluent control.
…You're working…within very tight guidelines in trade effluent, whereas a lot of this is your own initiative and there's that much more flexibility.’
Controlling pollution in direct discharges to watercourses is very different, he continued, since
‘trade effluent is very specifically geared towards discharges to foul sewer and the controlling and the charging of traders who are discharging into foul.
Whereas this job, although it centres around the similar sort of thing, has become much more diverse particularly in the last three or four years with our involvement with deposit of poisonous waste and site licensing…; planning applications are referred to a lot more now than when I first started.
When I did start in ‘73 it was very much the same as trade effluent but the sewers were open, if you like.
But since reorganization it's become much more diverse and we're expected to do a lot more different things.’
As one of the younger officers who came into the job around the time of the reorganization of the water industry, he enjoyed the additional tasks, in contrast with the more experienced men who feel their autonomy has been eroded.
Much to their chagrin, those who look fondly back to earlier days when things were different, believe efforts by senior officials to regulate the activities of field staff more closely have created an unnecessarily ordered and bureaucratized job.
Attempts to further the degree of contact between field and headquarters staff through more extensive reporting, and efforts to make their job more ‘scientific’ in their view merely restrict their occupational freedom.
Thus, paradoxically, changes introduced ostensibly in the interests of rationalizing field officer activity are condemned as irrelevant and unnecessary attacks upon field level autonomy impairing the very efficiency the agency seeks to foster.
Recent organizational changes are, for the more experienced officers, evidence of serious misunderstanding at headquarters about real pollution control work: ‘If you spend too much time in an office you can't do your public relations — you can't respond promptly to protect the good name of [the authority].
’ Some of the older staff have reacted by attempting to do the job much as they have always done it, which means, in effect, engaging in various minor acts of deviance from new bureaucratic demands in order to minimize the trouble  caused.
For example, to commit an account of an incident to paper is to endow it with a  permanence and visibility to senior staff which may result in the creation of further — seemingly unnecessary — work.
For the field man who deals with real problems , paper work is incidental, after the fact.
In putting a case on paper the officer is also yielding control over its disposal:
FO Basically I do exactly the same now as I did then.
But they made it — it's been made — more complicated.
KH In what way?
FO More paperwork.
They want more reports.
…If you've got an oil spillage they want to know…the make-up of the oil, what it is, and God knows what.
But there's a lot of incidents that I do that I just go out, clear it up and I don't even report a lot of them because you're only making paperwork for yourself.
If you can put it on paper someone comes back: ‘What about so-and-so?’
[In the old days]a lot of it wasn't reported.
As long as you kept the public happy and there were no complaints — no-one could find any complaints to write into Head Office with — you were doing a good job.
And I like to keep it that way still if I can, because you can make yourself a lot of work over some small incident sometimes.
[His emphasis]
II.
Control
In a job with a high degree of autonomy and unpredictability, the control of field staff assumes considerable importance, for ‘the  behaviour of the members of an organization’, as Blau (1963:2) observed with studied understatement, ‘does not precisely correspond to its blueprint.’
Control is possible in an organization where staff can harbour ambitions about self-advancement allied with a desire for unruffled relationships with superiors upon whom they depend.
The most explicit form of control is exerted through the field officer's immediate superior, the area supervisor, who occupies the key position of intermediary between senior officials based in offices in headquarters and district officers in the field.
He is the line of communication between senior staffing headquarters and junior staff in the field, transmitting reports and results from the field upwards and instructions and decisions downwards.
Though he has a good deal of contact with senior officials (and in the northern agency spends most of his time at headquarters) he has a strong loyalty to the field officers in his area, retaining from his own earlier experience as a field officer what he feels to be a sympathetic understanding of practical problems.
Despite the differences in conception of the job, field staff are linked in a strong ‘web of solidarity’(Manning, 1977:144) which reaches across boundaries of age, background, or experience.
An important task for the area officer, accordingly, is to  represent and interpret the views of junior officials to seniors, and vice versa.
As in all organizations, there is a marked interdependence between staff.
Field officers rely on senior officials not simply for their own advancement, but for their support in disputes with dischargers and in cases which field staff wish to see taken to court.
Headquarters staff are dependent upon the energy and diligence of their field officers in controlling and preventing pollution, in supplying adequate data and reports, and in representing the agency to the public.
As go-between, the area supervisor has a sense of responsibility towards his seniors matching his sense of loyalty to his field staff.
In directing officers in his area, the supervisor monitors their work and performance and effects some control over their output.
As the recipient of all their reports and assessments, formal and informal, the supervisor is in a position to exert his authority by moulding disparate practices and  judgements in the field into some degree of consistency.
‘Part of my job’, said one, ‘is to make sure that the approach in every district is  similar throughout the area and that we are consistent, in the same way that it's [my superior's]job to make sure that I'm consistent along with my colleagues in all the areas within the region.’
Supervisors can exploit a variety of opportunities for control of field staff.
In the first place, they also know the job and the men in the field.
Unlike most senior officials, the area men began their careers as field officers and worked their way up.
Though they spend most of their time at their desks managing field work and consulting senior officials in headquarters, they are in frequent contact with their staff.
They know the difficulties, the frustrations, and the temptations of the work.
Secondly, area men are directly linked with their officers by the radio telephone in their cars.
Field men can expect to be contacted not only with requests to handle complaints, instructions to attend pollutions or collect samples, but also on quite trivial matters.
The radio telephone is only a partial link since often an officer cannot be located by it.
He will frequently have to take samples or make visits which involve prolonged absences from his vehicle; besides, the terrain in some districts is such that reception of the radio signal is weak or non-existent.
It is not unusual, then, for a call to an officer on the radio to go without response.
But if repeated calls fail to produce an answer the officer may subsequently need to account for himself.
Indices of output are another opportunity for the control of field staff.
Certain pieces of visible evidence of field officer activity serve as output measures, of which the most conspicuous is the sampling schedule which each has.
The field man who has difficulty in meeting his programme can raise doubts about his industriousness.
But it is often difficult to judge.
So much of the job is unpredictable, and a pressing problem or a spate of pollutions or complaints must be given priority over routine sampling.
Meeting sampling schedules will become more of a difficulty for field staff as they are faced with more demands from the organization.
They must now recognize that laboratories need a steady flow of samples, and computers are increasingly relied upon for storage and handling of sample data.
Patterned sampling erodes the field man's personal discretion while it offers a more visible index of activity for the organization.
Senior staffing the northern agency did attempt during the research period systematically to evaluate their officers' work from their sampling records.
Statistics were compiled of the number of samples (including formal samples) taken each month by each officer in each area.
For a time the results were communicated to field staff at their regular monthly meetings.
The analysis of sampling behaviour by headquarters, however, was immediately resented by field staff as an attempt to monitor their performance.
It was not simply the principle of such an analysis being employed as a means of over-seeing their activities, they also objected to the ‘league tables’(as they called them) on the grounds that they were an inaccurate and misleading data base for such an analysis, given the nature of the field man's work:
‘…somebody may have one works [where]the idea is…
‘We'll stat them twice weekly for the next four months’.
OK, but if that's on his cards to do so why should he be top of the table?
It just means that he's — a lot of his time is taken up doing stats and it's if he's doing that he's not doing something else.
And stats do take a bit of time to do and you can write off a couple of hours if you're going to do it properly and make sure that you've got your i's dotted and your t's crossed.’
This experienced man's disquiet stemmed from the fact that the taking of a statutory sample, while visible in the organization, is (as he saw it) a potentially inefficient use of an officer's time, and the pressure to take a formal sample to show up well in the league tables placed an improper constraint on the discretion necessary to do the job efficiently.
The stat, in short, is not necessarily the most appropriate way of securing compliance.
But field staff fear that this  might not be appreciated in head-quarters where senior officials might be unfamiliar with their routine strategies: ‘One can say that because you haven't taken any stats in the last two years it's because you're a good lad, and people who you may have to take stats upon know that you're around a lot, and they know that if they're naughty it's a two-edged thing, you can look at it two ways.’
The existence of league tables was further evidence for older officers of inroads into their enforcement discretion and of lack of knowledge among their senior staff of the hard realities of pollution control work.
Another visible index of output in any organization, of course, is the production of paperwork.
As more of the field officer's job is bureaucratized and made more ‘scientific’, he finds himself spending less time on the river bank.
Instead, he must devote more time to drafting letters, making records, and writing reports in the office.
Office work creates its own demands and its own routine, which area officers and senior staff can exploit as a means of assessing field staff's competence and industry.
The power to evaluate is a power to control.
A final source of control over field staff stems from the supervisor's dependence upon the officer as gatekeeper — as supplier of reports and opinions.
He may legitimately expect from his field officer detailed knowledge of and familiarity with any discharger or any ‘problems’.
The latter will reveal themselves to the area supervisor in sample results or — a more serious matter — in recurring complaints from the public or other water users about particular pollutions.
Supervisors demand to be kept fully informed, and expect a field officer to have at his fingertips all relevant details about any pollution and the people involved.
They look, in short, for a display of competence.
III.
Covering
One of the paradoxes of pollution control work is that although they enjoy considerable autonomy, field men are acutely conscious of the scrutiny of their seniors and feel vulnerable to criticism.
Like other enforcement agents they adapt by employing protective strategies.
In effect an officer's decision behaviour in marginal cases where his work may become visible to his supervisor and where there is no ‘obvious’ course of action comes to be dominated by a desire to minimize potential damage to his position in the agency.
‘I have to cover myself from my superiors,’ said one, ‘because they'll know I've been on site.’
In practical terms it means taking that course of action which most  reliably will avoid the possibility of criticism by their superiors.
Covering is the response of officials enjoying substantial autonomy to efforts at organizational control.
It is a constant concern: ‘you have always to cover yourself.’
Covering means ‘doing it by the book’— erring on the side of caution and producing concrete evidence of activity when making discretionary decisions whose outcome will be known to the officer's supervisor or any senior staff.
The result is that more rather than fewer cases are created, with staff conforming rather than innovating, for they realize that it is difficult for their superiors to complain of their being too efficient or too industrious.
The decision-making which has the potential for being known to senior staff, however, does not generally embrace the routine pollutions.
The persistently troublesome problems and the large spot discharges are the pollutions which are likely to come to agency attention.
In the most serious cases, a field man will always be concerned with covering himself in deciding whether or not to take a formal sample.
His experience may tell him that it may be unnecessary or inappropriate in the circumstances, but failure to take one may become visible to headquarters.
The implications of such an omission may be serious, since legal action is rarely possible without the evidence of a ‘stat’.
Yet field officers often find it difficult to predict when senior staff may wish to consider prosecution, owing to the invisibility of the decision process in the higher reaches of the agency.
Their sensitivity to criticism in this context was made clear by an officer of considerable experience:
‘I've got to look over my shoulder, because there's always somebody that says ‘Well, why didn't you take a stat sample?’
And this has always been levelled at you.
I mean, you can go along and always think ‘Oh there's nothing to this’, but then for some reason or other somebody has a complaint's gone a big way round and ends up right at the top, and then, of course cascading down comes the ‘Why?
Why?
Why?’.
And somebody says ‘Why didn't you take a stat?
You should have taken a stat.’
And you say, ‘Well, I didn't think it warranted.’
And they say ‘It's not for you to think.’
And there's this attitude that goes along, so some people will say ‘Oh I'll take stats’, y'know, ‘regardless of whether I personally think [they]ought to be taken.’
The problem is often particularly poignant since most serious pollutions are ‘one-offs’— spot discharges, rather than persistent failures to comply — which deny field staff a second chance to ‘get it in the bucket’.
If a field officer who has taken a risk and opted to negotiate should subsequently have second thoughts, he may find his evidence has disappeared.
The practical problem of choosing a course of action is compounded by the difficulty of predicting the consequences of a particular pollution without spending a great deal of precious time on the problem:
‘Somebody like [the agency head]isn't going to…lay down the rules of where you should take a stat, or where you shouldn't take a stat.
But the other way is slightly different you see.
They can always be thrown out, they can't be obtained.
…And at times in retrospect you wish you had taken a certain stat, because it turns out that the whole thing has boiled up, completely beyond what you know it to be, but it's become political and the authority is being attacked and the chiefs can't defend it and say, ‘OK.
We'll prosecute’, because that silly fool down there didn't take a statutory sample.
And in truth why didn't you?
You know.
Is it just that it's too much effort?
Or should you spend a bit more time really finding out the extent of the pollution?’
One implication of this for field staff is that seniors find it much simpler to make negative rather than positive evaluations of their competence (cf.
Niederhoffer, 1967:58).
Their work is more likely to come to the attention of headquarters staff ‘in practice…’, as a senior man put it, ‘only when there's a cock-up’.
An officer's doing the right thing at the right time is taken for granted.
Failure to do so is much more noticeable.
An officer who neglects to take a statutory sample which hindsight shows was necessary will find that his omission is more visible to senior staff than his taking a formal sample which is subsequently used in a prosecution by the authority.
The commonest and most visible indices of field officer performance are negative, as an agency head explained: ‘An area supervisor will sit there and say, ‘So and so has let me down again.
He never did this, he never did that, I don't think we can take action, dearly as I would like to’— that's a negative evaluation.
…Very, very rarely does anybody come to you and say ‘Well done, that was a good job’.’
IV.
Competence
If it is much easier for senior staff to make negative rather than favourable assessments of his ability, the field officer is faced with an important practical problem of how he portrays himself to his seniors as good at his job.
There are no ready measures to display as indices of success.
This is not a problem confronting policemen.
In a sanctioning system, the enforcement agent can work by a penal control criterion of activity, as measured by arrests and clear-up rates (Reiss and Bordua, 1967:37; Rubinstein, 1973; Skolnick, 1966) even though police work actually involves little contact with ‘criminals’ and few arrests  (Manning, 1977:348).
The policeman's indices of industry are visible, quantifiable, and relatively easy to produce.
For instance, the traffic policeman who writes tickets for motoring offences may have a regular quota to meet (Petersen, 1971; Rubinstein, 1973).
When in arrears he learns ‘to sniff out the places where you can catch violators when you're running behind’(Skolnick, 1966:55)
Performance measures which mean something to policemen are largely irrelevant in an enforcement system directed towards compliance.
In fact the pollution control officer has as indices of activity neither the policeman's arrest rate nor the evidence which some other compliance system enforcement agents can exploit, such as the dollar amounts recovered by consumer protection officers (Silbey, 1978).
Senior staff assume the pollution control officer will meet his sampling quota: to do so is no sign of hard work or competence.
Since the formal procedures of the law are used so rarely, the number of legal samples or prosecutions in which an officer may be involved are never taken as a sign of competence.
In a compliance system, indeed, resort to formal processes is often regarded as a sign of failure.
Other measures of field officer performance have to be used.
Quantitative indices have considerable appeal for organizations, since they are easily handled and appear to be relatively unproblematic.
But, as in other areas of enforcement activity, the quantitative measures available in pollution control have only limited utility since, like crime rates, statistics of ‘pollution’ and ‘compliance’reflect the behaviour of enforcement agents rather than some ‘objective’measurement of the phenomena themselves (Cicourel, 1968).
Sometimes a change of water quality is used as an indicator of effectiveness (see Wenner, 1971).
‘Obviously the most apparent signs of success’, said a supervisor,
‘are  significant improvements in watercourses either because one has managed to get a discharger to cause his discharge to cease or to be brought up to a standard where a very  significant polluting input has stopped, and there is a corresponding improvement in the overall river system.
You perhaps get restoration of fishery or enhancement of amenity or enhancement of the quality of the water such that it can be used for a far wider spectrum of requirements than it was before.
Such measures, however, are of little immediate utility.
Changes in water quality are rarely dramatic, but occur very gradually, and such a gross indicator rarely shows the direct impact of a field officer's activities.
Even improvements in a number of effluents may not  realize a noticeable change in water quality unless they constitute a substantial part of the flow of a watercourse.
And there is always the problem of establishing a link between enforcement activity and its impact: most changes in water quality may be attributable to levels of economic activity and shifts in patterns of land-use, which have little to do with pollution control work.
Only where a significant source of pollution stops suddenly — a large factory closing down, a new sewage treatment works being opened — will a striking improvement in water quality be discernible.
The unfortunate irony for field staff, however, is that immediate changes in water quality are almost certainly changes for the worse which follow a major pollution incident.
The pollution control officer's nearest analogy to the police officer's arrest rate is a show of productivity measured in terms of paperwork, a feature assuming greater importance since reorganization.
While paperwork is employed also as a protective strategy (cf.
McCleary, 1978:145 ff.), field staff work on the assumption that the paper they produce and transmit to their superiors will be taken to indicate their industry and diligence.
‘The reports you write, the information you may have’ are taken into account.
‘When [your supervisor]asks for a particular point, the more fully you can answer it [the better].
If your report makes good sense and it's well laid out [so much the better].’
Paperwork is concrete evidence of work.
Thus sample data and accounts of incidents become part of the raw material for an assessment of the competence of field staff.
Reports fully and promptly written, and letters thoughtfully and sensibly drafted (thereby requiring little or no alteration when passed to the supervisor for approval and signature), all help create an impression of good work.
These indicators, however, suggest little of an officer's abilities in the field, where outputs are vaguer and defy quantification.
The nature of pollution control work demands instead essentially qualitative  judgements of field officers' abilities.
Field staff are at an advantage in this connection, so far as routine cases are concerned, inherent in the nature of the job.
Since the field officer is a loner, he controls his output to a substantial degree.
His encounters are essentially private in most cases, for polluters do not often go over his head to his superiors, either to negotiate or to complain.
As a result, supervisors are not often in a position to make first-hand assessments of an officer's skills in the field; they have to learn indirectly about his work, his negotiating abilities, the demands he makes, and his  integrity.
The officer's power to select what gets known to his supervisor may be exploited to support an image of competence which he can present in the reports he supplies.
Competence is a many-sided quality which reaches beyond those virtues of initiative and on-the-spot decision-making ability which are normally expected of field staff.
Like policing, it is also a matter of flair, of the ability to be in the right place at the right time.
One supervisor said he was happy when his people tripped somebody up:
‘It's amazing how many people who, when you catch them with their trousers down and take a formal sample, will say, ‘It's been beautiful for the last two years and just this, just yesterday that this thing went wrong and your chap happened to come.’
And, as far as I'm concerned, that's the sign of a good officer.
When he goes on the one day in two years that something went wrong, that shows he's doing a good job.’
Serious pollutions, however, are relatively rare events.
In routine work the field man must display himself as competent in other, subtler ways, showing himself to be on top of his job.
While the primary virtue is the ability efficiently to get results, the dependence of senior staff on the man in the field for a continuous supply of information also places a premium on his knowledge.
It is assumed that it is only the field man who ‘really knows’ what is happening ‘out there’.
Knowledge is again not a matter of understanding pollution control technology or the biological or chemical processes involved in water purification; such knowledge is taken for granted.
A field man's practical knowledge demands instead thorough awareness of the nature and past history of any ‘problem’, including the record and results of prior attempts by the agency at control.
An officer will be expected to know the personalities concerned, for this permits evaluation of the appropriateness of his action as well as prediction of their future behaviour.
Ready answers to enquiries from above are essential.
‘I don't like to say ‘I don't know’ if [my supervisor]rings up and asks ‘What's going on at so-and-so?’‘said one field man.
‘I make sure I know what's happening.’
(Cf.
Wilson, 1978:83.)
Competence is also displayed in a detailed knowledge of territory.
This aspect of the much prized composite quality of ‘experience’ takes time and work: ‘You got to know the district.
You got to know the people.
…I don't think you can do the job basically, in an office.
Not a field officer's job.
You got to hoof it.
Know the rivers.
I think I can say I walked the best part of the rivers in my district.’
A supervisor can tap such first-hand knowledge without wasting time studying Ordnance Survey maps or other records, while the competent field man is in a position to handle a problem immediately in an emergency  without having to research the questions of where a pollution may have come from, where it will go, or what damage it might do.
There was a call to say there had been an accident involving a lorry which had careered off the road spilling its load of drums, some of which were leaking an unidentified liquid.
It had happened in Fred Wheeler's district — geographically the largest in the whole area, and an important catchment for potable supply — on a main road out in the country, somewhere between two towns about 15 miles apart.
Wheeler happened to be in the office when the call came through.
He told a senior colleague there was only one place on that particular fifteen-mile stretch of road where a lorry might be expected to run off it, at a bend where the camber of the road sloped to a ditch.
Any liquid would gather in the ditch and there would be plenty of time to take preventive action, since it did not discharge to a stream for some distance.
It would be easy, Wheeler said, to block the ditch off to trap the pollutant.
Knowing the spot, he was sure he could handle the pollution on his own.
After he had left the office his senior colleague observed with undisguised admiration how well Fred knew his district and how valuable it was for an officer to have such knowledge at his fingertips.
Wheeler phoned the officer an hour later to report that he had correctly pinpointed the location of the lorry and the likely consequences of the accident.
Everything, he said, was under control.
[From field notes.]
V. Postscript
Legal organizations, to be effective in attaining their mandate, have to transmit their policies to and make secure their control over the enforcement agent in the field.
It is he who is in contact with pollution (or whatever problems cause concern) and his discretion which gives practical expression to regulatory policy.
The control of junior staff is an enduring dilemma for bureaucracies, just as for staff the primary practical concern is how to succeed within the organization.
Similarly, the autonomy which for an agency is a problem of organizational control is for the enforcement agent a source of personal control, providing satisfaction and professional pride.
The nature of pollution control work draws attention to these issues because it involves a substantial degree of discretion at field level among staff who are physically dispersed and isolated for most of the day while tending a complex and unpredictable environment.
The work invites the imposition of organizational controls to minimize its ‘centrifugal tendencies’(Kaufman, 1960).
Organizational control is important for an enforcement bureaucracy not simply because agency effectiveness is at stake.
Where the application (or, in one sense, non-application) of legal rules is concerned, there is an abiding concern for a notion of consistency of treatment.
It is difficult to maintain control where a scattered enforcement staff possess high discretion.
Scrutiny by senior officials is easier in  more serious cases because by definition they are more likely to be public knowledge in the agency.
Where the privacy of routine cases provides an effective screen to scrutiny, however, the field officer is freed from the need to cover himself by acting according to his perception of the organization's expectations.
These cases are the most numerous, and some have the potential for becoming ‘serious’.
The irony of organizational control in a compliance system is that it may impede performance and efficiency at field level, where enforcement is a matter of negotiation and bargaining demanding the flexibility of high discretion.
Indices of success in compliance systems are more elusive for field staff to attain than in sanctioning systems.
In the latter, agents are organizationally rewarded by how well they measure up to the relatively concrete criteria provided by the enforcement process.
The indicators of success in a compliance system, however, are vague because compliance itself is a vague and open-ended concept (ch. 6), and the enforcement agent has to fulfil a variety of roles demanding a wide range of skills and knowledge.
He finds himself evaluated by the correspondingly vague notion of competence.
In a compliance system, the ‘good’ officer is one who gets results quietly and efficiently.
5
5.
Creating Cases
I. Working Definitions
The ‘facts’ of a pollution, like other forms of deviance, do not exist independently of the interpretative judgments which enforcement agents make about them.
Any events or acts of possible ‘pollution’ have to be defined and assessed by a field man, having regard for their setting and context.
The ‘pollutions’ produced as a result of these interpretative processes form the basis for any response by the enforcement agency.
Pollution control field staff have defined their central task in practice as securing the compliance of those who pollute, or risk polluting, watercourses.
In utterly mundane terms it means getting polluters to do what they want them to do.
But as with other types of deviance, pollution is not a simple, self-evident notion.
Whether a given act or event is seen as pollution or not, to paraphrase Becker (1963: 14), depends in part on the nature of the act or event and in part on what other people do about it.
To understand how compliance is secured requires in the first place an appreciation of the means by which pollution may be defined, identified, and raised as a matter requiring the intervention of the pollution control agency.
Certain kinds of events legally definable as ‘pollution’ are not followed by any action on the part of the field officer, supporting Becker's dictum that ‘an infraction of a rule does not mean that others will respond as though this had happened’(1963:12).
Since the legal rules about the control of water pollution are expressed through the discretion of field officers it is important to understand their working definitions of pollution in terms of the kinds of events, activities, or social settings which could give rise to action on their part, whatever its ultimate conclusion.
The law itself, framed as it is in terms of strict liability, is not concerned with any niceties which might be provoked by extenuating circumstances.
It simply proscribes discharging without consent or causing pollution (ch. 1, s.iv).
Identifying a discharge as ‘polluting’ is the first step in opening up the sequence of decisions to be made about modes of control.
The possibility of pollution may often be established in the first instance by a third party — an onlooker or a user downstream — or by the  discharger himself, rather than by the pollution control officer.
When cast in this reactive role an officer inevitably becomes the recipient of prior definitions made by onlooker, complainant, or discharger (though he may, of course, subsequently redefine what has been reported).
Since others do not possess the experience or diagnostic expertise of the field officer (except, in some cases, the discharger himself) and since reporting is contingent upon the knowledge that there exist means for ‘doing something about the problem’, it follows that the kinds of ‘pollution’ most frequently drawn to the agency's attention are those where the pollution or its consequences are easily noticed and identifiable as ‘abnormal’or ‘unusual’.
The field officer will only discover examples of pollution himself, however, when he engages in proactive enforcement, through regular surveillance by sampling or inspection or, if his suspicions are aroused, through spot checks.
The chief means of proactive enforcement is routine sampling, which will bring to light or confirm the existence of persistent pollutions.
But since field staff can sample in a day only a  minuscule proportion of the discharges and watercourses in their districts, the coincidence of sampling when a serious ‘one-off’ pollution is occurring is very unlikely.
Thus the potential ‘pollutions’ which the officer himself discovers are more likely to be viewed as ‘marginal’or ‘non-polluting’cases where no action may be taken.
Whether the ‘pollution’ comes to light as a result of proactive or reactive enforcement, however, the field man must decide at an early stage whether what he is observing constitutes a ‘pollution’or not.
Central to this question is a working construction of what is tolerable .
This pliable conception structures the course of action taken.
One part of this judgment is a moral question raised by the officer as to whether the case is one about which action ought not to be taken.
The answer to this has two interrelated components.
First, there is an assessment (sometimes negotiable) about whether it is technically within the discharger's power to do something about the ‘problem’.
It is widely believed, for example, that farmers contaminate watercourses every day in the normal course of their jobs; but, as an officer from a rural district put it, ‘I wouldn't  take action if he couldn't do anything about it.’
In other cases, dirty water is considered to be ‘natural’ or ‘inevitable’.
In urban areas field officers are well aware that heavy rain causes a substantial run-off of solids from buildings and roads into the nearest stream; those in mining areas know all about run-off from colliery tips in wet weather.
The second issue is more explicitly concerned with the discharger's economic capacity to comply , as gauged  by common-sense assessment.
The question is whether remedial action would impose an unacceptable economic burden.
For instance, discharges frequently run from septic tanks in the grounds of country cottages, many of whose occupants are old people who have the sympathies of field men, since most of them are believed to be badly off.
It is possible, technically, to control these discharges — but to take action here would be to involve the owners in an expenditure regarded as totally unjustifiable in the context of their limited means and the modest potential for damage.
Field staff, by describing their inactivity as ‘turning a blind eye’, recognize that the formal law can embrace cases of this kind.
The other part of the decision about what falls within the working definition of ‘pollution’ is a judgment as to whether the effluent will have an ‘impact ’.
If it will, it becomes a ‘problem’ and the officer must act; otherwise the field man will feel no professional obligation to take action.
For practical purposes, therefore, ‘pollution’ is something which normally requires some action on the part of the enforcement officer and is defined not by legal rules but by the response of the enforcement authorities.
It is an organizational and moral rather than a legal construct.
This suggests that an event which the law might not recognize as pollution can in practice nevertheless be treated as such.
For example, seepages often occur in urban or industrialized areas where waste materials have been dumped, often decades earlier.
Water frequently accumulates on old factory and tip sites absorbing various kinds of powerful pollutants.
From time to time the accumulation escapes by seepage through the ground and, most visibly, through earth banks around the tip.
Seepages are usually treated by field officers as worthy of attention, therefore for practical purposes as pollution, since the pollutants involved are frequently visible and often toxic.
Yet they know the legal position is less than clear.
Some seepages can be sampled if there is a noticeable flow, but many are so insubstantial in quantity that sampling is not possible and it becomes difficult to talk of a ‘discharge’.
Since the practical definition of pollution is tied to the notion of impact, it requires an assessment of setting, for setting determines the degree to which the field officer can contemplate tolerating the contamination.
This assessment is of crucial importance.
Because setting varies enormously, since each watercourse possesses its own unique characteristics, pollution is a highly relative notion.
Some treated sewage effluents, for example, are cleaner than some rivers, while a ‘bad’ pollution on a potable supply river may not even be  noticeable in an urban watercourse.
Two other features linked with judgments about impact are to be noted.
The first, a matter of immediate significance, is an evaluation of the potential damaging effects of a pollution.
The crucial issue here is whether or not the effluent is entering a watercourse which is used for water supply or amenity.
Those rivers employed for potable supply create a special concern among field officers, reflected in a markedly greater willingness to define a discharge as polluting.
This obtains a fortiori the nearer a discharge is to an intake for potable supply or some other use, such as fish farming, which requires water of very good quality.
Since use of land for domestic and industrial purposes is largely incompatible with clean water, potable supply rivers tend to be found in rural settings where they also have considerable amenity value.
Rivers in predominantly urban catchments, in contrast, receive large amounts of effluent treated to greater or lesser degree at sewage works, as well as discharges from industrial sites.
A watercourse viewed primarily as an effluent carrier will be thought better able to tolerate further pollution.
An officer from a large rural district considered to be quite a ‘difficult’ patch observed, for instance, that he was ‘sure the blokes in [the city nearby], where there are many polluting discharges into relatively fishless rivers, would not worry about things that'd cause great concern to Stewart and Fred’[two officers in very rural catchments with potable supply rivers).
The second feature in assessing impact reflects the organizational context of discretion.
This is a judgment about noticeability .
Many kinds of pollution provide visible evidence of their presence.
Water is often discoloured.
Steam indicates overheating.
Oil is always particularly alarming since a very small quantity will quickly cover a large area of water with an  unmistakable iridescence.
Other kinds of oil emulsify on contact with water, turning it, even when substantially diluted, the colour of milk.
Pollutions which are high in suspended solids make water appear murky and leave deposits on the beds and banks of watercourses.
Foaming water is evidence of the presence of detergent — though paradoxically the more water foams the cleaner it is, an important clue in industrial areas where river water almost always looks dirty.
Noticeability does not, however, simply mean visibility.
Polluted water often smells, and a serious and persistent pollution may turn a stream anaerobic, causing it to give off hydrogen sulphide, with its familiar odour of rotten eggs.
Contamination of water which is noticeable raises the field officer's anxiety because it indicates to the untutored that all is not well.
It is  important to bear in mind that, in contrast with trade effluents which disappear into sewers, most effluents discharging directly into watercourses are visible — and even if the discharge is not visible, its consequences (in the form of dead fish or other damage to the river's vital signs) certainly are.
This places different constraints on pollution control officers.
Establishing noticeability requires attention to location and time, which in turn determine the significance assumed by such seemingly intrinsic features as the quantity and quality of the discharge and its continuity.
Watercourses vary in size from the merest trickle in a ditch to large tidal rivers; size is significant since it controls the extent to which any pollution will be diluted, thereby more readily purified by natural processes, and less noticeable.
Field men again adopt very different standards of tolerance, depending on the nature of their patch.
Some spend their time inland on headwaters where streams are small and flows are low, while others work on predominantly tidal rivers where dilution is easily achieved and any pollution carried out to sea.
The officer on a tidal river will be much more tolerant of pollution: one, for example, took a murky-looking sample of the discharge from a sand and gravel works which he described as ‘a bit high’ in suspended solids.
‘If it was really bad ,’ he said, ‘I'd go and have a word.’
[My emphasis.]
Discharges may be permanent and persistent, or they may be episodic or isolated.
Some will be regarded as ‘temporary’.
Many effluents which in other circumstances would be considered polluting — often highly polluting — are tolerated if the officer is satisfied that they will be relatively short-lived.
Water pumped out of building excavations or road works, for example, may be permitted to flow directly into a neighbouring watercourse without a requirement that any solids settle out in the lagoons which are the typical method of purifying similar discharges more permanent in character.
By the same token the continuous or intermittent discharge will concern an officer much more than one which is only occasionally made.
The amount of polluting matter discharged is also of considerable significance, but how significant depends on the capacity of the receiving watercourse.
A discharge small in volume may be judged polluting if its watercourse is also small; if the stream is large, however, the effluent overlooked ('You take no action when your flow is piddling small') or, at least, considered insignificant and postponed indefinitely as a job to be tackled.
‘That's not real pollution,’ said an officer, noticing a small, discoloured discharge, and, by way of justifying his inaction, ‘It's not ‘pollution’to put a little in.
…I don't see what harm that's doing to the [river]when there are thousands of millions of gallons a day coming down.’
(His emphasis.)
Weather and seasonal variations affect flows and, in turn, judgments as to whether a particular effluent is polluting.
Summer flows, of course, are noticeably smaller, offer much less dilution and greater visibility to any discoloured water.
In summer, field men cannot afford to be too tolerant of pollution, especially with watercourses exposed to the greater scrutiny that comes with recreational use.
Prolonged rainfall, on the other hand, provides massive dilution and little visibility, and in these circumstances the field officer will expect the first flush of urban run-off to bring oil, solids, and other matter washed from streets and buildings into his streams.
Furthermore, the storm overflow system may well operate if the sewers are overloaded, discharging some of their contents directly into the rivers.
The normal expectation of the officer in very wet weather, then, is that all watercourses will be swollen, turbid, and discoloured; any further pollution is less likely to be noticeable or do any particular damage.
What is ‘noticeable’ for the field man is thrown into relief by a conception of the ‘normal’(Goffman, 1971).
A particularistic knowledge of what is ‘normal’ for this watercourse, this discharge, in this weather, at this time of the year shapes an officer's expectations and equips him to attend to anything ‘abnormal’.
Is this pipe normally running?
Is the discharge normally this colour?
Does this treatment plant normally cause problems?
This is all part of a search for incongruity which is a characteristic of enforcement behaviour in general(Rock, 1973a:177–9; Sacks, 1972).
Pollutions are rarely dramatic events in themselves, but are often more striking in their consequences.
Any serious pollution is a hazard to the life which depends on the watercourse — all but the dirtiest of rivers support some form of fish and plant life.
Bird and beast drink from them.
Fish floating dead in a river provide very conspicuous evidence of dirty water.
Fish are sufficiently intolerant of pollution to occupy a position of immense significance in pollution control work: ‘if fish are killed in even small numbers in rivers, they are a readily-observable sign of pollution which generates public concern.’
(Unpubl. agency document.)
Fish life is the commonest indicator of the general health of a river.
For example, the presence of sticklebacks (fish known for their tolerance of dirty water) in a previously fishless stream is taken as an unambiguous sign of an improvement in water quality.
The epithet most frequently applied to a dirty watercourse is  ‘fishless’, while the aristocrat of freshwater fish is also the least tolerant of pollution, hence a watercourse of very good quality is usually referred to as ‘a trout stream’.
The trout stream, in particular, has a special significance for field staff and is a source of professional pride.
Most are in country areas of high amenity value which attract outsiders — anglers and tourists — with decided views about what is meant by clean water.
This inculcates in rural officers a notably greater intolerance of pollution in everyday work.
Many pollutions will kill fish, or at least cause them distress.
In either case they are readily visible to onlookers.
A fish in distress swims erratically near the surface and readily suggests that it has something wrong with it.
A dead fish floating on its side, exposing the silvery scales on the underside of its body, is even more conspicuous.
Field officers assume that even the most ignorant onlooker will deduce that fish die because there is something wrong with the water.
The impact and noticeability of any contaminated discharge depend, of course, on the kinds of pollutant it contains.
Organic pollutants take oxygen from water, and if present in sufficient quantities will kill fish and other life, including plant life.
In a particularly noxious form, such as silage liquor or untreated sewage, the presence of organic pollution will be signalled with the growth of a grey fungus on the stream bed.
Inorganic pollution is not harmful to aquatic life to the same extent, unless it happens to be toxic; thus its consequences are frequently less evident.
Some inorganic pollutants, however, are intrinsically visible: a high concentration of inert solids, for instance, the waste from dyeing processes, or certain metals, like chrome, found in the effluents from metal-finishing works.
In general, the dirtier the receiving watercourse the less likely a discharge is to be defined as polluting, since the pollutant is less likely to have any measurable impact on the stream, less likely to be visible in already dirty water, and less likely to produce any noticeable ill-effects upon already scarce fish, plant, or animal life.
From the field man's point of view, it is immaterial whether the water itself appears obviously polluted or whether a pollution has produced harmful consequences such as dead fish.
In both cases it is open to others also to define the water as having something wrong with it: as one officer put it, having described an oil pollution which at the time was beyond his control: ‘I prayed for rain and darkness’.
Formal consent standards attaching to a discharge may also be a criterion for action in a persistent pollution.
Field men have ready  access to consent documents and will treat as relevant the degree to which standards are exceeded.
This is sometimes a reflection of the belief that if sample results show the discharge to be so much beyond the consent limits then the pollution must be having some effect on the stream.
Almost certainly linked with this reasoning, however, is the desire to preserve the field man's credibility in the eyes of the discharger by demonstrably not tolerating a degree of pollution which may be seen as ‘getting away with it’.
The kind and amount of pollution which come to light in these circumstances are only knowable after a routine sample has been taken and analysed in an agency laboratory.
‘Pollution’ here takes on a much more precise and public character since sample results can be displayed and compared by field staff with the discharger's consent, whose parameters and limits mark out in a formal sense the degree to which the agency itself is prepared to tolerate pollution.
In deciding whether a breach of agreed standards is in itself cause for action, the field man will again set the pollution in the context of its location before judging the degree by which it exceeds the consented level.
It must be remembered that the agencies, as a matter of policy, tolerate a certain amount of pollution partly in recognition of the vagaries of pollution control, and sampling and analytical error.
Policy in the northern agency during the research called for compliance in about 70 percent of routine samples; with the review of consents, the agency has become seemingly less tolerant, calling for compliance in 95 percent of samples.
Laboratory analyses often confirm a field man's suspicions or draw his attention to pollution previously unnoticed.
In these circumstances staff then employ working norms which serve as rules-of-thumb to impose order on the judgment as to whether action is necessary.
An area officer with a mixed catchment described his approach:
‘…you've got to look and see whether it's a big discharge or a small discharge.
If it's a small discharge and say it's twice the limits, three times the limits, then it would be considered to be needing improvement.
If it's a small discharge and it's just over the standard then it's unfortunate .
If it's a big discharge and it's way outside the limits then it's serious — two to three times the limits.
If it's a big discharge which is perhaps on a Royal Commission standard and it is consistently turning out say a 30 BOD and a 40 solids then it can be regarded as harmful and one would press for improvement to be carried out.…
I will often say ‘Well this is twice what it should be, or three times what it should be,’ and decide accordingly as to whether it is serious or not.’
[My emphasis.]
Three working categories are employed here: discharges which are  ‘small’ and ‘just over the standard’are defined as ‘unfortunate’.
No action is specified as the normal consequence of discovering this class of ‘pollution’.
One noticeably in excess of the standards (30 BOD rather than the 20 of the Royal Commission, 40 solids rather than 30) is ‘harmful’ and requires ‘improvement to be carried out’.
A ‘big discharge’ which is ‘way outside the limits’(by which is meant ‘two to three times the limits’) is described as ‘serious’and presumably demands action, though no reference is made as to remedy.
Though almost certainly more tolerant than the norms observed by the police in deciding whether or not to take action against speeding motorists, these norms are somewhat less tolerant than those observed by some staff in areas of greater industrialization, as the following conversation with a field officer from such an area suggests:
FO…
I usually look upon a BOD over 100 milligrammes per litre as very bad.
KH Where the consent would be 20?
FO Where our normal limits are 20.
The authority normal working standard is a 20, so I consider 100 milligrams per litre to be bad — that's five times the BOD.
Our pH 16 values are normally 5 to 9; I look upon anything above pH 11½ to be bad — that's from my experience in the laboratory that to get to a pH of 11 is easily done but to get to a pH of 12 you need a dam sight more alkali.
KH…
Do you have any other parameters?
FO Well, our non-ferrous metals limit has usually been one milligramme per litre, they have recently changed to 0.5 milligrams per litre now.
I look upon anything above 10 milligrams per litre, non-ferrous metals, as bad.
But we've got no set limits, I Think it is all a personal judgment…
This final remark aptly sums-up the importance of context and individual discretion.
II.
Discovery
Taking enforcement action requires in the first place techniques to bring deviance to light.
This is a matter of discovery .
Secondly, the deviance must be linked with an offender, a matter of detection .
The distinction between discovery and detection is important.
For example, the mobility of the evidence of pollution renders it potentially visible to a number of possible reporters but at the same time makes it more difficult to trace to its origin.
Here, discovery is often easy, detection difficult (though aided by the fixed location of most dischargers).
Field officers do not go about the business of bringing pollution to light in an unpatterned way.
To do so would be thought ineffective.
Field men know that pollution does not crop up at random and one of the arts of enforcement is to be in the right place at the right time — or  at least to know where to look, for a particular problem in this form of enforcement is to forge a link between act or event and offender.
Detection is less of a difficulty for certain other regulatory agents, such as housing inspectors (Mileski, 1971) or consumer protection officers (Cranston, 1979), whose enforcement domain is peopled with complainants.
In water pollution, however, the evidence is mobile and there may be no complainants with a stake in reporting it.
The mobility of pollution contrasts with other static forms of regulatory rule-breaking where enforcement is essentially proactive (e.g. Stjemquist, 1973; Mawby, 1979).
Since pollution is noticeable to others, and not necessarily at its source, it is suited to reactive methods of enforcement and field staff are accordingly sensitive to the need to respond to complaints.
Mobility means that the deviance exists independently of its origin, allowing polluters opportunities of evading detection.
In fact tying a pollution to its source can be a tricky piece of detective work.
Ironically, however, the mobility of the evidence may increase the chances of discovery since it will be given greater exposure.
But field staff may have their suspicions and these can be translated into more frequent monitoring of the suspects in the hope of ‘catching them at it’.
A proactive programme of monitoring or inspection needs, in other words, to be informed by the experience of the officer: ‘A lot of sampling is so unnecessary.
…When it comes to [discovering]pollution it's one in a thousand that you'll [do so]by sampling — it's in an officer's technique…‘
There are three techniques which amount to working rules for the more efficient discovery of pollution.
The first is ‘know your district ’, for knowledge of people and processes helps a field man organize his expectations and so inform his efforts.
This is a major reason for the commitment in the job to thorough knowledge of the topography and geography of the district — the watercourse routes, the sites of potential pollution, and the location of sewage treatment works.
Effluent in rural areas is usually discharged visibly into watercourses and can often be traced without much difficulty to its source.
This all assists the job of detection, even though the officer has more terrain to police.
The much smaller district of the urban field man, in contrast, has many more discharges per river mile, often from old-established industries in business for decades, more or less oblivious to changes in the law or the organization of water pollution control.
Effluent discharges are often made inconspicuous by buildings or the frequent disappearance of the watercourse into culverts.
Even when a  discharge is discovered, it is sometimes very difficult to establish where the other end of the pipe is: town plans or the other records which comprise the organizational memory are often incomplete or out of date, while physically tracing the effluent can involve the time-consuming and hazardous task of lifting manholes in the middle of city streets while filling sample buckets, proceeding by trial and error to narrow down the possible sources of pollution.
It takes years, it is thought, to get to know an urban area well.
Knowing the area also means knowing the people well, especially those the officer will regularly encounter.
After all, he is well-placed to make himself a familiar figure to the discharger:
‘It's only really the chap on the ground who gets to know what's going on, gets chatting — and not just chatting with the management of the firm — chatting with the chap that runs the pretreatment plant, y'know, having a cup of tea with him and generally getting to know the individuals and the characters.
…Over the last ten years we've built up a pretty good network.
…I know what pubs to go into when I want to meet someone to have a chat.…’
This familiarity assists reactive enforcement.
It is an opportunity for the field man to educate people into what they can and cannot discharge into the river, and it contributes to a network of relationships which creates a means of learning about pollutions shortly after they occur.
Familiarity can also encourage a mutual sense of trust which enhances the officer's capacity to detect and control because it encourages self-reporting of deviance.
Finally, it is also important for an officer to know about the processes which give rise to the particular effluents in his patch, since this helps the business of containment and on the spot diagnosis in an emergency.
Familiarity with industrial processes also better equips an officer to handle encounters with dischargers, offering a means for judging the ‘truth’ of any account offered in explanation of a pollution.
In short, he becomes more credible as a negotiator and as an enforcement agent.
Knowledge of geography, people and processes all contribute to the officer's ‘experience’, the virtue endorsed by the longer-serving officers.
Experience is held to be the foundation for effective pollution control:
The stream looked normal to me, but the sample turned out to be very cloudy.
Palmer had noticed that something was wrong with the water, even before taking the sample, and volunteered the opinion (subsequently confirmed) that cattle had been drinking in it upstream.
‘No textbook can tell you this,’ he said.
‘It's experience.
Years gone by in one town I you could tell from the drainage whether it was a colliery or a pottery.
You used to be able to go along to a pottery, say, and say, ‘What was going on here at about  eight o'clock this morning?’…
You used to surprise some of them because they thought they'd done it before you'd notice.’
[From field notes.]
The second working rule is ‘be suspicious ’.
It is not the suspiciousness prompted by regular contact with strangers, as in the case of policemen (Rubinstein, 1973); instead it springs from a recognition that, as a senior officer put it, ‘a discharger's priorities are not our priorities’.
As enforcement of water pollution regulations places demands on polluters of time, manpower, and money, one of the basic  premises informing routine pollution control work is the assumption that every discharger has a substantial economic incentive to evade enforcement: ‘Everyone will try to get out of it, or say it wasn't them.’
Furthermore, it is generally assumed that it is an easy matter to pollute and get away with it.
‘There are a hundred ways a firm can get rid of pollution into the river,’ said an experienced officer, ‘so long as they do it at the right time.’
The result is an imperative.
‘You've got to be suspicious.
You've got to be on your guard.’
Unless a watercourse is very small or the pollutant particularly powerful, the natural processes of dilution and purification will often make it very difficult for either proactive or reactive discovery to reveal the existence of pollution soon enough and in sufficient detail for it to be traced to a particular discharger.
Officers respond by going immediately to the places suspected to be the most likely sources of the effluent.
Suspicions are derived from past experience.
As in other forms of enforcement, deviance which has taken place once is assumed capable of repetition.
Or suspicion springs from an accumulation of complaints, from the physical signs of untidiness or carelessness, from characterization of a discharger from prior contact as ‘the sort of person’ who might be expected to give trouble, or characterization of a plant or business as ‘the sort of firm or occupation’which causes problems.
Farmers and small businesses (especially self-made men) frequently invite the latter response.
These are all examples of common-sense models of behaviour intended to predict continued misconduct.
Suspicions may also be aroused in the course of routine inspection or sampling: where is the waste going?
Why is that pipe discoloured?
Why is there no sludge in the settlement pit?
Hindered access to the effluent — any delay at the gate or other untoward behaviour which the field officer can interpret as stalling — may be taken as evidence that some sort of urgent remedial work provoked by his arrival, is under way.
Since ‘compliance’ is an administrative definition and since production or  treatment processes can constantly give rise to changes in water quality, field men must be ever-vigilant in the face of uncertainty.
Routine inspection of a watercourse is a constant search for the incongruous.
In all of this the pollution control officer behaves much like other enforcement agents, of whom the policeman on the street is the best-known example (Rubinstein, 1973:218 ff.; Skolnick, 1966:48).
If policing pollution is not quite the ‘uninterrupted sequence of suspicious scenes’(Werthman and Piliavin, 1967:56) which writers on the police describe so vividly, the pollution control officer must, even so, be continually on his guard:
‘First of all you check your brook.
If there's a change in vegetation, a change in the flow, a change in the colour…you begin to be suspicious…you get ‘nose’.
I sometimes head off to a certain place.
…I suppose sometimes I get a slight instinct for something happening.
…You need a ‘nose’ for what's wrong.
…They call it ‘copper's nose’.
There's no substitute for regular surveillance all the time, no substitute for that.
You can go to a stream fifty times in a year, but you've got to poke your head over the bridge — both sides — to be sure.’
Suspiciousness becomes almost an instinct, powerful and all-pervasive: ‘When you go out on a Sunday afternoon [in the country], say, and you look over a bridge at the stream, you cannot help yourself.
You're not looking at the stream, you're looking at the bloody quality and you can't stop yourself doing it.’
The third rule, which reflects the field man's position in the bureaucracy of pollution control, is ‘cover yourself ’(ch. 4, s.iii).
The field man's vulnerability to criticism from his superiors has implications for his decisions as to the circumstances in which action on his part is warranted.
‘At the end of the day I'm responsible for the authority.
So I have to take samples…one's got to cover oneself.’
In practical terms this concern is relevant only where supervising and senior staff in the agency may learn about a pollution; by definition these are cases which the agency regards as important, in particular, those which may have implications for the agency's public reputation.
Decisions about action in routine pollutions are a matter for the field officer's discretion.
His control in these cases is such that he alone decides whether or not to sample, whether or not to demand remedial action.
The routine pollution, then, is one which the field officer can keep private as between himself, the complainant (if any), and the discharger (if he can be detected).
The pollutions which escape the field officer's shroud of privacy are those which are so noticeable that they attract widespread public attention, or those where a complainant is of such status that he may enjoy direct contact with senior staff.
The agency itself has an  important stake in avoiding complaints or in dealing with them efficiently.
Pollutions which attract substantial publicity risk impugning the agency's competence.
In fact the water authorities are especially sensitive to criticism in the media.
Senior staff regard themselves as rarely far from the public eye, a view encouraged by the attention paid by some local newspapers to the water authorities.
Indeed officials at all levels work on the assumption that the dominant public image of their agencies, thanks to a critical press, is of costly, overblown, publicly-funded organizations.
Preventing cause for complaint, or making swift and effective intervention when grounds for complaint come to light, are opportunities for the agencies to demonstrate competence and efficiency to media and public alike.
This concern is expressed at field level in a much more cautious approach: ‘You take extra care where pollution could be visible — parks, lakes etc. — to the public.
It could bring the authority's name into bad repute, so a greater watch is kept.’
The guiding principle is one of minimizing the maximum damage.
In practical terms this is translated into the maxim ‘get it in the bucket’, a rule of particular importance in ‘one-off’ rather than continuing pollutions, since there may only be one chance to sample.
Besides, as field staff said, ‘you can always throw it away later’ if the pollution turns out to be unimportant and the officer wants to avoid the trouble of processing, that is, bureaucratically accounting for, his sample.
In general, wherever the officer believes a case to be one which may come to his supervisor's knowledge, it is appropriate to err on the side of caution, to ‘go by the book’ and protect himself from criticism.
He becomes, in effect, more willing to define cases as ‘pollutions’ since the agency has grounds for complaint only when an officer fails to take action in an instance which officially warrants it — not the other way round.
III.
Identification
Definitions of pollution are bound up with the process by which pollution is formally brought to light and identified.
In contrast with some other forms of deviance, many kinds of pollution do not carry with them indicators which can be taken for granted by an enforcement officer (or anyone else) as unambiguous signs of their presence.
Evidence decays.
All but the most persistent kinds of pollution (now increasingly rare) are ephemeral and mobile.
Isolated and episodic pollutions are soon flushed away.
Even a persistent  pollution will be less enduring given the right weather.
Field men, as a result, are not only often in doubt as to whether they are observing a ‘pollution’, they have little time to consider what action should be taken.
Where an officer wants to see what a new or unconsented discharge consists of, therefore, or where his own judgment suggests that a discharge may be polluting, he turns to his sample bucket, which offers the ultimate means for practical purposes of establishing the kind and degree of pollution.
Sampling takes a number of forms.
The commonest is the routine sample of liquid drawn in a bucket from discharge or watercourse, transferred to storage jars and removed to the laboratory for analysis at the end of the day.
A check of the water's temperature is often made on the spot and smaller samples may also be taken and treated immediately to enable a measurement of dissolved oxygen to be made, or to fix for the presence of certain substances such as cyanide.
Mud and other solid matter taken from the beds of watercourses or from the ground over which a discharge has been made in the past may also be collected for analysis.
Sometimes samples are taken of the natural life found in stream beds to construct a biotic index of the watercourse which will indicate its cleanliness by the kind of life the water will support.
Such sampling generates quantitative data permitting trends to be charted which, if a deterioration is apparent, will draw attention to the existence of previously undetected pollution.
Sampling is one of the more tedious jobs.
Some field men find the business of drawing the sample, filling the bottle, transferring its contents to storage jars, fixing for dissolved oxygen or cyanide, taking the temperature, and filling out sampling forms and labels all rather tiresome.
If a discharge is small or inaccessible, sampling is also time-consuming.
If an officer does not need to sample to fill his quota he may prefer to rely on his experienced eye instead and run the risk that an invisible pollutant like zinc is present.
After all, as one said, ‘you can usually tell if the water's good just by looking at it’.
Besides, sample results are not instantly available, but take at least two or three weeks, sometimes longer, to come through from the agency's laboratories.
In serious cases results can be produced more quickly, but in the case of organic pollutions the analysis itself takes five days.
Many officers routinely make an impressionistic assessment of quality, with a sniff of the water in the sample bottle or a sight of it against the light.
The field man confronted with something which may be a ‘problem’ has to rely at the outset on his own personal  judgment about the most appropriate action to take without waiting for sample results.
In making this judgment he resorts to various clues which usually indicate some of the commoner forms of pollution:
FO…you acquire the…skill, with practice, of looking at a discharge and being able to say visually in many cases, that there's things like suspended solids — that it is going to be outside consent; it is clear to you that sample is going to be outside.
So you're not messing around and wasting everybody's time.
And even the organics…
I mean, inorganics are totally invisible, you can't really see inorganic pollution in general, but organics will colour more often than not.
Farm effluents are khaki, milk is white,…treated domestic sewage tends to have a sort of pale golden straw colour to it — depending on how dark the straw is it's a fairly clear indicator to you.
And how turbid…it then sort of goes through this darkening in turbidity.
It tells you just about how much organic matter is present.
KH On the spot?
FO On the spot.
And I mean over the years you can sort of pick a sample out and say ‘It's pretty close, this one’; or, y'know, ‘Do something about it’, there and then, if you think there is anything that can be done.
Or it can be very bad.
Or you can pick it out and say ‘That's a beautiful one, isn't it, there'll be no problem there,’ and you look no further.
KH It's an art almost, rather than a science?
FO It's certainly not a science.
…[Take]temperature — you've got a thermometer in the car but you begin to feel what is about thirty degrees C. You sense that that's about thirty.
Identifying some kinds of pollutants, however, is simply not possible by rule of thumb assessments made on the spot.
Indeed, some sorts of pollution may also for a time evade detection in the laboratory.
Analysis can only reveal the presence of a pollutant for which tests are actually carried out and it adds to the costs and time required (another constraint, of which field staff are well aware, against sampling too freely) to analyse routinely for pollutants on more than the usual parameters — BOD, suspended solids, ammonia.
From time to time‘pollutions’ with serious consequences occur which remain in effect undetected while laboratory analysis is directed towards testing for the presence of other substances.
One such pollution which defied attempts at on the spot diagnosis and, for a time, laboratory analysis as well was described by a supervising officer:
‘I can think of one firm that I think had tried to pull the wool over our eyes for many years.
This particular firm had been causing fish mortalities in the stream — about half a dozen fish mortalities in the sixties.
[Field staff]had been going along taking samples which had looked completely clear and satisfactory.
And they'd reported that it was clear and satisfactory.
In fact the effluent which was being discharged contained a very high quantity of zinc which was killing the fish.
And it wasn't until we started analysing for zinc that we realized what the problem was.
The firm had never said, ‘Well, we're discharging an effluent containing zinc.’
And the odd thing was the effluent looked better the worse it was.
The clearer it was, the more zinc was in there.
When there was less zinc it looked cloudy.’
The frequency and regularity of field officers' monthly quota of samples is controlled largely by laboratory capacity.
Agency laboratories can process only a certain number of samples at any given time and organize the taking of samples to produce a steady and predictable flow.
Laboratory constraints reach the field officer in the form of a curb against excessive or irregular sampling, suggesting the possibility that the agency's capacity to process data limits its ability to discover and identify deviance.
For instance, an invisible pollution might not come readily to attention if an officer decides against sampling in the interests of easing the load on the laboratory: in the example above officers had reported that the water was ‘clear and satisfactory’.
But if there is any real doubt in marginal cases the officer's need to cover himself against the possibility of criticism from above normally resolves the issue in favour of sampling.
Sample results are a potential source of embarrassment to the agency, since, like criminal statistics, they are open to a variety of interpretations.
When an intractable pollution occurs water authority staff frequently respond by increasing the sampling rate.
Officers closely monitor those cases in which pollution may be attributable to a breakdown of treatment plant or some other apparently ‘accidental’ cause.
This is partly as a means of enhancing control, permitting the field man to transmit his concern about the effluent to the discharger, the props of sampling conferring a certain sense of gravity and the act of sampling carrying with it the clear implication that the discharger is under scrutiny.
Such sampling is also intended to produce better knowledge of the discharge, for then, as an officer said, ‘you have facts to back up your statement’.
An important consequence of these practices for the agency (connected with the familiar tendency to treat agency enforcement statistics as some sort of index of compliance) is that the publication of yearbooks containing sample results provides a statistical portrayal of non-compliance.
A sampling rate stepped up to counter a ‘problem’ can place the agency and its staffing a rather poor light, suggesting inefficiency.
Sample results are in effect the formal means of identifying the presence of pollution and are essential in any legal proceedings as a declaration of rule-breaking in kind and degree.
The ultimate criterion for the presence of pollution in law, in contrast with other more familiar forms of offence, is a test carried out according to the supposedly ‘objective’ precepts of natural scientific (predominantly chemical) analysis.
In private settings where the field man needs some  seemingly objective, unambiguous evidence to support his demands for remedial action, sample results are also useful, though most dischargers are prepared to accept the field man's personal assessment of the nature of the pollution.
In general, the presentation of sample results and the officer's interpretation of them assist in fostering an impression of scientific objectivity in the identification and measurement of pollution.
In a large organization, especially, the data offer important evidence to senior management (otherwise insulated from routine pollution control work) of a problem which needs money spent on remedial action.
Sample results can be portrayed as the outcome of laboratory analysis with all that that implies about accuracy, validity, and reliability, an impression doubtless enhanced by the use of computer print-out and the provision of results to one or more decimal places (cf.
Sanders, 1977:206).
Most officers have little difficulty in presenting themselves as specialists; their interpretation of the data is rarely challenged.
‘They treat you as the expert,’ said one experienced man.
‘You are the expert, and you are expected to know.’
Identifying the presence of pollution by scientific methods is not the relatively simple and unambiguous matter it might seem, however.
The data themselves are not unproblematic, for a certain amount of error is inherent in the very process of analysis and measurement.
For field staff, common sense takes precedence over their scientific inclinations.
They are well aware of the amount of variation possible in ‘scientifically produced’ data and look with a certain scepticism upon laboratory results, especially when they diverge markedly from their own intuition or their expectations based on past knowledge.
One field officer observed of the analytical results from a sewage treatment works, notorious in the area for its poor performance, that ‘if you get anything below 80 [BOD]you start suspecting your own lab’.
Knowledge that sample results are not unproblematic indicators encourages some staff, when confronted with marginal cases where the pollution is not particularly noticeable, to adopt a degree of tolerance:
KH Why the greater tolerance would you say?
FO Well…one factor must be analytical error in the laboratory, different laboratories.
You can send the sample to 10 laboratories and get huge discrepancies in the results.
I'm thinking particularly of BODs, perhaps.
You can get variations.
…A report was done recently, I read, and the variation was something like 30 per cent discrepancy between the different laboratories in the same sample.
So, that's one reason, analytical error, and  what they call sampling error.
Where the precise evidence of this form of rule-breaking is open to question, the deviant is often given the benefit of the doubt.
IV.
The Organization of Discovery and Detection
Where an enforcement agency actively seeks out deviance by organizing its discovery systems to survey, monitor, or inspect, it mobilizes its resources proactively .
Where outsiders, not under agency control, respond to rule-breaking which comes to light by reporting it to the enforcement agency, investigative and enforcement work is initiated reactively .
Both strategies are employed in pollution control work to enhance the discovery and detection of deviance.
Some forms of pollution are difficult to discover.
Some are intended to escape discovery; some cannot be recognized as pollution; and some are events which are impossible to predict.
Enforcement agents, accordingly, organize intelligence systems to circumvent these problems; in fact much of an officer's time is devoted to the discovery of pollution.
The fact that the agencies have as their enforcement domain only a small segment of the population, and one almost wholly in fixed locations, means that a polluter is potentially knowable.
Though theoretically any discharger is subject to the scrutiny of field men, enforcement activity is focused further and patterned to reflect a variety of assumptions held by agency staff about the likely location of pollution.
Proactive enforcement is therefore selective, allowing the agency choice in the number and kind of cases handled, and informed by common sense models which predict the occurrence of rule-breaking.
As in other enforcement work, allocation of resources has direct implications for the nature and extent of the deviance discovered (Long, 1979).
Similarly, different strategies of discovery adopted in the field generate different kinds of deviance.
Proactive strategies are most useful in discovering the invisible, persistent, or episodic pollutions (Reiss, 1974).
Reactive strategies, dependent upon complaints and tip-offs, are generally animated by the more conspicuous — hence the more serious — cases, many (perhaps most) of which are isolated incidents ('one-offs').
The presence of a complainant means that reactively organized enforcement is less private, since it is prompted by outsiders, and it permits agencies less opportunity to control their case-loads or  allocation of resources.
Deviance discovered by reactive means is relatively unpatterned as a result, in contrast with much proactive enforcement which is moulded by agents' predictions of where deviance is likely to be located.
This means that proactive strategies are particularly suited to those forms of deviance which are continuing or episodic — in terms of pollution, the persistent failures to comply.
These are in general more likely to be regarded as ‘less serious’ matters.
Routine monitoring represents a compromise between surveillance focused on the potentially troublesome and the need to be prepared for rule-breaking from an unexpected quarter.
Field men accordingly keep a check on water quality in general and the activities of certain dischargers in particular by regular sampling and surveillance of watercourses and effluents.
They are largely free to organize their monitoring.
They tend, however, to keep a closer watch on discharges which are potentially highly polluting or large in volume.
A visual check of the general condition of the water or effluent is normally made when a sample is taken, and other inspections are often made without sampling.
Proactive enforcement by inspection is often preferred to the time-consuming and troublesome business of ‘dropping a bucket’.
Inspection is a flexible means of monitoring, contact, and control.
It makes the agency's continued presence known to dischargers without the trouble and cost of a sample.
And since it provides the opportunity of personal contact with the discharger, it is a means of spreading advice or warnings.
The routine sample is a monitor of the state of a watercourse or a particular effluent, intended to build up a profile of water and effluent quality.
It also serves as an early warning of any deterioration in quality.
The general rule is that the more important the discharge, in terms of its volume, contents, and the use to which the receiving watercourse is put, the more frequently it is sampled.
Some large sewage works are sampled every day; major discharges may be sampled up to thirty times a year, while some minor ones are sampled only twice a year.
Regular monitoring is valuable to the field man for it assists the task of making enforcement appear routine.
One discharger will find it difficult to complain about being the subject of excessive attention from the water authority — of being ‘picked on’— because regular sampling means that all known discharges will be subjected to scrutiny.
Besides, the ritual of sampling and inspection makes it easy for the field man to portray his activity as a normal part of his job, rather than as a search for evidence of deviance.
Routine river sampling is carried out according to a schedule arranged by the laboratory, standardized as to place and, as far as possible, time.
In organizing their sampling and inspection of effluents, however, field staff adopt a different approach, informed by the imperative to be suspicious.
An important assumption shapes enforcement practice here, namely that deterioration in water quality will frequently come about by design rather than accident.
It is believed that many dischargers, particularly industrialists, have such control over their manufacturing and treatment processes that they are able to alter the quality and quantity of their effluents virtually at will, as economic considerations dictate.
The image of deviance as controllable moulds the form of proactive discovery adopted.
Officers must be prepared to do the unexpected to pre-empt the possibility that a polluter will effect a short-lived remedy for their benefit.
Thus routine sampling of effluents, ordered though it may be by laboratory capacity, must be organized by the field officer to appear unpredictable.
Any regularity in monitoring activities allows the discharger, in anticipation of a sample being taken, an opportunity to step up his pollution control to produce a better effluent.
‘It's worth money to a firm’, said a supervisor, ‘to know when we are coming to sample.’
Unpredictability, however, is difficult to achieve in practice.
The tedium of routine sampling means that a conscious effort is needed to do the unexpected: ‘randomness isn't an in-built thing, you always have to think about being random.’
Other demands on officers' time tend to impose a pattern on their behaviour which is difficult to break without substantial disruption to their schedule and mobility.
To avoid excessive travelling, they usually organize their sampling runs to cover a particular area.
Or they may take advantage of visits to dischargers for other purposes to fill a sample bucket at the same time.
Some sample at times which fit in with their journeys to and from home or the laboratory.
Some like to avoid the worst of city centre traffic, while those who work on tidal rivers have to time their sampling to coincide with low water, since many discharges are only accessible then.
It is difficult to disguise the routine nature of proactive sampling or to resist the temptation of dispatching the task more swiftly: ‘The trouble with this job is you get into habits.
You go down there on Tuesday because you can park.’
There is only limited opportunity, in effect, to break the patterned nature of their work if field men are to do the other things required of them.
But some attempt at disguise is essential.
Hence staff sample covertly where they can, without gaining access to the discharger's premises; or they sample at night or weekends when they are not expected to be at work, and any routine sampling done during the day is never by appointment:
The settlement pit in a sand and gravel works was well stirred up and discharging large amounts of solids into the river.
‘I'll go and have a word with him’, Lawton said, ‘but I won't push it unless he gets stroppy.’
We went into the manager's office.
Lawton adopted a stern attitude: ‘About your settlement pit.
It's really not good enough.
When did you last clean it out?
I don't want to take a sample, but it's not good enough.’
The manager replied it was cleaned out that morning, and came with us to take another look.
Lawton ended the conversation saying he would be back ‘tomorrow’[Friday]to see if it had been put right.
‘I never come back when I say I will,’ Lawton muttered to me, walking out of the works, ‘I might look in on Monday.’
Even if an officer is working on a pollution problem requiring repeated visits, he continues to do the unpredictable wherever possible to provide the polluter with few opportunities to organize his activities so as to create a spurious impression that things are under control.
‘Pure’ proactive enforcement (unguided, that is, by procedures for inferring a potential for deviance) is rarely engaged in.
There are too many demands on a field officer's time, and discharges are too numerous and too scattered for him to spend the day surveying dischargers in the hope of observing pollution actually occurring.
For this reason time is devoted to monitoring of a much more focused and patterned kind in which officers employ techniques to predict the sources of pollution, actual or potential.
This is the art of inspection.
Special skills are needed to read the signs of dirty water.
The officer must examine the colour, contents, and flow of the watercourse, and the condition of vegetation, trees, bed, and bank for the existence of deposits, stains, or fungus.
The banks or river walls must be scanned for obscure discharge points.
The colour of a pipe's interior, fresh deposits in the bottom of a pipe or stream bed, can all yield clues.
The older men in particular portray inspection as an art whose techniques, absorbed over a long period, become almost intuitive.
These technical skills have to be allied, however, with social skills to enable an enforcement agent to predict the likely source of trouble.