

1
The Undergraduate Curriculum
The final report of the SRHE/Leverhulme Programme of Study into the Future of Higher Education,Excellence in Diversity (SRHE 1983), called for a wide-ranging debate about the content of undergraduate courses in the light of contemporary needs.
Yet in a recent OECD report,Universities under Scrutiny , William Taylor remarks that ‘Curriculum is often the missing chapter’ in studies of universities (Taylor 1987, p. 42).
This book is an attempt to supply that chapter and stimulate that debate, not only in terms of universities, but of all forms of higher education in the UK.
On the face of it, the absence of such studies is surprising.
If education is about anything, it is surely about what is taught: the curriculum.
It would seem as if people were ready to write about every aspect of higher education — its aims, policies, governance, finance, organization, staff, students — except the one thing that gives all these their raison d'être .
However, as Taylor goes on to point out, there are cogent and even forbidding explanations for the apparent neglect.
The differences between institutions are, he argues, negligible compared to the differences between disciplines; even specialists within the same discipline often find communication difficult.
Hence:
Most of those who write and speak about universities are themselves specialists — in speaking and writing about universities.
If their origins were in an academic discipline, they are often no longer able to identify themselves with it — or are discouraged from doing so by their more specialised fellows.
They make no claim to understand other subjects and professional fields, and are in no position to describe, analyse, comment upon or evaluate what goes on there.
So the debate on curriculum can only proceed through the statement of generalities, kept aloft by aspirations for change which invoke openness, flexibility, breadth, coherence, progression and other high-inference notions.
To  hard-nosed sceptics among the scholars, researchers and professionals, such language is empty of meaning, or cloaks a sinister political ideology, or is the last resort of those denied success and promotion in their own discipline — or sometimes all three.
(Taylor 1987, pp. 42–3)
Such comments explain why there can be so much discussion of undergraduate courses within specific disciplines, and yet so little of the undergraduate curriculum as a whole.
A subject association or professional body provides a natural forum for debates about degree courses in that subject.
There is a good deal of informal communication about courses in particular subjects, some of it passing along the external examiner grapevine, some of it through the ‘invisible colleges’ of research networks.
There are periodic official surveys of courses in particular subjects or fields, usually when major changes are being contemplated (as at present), and there are the regular activities of CNAA committees and boards and their counterparts, such as they are, on the university side of the binary line.
Some of all this specific debate surfaces in the pages of the Times Higher Education Supplement , and even on occasion in the general ‘quality’ press.
By contrast, there is remarkably little discussion of the overall pattern and content of undergraduate studies.
As Taylor rightly says, most academics simply do not feel competent to comment on what goes on outside their discipline, and even if they do, there are powerful professional and institutional demarcations which deter them from doing so.
Of course, this does not mean that lecturers do not have stereotypes of, and views about, other disciplines which may be well or less well informed.
It does not rule out habitual sniping or genuine interest, preclude competition for students, or prevent the longer-term struggles for academic territory or prestige which characterize the development of the ‘map of knowledge’.
But little of all this results in rational or systematic debate about what people should study during the three or four years that lead to their first degree.
The official reports are also reticent.
Robbins (1963)— comprehensive and thorough in many respects — had relatively little to say about the undergraduate curriculum, beyond some general statements about the aims of higher education, and recommendations about the balance of arts and science and single and combined honours courses.
Recent policy statements have been even more succinct.
The Development of Higher Education into the 1990s (DES 1985b) does have a short section on higher education, the economy and subject balance, but is in general much more concerned with access to and management of the system, and subsequent documents have tended to reinforce that emphasis.
Even the SRHE/Leverhulme enquiry carried out during the early 1980s was arguably weakest on the curriculum, and although the Society has organized conferences on curricular issues (most recently that on Education for the Professions ; Goodlad 1984), it has not attempted to tackle the overall questions of what is taught and what ought to be taught.
Wisely, perhaps, given Taylor's cautions.
Yet the questions cannot be avoided, least of all by students who are faced with a largely predetermined set of choices.
The undergraduate curriculum could be otherwise.
There may be good reasons for it being as it is, but it could be different, and is different in other countries.
Even the fact that it could be different, let alone any evidence that it might be capable of improvement, justifies study of it.
However, the difficulties of thinking about it as a whole are considerable.
The differences between disciplines which Taylor refers to are compounded by differences between sectors, institutions and even departments.
And the largely monodisciplinary pattern of higher education reproduces itself in the writing about higher education, most of which adopts the particular perspective of one discipline, be it philosophy, history, sociology, economics or psychology.
The aim of this book is to create a broad, multidisciplinary framework for thinking about what students are taught and ought to be taught on first degree courses.
I shall explore three frames of reference for thinking about the undergraduate curriculum: in terms of knowledge, in terms of the relationship between curriculum and society, and in terms of the development of individual potential.
I shall try to show that these three frames of reference are complementary rather than self-sufficient or mutually exclusive.
In each case, I shall try to identify useful concepts and models, and discuss some of the arguments associated with them.
And although I move on in the final chapter to consider some of the policy implications of the analysis, the main aim will be to clarify rather than prescribe.
The differences between disciplines to which Taylor refers mean that the discussion will to some extent be an abstract one, moving at a level at which one can identify general ideas, characteristics and trends.
No doubt one can only really understand a discipline from the inside.
But it is debatable whether one can wholly understand it from the inside.
We already use concepts and ideas which cut across or transcend specific disciplines: words such as‘arts’, ‘science’, ‘pure’, ‘applied’, ‘liberal’ and ‘professional’.
Higher education policy is couched in such terms, and higher education institutions and undergraduate courses are structured in ways which embody certain curricular concepts, models and assumptions.
The language for talking about the undergraduate curriculum already exists; it is a matter of using it.
The nature of curricula
The term ‘curriculum’ is generally understood but not widely used in higher education; academics are more likely to speak of undergraduate studies in terms of courses, programmes, syllabuses/syllabi or content.
It is necessary, therefore, to offer some definitions of the term, and to explore some of its connotations.
The Latin origins of the word refer to a course in the sense of race-course, but its current meaning in education has moved some way from that.
The simplest definition of the curriculum is ‘what is taught’(Taylor and Richards 1985, p. 2) and the study of the curriculum is concerned with what is taught (description) and what ought to be taught (prescription).
There are fuller and wider definitions.
For example, Kerr (1968, p. 16) defines the school curriculum as ‘all the learning which is planned and guided by the school, whether it is carried on in groups or individually, inside or outside the school’.
This emphasizes the intentional nature of the curriculum, and the various forms and settings it can have.
Other definitions refer to the totality of what students experience during their course of studies — the learning rather than the teaching — stressing the effects (foreseen or otherwise) of curricular plans and intentions.
One ambiguity which runs through most definitions, as it does with the word ‘course’, is whether one is referring to the total package of studies or only one element in it; thus one can speak of the undergraduate curriculum or the history curriculum.
The American usage of referring to the parts as courses and the whole as the programme seems to be gaining ground here.
But what does the word curriculum denote or connote that ‘course’ does not?
How does it differ from a syllabus?
In what way does it go beyond ‘content’?
Why use what seems like jargon?
Perhaps the simplest way to answer these questions is to explore the planning of a curriculum, any curriculum.
Academics who are planning or revising a curriculum have to address three kinds of questions.
The most obvious questions have to do with the elements or components of the curriculum: the things that go to make it up (see Figure 1.1).
There will need to be an initial prospectus which states the overall aims, content and form of the course.
Decisions also have to be taken about the admission of students: how many and on what basis?
A syllabus needs to be worked out, specifying in varying degrees of detail what is going to be covered and in what order.
The syllabus may influence and be influenced by the matter of staffing: who is going to teach what?
And when (timing) and where (location)?
The matter of teaching also raises questions about the methods to be used, and the learning materials (including facilities and equipment) which will be needed.
Finally, there are the questions to do with the assessment of the course, including any examinations.
Such questions may not be addressed in quite this form or this order.
While a formal prospectus is normally issued for each degree course, such statements vary considerably in the amount of detail they give, and how explicit they are about the aims of the course.
The process of admissions also varies, not only from one course to another, but between younger and older students, and from one institution to another: for example, the Open University is ‘open’ in terms of admissions, and there are normally special regulations relating to mature students (on undergraduate courses, typically but not always those aged over 21 on entry).
A syllabus may be more or less fixed or negotiable; apparently rigid courses can in fact be  quite flexible in detail.
Teaching methods vary from subject to subject.
The pattern and timetabling of courses varies greatly, as do the pattern, timing and methods of assessment.
Moreover, those planning a curriculum may find that they proceed not in a linear fashion, but by moving back and forth among the various headings, since these affect one another.
The list given here is intended only as a general guide.
Figure 1.1 A model of curriculum planning.
However, in order to answer such questions properly, curriculum planners need to address two other kinds of questions.
The first of these concerns the functions of the curriculum, any curriculum.
What does a course do for students that they would find difficult or impossible to do on their own?
What advantages does it offer over independent study?
Why formalize the learning process in a curriculum at all?
These are difficult questions, which go to the heart of the educational process, but the headings in Figure 1.1 suggest some answers.
Perhaps the most basic function of organized education is to give students access to something which they would not otherwise have.
A curriculum, any curriculum, makes available human and physical resources which the student can use to facilitate or enhance his or her natural capacity to learn.
But any particular curriculum goes beyond such generalized access in a number of ways.
In selecting the student for the course, and (implicitly) the course for the student, it should offer a certain guarantee of mutual appropriateness  in terms of aims, content and level.
It should help to induct the student not only into the field of study but the approach to studying.
It should provide a measure of structure and sequence in what is learned, though that measure may vary a good deal from subject to subject and even student to student.
It should provide teaching (which can itself be analysed into a number of more specific methods, functions and contingencies; see Squires 1988).
Beyond the provision of overt, timetabled teaching, it should create an environment which is conducive to learning, and the materials and facilities which are needed for study.
And, finally, it can officially accredit students' learning, thus giving it public recognition and status in a way that is simply not possible for the autodidact.
Again, the way such headings work out in practice may vary a good deal from course to course.
Some curricula are more tightly structured or sequenced than others.
Teaching may involve expository or participative methods.
The part-time or ‘distance’ student does not have the same environment as the full-time one.
The accreditation process differs in different sectors of the system.
And one must not forget that many of these functions can become dysfunctions, and assume a negative or pathological form: faulty selection, awkward induction, rigid structure, poor teaching, inadequate materials, invalid assessment, and so on.
But the headings indicate the kinds of functions that a course can and should perform, if it is to justify its existence as an improvement on independent study.
These functions are not carried out in a vacuum; they are affected by certain key contingencies or variables.
The answer to many questions about the curriculum is: ‘it depends’.
It depends on who, what and where one is teaching.
The nature of the curriculum will need to reflect its general aims, its content and the level at which it is pitched.
Thus liberal arts courses might be expected to have different aims from vocational or professional ones, theoretical courses will differ from applied ones, and undergraduate courses will differ from those in the same subject at A level.
Likewise, the ‘who’ matters.
The nature and shape of the course will often be affected by those who plan and teach it, the nature of and changes in the student intake, and any indirect consumers (such as employers or professional bodies) it may have.
Where a course takes place is important not only in terms of regulations and resources (or the absence of them), but in the more subtle aspects of the setting: the traditions, norms, ethos, style and habits of particular departments, institutions or sectors.
There is not room here to discuss these various components, functions and contingencies in any detail, but the model presented in Figure 1.1 should at least suggest some of the ways in which the concept of the curriculum goes beyond mere ‘syllabus’ or ‘content’.
It involves, for example, some consideration of the overall aims or purpose of a course, though this does not necessarily mean that such aims have to be explicitly formulated or prespecified.
It involves thinking about differences in ‘level’ which is a familiar though complex concept.
It points up the importance of admissions, and suggests that the assessment of a course may ‘wash back’ on  its content and aims.
It implies that the ‘content’ of a course may be intimately intertwined with its ‘process’: the way it is taught, the staff who teach it, the environment it takes place in.
It alerts one to the importance of contextual factors such as those relating to the institution's regulations, resources and ethos.
Above all, it highlights two aspects of the curriculum.
The first is that a curriculum is not a plan but an experience, not a script but a play.
Heyman (1981) has stressed the importance of seeing the curriculum not only as a set of structures and functions, but phenomenologically, in terms of the kind of experience that its various participants together create.
This is easy for lecturers to forget in the concern with syllabuses, materials and all the paperwork that curriculum planning involves.
The overt, explicit aspect of the curriculum coexists with a less obvious, implicit or tacit side, which has been dubbed the ‘hidden curriculum’(Snyder 1971; Cornbleth 1984) and the curriculum plan is always open to a degree of interpretation and even reconstruction by those involved.
Secondly, the model implies that curriculum planning is always to some extent a contingent matter, in which there will be few across-the-board answers.
Much depends on the who, what and where.
In interviews and written responses to questions, the academics contacted in this study referred, in their comments on courses, to factors such as student numbers, student quality, student age, changes in A level syllabuses, staff losses, changes in funding, changes in regulations, the influence of professional bodies, changes in graduate employment and developments in research, as well as purely ‘internal’ changes in the subject itself.
Planning a course is not an abstract exercise, but one which is intimately affected by the participants, content and setting.
We have discussed briefly the various kinds of questions that curriculum planners need to ask, in order to clarify the idea of a curriculum.
But who asks these questions, and who takes the decisions that follow from the answers?
Becher and Kogan (1980) have identified four structural levels in the higher education system: individual, basic unit, institution, and central authority.
(The basic unit is typically an academic department or comparable unit.)
Elaborating a little on this, we can say that curricular decisions may be made by students, individual lecturers, departments, faculties, academic senates or institutional committees, and central authorities in or near government.
The influence of professional bodies and other indirect ‘consumers’ is also relevant in some cases.
One of the interesting questions that can be asked about the curriculum has to do with the relative power and influence of these various actors in the planning process; for example, in their study, Boys et al .
(1988) detect shifts in some cases (but not all) towards higher level and external influences.
On the other hand, the generally low ‘compliance observability’ of the teaching-learning process means that a good deal of power and influence is likely always to remain with those who actually operate the system, i.e. the lecturers and students.
Again, it is not easy to generalize; much depends on  the institution, the subject and the general framework of regulation and control.
Figure 1.1 sets out a general model for the planning of courses.
However, in this book our main concern is not the actual planning of courses, but the basis, or rather bases, for that planning.
The very headings in the model presuppose some kind of conceptual framework for thinking about what is to be taught; what is usually referred to in the literature as ‘curriculum theory’ rather than‘curriculum development’.
How do we decide what to teach?
How do we decide how to decide?
The three main theoretical frames of reference will be explored in the three middle chapters.
First, however, something must be said about the existing patterns and trends of the curriculum in higher education.
The curriculum in higher education
The system of higher education in the UK is usually described in institutional rather than curricular terms, and even in a book on the curriculum something must be said about the pattern of institutions since this affects what is taught.
Classifying and even counting these institutions is by no means as simple a task as one might think.
One has to decide whether federal universities are singular or plural; what proportion of an institution's courses have to be ‘advanced’ to justify its inclusion in the higher education sector; and whether to include a number of small, specialized institutions (for agriculture, technology and the arts) and voluntary colleges (mainly church-affiliated) in the list.
Military colleges might be included on curricular grounds, but are usually excluded on financial ones.
The one private university (Buckingham) is excluded from the official statistics, and will be here.
The situation is further complicated by recent and impending institutional mergers.
According to the most recent Green Paper (DES 1985b) there were at that time 184 institutions engaged wholly or mainly in the provision of higher education courses, and another 372 in which some provision was at this level — a total of 556 (10 fewer than given in Annex A of that document).
Higher education or ‘advanced’ courses are normally distinguished from ‘non-advanced’courses by being beyond A level, Scottish ‘Highers’(not the same) or the equivalent in technical qualifications (such as BTEC National), though recent trends towards more flexible access have tended to erode this demarcation at the point of entry, particularly in relation to mature students.
It should also be noted that many universities offer extra-mural courses which have no fixed entrance requirements, that the Open University is open entry in terms of prior qualifications, and that many institutions are now developing ‘access’ courses which provide non-standard routes of entry to first degrees.
The 184 main providers are divided into two sectors: 46 universities (including the Open University) and 138 polytechnics and colleges.
The  universities are not formally sub-divided, but informal groupings based on origin and type distinguish between Oxbridge (Oxford and Cambridge), the large federal university of London founded in the early nineteenth century, the larger ‘civic’ universities established later in the nineteenth century in provincial cities (e.g. Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds, Bristol), the smaller civics such as Exeter, Hull or Leicester, the ‘new’universities founded ab initio in the 1960s, such as Lancaster, Essex and Sussex, the ‘ex-CATS’such as Aston, Salford and Bradford, which were upgraded from Colleges of Advanced Technology at around the same time, and the Scottish, Welsh and two Northern Irish universities.
While this kind of breakdown does help one to comprehend the various strands and stages that go to make up the current system, it is rather crude.
It does not distinguish between the older Scottish universities, such as Edinburgh and St Andrews, which predate all the English ones except Oxford and Cambridge, and the newer ones, such as Heriot-Watt and Strathclyde, which like the English ex-CATS were upgraded from existing technical institutions, but ones with a more prestigious history.
It does not show that Wales unlike Scotland has a federal multi-campus university, or that the University of Ulster is the result of recent merger between a university and a polytechnic.
And it does not accommodate certain institutions, such as Durham, Keele or the Open University, which because of origin or nature, are sui generis .
The non-university institutions are however, formally sub-divided, by location and partly by type.
In England and Wales there were 30 polytechnics and 82 colleges or institutes of higher education in 1985.
There is no difference between colleges and institutes, but that between the polytechnics and the colleges/institutes is largely a matter of the scale and level of provision — polytechnics tend to be larger, and provide more high level courses, including some postgraduate ones.
Many colleges were originally teachers' colleges which diversified their provision in the 1970s to include broad-based arts, social science and science degrees.
In Scotland, the 16 ‘Central Institutions’ correspond roughly to the polytechnics in the rest of the UK, but in Scotland and Northern Ireland the colleges are typically ‘monotechnic’(concentrating exclusively on technology, education or art, for example), whereas in England and Wales they are now almost entirely multi-subject.
Three general changes are now modifying what has until recently been described as a ‘binary’ system of higher education.
The first is that universities appear to be becoming less autonomous than before, and the polytechnics and some of the larger colleges more, although it is difficult to decide whether the latter, recently removed from local government control and granted corporate status with central funding, are being ‘nationalized’ or ‘privatized’.
(The Scottish Central Institutions remain under the aegis of the Scottish Education Department.)
This change erodes the distinction between university and what were previously known as ‘public sector’ institutions, and may blur what Burgess (1977, pp. 2332) has argued is a  contrast between the ‘autonomous’(university) and ‘service’(polytechnic/ college) traditions.
This distinction, as we shall see later, is partly a curricular as well as an institutional one.
The most recent White Paper, however, firmly places all institutions in the service of the economy (DES 1987).
The second change is the increasing differentiation among universities in terms of funding, based initially on surveys of research performance, but now becoming widened to include a much broader range of performance indicators.
This seems unlikely now to lead to the formal designation of the three types of universities ('R' for research-based, ‘X’ for mixed, and ‘T’for teaching only) that has been mooted, but it seems probable that in practice the university system will become more overtly stratified than before; there has always been an element of covert stratification, although this has often related to departments rather than whole institutions.
Compared to some continental countries, the levers of higher education policy in the UK are often financial rather than legislative, and this can lead not so much to a change of title as a gradual dissociation between title and reality.
The third major change is the advent of self-validation of courses for a number of polytechnics and colleges, which like all the other ‘public sector’ institutions, have until now had their degree courses validated and degrees awarded by the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA), a national body established in 1964 to develop and regulate courses and qualifications in public sector higher education.
The CNAA has always embodied a mixed, bureaucratic-collegial model of regulation, but the emphasis seems now to be moving towards the latter as its validation role declines.
(This process in some ways parallels the emergence earlier in this century of the smaller civic universities — and some overseas ones — from under the wing of London University.)
The changes currently taking place in the system are thus multiple and complex, but they point away from the existing binary pattern towards one that is perhaps more unitary and certainly more differentiated.
How far does the curriculum map correspond to this institutional map?
Do the institutional headings referred to above indicate parallel differences in the pattern and content of first degrees?
How far is the binary system binary in terms of curricula as well as organization?
There is a prima facie case for thinking that it is.
While each university plans and validates its own degree programmes in the light of a general awareness of policies, constraints and demands, the CNAA sets out general principles for first degree courses under its aegis.
Many of these are couched in terms which would be unexceptional in universities.
The institution, it says, ‘should provide a cultural environment which stimulates a wide-ranging interest among students, and in which rational debate is encouraged’(CNAA 1986, p. 21).
There is a reference to ‘debate within a wide academic community’, and, echoing Robbins (1963), to the development of the student's ‘intellectual and imaginative skills and powers’.
However, there are also two general principles which seem to signal a particular emphasis in the public sector.
The first concerns the application of knowledge:
The student must also be encouraged to develop the ability to see relationships within what he or she has learned, and to relate what he or she has learned to actual situations.
(CNAA 1986, p. 23)
The second implies some breadth of study:
The student must be encouraged to appreciate the nature of attitudes, modes of thought, practices and disciplines other than those of his or her own main studies.
He or she must learn to perceive his or her main studies in a broader perspective.
As part of this process he or she must be enabled to develop an informed awareness of factors influencing the social and physical environment.
(CNAA 1986, p. 23)
Such principles are rather general, and the concrete nature of the validation process together with the general English distaste for ‘philosophizing’ will have limited their impact.
However, they have been quite widely discussed within the CNAA over the years, particularly in the science and technology boards and committees.
It may be that, in practice, the norms and practices of the various CNAA subject boards count for more than such general sentiments.
Nevertheless, there is nothing comparable on the university side, unless one refers to the general aims of higher education enunciated by Robbins (1963) and endorsed by the recent White Paper (DES 1987, para. 1.2): ‘instruction in skills, the promotion of the general powers of the mind, the advancement of learning, and the transmission of a common culture and common standards of citizenship’.
Again, however, one wonders how far this was mere rhetoric in the original or mere gesture in the repetition; although it may have some influence on the ‘mission statements’ that some institutions are now struggling to formulate.
On the university side, the main curricular differences are geographical rather than institutional.
Although all UK universities (except the Open University) comprise a single system with common admissions procedures, first degree courses in Scotland, and to a lesser extent in Wales and Northern Ireland, are broader than they normally are in England.
The reasons are largely historical, and in the case of Scotland have been chronicled and defended by George Davie in his books on ‘the democratic intellect’(Davie 1961, 1986; see also Burnhill and McPherson 1983; Bell 1987).
In the Scottish universities, students normally enter at 17 rather than 18, after taking five ‘highers’ subjects rather than three A levels, belong initially to a faculty rather than a department, and proceed to either a three-year ordinary or a four-year honours degree.
[The norm in England and Wales is three years to honours, and in Northern Ireland there is a mixture of three- and four-year courses; although it has recently been claimed that as many as 40 per cent of all British university undergraduates are on courses lasting four or more years, in modern  languages, medicine, engineering, architecture and some business subjects (Institute of Physics 1988).]
Whereas in Scotland over 36 per cent of graduates obtained a pass, ordinary or general degree in 1986, the figure for the UK as a whole was only 12.7 per cent, with the majority of pass degrees in England being in the fields of medicine, dentistry or veterinary science (Source: USR).
The relatively broad ordinary degree has an important if subsidiary place in the Scottish system.
The first two years of study there will normally involve between three and six subjects rather than the one, two or three typical of the English university, and specialization does not really begin until the third year of the honours course.
In Wales and Northern Ireland too, three subjects in the first year is common outside professional degree subjects such as law and engineering.
This broader pattern is more typical of the pattern in other anglophone countries than the relatively specialized English university one, and indeed in some cases contributed to it historically.
But it is worth noting also that Scotland has had a relatively strong tradition of technical education for the last century, in contrast to the rather patchy developments south of the border (Argles 1964).
There are thus geographical and sectoral differences within the general pattern of curricula in higher education.
But what is that general pattern?
It may be useful to begin with some general figures.
Table 1.1 gives the numbers for all higher education students (sub-degree, undergraduate and postgraduate) in the UK between 1975 and 1987.
It shows the steady increase in both sectors and modes of study over that period, to the current total of about one million.
It also shows that whereas the universities and polytechnics/colleges had almost the same number of full-time students in 1987, part-time students were mainly concentrated in the latter and the Open University.
As regards undergraduates, Table 1.2 shows the numbers of full-time and part-time students enrolled over the same period, and Table 1.3 the number of first degrees awarded in each sector.
Part-time enrolments have grown somewhat more rapidly than full-time ones, but the trends in first degrees awarded are more complex, with a slight decline in the universities and a steady increase in the polytechnics/colleges in recent years.
The long-term growth in the latter has been enormous.
Table 1.3 also gives the figures for higher degrees, over 90 per cent of which are awarded by the universities.
Such broad figures give a general sense of overall patterns and trends, but more detailed information is necessary for a discussion of the undergraduate curriculum.
First, one has to identify what it is that undergraduates actually study.
Table 1.4 lists current full-time sandwich and part-time first degree courses in the UK.
Two points should be noted.
First, although Table 1.
4 is intended to give a general picture of provision it is not exhaustive; some of the variants and sub-divisions of subject headings (such as types of history or engineering) have been conflated in order to reduce the overall length of the list.
Secondly, many of the subjects in the  list can be studied in pairs, in ‘joint’ or ‘combined’subject degrees, so that the overall pattern of studies is less specialized than it appears.
Table 1.1 Higher education: full-time and part-time students
Despite these caveats , Table 1.4 gives an interesting overview of first degree courses in two respects.
First, the sheer range of degree subjects is striking.
Whereas a comprehensive secondary school might offer some 30 subjects for all its pupils, and about a dozen subjects account for the great majority of A levels, the curriculum explodes in higher education, part of a post-school explosion even greater when one takes into account the vast number of technical and vocational courses that exist in non-advanced further education.
The university list is longer than the polytechnic/college one partly because of the greater range of degrees, and partly because of the greater number of more specialized degrees in the universities, although it should be remembered that specialized patterns of options may exist within broad degree programmes.
Secondly, Table 1.4 gives some sense of the different distribution of subjects in the universities and polytechnics/colleges.
While the spread of  degree subjects varies a good deal among institutions within each sector, one can see some broad differences in the overall pattern.
Quantitative              data bear out these differences of emphasis between the two sectors (DES Statistical Bulletin 4/89, Table 7; Tight 1986).
Education is a much more common first degree subject in the polytechnics and colleges than the universities, whereas courses in medicine and agriculture are heavily concentrated in the latter.
The universities have a preponderance of students in arts, languages and pure science, the polytechnics/colleges in professional/vocational studies.
The latter also have more engineering/technology and business/social studies students.
Art and design are largely concentrated in the polytechnics and colleges, some of which incorporate previously autonomous colleges of art.
Table 1.2 First degree courses: full-time and part-time students
Table 1.3 First and higher degrees awarded
Table 1.4 First degree courses in the UK: Full-time, sandwich and part-time
Table 1.4 also gives some sense of the differences of emphasis within these broad subject categories, showing that polytechnic/college courses are often ‘applied’, whereas those in the universities are (by implication) often ‘theoretical’ or ‘pure’; although one must not rely too much on labels in higher education.
Some of these differences can be explained by the historical fact that ‘public sector’ institutions incorporated previously distinct colleges of teacher education, technology and commerce.
Some may be attributable to the initial aim of the binary policy to create a sector with a more applied or vocationally relevant emphasis and ethos, although the extent to which that was eroded in the 1970s by ‘academic drift’ is open to question (Pratt and Burgess 1974; Donaldson 1975; Neave 1978, 1979b).
But in some ways the universities have themselves been subject to a countervailing ‘vocational drift’ in the 1980s, as a result of both government pressure and student demand.
Within the degree course headings in Table 1.4, there are many variations in the structure of courses.
The appendix of the Robbins Report (2B), which dealt with the undergraduate curriculum, attempted to classify courses in terms of one, two or three main subjects with one, two or three related or unrelated ancillaries.
Thus many students would take a single, combined or (more rarely) a tripartite subject degree, with one or two ancillary or subsidiary subjects in the first two years, and some main subject options in the final year.
This classification fits some university courses well, but it is now inadequate for the system as a whole.
It does not suit professional courses, such as those in medicine, law, engineering or business studies which can be thought of as composite subjects, and which therefore tend to have few external ancillary courses.
Nor can it cope with the more general interdisciplinary and modular patterns which have emerged in the last two decades; and it is university-biased in its assumption that the basic academic unit is the subject-department, whereas composite departments offering broader programmes of study are common in the polytechnics and colleges.
How far does the general pattern shown in Table 1.
4 vary with time?
A comparison of the prospectuses for 1980–81 and 1986–87 of a number of institutions for this study suggested that, contrary to the arthritic stereotype purveyed sometimes by the press and others who should know better, degree provision in higher education is by no means static.
Typically, the    broad changes are gradual, the addition or subtraction of a handful of courses or course combinations in any one year, the first usually reflecting potential student demand or research developments, and the second often stemming from resource and staffing problems.
In some universities which were hard hit in the 1981 cuts, the changes were more dramatic; one university lost 25 and gained 3 degree courses over the period.
Generally, however, the pattern is one of gradual, rolling, incremental change.
Table 1.5 First degree students from home and abroad (000s): Subject and mode of study
This pattern manifests itself even more clearly in the detail of courses.
Many of the prospectuses and some of the accompanying letters noted changes in the content of courses, e.g. at the research frontiers of the natural sciences, in the pattern and interrelation of the social sciences, in the new enhanced and extended engineering degrees, in the structure of courses (new combinations and in some cases modular schemes), in project-based options in the final year, in the pattern of teaching and assessment, and in the development of work placements, European links or part-time degrees.
One must be careful about making judgements about the capacity of the system to innovate and adapt, because the UK system operates to a considerable extent in an informal, pragmatic mode which makes reliance on labels and formal accounts hazardous.
A course may change radically without changing its title; conversely, re-titling a course may simply be an exercise in re-packaging it for external consumption.
Trow's (1975) distinction between the ‘public’ and ‘private’lives of higher education, although American, is crucial in understanding the British system.
Nevertheless, quantitative data do provide some guide to changes in the subject balance of first degree courses over recent years.
Table 1.5 gives the figures for full-time, part-time and total degree enrolments in 11 subject groups between 1979–80 and 1986–87, excluding the Open University where degree courses cannot be grouped in this way because of the structure of foundation plus optional courses (Open University 1989).
In interpreting these broad trends, one should remember that the first two groups of subjects, education and medicine, are subject to what passes in the UK for manpower planning.
What the unfettered demand for such subjects would have been, one can only guess.
The other subject groups, however, represent a largely demand-led pattern of provision, following the Robbins principle, although there are manifold factors which sully the pure concept of demand in practice.
What one sees in general terms are substantial increases in science, technology, administrative, business and social studies, and creative arts enrolments, but stasis or decline in languages and humanities.
There are of course significant subject variations within these broad groups.
How far does the pattern of subject choice vary by sex?
Table 1.6 gives the male/female enrolments in the 11 subject groups for 1979–80 and 1986–87.
It shows that the proportion of female enrolments has been growing steadily, though it is still some way short of parity.
It also shows women are over-represented in education, languages and literature and  music/drama/art/design, whereas men are over-represented in engineering and technology and science, and that this pattern has not changed a great deal over the period, despite attempts to even out the balance, and in particular to attract more women on to science and technology courses.
(The rounding of figures in this and the other tables creates some slight discrepancies in aggregates.)
Table 1.6 First degree students from home and abroad by subject group, sex and mode of study
 Table 1.6 helps to provide an overall picture of the content, pattern and distribution of first degree courses, but once one begins to look at courses in  any detail, the picture becomes much more complex.
While in many ways the UK system is a homogeneous one, with centralized application procedures, common though varying admissions requirements, and a national system of student support through grants and now loans, its often decentralized and pragmatic mode of development has led to great variation in detail.
It is unusual outside some strictly regulated professional courses to find two courses covering the same content; it would be difficult to find two that have exactly the same pattern of assessment; and impossible to find two that are taught in precisely the same way.
There are also variations in the institutional patterns.
The relatively broader Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish patterns have already been mentioned.
Some universities, such as Queens University Belfast, offer a preliminary year in some subjects; and a common foundation year is an important feature of art and design courses in the polytechnics and colleges.
Some universities, such as Cambridge and Nottingham, divide first degree courses into ‘Part I’ and ‘Part II’, the former usually but not always occupying the first two years, with some transfer between subjects possible at the second stage.
There are three different patterns of curriculum within London University: university-wide, college-based and course unit.
One can obtain a degree (largely) through an individualized scheme of ‘independent’ study at Lancaster University and North East London Polytechnic.
There are institution-wide modular degree schemes at Oxford and City Polytechnics, as well as within faculties in other institutions (Squires 1986).
About 30 per cent of polytechnic/college graduates and about 5 per cent of university graduates are the products of ‘sandwich’ courses which include either one (year) long placement or several shorter ones (AGCAS 1989).
The Open University has a unique combination of foundation courses followed by a modular course structure.
The University of Keele offers its students the option of an initial broad, foundation year before embarking on the three-year course (Iliffe 1968).
The University of Essex has a multidisciplinary first year, and the University of Sussex an initial two-term preliminary course.
In some polytechnics and colleges students can proceed from a two-year Diploma in Higher Education to a first degree, and the CNAA has set up a Credit Accumulation and Transfer Scheme (CATS) which allows students to accumulate credits not only from a variety of higher education institutions but from accredited employer-based and experiential learning.
Many of the colleges and institutes of higher education have established broad-based curricula in the arts, social sciences and to a lesser extent natural sciences.
Some institutions offer theme-based rather than subject-based foundation courses in the first year, e.g. the Polytechnic of Central London's social science foundation course.
A few institutions, such as Stirling University, operate on a two-semester rather than three-term year.
Once one begins to examine the system in any detail, the institutional variations seem virtually endless; and standardized titles and labels often conceal even more informal variety.
The homogeneity or variety of the system is thus largely a matter of the level of magnification.
Taken as a whole, it appears relatively standardized, particularly if one compares it with that in the USA.
In its detail, however, it is extraordinarily diverse.
This fact alone suggests that a purely descriptive approach to first degree courses is likely to be unproductive or excruciatingly boring.
Besides, the variations in the pattern and emphasis of such courses seem to have grown up largely pragmatically, as a function of the organizational ‘discretion’ that both institutions and academics have in responding to the needs, pressures and priorities they have perceived over a long period of time.
It would be possible to trace the evolution of first degrees.
historically in this way, as has been done in the histories of particular institutions or particular subjects.
That would be an interesting task, but one for which this author is singularly ill-equipped.
Instead, I shall draw on some of what has evolved over the last half century as ‘curriculum theory’ in education to try to suggest some frameworks and perspectives for analysing the wealth of detail which the system displays.
This involves not only asking ‘What is taught?’ but ‘How do we ask what is taught?’
The three dimensions of the curriculum
The need for some kind of frame of reference for thinking about the curriculum, and asking what is and should be taught is most obvious in the schools.
The fact that education (though not schooling) is obligatory up to the age of 16 forces one to try to justify and legitimate in curricular terms such a major act of social compulsion.
One justification commonly offered is that the schools exist to provide children with a good basic or general education; the problem is basic to what and general in what sense?
(Squires 1987a).
One obvious way of conceptualizing generality is in terms of knowledge .
Children, it is argued, should receive a good grounding in the main forms or types of human knowledge, for both practical and abstract reasons.
If they do not have such a grounding, it will be difficult for them to pursue more advanced studies subsequently, especially in ‘vertebrate’ subjects such as mathematics and science; also, a merely partial or incomplete exposure to such forms of knowledge sells them short in terms of human thought, indeed of the very concept of mind.
Perhaps the best known exponent of this model of general education in the UK is Hirst (1969; 1974), but it is familiar in most countries, and results in the relatively academic type of secondary school curriculum that one finds in the English grammar school, the French Lycée or the German Gymnasium, with appropriate national differences of emphasis (the English have always stressed ‘process’ rather than‘breadth’).
Whereas philosophers such as Hirst (1974) and Phenix (1964) have attempted to classify knowledge in terms of logical forms or groupings, the knowledge-based curriculum in the schools tends to be organized in more familiar, traditional subject categories: mathematics, physics, history, geography, English, etc.
The influence of this view is apparent in the new National Curriculum soon to be implemented in the schools.
It is worth pointing out that advocates of such a curriculum do not see knowledge as inert and impersonal but as something which can deeply affect the way an individual thinks, behaves and views the world.
A second approach to conceptualizing a general education is in terms of the society or culture of which it is a part.
Children, it is suggested, need to be inducted into the main forms or aspects of the culture they live in, partly because this will equip them to lead full adult lives, and partly because culture seems to some as inclusive a concept as one can find for planning a general education.
There have been several important variants of this model of the curriculum, ranging from the American pragmatists (notably Dewey) to the Marxist theories of ‘polytechnical education’, but a recent formulation in this country is that of Lawton (1983) with his notion of general education as a selection from the eight aspects or ‘sub-systems’ that any culture has: social system, economic system, communication system, rationality system, technology system, morality system, belief system and aesthetic system.
Such an approach overlaps to some extent with the ‘knowledge-referenced’ curriculum, but it also results in the inclusion of elements related to health, economics, civics and other ‘relevant’topics which one would not normally find in an academic-style secondary school.
The main examples of general education planned in terms of the society or culture are the American high school and the polytechnical schools in the Eastern bloc countries, but the model has also influenced secondary education in Scandinavia and the secondary-modern type schools in those countries which have a selective secondary system.
Advocates of this type of curriculum not only have the problem of deciding who can speak for the culture (or cultures?) and making an appropriate selection from it, but of deciding to what extent the curriculum should attempt to conserve, reform, revolutionize or even reverse cultural patterns and trends.
An education may therefore be thought of as ‘general’ either in terms of types of knowledge or the culture to which it belongs.
However, the term general can be conceived of in a third way, in terms of the all-round development of the individual.
The schools are expected to provide the stimuli and security which will allow children to grow, develop and mature.
But develop in what sense?
The most obvious form of development is cognitive, in terms of the mastery of ever more complex forms of thinking and consciousness.
But there is a strong tradition in this country that education (including higher education) should go beyond cognitive or intellectual development, that it should draw out, through its curricula, teaching and environment, the entire range of types of ability and talent — intellectual, artistic, physical and social — and set these in the context of the whole person, of ‘character’, ‘autonomy’ or ‘maturity’.
As Hargreaves (1982) has pointed out, much of this is rhetoric rather than reality, especially when secondary education comes within the orbit of public examinations, which have hitherto largely emphasized cognitive development, but  it does constitute a strong element in ‘progressive’ models of primary education, and has influenced the content, teaching and assessment of courses leading to the General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE).
The importance of recognizing the ‘total package’ of a person's abilities and development becomes obvious once again when one enters the world of employment, as we shall see in the discussion of graduate employment and the notion of ‘education for capability’in Chapters 3 and 4.
There are thus three distinct frames of reference which we can bring to bear on the concept of basic or general education: knowledge, culture and student development.
Each of these in isolation produces a form of curriculum which embodies its own emphases; but it is surely better to consider them as the three necessary dimensions of any truly general education (Squires 1987a).
Logically, they cannot exist separately: all knowledge involves some kind of mental processing and exists in a cultural context; all cultures are conceptualized in terms of knowledge and involve abilities and skills; all development has a content and a context.
In practice, too, all three dimensions are always present; the differences between school curricula reflect the relative priority accorded to one dimension or another.
This three-dimensional model can also be used to analyse the undergraduate curriculum, and will provide the three broad frames of reference for the three chapters that follow, which examine first degree courses in terms of concepts of knowledge, the economy and society, and the development of student ability or potential.
However, the working out of these three dimensions in the undergraduate curriculum is bound to be rather different from their manifestation in the school curriculum because higher education comes at a different stage in the educational life-cycle.
The notion of educational ‘stages’ is useful as long as it is not interpreted too rigidly or schematically (Squires 1989a).
Broadly, one can distinguish five main stages in an individual's educational life-cycle.
Compulsory education constitutes the initial basic and general stages, the difference between the two being mainly a matter of scope and level rather than intention or function, though it sometimes corresponds to the transition from primary to secondary education.
The years that immediately follow the end of compulsory schooling can often be seen as a foundation stage providing a relatively broad base for work in a particular occupation (as do many craft and technician courses) or for more advanced studies in a specialized field.
The foundation stage is then followed by, or merges into, a more specific stage which provides a more specialized education or training, which may be on or off the job, or a mixture of both.
Beyond that, we are into the final,open stage of adult or continuing education, which may go on intermittently for many years, compensating for missed opportunities, updating and extending existing skills, or opening up new fields of interest and expertise altogether.
Of course the length of the various stages may vary from person to person (not to mention country to country) and some people's general education may go on well into their higher education, whereas for others it ends early in secondary school.
Some current trends reinforce this linear pattern, whereas others modify it.
The rising threshold of competence needed in the job market and the relative decline in traditional semi-skilled or unskilled jobs means that the compulsory school can no longer hope to provide a marketable, vocational education as it did for some (usually lower-achieving) children in the past.
It may well include pre-vocational elements in its curriculum; however, these are primarily there for purposes of motivation and orientation rather than vocational training in its traditional form.
The generalist function of compulsory education seems thus to be becoming clearer.
(This might lead one to approve the technical but question the vocational element in TVEI.)
Beyond school, the traditional idea that craft and technician courses can turn out ‘finished’ workers is being undermined in many occupations by the rapid changes in work skills, and hence the foundation function of the 16–19 stage seems to be becoming more obvious.
The pattern of labour in an advanced economy means that many jobs and roles now require specialized education and training to a higher level than before, though this co-exists with ‘de-skilling’ in other jobs.
The desirability of and necessity for continuing education throughout the lifespan is now widely accepted in principle, although in practice there still exist many barriers, not least of cost, which limit adult participation in education and training.
There is a good deal of rhetoric in this field, and as regards higher education institutions, the increased (self-) interest in mature students has been prompted partly by the decline in the 18-year-old age-group by about one-third between 1982 and 1995; although for various reasons that decline does not simply translate into a comparable decline in intake (Fulton 1981).
Nevertheless, all these broad trends seem to reinforce the notion and distinctness of the various educational stages, and lend substance to the idea of an educational life-cycle.
In other ways, however, the pattern is becoming less rather than more linear.
There are second chances to get one's initial basic or general education, through everything from adult basic education classes through to GCSEs and A levels in further education colleges.
The age regulations governing access to training are becoming more flexible, on paper if not always in practice, and there is increasing emphasis on ‘access’ courses of various kinds for adults.
A quarter of all full-time home first-year students on first and sub-degree courses were aged over 21 on entry in 1987 (DES Statistical Bulletin 4/89, Table 6), and the proportion of part-timers is much higher (see DES S tatistical Bulletin 11/88 ‘Mature Students in Higher Education’).
The development of more flexible systems of access and qualifications (in particular modular credit schemes) means that the educational life-pattern for any one individual is likely to be less rigidly linear than in the past, a situation which is foreshadowed by developments in the USA (Stacey et al .
1988).
While one must distinguish between formal access and real accessibility, there are more second routes and second chances, and fewer dead-ends and irreversible choices than in the past, and the whole notion of ‘stages’ has to be interpreted in the light of the  individual's self-perception and the increasing fluidity of age-roles.
Some men and women may be acquiring their foundation skills in their 30s, others discovering what a general education can be in their retirement.
Nevertheless, the notion of educational stages helps one to place the undergraduate curriculum in a longer perspective, and to explain the phenomenon of specialization which typifies the undergraduate curriculum in this country.
Some degree of specialization is a characteristic of undergraduate curricula everywhere.
Even in the broader US system, students ‘major’ in something; but the British, and in particular the English, system is unusually specialized in international terms.
As noted above, A levels or Scottish highers typically constitute the foundation stage which precedes undergraduate studies — a foundation in terms of process as much as content — and it is significant that non-A level-based degrees often begin with ‘foundation’ courses.
Indeed, the very notion of student access implies curricular foundations.
As regards degree courses themselves, some are broader than others, and in effect provide a foundation for subsequent specialized postgraduate education or training; indeed, it may be more accurate in some cases to see the whole process as a four-year not three-year one, consisting of three foundation years followed by a specialized professional post-graduate year.
Many degree courses, on the other hand, clearly belong to the specific stage in a person's educational development, after which his or her interests and horizon may narrow further, in specialized research or employment, or broaden out again.
We have now looked at the general patterns and trends of first degree courses, while acknowledging that there are manifold variations in detail.
We have explored a general, if somewhat schematic, framework which allows us to analyse rather than simply describe what undergraduates are taught during the three or four years that lead to their first degree.
It has been argued that such courses come somewhere around the foundation or specific stage in most people's educational development, although the increasing proportions of mature students must make us wary of too linear a model.
And we have sketched out three broad frames of reference for thinking about the undergraduate curriculum: in terms of knowledge, society and student development.
It is time now to move on to consider the first of these.
2
The Curriculum as Knowledge
‘The cow is there’, said Ansell, lighting a match and holding it out over the carpet.
No one spoke.
He waited till the end of the match fell off.
Then he said again, ‘She is there, the cow.
There, now.’
‘You have not proved it,’ said a voice.
‘I have proved it to myself.’
‘I have proved to myself that she isn't,’ said the voice.
‘The cow is not there.’
Ansell frowned and lit another match.
E. M. Forster,The Longest Journey 
Debates about the nature and structure of knowledge can seem incurably rarefied, the preserve of a certain species of philosopher or the indulgence of earnest and callow undergraduates, like those in the opening of Forster's novel.
Certainly, one does not overhear such debates every day in the senior common room or students' union, and any analysis of the curriculum as knowledge is likely to appear remote from the priorities and concerns of the average lecturer or student.
But it is not.
Assumptions about the nature and structure of knowledge are built into the language of higher education policy, the statistics of higher education, the structure of institutions, the identity of academic professions, the planning of courses, and the methods and styles of teaching and learning.
It has already been observed that the statistics on higher education group subjects and courses in certain ways, and this is true not only of DES data, but other sources, such as the NAB and USR classifications (the latter recently revised), or the transbinary database being established under the aegis of the CNAA (Bourner 1984).
Such classification is inevitable but problematic.
Perhaps the most familiar grouping is the broad division of all courses into ‘arts’ and ‘science’.
Despite the publicity (and acrimony) surrounding the ‘two cultures’ debate in the early 1960s (Snow 1964; Leavis and Yudkin 1962), the distinction is implicit rather than overt in Robbins (1963), although the worries about the intake of maths/science-based students show through in several sections (see, for example, Robbins 1963, Table 45).
However, the report is also concerned with the balance between science and technology , noting the relative emphasis on the first in the UK compared to other countries (Robbins 1963, Table 40) and suggesting ways of upgrading the latter.
The arts/science distinction is more central to the 1985 Green Paper, particularly in the discussion of ‘subject balance’.
It is worth noting too that DES statistics sometimes single out ‘science’ enrolments, implying that this is an important and distinguishable category (see, for example, DES Statistical Bulletin 14/86, Table 7).
There are several facets to the arts/science distinction.
In other tables in the 1985 Green Paper on staff/student ratios (A11 and A12), the DES distinguishes between arts, science and clinical medicine courses in the universities, but between ‘lab based’, ‘class based’ and art and design in the polytechnics.
In terms of staff-student ratios and teaching costs and patterns, the distinction seems to be the essentially practical and administrative one of laboratory-based vs library-based studies rather than anything more abstract.
However, the frequent references to mathematics or numeracy in this connection suggest that the arts/science distinction may also to some extent be a maths/non-maths one, although no doubt some economists and psychologists are more numerate than some engineers and biologists, and numeracy tends nowadays to refer, however inaccurately, to computing as well as mathematics.
The most obvious way of interpreting the arts/science distinction is in terms of the kinds of knowledge involved: broadly speaking, ‘arts’ refers to humanities subjects and social sciences (although the 1985 Green Paper restricts the latter to ‘non-vocational social studies’), and ‘science’comprises mathematics, the natural sciences and applied sciences including medicine.
The value of such a simple dichotomy is questionable.
It lumps together subjects which are in some ways profoundly dissimilar, and erodes distinctions which may in themselves be significant not only conceptually but in terms of policy.
For example, the general association of mathematics with ‘science’ may disguise its potential in relation to other subjects; and the whole question of the relationship between science and technology in the UK has been the subject of a lively debate in the last decade.
Nor does the arts/science distinction make much sense in terms of graduate employment, if it is assumed that the distinction is based on a simple non-vocational/vocational one or ‘non-relevant/relevant’ one.
Evans (1971) properly defines vocational education as being that education which makes a person more employable in one occupation than others.
For example, DES Statistical Bulletin 1/86 (Table 4) gives the percentages of higher education graduates believed unemployed six months after completing their courses in 1979 and 1984, for nine groups of subjects.
While the table shows that the worst graduate unemployment in 1984 was among the arts (other than languages) group, it also shows that scientists were more likely to be unemployed than either social studies or language graduates (social studies here includes business, accountancy and law).
What is even more striking is the variation within the various subject  groups.
In 1984, the six-month unemployment rate for electrical/electronic engineers was 4.2 per cent, but that for chemical engineers 11.1 per cent ; 9.9 per cent for physicists but 21.9 per cent for zoologists; 11.4 per cent for economists but 18.4 per cent for sociologists, 9.3 per cent for French graduates but 15.1 per cent for Russian graduates.
Even in the professional/vocational group, librarians were four times more likely to be unemployed than architects.
The validity of such first destination statistics as a general measure of graduate employment will be discussed in Chapter 3, and it is important to note that in this case they did not cover the colleges/institutes of higher education, which produce significant numbers of ‘arts’ graduates who have relatively high unemployment rates.
Nevertheless, such figures demonstrate the bluntness of the arts/science distinction in terms of graduate employment.
The structure of knowledge in higher education is, however, not only implied by broad notions such as arts, science and subject balance; it is embodied in the very structure of institutions and the academic professions.
This fact becomes clear if one imagines an institution called The Anarchic University or Polytechnic (some academics might think it is a fair description of their own).
In such a place, staff would be appointed not to this or that department or faculty, but simply to the institution.
They would be responsible for teaching what they liked to whom they liked.
They could call their courses whatever they wanted, and make them as long or short as they wished.
Students, likewise, would simply be admitted to the institution; they would not belong to a department or faculty.
They could study what they chose, in the order they chose, and there would be no distinction between different years, or levels of course.
As long as they passed the necessary assessments for each course, they would get their degree at the end of three years.
Even if such an institution were established, it is unlikely that it would remain truly anarchic for long.
Staff would begin to cluster in groups, perhaps because they needed common equipment and facilities, perhaps because they discovered common ground in what they taught.
Some such groups would become more permanent, establish certain physical and academic territories, begin to call themselves by a common title, and start to defend these against ‘outsiders’ with vigour and cunning.
Students also might begin to cluster in little sub-cultures, small tribes united by a common interest which in due course would become institutionalized and formalized.
These groups might enter into semi-permanent contracts with academics who had similar interests, and develop rules about who could and could not take part in a ‘course’ in a particular ‘subject’and how that ‘course’should be conducted.
Some criteria and methods for ‘assessing’ and ‘accrediting’what had been learned would gradually emerge, serving to validate the teaching contract, regulate entry to the emerging ‘discipline’and generally build up its identity and status.
No doubt, in the fullness of time, a structured institution would emerge, with all the rituals and    regulations, and all the academic-territorial demarcations, conflicts and ambiguities, which typify the modern university, polytechnic or college.
Table 2.1 Faculty and School structures
However, such a fantasy serves to show just how structured contemporary institutions of higher education are, and how far such structures imply structures of knowledge.
It is taken for granted that an institution will be sub-divided into faculties, schools, departments, units and centres; but the epistemological implications of such subdivisions are rarely examined explicitly.
Table 2.1 lists the faculty or school structures of a number of institutions.
No doubt such structures reflect not only assumptions about the structure of knowledge, but more mundane matters such as the existing groupings of staff, the physical location of sites, historical accident and the current pressures to retrench and regroup.
But once one starts looking at such headings, questions arise.
If there is a faculty of science and one of applied science why is there not a faculty of applied social science as well as a faculty of social science?
Why are engineering, medicine and agriculture not all grouped together as applied sciences?
What is or are liberal studies?
What kind of knowledge is involved in development studies or urban and regional studies?
What is the difference between social science and social studies, or between arts and humanities, or humanities and letters?
Or between arts and art?
And when one thinks of individual subjects, why is mathematics typically in the science faculty when it is not a science?
Should one speak of biological science or sciences?
Why is law sometimes a faculty in its own right, and sometimes a department within a faculty?
Why is history, which is clearly a social subject , not a social science?
Why do the USR undergraduate statistics have two headings each for psychology and geography, one in the natural sciences and one in the social sciences?
What kind of subject is geography?
How does it relate to environmental sciences?
Why can one sometimes get a B.A. in economics, and sometimes a B.Sc.?
Where does architecture belong?
And what about computing?
Do languages belong inherently to the arts?
Is business studies a subject or a collection of subjects?
And why should philosophy not be in every faculty?
Such questions seem both searching and naive, searching because they open up a Pandora's box of issues about the nature and structure of knowledge, naive because they are not usually asked, and doubtless cannot be answered, in quite such a simple way.
Nevertheless, any account of the undergraduate curriculum has to address such issues, not because the questions must be asked, but because they have already been answered — in the institutional, professional and curricular structures that exist — and these answers must be examined.
The problem is to come up with an analysis and structure which is not only reasonably clear and self-consistent in terms of concepts of knowledge, but which maps on to and helps to explain the curricular structures that are already in place.
The boundaries of higher education
The first demarcation is between what is and is not ‘higher education’; this constitutes the general boundary within which knowledge and curricula are structured.
That boundary is itself by no means clear, and is continually being tested, but certain criteria seem to be involved.
First, the curriculum should be based on some body or bodies of knowledge.
This in itself involves several things.
To begin with, it implies that the curriculum is some advance on pre-theoretical or commonsense knowledge (Berger and Luckmann 1971), treating as problematic what is normally taken for granted.
Secondly, it implies some notion of rationality and explicability (Dearden et al .
1972), although Schilling (1986) draws a distinction between theoretical rationality and practical rationality.
And, thirdly, there is the expectation that the body of knowledge is in some sense developmental or cumulative, though this notion is perhaps easier to relate to the sciences and technology than the social sciences and easier to the social sciences than the arts.
Although positivists treat scientific knowledge as the paradigm of all knowledge (implicit in the expression ‘hard sciences’), in practice the criteria for judging the development or fruitfulness of bodies of knowledge in higher education seems to be relative to those bodies, and each field is judged largely on its own terms by those who work in it, although outsiders may have other and sometimes more sceptical views.
The more organized the body of knowledge appears to be, the more distinct its academic identity, and the more likely it is to be called a ‘discipline’.
Disciplines which exist only at the intersection of other disciplines may be regarded as merely derivative or parasitic, and their very identity doubted or denied (Albrow 1986).
Secondly, while such knowledge may involve certain skills, it should not  merely be a matter of skill .
‘Skill’ is itself an elusive concept, but it implies a degree of routinization or automacity in the performance of perceptual-motor or cognitive tasks (Fitts and Posner 1973).
Thus there is some feeling in higher education that courses which involve languages or computing merely as skills are not proper ‘subjects’.
This curricular boundary is sometimes embodied in the fine institutional distinction between a ‘department’ and a ‘centre’, though the latter can also indicate a specialized research centre.
‘Proper’ subjects have to ensure that even if they involve skills, they are not based on them.
Historically, engineering has had to distance itself from the sound of metal-bashing, and agriculture has become fiercely scientific and managerial; while the obvious skill element in medicine and veterinary work only comes after a thoroughly academic grounding (though it is sometimes pointed out rather unkindly that surgeons evolved from barbers).
The same kind of criticism is sometimes levelled at newer, vocationally orientated courses in higher education (such as secretarial studies, catering or nursing) which are perceived, however inaccurately, as being largely a matter of skill acquisition.
Such courses have to develop an element of ‘theory’ or ‘analysis’in order to acquire academic legitimacy; which risks producing a counter-reaction from practitioners.
A different kind of criticism is sometimes levelled at courses in creative fields such as music, drama, art and even architecture.
It is accepted that such activities are not merely a matter of skill, but questions are asked about how far the ‘knowledge’ in such fields is capable of being explicated and taught in an explicit rather than tacit, intuitive or mimetic manner, or how far one can develop standard or consensual criteria for judging performance.
Again, such subjects typically have to develop a more ‘scholarly’, conceptual or abstract side in order to gain admittance to and status within the academic fold, although to some extent they can isolate themselves from other faculties and departments — art and design in the polytechnics and colleges often seem to be states within a state, enjoying an autonomy underpinned by their separate location on inherited art college sites.
The tension within such subjects between ‘theory’ and ‘practice’remains.
But the existence of such fields within the undergraduate curriculum is interesting not least because it raises some of the basic epistemological and educational questions in a particularly sharp form; questions which may have caused some of the digestive problems which the CNAA has had with courses in art and design.
The third aspect of the boundary of higher education is that it should be higher .
This implies a level of studies which is clearly beyond that which pertains in the schools or non-advanced further education.
The term also carries with it certain elite connotations, and quickly generates references to ‘standards’ and ‘excellence’.
As we noted in Chapter 1, level is an elusive concept, difficult to objectify without formal procedures of initial admission and final assessment.
The main doubts about level and standards in higher education probably relate to new or interdisciplinary courses for which the criteria are not well established, or courses which have atypical  entrants (e.g. ‘unqualified’ mature students) or which are not assessed in conventional ways (e.g. with a heavy reliance on course or project work rather than unseen examinations).
The general ‘boundary maintenance’ around higher education goes beyond these broad criteria to do with bodies of knowledge, skill and level.
Historically, higher education has often seemed reluctant to admit new fields of study and enquiry; witness the problems faced by the natural sciences and professional fields in nineteenth-century Oxbridge, or by the social sciences in the twentieth century.
Albrow (1986) has questioned what he calls the ‘myth of the heroic struggle’ in sociology, but it seems clear that many disciplines had to fight hard to gain entry and become established, especially where they appeared to threaten the hegemony of existing disciplines, as English and modern languages did with classics, the social sciences with history, and now perhaps computing with mathematics.
But as Church (1978) has noted, even modern history was accepted only as ‘half a degree’ initially in conjunction with law, and law itself was slow to become established inside, rather than outside, the higher education system (Twining 1987).
Such struggles have both a positive and a negative side.
In one way, they represent little more than the attempts of established disciplines to retain market share in a situation of academic and economic scarcity.
In times of expansion, developments can be additive, and it is easier for new subjects to become institutionally — as distinct from academically — accepted (doubts can linger for a long time).
However, now that the resources for higher education — both for research and teaching — are limited or declining, more money for one department often means less for another.
Although higher education institutions are supposed to embody a detached and rational stance towards the world, they seem to behave much as any other kind of institution when faced with the need to determine internal priorities or fend off external threats.
Perhaps because they are relatively loose in conventional management terms, with a good deal of devolved power and individual discretion, they seem relatively ‘tight’ in normative terms, held together more by values than by structures (Becher and Kogan 1980); indeed, they may constitute an interesting organizational example of the ‘simultaneous loose-tight properties’described by Peters and Waterman (1982).
It is not surprising, therefore, that those norms sometimes turn into dogma, which pose an internal, as distinct from an external, threat to academic freedom.
Because of the intimate and informal way in which the system operates, academics can put one another under a good deal of pressure, whereas they can often find ways of coping with or deflecting external demands.
In another way, however, the difficulties experienced by new courses or fields in gaining acceptance are functional and desirable.
It takes time for the validity or fruitfulness of any academic development to become clear, and too rapid a response to intellectual fashions could leave institutions with an embarrassing residue of dubious courses, which once installed are  difficult to dislodge.
The history of ‘communications’ as a field of study is perhaps a case in point.
This was much in vogue in the 1960s, due not only to the fashionable ideas of Marshall McLuhan, but the more serious earlier work by Wiener (1948) and Shannon and Weaver (1949), but as time has passed doubts have grown not so much about its existence, but rather whether it does not constitute two distinct fields of machine and human communication, for which information theory cannot provide a unifying paradigm.
Similar doubts were expressed about the study of the environment, which took off about the same time, but this seems to have gained a much firmer academic foothold, despite the fact that such courses range from the physical to the social with, as one CRAC Degree Course Guide put it, almost nothing in common between these two extremes.
The general growth of awareness of environmental problems may have provided a problem-centred focus which helps to overcome any sense of theoretical looseness.
The mere passage of time, however, seems of itself to help legitimize fields of study, perhaps as much through growing indifference as acceptance.
The study of the discipline does not often include a study of its own academic evolution; indeed, one suspects than an ahistorical attitude is sometimes projected by lecturers, as if the discipline had always existed in some vague Platonic sense, and could not possibly not have been there.
(Of course, the history of the discipline can be used not to question it, but to try to establish the canon, and to legitimate authority based on it.)
Institutional and professional continuity seems to allow established disciplines to contain epistemological doubts or crises which might kill off the fledgling.
For example, one wonders if the doubts about the unity of geography are any less profound than those that afflict environmental science, but geography has been around for much longer and has developed powerful institutional, professional and curricular structures, not least in the schools.
Such structures also seem to provide a kind of elementary momentum in periods where a discipline is in the doldrums, and not a great deal is happening at the research level.
Or in the end the crisis may become a fact of life.
There are thus general if disputed boundaries to the undergraduate curriculum as currently conceived.
It should be based on or at least draw from coherent bodies of knowledge which go beyond mere skill and are capable of being explicated and taught at a high level.
Within such broad parameters, the curriculum is worked and fought out in terms of the structures of disciplines, fields and courses.
It is not possible here to attempt to unravel the many strands of thought and practice that have historically influenced the contemporary curriculum in this way, but it may be useful to refer briefly to some of them before going on to consider the current pattern.
The structures of knowledge
Much of the writing on education and the structure of knowledge refers not to higher education but to the schools, and in particular to the concept  of general education at the secondary level.
This makes it less relevant than it might be here, partly because the undergraduate curriculum is relatively more specialized than the secondary school one, and partly because distinctions or dimensions which are important in higher education — for example, between the pure and the applied — are less so in the schools.
Nevertheless, there are certain major figures who stand behind curriculum thinking at both levels.
Plato's theory of knowledge, as elaborated in the Republic , seems an inescapable point of departure.
As Schwab (1964) has pointed out, one of the features of Plato's scheme is that it does not primarily classify knowledge in terms of what it is of or about but in terms of its quality — its degrees of reality.
Thus the physical, biological or social can all be apprehended or known as images, things, hypothetical ideas or real ideas, with each level of knowing more real than the previous one.
These different ‘levels’ of knowledge in turn involve different states of mind in the knower: conjecture, belief, understanding and pure reason.
There is thus an interaction between the nature of knowledge and the process of thought, a notion which, according to Schwab, underpins modern curricular concepts such as problem solving, concept formation and enquiry, and leads to a general emphasis on ‘process’ rather than‘content’.
This is a distinction which has been at the heart of a good deal of post-war curricular reform in the schools both in the USA and the UK (see, for example, Bruner 1960), and which will be explored further in due course.
The influence of Plato, though difficult to exhume from the centuries of interpretation, seems to relate more to the ‘process’ and ‘quality’of studies than to their ‘object’or ‘content’, though it is worth noting the paradigmatic nature of mathematics and the primacy of philosophy in his scheme of things.
The other major Greek influence, Aristotle, classified all thought into the theoretical, practical or productive, concerned broadly with knowing, doing and making (Ross 1928; pp. 993b, 1025b).
Mathematics and the natural sciences constitute examples of the first, ethics and politics of the second, and fine arts and engineering the third.
We seem to have lost the distinction between the second and third, which seems to depend on the existence of an identifiable artefact in the latter case.
But although Lobkowicz (1967) cautions us against assuming that Aristotle's distinction between theory and practice is similar to today's usage, and suggests that it was as much a matter of the context as the content of knowledge — types of life as well as types of thought — the dichotomy is still very much with us.
It is not, however, as clear-cut in this country as it is on the continent.
Although one does find parts of courses labelled ‘theory’ or ‘practice’in some subjects, more often the contrast is attenuated, perhaps by an often unconscious empiricism.
The medieval period sometimes attracts people who are looking for some general structure for the undergraduate curriculum which goes beyond a mere aggregation of subjects (see, for example, MacCabe's 1982, proposals for a ‘modern trivium’).
In medieval times, the curriculum was  divided into the trivium of the three verbal arts (grammar, rhetoric and logic or dialectic) and the quadrivium of the four mathematical arts (arithmetic, music, geometry and astronomy)(Wagner 1983).
The central position of theology as the ‘queen’ of disciplines was paralleled in later centuries by the similar position occupied by philosophy in Scottish universities (Davie 1961).
The generally utilitarian function, if not rationale of medieval universities (Cobban 1975), is acknowledged even by those such as Veblen (1957, p. 3), who argued that the best principles for academic endeavour are ‘an Idle curiosity, and the Instinct of Workmanship’, and provides ammunition for Bell (1971) and others who contend that the liberal tradition is based largely on an historical myth.
But the issues are complex and it is difficult in general to assess the real strength or continuity of influence of these classical or medieval models on the modern curriculum.
One wonders, for example, to what extent the original distinction between theory and practice was reinforced or modified by the later Christian one between the contemplative and the active, or when and why the word ‘pure’ came to be used of certain types of knowledge.
It may be that such historical exemplars, rather like foreign comparisons, are largely used to legitimate a particular contemporary point of view, rather than constituting a real and unbroken tradition.
Subsequent centuries brought more layers of thought and tradition to ideas about the undergraduate curriculum.
British empiricism, and to a lesser extent German idealism, must have entered the bloodstream of at least some subjects.
Kant's distinctions between analytic and synthetic judgements and between the a priori and a posteriori are obviously important to the philosophy of knowledge, but their influence on the structure of the curriculum is not obvious, except perhaps in reinforcing the general sense that mathematics is somehow unlike all other subjects.
On the other hand, the influence of Comte's Positive Philosophy seems to have been pervasive if often unacknowledged, and still surfaces in odd places (see Alexander 1988).
Comte (Martineau 1853) proposed a hierarchy of positive sciences which classifies knowledge in terms of its objects, what it is of or about.
The hierarchy begins with mathematics, and then moves up through astronomy, physics, chemistry and biology to sociology at the top.
Setting aside mathematics for the moment, the different levels can be seen in terms of scale (which Hodgson 1985 neatly gives in centimetres), in terms of envelopes (Needham 1969) or perhaps best in terms of levels of organization (since physicists argue that they relate to ‘all levels of scale’; Institute of Physics 1988, p. 2).
Comte's hierarchy is more often expressed nowadays in terms of a spectrum running from ‘hard’ to ‘soft’sciences (spectra are less contentious than hierarchies), but its influence is still apparent at the undergraduate level, although the picture at the postgraduate and research level in the sciences seems to be becoming ever more complex and many-faceted.
Probably few people would adhere strictly to Comte's scheme nowadays if it was presented to them in its original form, but nevertheless it does still seem to underpin the structure of first degree  courses in the main natural sciences (physics, chemistry, biochemistry, biology) and the typical faculty demarcation between the natural and the social sciences.
It does of course raise serious questions about reductionism (Peacocke 1985), although it is worth noting that reductionism between levels (e.g. from the social to the biological or from the biological to the biochemical) is different from reductionism within a given level (e.g. the psychological as against the sociological, or the sociological as against the economic), which is a matter of perspective or aspect rather than level in Comte's terms.
Perhaps the confidence of physicists noted by Becher (forthcoming) has something to do with their apparent irreducibility.
Apart from the issue of reductionism, Comte's scheme raises two other major problems.
The first is the place of mathematics in any scheme of ‘science’, a problem not only for positivism but for any theory of knowledge; as Schwab (1964) notes, mathematics is one of the perenially puzzling disciplines.
The paradox is that while mathematics appears to be based on axioms rather than empirical knowledge (although some have argued that it is rooted ultimately in the ‘one-twoness’ of things), it has nevertheless turned out to be remarkably fruitful in enabling us to understand the physical and to a lesser extent social world; it is as if we had invented a game which turned out to be real.
The second major problem with Comte's positivism lies at the other end of his hierarchy, at the level of the social.
Comte's scheme covers, in his own terms, what would now be regarded as the main social science disciplines, together with philosophy, theology and history.
The problem comes with the arts.
Comte does not ignore the arts; indeed his work ends with a call to ‘aesthetic action’:
One of the least anticipated results of this working out of opinions, morals, and institutions under the guidance of positive philosophy, is the development which must take place in the modes of expressing them.
For five centuries, society has been seeking an aesthetic constitution correspondent to its civilization.
(Martineau 1853, p. 559)
Comte's view of the arts was primarily an instrumental one; they were to be harnessed to, and take inspiration from, the new scientific, moral and political order he proposed.
Such a view implies the incorporation of the arts or humanities into the broad domain of the social or human sciences, a development which has to some extent occurred in France with the concept of sciences humaines and in Germany under the rubric of Geisteswissenschaft .
However, in both countries, the creative arts also maintain a distinct existence under the headings of Kunst ,lettres and beaux-arts .
In this country, where the concept of science has always been the narrower one associated with the paradigm of the natural sciences, there is still in most institutions a very firm institutional demarcation between arts or humanities on the one hand and the social sciences on the other, a demarcation which will be explored later.
If Comte's positivism provides an example of the apparent continuing  influence of one nineteenth-century idea on the undergraduate curriculum, the notion of a liberal education, and in particular its expression by Newman in The Idea of a University (initially in 1852 and later in 1873) provides another.
Of course, the concept of a liberal education goes back to the Greeks, and Newman's lectures and books were only one more interpretation of an idea which as Rothblatt (1976) clearly shows has demonstrated a remarkable adaptability and longevity.
Nevertheless, Newman's was an important interpretation, even if it influenced the rhetoric of higher education more than the reality (Bell 1971; see also Slee's 1986, interpretation in relation to the growth of history as a discipline).
However, there were important differences between the classical and nineteenth-century forms of the idea.
In its classical form, the concept of liberal education was grounded in the doctrine of metaphysical realism: that there was a Reality, that that Reality could be known, and that the purpose of education was to lead people towards that knowledge.
Such knowledge was not only desirable in itself, but would liberate and transform the life of the individual, and through him [sic], the life of the society, since such individuals would or should be the appropriate leaders or rulers, a notion which would become democratized in modern ideologies of liberal education to include ‘leaders’ in any walk of life (especially the working-class) and indeed the ordinary, democratic citizen.
However, as the belief in metaphysical realism declined in the nineteenth century in favour of more nominalist, relativist or generally hesitant views of knowledge, the concept of a liberal education seemed to lose its firm epistemological foundation and become not so much a theory of knowledge as a theory of ignorance.
There could be little agreement any longer on the nature of reality or truth, but this did not prevent a wide if vague consensus about the undesirability of dogmatism, superstition, parochialism, unexamined assumptions and unthinking lives.
Such ideas have probably influenced the process of teaching more than the content of courses in higher education, although they had a direct bearing on the original terms of reference of university extra-mural departments.
It is sometimes argued that certain subjects are better vehicles for a liberal education than others, because they are concerned with the human rather than merely the natural, or are reflexive rather than merely instrumental; hence the term ‘liberal’ has been most often associated with the arts, and in this century social sciences, though it has been used of some science courses as well(e.g. ‘Liberal Studies in Science’).
However, once one begins to argue the toss about the liberal value of various academic subjects, it becomes difficult to exclude any of them: Do not medicine and engineering raise profound questions about life?
About society?
About what is good or beautiful or true?
And do not such disciplines go further and focus such questions in real-life judgements, decisions and actions?
Compared to the USA, where there is a long tradition of debate about general education (Squires 1976; Gaff 1983), the main influence of the concept of a liberal education in British higher education has probably been on the enactment of  the curriculum — on the methods and styles of teaching, the role models and relationships involved, and the general learning ethos and environment.
This emphasis reappears in the ‘process’ justifications of higher education, advanced both by its providers and consumers, in terms of training the mind, learning to think, developing autonomy and so on, notions which are to some extent ‘subject-free’, and which will be explored further in Chapter 4.
Among more recent writing on knowledge and the school curriculum, two of the most interesting examples are Hirst's discussion of ‘forms of knowledge’ and Phenix's ‘realms of meaning.
’ Again, it is not possible here to do these justice in the space available.
Hirst (1969, 1974) divides knowledge into seven or so distinct or irreducible forms: mathematics, the physical sciences, the human sciences and history, literature and the fine arts, morals, religion, and philosophy.
His later work has tended to modify the distinctness of each of these, as well as exploring problems which arise with particular forms of knowledge; for example, the fact that the social sciences may involve truths of several different logical kinds, or the difficulties of explicating the kind of knowledge embodied in literature and the arts.
While Hirst's analysis addresses the nature and structure of knowledge in general, and can be related to the undergraduate curriculum, it has nevertheless been debated mainly in terms of the schools.
Likewise, Phenix (1964) identifies a number of basic categories, but his approach differs from Hirst's in two important respects.
First, he takes ‘meaning’ rather than knowledge or rationality as his point of departure and, secondly, his headings are less closely related to conventional subject headings: symbolics (including language, mathematics and other non-discursive symbolic forms), empirics (natural and social sciences), aesthetics (the arts), synnoetics (personal knowledge), ethics, and synoptics (history, religion, philosophy).
The use of these somewhat esoteric labels may obviate the difficulties of using terms which have a common and often imprecise meaning for a precise purpose — a problem which has afflicted the understanding of Hirst's work — but it has also limited their circulation, and outside the rather enclosed world of curriculum theory, Phenix's work is largely unknown.
The relationship between the two approaches has been discussed by Hirst (1974), and both writers have stimulated further thinking in the field of curriculum theory, particularly in relation to the schools (see Richards' bibliography, 1984).
But what of higher education?
Concern with the nature and structure of knowledge is a continuing if not always explicit aspect of many subjects, but few discussions go beyond the single discipline or field.
Oakeshott's (1962) distinction between technical and practical knowledge, which itself echoes Aristotle, has been used by Eraut (1985) in a discussion of professional knowledge.
Plumb announced a ‘crisis in the humanities’ as long ago as 1964.
An issue of New Universities Quarterly in 1980 [Vol. 35(1)]contained several papers on the arts.
The Leverhulme study also devoted one volume specifically to the arts in higher education (Robinson 1982), but although  this contained much interesting material, particularly on social and anthropological views of the arts, it did little to establish their epistemological base.
The Scottish challenge mounted by Davie (1986) continues.
The OECD (1972; Levin and Lind 1985) volumes on interdisciplinarity inevitably raise questions about the nature of disciplines.
Levine and Weingart (1973) and Levine (1978) have provided accounts of the undergraduate curriculum in the USA, and Boyer (1987) a contemporary discussion.
Bergendahl (1984) has edited a colloquium which includes foreign as well as Swedish speakers (see, for example, Scott 1984b, and Silverman 1984), and Scott (1984a, 1987) has also advanced more general analyses.
There have of course been innumerable discussions of developments within particular disciplines.
But the two most systematic modern contributions to our general thinking about the undergraduate curriculum are the recent paper by Donald (1986) and the book by Becher (1989a), which itself reviews some previous attempts.
Of the two, Donald's approach is the more abstract.
Knowledge is categorized in terms of four parameters: the nature of the concepts involved, the logical structure of the discipline, the truth criteria used, and the methods employed.
Each of these can be analysed further.
For example, concepts are analysed for their generality or degree of abstraction; and logical structure is a matter of either similarity or dependency relationships, which in turn can be sub-divided into associational, functional and hierarchical, or procedural, logical or causal.
The paper is rigorous and thought-provoking, but it does not map easily on to existing curricular structures, and the very complexity of the model may limit its diffusion in higher education.
Becher is more concerned to develop ways of analysing the differences between disciplines which will allow him to explore their particular ‘cultures’.
He reviews various previous attempts to categorize different kinds of knowledge, some of which have been mentioned above, and devotes particular attention to Pantin's (1968) distinction between restricted and unrestricted sciences, Biglan's (1973) three dimensions of hard/soft, pure/applied, and life/non-life and Kolb's (1981) typology of abstract/concrete and active/reflective.
Drawing on such work, Becher arrives at a four-part typology of hard/pure, hard/applied, soft/pure and soft/applied.
Although he stops short of locating particular disciplines within this typology, one can see that for example the natural sciences would tend to be hard and pure, engineering would be hard and applied, the arts are likely to be soft, and so on.
However, he also stresses the differences that exist within disciplines, for example, physical geography may be placed on the hard side of the line, but human geography on the soft side, and in any case the line itself is not sharp.
He argues that most individual subject areas themselves turn out on closer examination to contain a diversity of research styles and epistemological characteristics.
A rapid review such as this of theories of knowledge and the curriculum cannot hope to do justice to the various concepts and models, and risks  inducing a kind of conceptual vertigo.
It does, however, serve to establish two points.
The first is the basic realization that knowledge can be ‘carved up’ in different ways, depending on what criteria or parameters one employs.
It is easy for us to slip into the assumption that the institutional, professional and curricular structures with which we are familiar are somehow natural or inevitable.
In any case, it is usually easier to think in concrete terms than abstract ones; easier to reify knowledge and turn it into a thing.
Secondly, it is significant that several recent writers — such as Kolb, Donald and Becher — have moved away from unidimensional classifications of knowledge to multi-dimensional typologies, which seem to map on to the undergraduate curriculum better.
The model that follows involves three such dimensions.
Object, stance and mode
The most obvious dimension of the curriculum as knowledge is the ‘object’ of study, i.e. what the course is about (see Figure 2.1).
In this simple sense, we talk about a course in physics, history, medicine, music or whatever.
Here, in the natural sciences, despite the complex patterns that exist at the research level, it still seems appropriate to use the broad categories identified by Comte and embodied in the nomenclature of undergraduate degrees — the physical, the chemical, the biological — while recognizing that there are gradations between these (physical chemistry, biochemistry) and foci and links within and across them (geology, biophysics, physiology or ecology).
The main problem with the ‘object’ dimension arises when one moves beyond the biological to the social and human.
The label ‘social science’ has always been something of a misnomer, because in addition to the obviously collective perspectives of economics, sociology, anthropology and politics, it also includes a concern with the individual, in particular in some branches of psychology.
The term ‘human’ might therefore be preferred, and is more common in some other countries, but that brings another problem, namely the relationships between the concepts of ‘human science’, ‘humanities’and ‘arts’.
Setting aside for the moment the human science/humanities distinction we need to decide whether there is any real difference between ‘humanities’ and ‘arts’.
Institutional labels would suggest not; it seems to be largely a matter of historical accident whether a university, polytechnic or college has a faculty/school of humanities or one of arts (or even letters).
As noted earlier, we should not perhaps take labels too seriously.
However, there lies a problem beneath the labels.
There is a strong tradition in the UK, deriving partly from Matthew Arnold, that the arts are essentially human in their capacity to develop human sensibility, and moral and social awareness.
In this sense, the modern humanities were taking on the mantle worn by classics in earlier centuries, as a central cultural frame of reference.
On the other hand, there is also the view that art-objects are  different from all other human artefacts and phenomena in that judgements about them have to refer partly to the medium and form of that artefact.
In this sense, a novel or symphony has to be judged partly in relation to the overall system of language or music, and to the specific ‘grammar’ of that particular linguistic or musical form.
Words such as system and grammar suggest something remote and rational, but as Abbs (1989) points out, they constitute ‘a fundamental sensuous mode of human response and interpretation’.
They are intimately bound up with sense perception and consciousness.
The conflict between these two views of the arts currently takes the form, in the case of English, of the struggle between those academics who represent the ‘humanistic’ Arnoldian tradition, often as interpreted by Leavis (1952), and the more recent continental influences, such as structuralism, which emphasize the systemic or formal properties of art-objects (Welch 1987).
(The work of Hoggart 1957 and others on popular culture seems to me to constitute largely a variant of the first tradition, though with some Marxist influence in some cases.)
Figure 2.1 The curriculum as knowledge.
The issue here is whether the arts can be subsumed under the ‘humanities’ or whether they require their own heading, as being different in kind from other human phenomena.
The emphasis on medium, form and aesthetic grammar would suggest that, whatever their ‘content’ or ‘effect’, they are somehow different; at the simplest level, saying that a history or sociology book is badly written is different from saying that a  novel is badly written.
Of course, it may be objected that the very notion of an ‘art-object’ is a cultural construct peculiar to certain traditions, but that notion is so deeply embedded in Western culture that it is difficult to dismiss it.
Provisionally, therefore, Figure 2.1 distinguishes between the ‘human’ and the ‘artistic’.
The work of Becher and others, however, suggests the need for a second dimension in classifying curricula.
It is not enough to say what a course is about; physicists and engineers, biologists and doctors, economists and managers may each be concerned with the same phenomena but for different reasons and in different ways.
This difference is usually formulated in terms of a difference in knowledge (pure as against applied, theoretical as against practical) but it may be more accurate to see it as a difference of stance .
It is a matter of intention or angle rather than data.
We can distinguish broadly between the intention of knowing, and the intention of doing, which correspond roughly to the conventional distinction between pure and applied.
To say that the stance is one of knowing does not necessarily imply a belief in ‘objectivity’; the process may be thought of as a hermeneutic, interpretative one in which objective knowledge is not possible.
However, the idea of ‘knowing’ does suggest a concentration on the nature of the object or phenomenon.
By contrast, the stance of doing is concerned with acting upon those phenomena to bring about change, although the capacity to react or respond to phenomena may be a precondition of successful action in some cases, for example in the diagnosis of human problems and situations, as Ryan (1984) points out in relation to medicine.
Nevertheless, responsiveness or sensitivity in such instances is only a means to the end, which is to effect change of some kind.
The distinction between knowing and doing is by no means clear-cut, but the real problem arises with the third stance identified in Figure 2.1, that of ‘being’.
Being is rejected by many linguistic philosophers as a meaningless or misleading term, a conceptual chimera; but it is central to the phenomenological tradition.
The problem is that both ‘knowing’ and ‘doing’seem largely to exclude the knower or doer from the equation; they tend to excise the subjective, and direct attention away from it.
Knowing typically excludes the experience of knowing, doing the sensation of doing.
‘Being’ in this sense is not synonymous with the self or the subject; it implies being-in-the-world, a kind of subject-objectivity.
‘After all’, remarked Merleau-Ponty, ‘the world is around me, not in front of me’(1964, p. 59).
Nor is being a passive notion, although the nature of its projects or problems is difficult to express.
We can say that the purpose of knowing is truth (however conceived) and that the purpose of doing is effectiveness (Horner 1985).
We could perhaps speak of coming to ‘know’ being, but it may be that in this case ‘knowledge’is itself a metaphor.
Words such as illumination, actualization and realization come to mind.
Such language seems vacuous to some, but if we are to comprehend the nature of the arts in particular, being is a concept which it seems difficult to do without.
It does not necessarily imply essence or totality, but merely a derestriction of  the stances of knowing and doing.
It does not exclude anything; but that is not to say that it can attain everything.
Two other points should be made about the notion of ‘stance’.
The first is that despite what was said earlier about the unique nature of art-objects, the stance of being suggests why the arts are so frequently associated with the human, and are therefore regarded as central to the ‘humanities’.
One can thus see gains and losses in the two broad approaches to the study of literature described by Welch (1987).
The Arnoldian tradition relates art firmly to being in all its existential, moral and aesthetic modalities, but in so doing perhaps diminishes our awareness of the unique properties of the arts as arts; conversely, while the continental schools in various ways direct our attention to the formal or technical properties of the arts (even when contesting them), they perhaps risk losing the human frame of reference.
Secondly, the notion of stance may help us to locate the study of mathematics, computing and language (qua language) in the curriculum as a whole.
These three disciplines sometimes relate to the objects of study (physical, biological, human, etc.) in the lowly status of ‘service courses’, in which they play a limited functional role (statistics for social scientists, computing for chemists, languages for management students).
Service courses, to judge by what one hears, are a frequent source of irritation on both sides, with the provider unhappy about cannibalizing or trivializing his or her discipline and the consumer complaining that the course is not geared or geared down to his or her needs.
However, mathematics, computing and language go far beyond such a service role; they are disciplines and objects of study in their own right, with an intrinsic as against merely instrumental status in the academic world.
The model being offered here suggests that far from merely being tools or means, they to a large extent constitute our stances in and towards the world; in this sense, they lie across the base of the pyramid in Figure 2.1.
There are arguments about whether we have some ‘primordial’ sense of the world which is in some way independent of the symbol systems we use, or to what extent our visual or aural perceptions of painting or music depend on or are penetrated by the knowledge we have through such systems.
However, setting aside such issues, we can say that the very stances of knowing, doing and being are inconceivable — literally — without the symbol systems of language and mathematics.
It is in this sense that one can argue that our consciousness of the world is consciousness of the symbols we use.
It may seem odd to add computing to mathematics and languages as another basic symbol system, since computing is often regarded (not least by mathematicians and linguists) as something less profound, more purely instrumental.
However, its use in a wide variety of disciplines has grown dramatically in recent decades, to the point where it seems not only to be facilitating what was done before, but to be creating new possibilities.
In particular, it appears to be forging links with philosophy, linguistics  and psychology in what are increasingly referred to as ‘cognitive sciences’, and establishing itself not simply as a tool but an object of study in its own right.
It would be unwise to set limits to its march.
Two dimensions of the curriculum as knowledge have now been explored: the ‘objects’ of study, and the stances that people can adopt in relation to those objects.
The need for a third dimension arises most obviously from what may be called the problem of philosophy.
Philosophy, in the undergraduate curriculum, can be regarded in two ways.
On the one hand, it can be seen as a discipline, indeed perhaps the oldest of all disciplines, with its own core of sometimes highly technical activities which are peculiar to it, and the normal organizational manifestations of departments, chairs, courses, degrees, and so on.
However, philosophy is also closely related to many other disciplines.
Science evolved out of natural philosophy (indeed the term is still sometimes used in Scotland) as did psychology.
More recently, philosophy has had very close links with mathematics and artificial intelligence.
There is the philosophy of science and of social science, political philosophy, aesthetics as an aspect of the arts, jurisprudence in law, and ethics impinging on a range of applied fields such as medicine and education.
Degrees in such fields may include courses or options on the ‘philosophy of’ the field, and in a looser sense still, people may refer to any fundamental statements or questions in a field as ‘philosophical’.
So where does philosophy belong?
And is its typical location in faculties of arts or humanities appropriate?
One useful way of looking at this problem is to recall Kuhn's notion of ‘normal’ science (Kuhn 1962; Lakatos and Musgrave 1970).
Normal science, according to Kuhn, is science which proceeds along and within the lines that have become established as orthodox, for the moment.
It aims to elaborate and refine rather than overturn; it is evolutionary rather than revolutionary.
Kuhn argued that the comparatively long periods of normal science were punctuated by crises when the existing paradigms broke down and a new paradigm, and eventually orthodoxy, would become established; the Copernican revolution was a prime example of this.
This theory of scientific development has been contested; others have pointed to more incremental patterns, or to cases especially in the social sciences where paradigms do not displace each other but simply accumulate as alternative perspectives.
This aspect of Kuhn's argument is not at issue here.
What is useful is the idea that research and study in a particular field or discipline can proceed for many people for quite long periods in a relatively routine or normal way, without continually digging up the roots.
Such ‘normality’ can surely apply not just to the sciences, but to any discipline; it refers to the working acceptance of current assumptions and procedures.
Indeed, it is difficult to see how knowledge would advance if people did not get on with ‘normal’ work much of the time.
However, few disciplines or academics are ever wholly ‘normal’.
The fundamental questions may be shelved for the moment, but they are always there; it is a matter of foreground and background rather than distinct  modes of operation.
Most undergraduate courses claim at least to encourage students not only to learn, but to think about what they are learning; to challenge the assumptions, to question the questions, to consider the alternatives.
If this process becomes more than sporadic, we may label it ‘critical’ or ‘reflexive’, in the sense of turning thought back on itself.
There may be references to ‘second-order questions’ or ‘metatheories’, and if the process becomes sustained and systematic, the word philosophy tends to creep in.
What this suggests is a third dimension of the curriculum as knowledge, which refers to the mode of work, and the extent to which it is normal, reflexive or philosophical.
To be sure, these are gradations not distinctions, and it is difficult to say where one ends and the other begins.
But such a dimension does help to explain why philosophy can be seen both as a mode of thinking in any discipline, and also a discipline in its own right; for it is at least arguable that the ‘questions about questions’ in every field eventually converge on certain basic questions and concepts which we recognize as the traditional domain and concern of the philosopher.
This allows Figure 2.1 to rise up to a satisfying and unifying point, and has implications for the role of philosophy in the undergraduate curriculum which will be explored in the final chapter.
Object, stance and mode are broad terms, and in the undergraduate curriculum they take more precise and concrete forms.
The object of study does not usually encompass the whole physical, biological or other field, but focuses on certain phenomena, problems, aspects or themes.
The physicist concentrates on the behaviour of certain particles, the economist on a particular type of firm, the literature student on a certain period or genre.
Stance manifests itself in the adoption of certain approaches, methods or techniques: the experimental method of the scientist, the survey method of the sociologist, the close reading of the student of literature.
Methodological arguments may reflect deeper disagreements about stance, for example between empirical sociologists and ethnomethodologists.
‘Mode’ may be reflected in either a course title (philosophy of, critical theory, foundations of) or in the subtle detail of teaching and learning which may assume or encourage a ‘normal’or ‘reflexive’process.
There are daunting epistemological problems involved in the ideas of object, stance and mode.
However, Figure 2.1 does seem to clarify several aspects of the undergraduate curriculum at a more practical level.
First, it allows one to see and establish broad relationships between different groups of disciplines and faculties.
One can see that the natural sciences are in the main concerned with the ‘knowing’ of physical, chemical and biological ‘objects’in a largely ‘normal’or operational mode.
This is not to say that the sciences are ‘objective’ or even that all scientists suppose them to be so, nor that they do not sometimes have an active or applied emphasis, or that they are not sometimes reflexive and even philosophical, although in practice the ‘philosophy of science’seems to be marginal to the mainstream of scientific activity.
Whether the stance of ‘being’ makes any sense in the natural sciences is an interesting question, but it is worth noting that some  physicists talk of a phenomenological or holistic approach.
The so-called applied sciences, such as engineering, agriculture and medicine, are concerned with much the same objects, but from a different stance: they are largely concerned with ‘doing’, although again this does not necessarily preclude ‘theorizing’ or ‘philosophizing’.
The social sciences embody a range of sometimes conflicting stances towards the human world.
In their empirical modes, they seem concerned with ‘knowing’, conceptualizing, modelling and theorizing about human phenomena.
However, ‘applied’ social sciences are ultimately concerned with doing, with action or deliberate change.
And there are traditions within the social sciences which include the knower or the subjective in the equation, in the tradition of verstehen in sociology, in ethnomethodology, and in phenomenological psychology.
The arts, as noted above, can be viewed both in terms of properties of the art-objects and in relation to the stance of being.
But within the arts, and indeed within any one discipline or medium, one can distinguish the ‘scholarly’ emphasis on textual and historical accuracy from the more interpretative and responsive ‘readings’, which in turn differ from the active, creative mode of ‘doing’the arts.
And while work and study in all disciplines can range from the routinely normal through the critical and reflexive to the philosophical, philosophy exists as a distinct field of concerns.
The model does not provide answers to some of the curricular problems which concern us, but it may help us to frame our questions more accurately.
For example, it suggests a way of looking at the relationship between science and technology which focuses not on the subject matter of the different disciplines, but rather the stance towards it and use made of it.
Both scientist and engineer, biologist and doctor, chemist and agriculturist may be handling the same kind of data, but where the first intervenes in the world in order to understand it, the second has to understand the world in order to intervene in it.
It is surely a simplification to see the latter simply as ‘applied’ sciences; they embody a different stance and intention, which may in turn generate its own ‘theories of action’, which will be explored in Chapter 3.
The model also goes some way to clarify the problem of the ‘humanities’.
It suggests that of the subjects that usually comprise the humanities, philosophy need not necessarily be identified with the humanities at all, literature and the other arts are defined by their concern with art-objects and history arguably belongs to a broader conception of ‘human sciences’.
Such observations may help to explain the protracted sense of crisis in the humanities; but the model also offers the possibility of regrouping the traditional concerns of the humanities around the notion of ‘being’, if that concept can be allowed.
It is worth noting that Holbrook, writing about the arts,(1980) quotes Husserl's phrase ‘functionaries of mankind’.
Thirdly, the model suggests one way of accounting for the peculiar nature of mathematics, computing and language, as the disciplines which constitute our stances in and towards the world, and for the way they relate  to other disciplines, both servicing them at a mundane level and pervading them at a profound level.
It shows why philosophy may penetrate so many disciplines and yet remain a distinct discipline itself.
It also suggests why ‘interdisciplinarity’ may occur not simply at the notional boundaries of contiguous disciplines, but as a subtle and often unpredictable flow of information and influence from one part of the model to another.
It is not a question of disciplines and their boundaries being ‘natural’ or ‘artificial’, but rather that (inevitably perhaps) our conceptions of knowledge become overly reified in their institutional and professional structures and we need to be reminded of their fluidity within the whole epistemological space.
Disciplinary spaces
More fruitful perhaps than such broad categorizations is the implication of Figure 2.1 that it is better to think of disciplines as occupying a certain space in a universe of knowledge, rather than a certain level in a hierarchy or place on a map.
That space has to be defined and defended along three dimensions, not one, and the strongest disciplines in academic terms are usually those which can indicate quite clearly what stance they adopt towards what objects and in which mode of enquiry.
(Other aspects of the discipline, such as methodology and equipment and even physical location on the campus, can provide subsidiary means of self-definition.)
However, the situation is always to some extent fluid, and the dimensions of the disciplinary space may change, expanding here or contracting there, sometimes under pressure from a contiguous discipline.
Moreover, different stances and modes of enquiry can exist in respect of the same object, and this helps to explain why considerable ambiguities and tensions can exist within disciplines as well as between them.
The pure economist may see himself or herself as occupying a different space from that of the applied economist; the ‘scholarly’ critic from the ‘responsive’one; the ‘objective’social researcher from the ‘interpretative’one; the doctor who ‘delivers’health care from the one who ‘responds’to his or her patients.
The flows of information and the patterns of influence in and among the various disciplines are extremely complex.
With a broad historical perspective, one can see the influence of the ‘paradigm’ of the natural sciences on the emerging social sciences, and also certain pressures exerted on the arts by the latter.
But sometimes it is a case of a more specific influence; a concept, technique or even piece of equipment which acts as an exemplar, parallel or metaphor in another field.
Notions such as quantum leap, entropy, feedback and software spread far beyond their original habitats; indeed, whole languages and ways of seeing the world spread out and colonize other fields, in the way that experimental method, rational planning models, and computer terminology have done.
The spread of disciplinary languages is a measure of their relative influence, but such  epistemological imperialism is not always an index of their essential academic strength and status.
Physics appears a strong, fundamental discipline; computing a strong, pervasive one; history, a strong adaptable one; law, a strong self-contained one.
How do these rather abstract dimensions and headings work out in concrete terms?
How does one get at the identities of and relationships between disciplines in the actual curriculum?
It was mentioned in the preface that a number of written questions were put to academics as part of this study.
Four of these questions concerned (a) the size of the compulsory core of their discipline,(b) the boundaries of the discipline,(c) the structure of the discipline, and (d) the culture of the discipline.
The purpose of these questions was to try to get some sense of the spaces occupied by each discipline, how well that space was defined, and to what extent disciplinary identity or integrity was a matter of epistemological structure (unifying theories, concepts, methods, etc.) or a more elusive matter of disciplinary ‘culture’, involving academic norms, ethos or styles.
Some responses to such questions are cited here by way of example.
The size of the compulsory core of a discipline might tell us something about the strength of its identity, and the extent to which it constitutes an organic whole or, to use a common expression, ‘seamless web’.
How large was that core?
For students who specialise in economics, about ⅔ of the degree is ‘core’.
It could be smaller — maybe as little as ⅓.
(Economics)
100%.
Could not really be modified.
(Pre-Clinical Medicine)
Approximately two-thirds.
This seems to be about right.
(Music)
This is not a very easy question to answer.
Approximately 95% of lecture material is compulsory core.
However, do you count things like our final year project which occupies 25% of our third and final year?
Students have a very wide choice of projects to select from, indeed they can suggest projects of their own.
(Engineering)
About 80%.
I would hate it to get larger, but it could not be smaller because it is a specific professional education and training.
(Social Work)
About 20%.
It is generally held that it should be larger but no agreement on enlarging it seems attainable.
(Philosophy)
95% of the degree course is devoted to compulsory subjects.
We feel  that this is too high, but past experience has shown that undergraduates will only apply themselves to subjects which they perceive as relevant to their future careers.
(Engineering)
30%.
Could be anything 20–40%.
(Sociology)
The range in the size of the core is striking, and may reflect various factors: the ‘internal logic’ of the discipline, professional requirements, student attitudes, even staff shortages.
Whatever the reason, it is likely that disciplines with large or strong cores are less easy to displace than ones with smaller cores.
Another way of getting at the question of disciplinary spaces is to ask about the boundaries of the discipline.
This is a complex notion in itself, because as Figure 2.1 suggests, there may be several kinds of boundaries, demarcated in different kinds of ways; and the nature of the boundaries may be as much as institutional or professional as epistemological.
Nevertheless, the questions (Have the boundaries of your subject altered much in the last decade?
Is it more, or less distinct from other subjects than it used to be?) produced some interesting answers:
Generally it has resisted (both academically and administratively) the challenge of other disciplines.
It has been changed by the influence of sociology and anthropology but it has not surrendered its distinctiveness to them.
It is a self-confident subject.
‘Political history’ and ‘narrative’, previously considered outmoded, have undergone a renaissance.
(History)
Sociology has expanded enormously over the last decade in terms of the body of significant literature.
It has always had significant overlaps with Anthropology, History, Psychology, Economics, Politics, Social Geography, etc.
The boundaries certainly haven't become any more distinct lately.
I don't think the boundaries of Business Studies have ever been particularly clear.
Natural sciences and humanities are not included.
There is a real blurring between Business Studies and Management Studies and there is a much greater computing/I.T. input.
The boundaries have changed markedly from a close affinity with physical science (providing an understanding of theory and explanation) to a close affinity with engineering (knowing what, and how, specifying, designing solutions to specific technical problems, and technology).
(Metallurgy and Materials Engineering)
Other responses described both change and stability in the boundaries:
Linguistics is regarded as an ‘autonomous’ discipline in the mainstream tradition, a notion to which I do not subscribe.
There has been in the last decade a considerable strengthening of links with philosophy, sociology, cognitive science, discourse analysis, literary criticism.
Our interdisciplinary aims have always led [us]to concentrate on such links, but I think this is unusual in linguistics departments generally.
The boundaries of physics constantly change as new discoveries are made, e.g. the discovery of new fundamental particles.
However, the boundaries have not changed over centuries in terms of what is regarded as Physics.
This is because Physics is a basic, probably the basic, science.
It is, I think, concerned with the nature of the inanimate world — not just facts but their explanation.
It is about the interaction of energy and matter, cause and effect, understanding phenomena.
My subject [English]now incorporates a larger amount of theory — that is, questioning the nature of its own activity — than it used to do.
Courses which relate English literature to other subjects are perhaps commoner than they used to be….
In my own department, I should say that, although some members still believe that literature is best studied in isolation, looking simply at ‘the words on the page’, most of us now like to contextualise it in some way, often historically, and are inclined to ask students to read some texts which are not ‘literature’ in the conventional sense.
Most of these developments might be seen as making English less different, but the kinds of changes that go on in ‘literary theory’ are unlikely to be familiar to anyone but a philosopher.
Although Computing Science (or Computer Science) as a field has changed dramatically in the last ten years and will continue to do so in the next ten, I do not believe its boundaries have altered significantly.
It is becoming more of an engineering discipline, but numerical methods are less important, so that the range of mathematical skills required is changing.
The applications of computers to other subjects have resulted in a significant commitment to computing in those subjects, but the subject of Computer Science itself remains at the centre: ‘systematic approaches to the development of computer based systems (hardware and software)’.
It is this general systematic approach which keeps it distinct from the application areas of computing.
The next comment presents a changing view of physics which contrasts with the earlier one which stressed its stability:
The applications of physics have widened and continue to widen at an incredible rate.
However, all the important branches of physics are now seen as engineering subjects in their own right and are often taught without much of the underlying physics.
Thus undergraduate  physics is always being decapitated — once an aspect grows to be important, it is lopped off and becomes an engineering subject (electronics, semiconductor devices, fibre optics, acoustics, quantum electronics, electron microscopy, etc., etc., etc.).
The final comment emphasizes the continuing distinctness of law as a subject:
There has been very wide extension in the sense that a large number of new course options are being taught involving new specialisms.
In theory one might say that the problems have always been there and we have now just started to recognise them.
In general one might say that Law has become marginally less distinct from other subjects than it was in that quite a few people are doing cross disciplinary research, e.g. in law and economics and law and society.
But overall it remains a pretty distinct subject.
Questions about the ‘core’ and ‘boundary’of a discipline imply a spatial or territorial metaphor; but another way of getting at the nature of disciplines is to explore their internal structure.
Again, this is a complex notion in itself, so it is hardly surprising that some respondents found it difficult to reply to the questions: Has the conceptual map of your subject changed much in the last decade?
Is it more or less unified than it was?
Nevertheless, again, the replies help one to identify some of the aspects of the structure and unity of a discipline:
Ours is essentially a Basic Medical Sciences course, with some emphasis on morphology and with a scientific rather than clinical approach.
The conceptual map of the basic medical sciences has changed remarkably in recent years with developments in immunology, molecular genetics, biotechnology and the neurosciences, to name a few.
These changes are reflected in an evolving undergraduate curriculum.
An economist painted a picture of growing unity within his subject:
There has been a progressive unification of the theory of the behaviour of individual consumers and firms (microeconomics) on the one hand and theory of the behaviour of the aggregate economy (macroeconomics) on the other.
The idea of rational behaviour — or behaviour modelled as if rational — and the careful modelling of information and expectations (of future quantities or events) has become much more pervasive.
There has been a continuing move in the direction of making economic theory mathematically and logically more rigorous and developing statistical methods to test and measure theory using what data is available.
Economists working within the tradition of ‘political economy’ might disagree with this interpretation.
But such differences of interpretation are surely intrinsic to the pursuit of knowledge; they are the essence, not  accidents, of academic work.
For example, a lecturer in English dismissed some of the theoretical incursions referred to earlier:
Not much change.
The recent fashion for dubiously coherent theoretical approaches has made little impact, beyond occasional outbursts of rant and cant which no one takes seriously.
A few university colleagues…have from time to time shown some loss of nerve.
An engineer took a longer view:
I am not convinced that the ‘conceptual map’ of our subject has changed a lot in the last decade.
Certainly over the last quarter of a century it has changed quite a lot.
When engineering was first introduced into universities in a large way, then the departments bent over backwards to try to show that engineering could be taught as an academic subject.
Engineers were not just people who got their hands dirty mending cars!
However, recently, perhaps the conceptual basis for the teaching of engineering has shifted somewhat from that of an academic subject to a professional subject and indeed the professional institutions of engineering, and the Engineering Council have influenced a lot the ways in which the subject has grown up.
For example, most engineering degrees must now be accredited by the engineering institutions and ultimately by the Engineering Council if graduates wish to become chartered engineers and members of those institutions, so the way in which courses develop is very much dictated by the whims of the engineering institutes.
To some extent then the ‘conceptual map of our subject’ has been altered in ways beyond our control.
Another writer, responding to a general question about changes in his discipline, described a long-term cyclical or pendular motion which may suggest parallels in other subjects:
…having myself graduated in Business over 40 years ago, there seems to be a remarkable cycle in which we return to particular models every few decades.
The present pattern of Business Studies degrees, in many respects, reflects the state of thinking of commerce degrees of the late 30s, most of which had disappeared by or soon after 1950, in favour of a more discipline-oriented approach in which there were substantial new elements, with the appearance of sociology and politics, both of which were to acquire greater prominence.
With the 60s the dominance lay in two apparently contradictory pressures; one emphasizing sociology and organizational behaviour, the other quantitative methods and the beginning of the impact of the computer/information technology revolution.
The past ten years have seen striking changes which reflect social changes.
There has been a further growth in the importance of information technology, to the state where entire curricula have been revised on the assumption that  students coming up from school can programme quite complex computers within their first year.
The emphasis in the teaching of economics has moved from macro-economics to an emphasis on micro-economics and in particular decision-taking at the level of the firm.
This involves close connections with operations analysis.
Side-by-side with this has been a greater emphasis on the link with organizational behaviour and decision analysis, with a growing recognition of the importance of political processes within firms, quite apart from those around them.
The so-called functional areas, such as marketing, production and personnel have given way to a more problem-centred approach, but within this there has been a notable decline in the significance accorded to industrial relations, and still more, to the field of personnel management.
The new subject clusters, as they are sometimes termed, have grown in importance, such as policy studies, and there is a much greater emphasis on the development of personal and social skills as opposed to concentration on conceptualization and theoretical analysis.
(Business Administration)
Another writer on engineering distinguished between subjects and themes:
There has been a move away from the narrow field of Production Engineering into the broader field of Operations Management….
More use of open ended case studies is made from the second year onwards and the subjects have been unified under broad themes rather than treated as separate subjects.
Even these few quotations show that the notion of the ‘map’ or ‘structure’of a subject is by no means straightforward, and involves not only the theoretical or conceptual unities which are referred to in the literature on the nature of disciplines (OECD 1972), but the approach, emphasis and even methods of teaching.
A fourth question related to the ‘culture’ of the discipline.
The notion that disciplines, being not only bodies of knowledge but bodies of people, might develop their own norms and patterns of beliefs, attitudes or behaviours, which constitute a kind of sub-culture within the general academic milieu, was originally put forward by Gaff and Wilson (1971) but has been most thoroughly explored recently by Becher (1989a).
The very idea of ‘disciplinary cultures’ is itself problematic, involving as it does not one but two rather elusive concepts; and many disciplines appear less homogeneous to insiders than they look from the outside.
A discipline that is structurally diverse, and consists of a loosely related collection of sub-fields might nevertheless be held together by a common ethos or set of norms, attitudes and habits; even by a common style.
On the other hand, disciplinary cultures might, on closer inspection, reveal a set of sub-cultures which view one another with varying degrees of animosity, warmth or  indifference.
Despite the difficulty and unfamiliarity of the concept, it seemed worth asking academics if they thought the ‘culture’ of their subject had changed much in recent years.
Some found the question opaque or meaningless; others responded as follows:
History as a body of knowledge which all people who claim to be ‘historians’ must share has collapsed.
Its ‘norms’ now tend to be based on methodology.
Sociology is a pluralistic discipline with different norms, etc. prevailing in relation to a variety of different approaches.
Overall, the discipline in the UK has become more heavily dominated by those who espouse sociology's political role.
Medicine does have a culture of shared norms but on the whole I do not think that this has changed much.
In contrast to the last comment, a metallurgist, philosopher and zoologist all noted significant changes in the norms or emphases within their disciplines:
Yes, because of the change described (above), from the norms of science (free enquiry, publications, respect for truth, resistance to argument from authority) to the norms of commerce (cost consciousness, restriction to profitable study, limited publication and need to retain commercially valuable technology secret, respect for adequate solutions, acceptance of the authority of ‘current good practice’ and standards and specifications —‘doing it by the book’).
(Metallurgy and Materials Engineering)
The culture has changed greatly — from an emphasis on precise analysis to one on evaluation of overall views or theories.
Also attitudes towards quality of work have changed.
As university funding has come to hinge on publication, this has been encouraged for its own sake.
(Philosophy)
Shift from taxonomic, structural approach to a functional, quantitative approach involving an appreciation of statistics and increasing computer literacy, i.e. of a shift from the culture of a ‘knowledge of the cranial nerves of dogfish’ to a knowledge of the growth, dynamics and exploitation of fish stocks.
(Applied Environmental Zoology)
Again, in physics, a rather more stable picture was presented:
The culture of Physics has not changed greatly in recent years.
It is about establishing simple models to explain events and the applications of these models to predict the outcome in unexplored situations.
Experimentation is crucial in confirmation of predictions and establishment or elimination of theoretical models.
Students are encouraged to believe that they must be broad and hopefully able to cope with any Physical problem.
One English lecturer described both academic and political tensions which affected the ethos of her discipline:
This is the area of greatest conflict in my subject at present.
Teachers of English can be fairly divided into 1.
those who think that some literary works are inherently and self-evidently superior to the rest and 2. those who think that such value-judgements are only the product of an ideology which itself is the product of material circumstances.
These views often correspond to the political views of their holders: conservative and left-wing, respectively.
I should say that the current ethos of most departments is relatively left-wing as far as the teaching staff are concerned, but that many of the students hold views considerably further to the right.
A political scientist was sceptical of the whole idea of a shared disciplinary culture:
I do not really accept the underlying assumption about a ‘culture’ of shared norms.
For what it is worth, my view is that the student of political science is exposed to a wide range of somewhat superficial opinions, most of them barely distinguishable from the prejudices daily expressed in newspapers.
But fortunately there is much diversity in this muddle.
(Political Science)
Another lawyer spoke of long-term rather than short-term shifts:
In overall terms it is difficult to say that the culture of a law degree has changed.
That depends very much on the approach of some individuals.
Some want more ‘Law and Society’ teaching.
I can't say I have noticed any change in the last few years.
But over the last twenty years one could identify changes.
Such comments give some idea of what some academics understand by the idea of a disciplinary ‘culture’, a notion which we will explore in more depth in Chapter 4.
But the general limitations of questions and responses such as these should be stressed.
The above quotations represent excerpts from the briefly stated views of particular academics to some very general questions, typically in relation to their own course; others in the same discipline might or might not agree with them.
Moreover, there is no room here to explore the comments further, to probe the reasoning behind them or to see to what extent they represent a wider consensus.
They constitute no more than pointers towards an agenda for more detailed, empirical research.
However, what the questions and responses do illustrate is that the notion  of a discipline or subject, which is the basic building-block of the undergraduate curriculum, far from being straightforward and clearly defined, is in fact extremely complex.
We have tried to approach it through four general questions, about the core, boundaries, structure and culture of subjects.
The responses to those questions show just how problematic a concept it is, and makes phrases such as‘the map of knowledge’ begin to seem decidedly simplistic.
Figure 2.1 offers one attempt to locate disciplines within a general model of the curriculum as knowledge.
But how does knowledge manifest itself?
What forms does it take?
What kind of existence does it have?
Who creates it, who knows it, how is it used?
We have tended to speak as if it existed in some obvious and consistent way in higher education, but as some of the above quotations pointed out, the undergraduate curriculum may be influenced by other manifestations of organized knowledge, in particular research and professional practice.
Research and scholarship are concerned with the pursuit and advancement of knowledge.
At this level knowledge is classified not into hundreds of disciplines but thousands of specialisms, and although many specialisms can easily be located within a discipline, there are many others which are difficult to locate and are interdisciplinary or even transdisciplinary (OECD 1972; Squires et al .
1975; Cotterrell 1979).
On the other hand, some kinds of knowledge are organized as practice, most notably in the traditional professions such as medicine, law, engineering and teaching, but also in the newer ones such as accountancy, architecture, management, social work and now psychology.
Others again, such as physics, chemistry or history, have important professional associations or societies without being full-blown professions.
The influences of knowledge-as-research and knowledge-as-practice on knowledge-as-curriculum (and vice versa) raise some interesting and topical questions.
How closely linked are research and teaching?
Does research provide a constant curricular stimulus, or does it tend to reinforce authority and hierarchy?
Is its impact confined to final year courses, or diffused through the whole curriculum?
Does it necessarily have a fissiparous effect?
And what about the influence of the professions and organized practice on undergraduate studies?
Do professional requirements cover more or less of the curriculum in any given field than they did ten years ago?
Does the seniority structure of the professions tend to make professional courses conservative and traditional, not only in the overt but the hidden curriculum?
Or does practice provide a constant flow of real-life problems and approaches which helps to set the agenda for curricula and research, and which may even run ahead of theory?
Such questions go well beyond the scope of this book, but they point us away from the epistemological frame of reference of this chapter towards the socio-cultural one of the next.
3
Curriculum and Culture
The idea that the curriculum can be seen in terms of the society or culture of which it is a part is both ancient and recent.
It is there in Plato's writing on education, in the association of certain types of curricula with certain groups of people, and in the notion that education may have certain social functions or effects.
It is a recent idea in the sense that systematic sociological analysis of the curriculum is largely a post-war phenomenon, associated in the UK with writers such as Young (1971) and in the USA with the work of Michael Apple (1979, 1981) among others.
The bulk of that analysis has, however, been directed towards the schools.
In this chapter, we shall explore some of the ways of analysing the undergraduate curriculum in terms of‘culture’.
The word culture is being used here in its descriptive, anthropological or sociological sense, rather than its normative literary or artistic sense.
In this sense, everyone belongs to a culture or sub-culture and is ‘acculturated’; any distinction between ‘cultured’ and ‘uncultured’represents a particular value-judgement within that culture.
one could perhaps use the term ‘society’ just as well, but the word culture, with its connotations of the way of life of a people, seems preferable because of the potential influence of the curriculum on ideas, beliefs, values and habits.
As in Chapter 2, there will be room only to open up a few of the many possible perspectives and issues, and to suggest some ways of thinking about them.
A useful if rather schematic starting-point is Lawton's (1983) division of cultures into eight aspects or sub-systems which he argues can be used to analyse any culture: the social system, economic system, communication system, rationality system, technology system, morality system, belief system and aesthetic system.
Such headings are open to a number of objections; nevertheless, they do provide an initial framework for thinking about curriculum and culture.’
In terms of the social system, for example, one might look at first degree courses in terms of social selection and access — one of the functions identified in Figure 1.1.
Trow (1974, p. 6.3) has distinguished between elite and mass  systems of higher education and argues that ‘Countries that develop a system of elite higher education in modern times seem able to expand it without changing its character in fundamental ways until it is providing places for about 15% of the age grade.’
The importance of age-group measures is declining as higher education admits more mature students and becomes less age-specific, but nevertheless the proportion of young people enrolling is some index of the possible social functions and perceptions of first degrees.
Kelsall et al .
writing in 1972 seemed in no doubt that UK graduates then constituted an elite (which is not necessarily a bad thing).
However, it is likely that a quantitative shift from elite to mass higher education, such as has happened in the USA and Japan, will bring with it a qualitative change in the undergraduate curriculum.
As Furth (1982) points out, this may result in increased status differentiation within higher education between subjects or institutions; it may also affect the ‘hidden’ curriculum of assumed values, perspectives and relationships (Becker et al .
1968; Snyder 1971).
This last point also raises questions about another preoccupation of sociologists, namely socialization , and the ways in which, to use Bernstein's (1971) framework, knowledge is ‘classified’ in terms of demarcations, and ‘framed’in terms of the teaching-learning relationship.
Although this framework has been usefully applied to higher education (see Wright 1988), its main impact has been on studies of the school curriculum.
There has also been some interesting work on vocational education and training at the school or post-school stages (Willis 1977; Gleeson and Mardle 1980).
However, in general the literature on the sociology of the undergraduate curriculum is limited, and there remains much scope for further work on it in this country in terms of social selection, status and socialization.
In the absence of such empirical work, it is difficult to say much about it in sociological terms.
Curriculum and employment
One is on slightly firmer ground when considering the relationship between the undergraduate curriculum and the ‘economic sub-system’.
Not only does this lie at the heart of current government policies on higher education, but a good deal of empirical work has been done on it, particularly on the relationship between higher education and initial employment.
The more general relationship between higher education and the economy is of course extremely complex, but here also there is a substantial literature.
This is not a book about graduate employment, on which a number of important analyses have appeared in the last decade (Lindley 1981; Roizen and Jepson 1985; Harland and Gibbs 1986; Tarsh 1988; Brennan and McGeevor 1988; Boys and Kirkland 1988; Boys et al .
1988); nevertheless, something must be said briefly about the factors which complicate the  curriculum-employment nexus.
Working backwards from the labour market, first of all there are changes in the labour market itself.
One can distinguish between cyclical changes, which reflect the buoyancy or depression of the economy, and structural changes, which are longer-term shifts in the pattern of employment.
The latter may involve changes in the content of work (for example, the decline in manufacturing and shift to services) and changes in the level of work (upgrading or deskilling).
Neither cyclical nor structural changes are easy to predict, and there is considerable debate as to whether, for example, the shift to services will continue, and whether there really is a ‘rising threshold of competence’ in the OECD economies.
Even if the latter is true, it does not automatically translate into increases in higher level educational streams; in some countries the main growth at the 16–19 stage has been not in the pre-academic general streams, but in the intermediate ‘technical’ ones (Squires 1989a).
When one looks at the use of highly qualified manpower within this shifting labour market, the picture is further complicated by the phenomenon of ‘substitution’(Blaug 1983).
People are not always working in the jobs for which they were trained.
Where there are labour shortages (or sudden crises such as wars) one may find upward substitution — people working above the level they were trained for.
Conversely, where there is an oversupply of manpower of a particular kind, one may find downwards substitution, e.g. graduates working in ‘non-graduate’ jobs, leading sometimes to a ‘cascade’effect whereby people who trained for a particular level of work are systematically displaced by those more highly trained.
Or there may be lateral substitution, with people moving sideways into kinds of work which are different from, though often related to, their initial training.
Substitution is itself affected by various factors, such as both general and specific supplies of labour, the existence of restrictive practices and professional demarcations, the transferability of training, the technical possibilities of substituting capital (i.e. machines) for labour and, increasingly, the availability of continuing education.
In addition to these changes in the labour market, and the possibilities of substitution within it, the curriculum-employment nexus is complicated by a third set of factors related to the selection of graduates.
Here, the recent literature suggests that four main things may affect the initial selection of graduates.
First, there is their expertise derived from the subject content of their degree.
This is most obviously important where there is a direct link between the degree subject and occupation.
Secondly, there is their general ability , inferred from the class and source (i.e. institution) of their degree, and perhaps also from A level grades.
This is not simply innate or pure ability, but ability which has been developed through the process of the curriculum; not merely the ‘good mind’ but the ‘trained mind’(See Chapter 4).
Such inferred ability may be relatively more important in selection for ‘general entry’ graduate employment.
Thirdly, there are their personal qualities , which refer to the various personal (and social) attributes  and attitudes which may be relevant to a particular job and which emerge from references, ‘biodata’(i.e. biographical information) or during an interview.
Finally, there are the identifiable skills which they may or may not possess, such as numeracy, computing, communications and foreign languages, which to some extent cut across different degree subjects, and may be acquired on the growing number of ‘employment skills’ courses in higher education.
The distinction between these four factors is by no means clear-cut.
It is not easy to distinguish between high-level cognitive skills and abilities, or between interpersonal skills and personal qualities; nor one can easily sustain the complete disjunction between curricular content and process implied by the expertise/ability distinction, or the notion of ‘screening’ for ability that depends on it.
However, one can see that the relative emphasis on these four factors may vary (and sometimes conflict) not only from job to job (in some cases expertise is of the essence, in others the degree content is virtually irrelevant, and ability and ‘personality’ are the key things) but from one employer and even personnel manager to another.
The whole process involves a complex and perhaps partly unconscious set of trade-offs between various desirable graduate attributes and the more general context of supply and demand.
Much depends on whether the employer sees the degree as a screening for general ability, a broad foundation of knowledge and skills for a particular occupation, or as turning out a finished product which he can employ without incurring further substantial training costs.
With mature graduates, the situation may be different again, depending on whether the graduate is operating within an internal labour market which he has never left, or is starting out afresh.
Many part-time mature graduates are relatively limited to a local labour market rather than a national or international one, and this probably influences the behaviour of both employers and graduates.
These three sets of variables — to do with the labour market, substitution within it, and graduate selection — make the whole curriculum-employment relationship an extremely complex one, and make the interpretation of graduate employment statistics a hazardous business.
However, there is one kind of measure which, though still affected by many of the variables mentioned above, may help us to conceptualize the undergraduate curriculum in relation to employment; namely the occupational distribution of graduates in any one subject, which has been analysed in a recent paper by Tarsh (1988) in terms of the relative importance of direct, subject skills, and indirect, general skills.
There are several sources for this kind of data.
DES Statistical Bulletin 1/86 (Table 9) gives the relationship between five subject groups and four types of work for universities (GB) and polytechnics (England and Wales).
The annual AGCAS publication What Do Graduates Do ? gives figures for 18 subjects and 14 types of work for universities and polytechnics, with a less detailed breakdown for colleges.
While many of these types of work categories are still very broad, what the tables (and diagrams) show clearly is  that there is a marked contrast between subjects such as computing and engineering (civil, electrical/electronic, mechanical) where one type of work absorbs 70 per cent or more of the graduate output, and subjects such as English, history, biological sciences or social studies where graduates are absorbed into a fairly even plurality of occupations; with everything in between these two extremes.
A more detailed analysis of the degree subject/type of work relationship for polytechnic and college graduates has been provided by Brennan and McGeevor (1988), who showed that the percentage of ‘specialist’ graduates working in the field of their specialism three years later ranged from 97 per cent in pharmacy to only 24 per cent in 3D design, although it should be noted that employment figures for art and design graduates are particularly problematic (Barnett 1989).
The authors also show (Table 5.1) that the percentage of graduates in all the 31 subjects in their study employed after three years in the three largest type of work categories for that subject ranged from 100 per cent in three subjects (pharmacy, graphic design, electrical engineering) to under 60 per cent in three others (science, English literature and interfaculty studies).
However, the most detailed figures currently available for the degree subject/type of work relationship are in the university sector where the data relate 112 subjects or subject combinations to 121 first destination types of work.
Table 3.1 shows the intake of graduates in 25 subjects or subject combinations into types of work which absorbed at least 1 per cent of the total for that subject in one year (permanent UK employment, 1986/87).
The information has to be treated with some caution.
It refers only to university graduates, whom some employers may assume (partly on the basis of A level grades) to be more ‘able’ than polytechnic or college ones, and for whom therefore the ‘screening for ability’function of a degree for general graduate employment may be relatively more important (Gordon 1983).
Secondly, the figures relate to a time before the recent cutbacks in the financial services sector in the City of London and the intake to such types of work may have declined relatively since then.
Thirdly, it should be noted that the proportion of university graduates entering permanent employment itself varies from subject to subject (see AGCAS, annual) between about 40 and 75 per cent of all graduates in that subject, with a mean of 56 per cent; the remainder go into short-term or overseas employment, further research or training, are unemployed or otherwise classified (1987 figures).
[For this reason, law has been excluded from Table 3.1, since only 14 per cent of law graduates entered permanent employment, while 64 per cent went into (paid) further training.]
Nevertheless, the figures do illuminate the extent to which employment can provide a frame of reference for thinking about what to teach.
They give us a highly detailed picture of the initial occupational spread of graduates, and the extent to which they enter occupations which are cognate with their degree (the mere number of type of work categories is a rather crude measure; one has to look at the actual headings).
Such detail will be important in the discussion of transfer of learning in Chapter 4.
Table 3.1 Types of work employing at least 1 per cent of university graduate output in each of 25 degree subjects, 1986–7
Where there is a strong relationship between the degree subject and one or a few subsequent types of work, it is possible to orientate the curriculum towards such work.
Where, by contrast, the relationship between subject and type of work is more pluralistic, that possibility does not exist; or rather does not exist in theory.
For we have to consider the possibility that curriculum planners might assume an employment relationship where one does not exist (any longer?) and conversely may be unaware of, or ignore, one that does.
For example, how many physicists realize that physics is now as ‘general’ a degree in this sense as English; and how many academics are aware of the significant proportions of graduates in almost all subjects entering the financial and commercial sectors?
Where a strong subject-employment relationship does exist and influences course planning, we may speak of a ‘professional’ course.
This is to adopt a functional definition of professional education, rather than the normative ones which are common in the literature.
But what of courses which do not have such a steady relationship?
Since they cannot be planned in terms of the students' likely destinations, they must have some other kind of rationale or logic.
The most obvious one is in terms of the discipline itself.
The titles of such degrees bear this out: headings such as physics, geography, sociology, English and history refer to the well-established and familiar ‘bodies of knowledge’ discussed in Chapter 2, which can constitute an ‘internal’rationale for the course of study without any necessity to refer outside or beyond to the world of work.
In this case we can speak (without prejudice) of ‘academic’ courses in contrast to the ‘professional’ones referred to above.
However, in addition to defining ‘academic’ courses negatively in terms of their ‘weak’link with employment, we may also be able to define them positively in terms of their ‘strong’link with academic research and  postgraduate study.
Table 3.2 gives the proportions of graduates in each of 30 subject categories who went on to ‘further academic study’ after their first degree.
Again, certain caveats must be observed.
The figures are based on a survey sample, although one with a very high response rate.
The category of ‘further academic study’ is a relatively broad one, comprising all full-time further education or training aimed at a higher or other degree at home or overseas.
For reasons of classification and sample size, not all the headings in Tables 3.1 and 3.2 are comparable, and law is omitted from the first and medicine from the second.
Nevertheless, one finds that on the whole, ‘professional’ courses such as pharmacy, architecture and engineering (and doubtless law if one classified its trainees as employed) appear in the top half of Table 3.1 and the bottom half of Table 3.2, and ‘academic’courses, such as the natural sciences and the ‘non-applied’arts and social sciences, appear in the bottom half of Table 3.1 and the top half of Table 3.2.
However, there are some courses which do not seem to fall naturally under either the ‘professional’ or ‘academic’heading.
The AGCAS booklet and the USR statistics refer to ‘combined’, ‘interfaculty’ or ‘general’courses.
In the universities, these are mainly the combined or joint honours courses mentioned in the opening chapter, which often come in cognate pairs such as physics and chemistry, economics and sociology, or French and German.
Such combinations are perhaps a sub-type of the ‘academic’ degree course.
But the USR statistics also list ‘other’ and ‘general’courses, and combinations which cut across the main course groupings.
These may not account for many university graduates (although relatively more in Scotland), but they are rather more important in the polytechnics and colleges, especially in the latter where such multi-subject combined or general degrees are quite common (outside Scotland).
Some of these broad polytechnic/college degrees seem relatively ‘academic’ in content; others are broad in occupational terms.
What is the rationale of such courses?
Are they ‘professional’ or ‘academic’?
In many cases they seem to be neither, in that they do not have a direct or specific relationship with the labour market; nor do they fit into the conventional, specialized academic categories.
They are rather general, although some general degrees allow for considerable specialization within them, and one must always distinguish between what is on offer and what the student actually does.
This does not mean that there is no rationale behind them.
They may be planned deliberately to give the undergraduate a good general education, for example by sampling or balancing a number of types of knowledge, or they may he planned in terms of an applied, problem focus such as environmental control, or a broad theme such as modern urban society, or in terms of some concept of individual development.
But in the prevailing higher education culture they seem to represent neither one thing nor the other.
Table 3. 2 Percentage of graduates in 30 subject categories proceeding to further academic study, 1987
Such courses also raise questions about graduate employment.
There may be the possibility of partial substitution or compensation among the four factors identified earlier — expertise, ability, personal qualities and  skills — in the case of particular graduates and graduate jobs.
More of one may make up for less of another in some circumstances.
A more serious problem arises where the applicant does not rate highly in terms of either expertise or ability, that is where the content of the degree is irrelevant, and  the quality of it uninspiring.
by no means all general degrees are associated with low quality or ability, but some are, and the employment prospects of graduates of such courses appear to be relatively poor, with substantial proportions of them entering ‘non-graduate’ jobs (see Harland and Gibbs 1986; Tarsh 1988).
Such a situation raises two questions about the curricula of such courses.
First, to what extent do they (or indeed other courses) really develop the high-level, indirect, general-purpose skills which are implied in the ‘trained mind’ doctrine?
And secondly, would it not be wiser in terms of employment to steer ‘low-quality’ graduates towards ‘high relevance’courses which would allow them at least to offer some expertise to prospective employers?
This is an issue to which we shall return at the end of the chapter; first, however, we must explore the broad classification of degree courses which has emerged from this analysis of their relationship with employment.
There has been an implicit triangularity about much of the preceding discussion which can be explored further, although as with all models of the curriculum, this one simplifies the reality.
Figure 3.1 suggests that in relation to employment and the economy, undergraduate courses lie somewhere among three points: the professional , the academic and the general .
With the first, the course is planned substantially though by no means exclusively in terms of an external occupation; with the second, the rationale of the course is primarily internal, in terms of the demands of the discipline and implicit preparation for research (and in some cases school-teaching); with the third, the rationale derives from something other than an occupation or a discipline.
The three points represent three ‘ideal types’ or extreme cases; most courses will lie somewhere within the area thus bounded.
How far does the relative emphasis on academic, professional or general courses vary from one part of the system to another?
Without a detailed analysis, one cannot be certain, but it appears as if the Scottish universities, with their significant proportions of general courses, are fairly evenly spread in terms of Figure 3.1, whereas universities in the rest of the UK seem to emphasize the academic or professional and de-emphasize the general.
Because of its foundation-plus-option course structure, it is difficult to place the Open University in the diagram, but it may tend towards the academic and general at least at the undergraduate level.
Brennan and McGeevor (1988) locate polytechnic/college courses on a continuum ranging from the ‘occupational specialist’ through the ‘occupational generalist’and ‘generalist plus’to the ‘generalist’, which suggests that they lie down the professional-general side of the triangle.
However, the English and Welsh colleges, apart from their teacher education function, are associated mainly with general courses (Harland and Gibbs 1986), whereas the Scottish central institutions are the most clearly ‘professional’ of all the institutions in the UK.
As Table 1.4 showed, the ‘duplication’ of the universities and polytechnic/colleges in professional courses is more apparent than real, since certain types of professional courses are largely concentrated in one sector and there may be differences of emphasis between courses in the same subject.
Figure 3.1 Professional, academic and general degrees.
The institutional distribution of types of course has interesting policy implications which, however, go beyond the scope of this book; here we need to explore further the types themselves.
In each case, something will be said about the literature on each type, the patterns or sub-types that exist, and the problems and issues associated with them, beginning with the ‘professional’ course.
Professional curricula
It has already been made clear that the definition of a ‘professional’ degree course being adopted here is an operational rather than conceptual one: it is a course which has a consistent and fairly exclusive relationship with a particular occupation, exclusive in that graduates from such courses tend not to go into other occupations, and in that entry to that occupation is largely or wholly restricted to graduates from such courses.
Traditionally, some occupations such as accountancy and engineering have had non-graduate entry routes, through on-the-job or technician education, though the general drift is towards all-graduate professions.
The term ‘professional’ will thus be used in a looser way than would be indicated by the conceptual analysis of what is or is not a profession.
Nevertheless, the literature on the professions per se provides a useful entrée into this type of education, because it identifies some of the main themes which characterize not only those professions but preparation for them: the existence of a body of specialized knowledge and expertise; the influence of professional norms and ethics; the autonomy and responsibility of the professional; the relationships with colleagues, clients and the  state.
The literature on the professions goes back a long way, but seems to have reached a peak in the 1960s and 1970s (see, for example, Etzioni 1969; Jackson 1970), perhaps because the professions were at an apogee of esteem at that point, before the attacks of Illich (1977) and others who, like Shaw many years before, accused them of establishing a ‘radical monopoly’ in the name of meeting people's ‘needs’.
This was essentially a moral critique; the political attack was to come a decade later.
Although there was also a burst of writing on professional education during the same period (Schein 1972; Cook 1973; Turner and Rushton 1976), its central importance in higher education means that it is a continuing, indeed permanent theme.
In addition to Jarvis (1983) there have been books and papers emanating from a recent SRHE conference (see Goodlad 1984; Squires 1989b).
Professional education is also a recurring theme in OECD studies of higher education.
One of the most interesting current lines of research is the exploration of the relationship between professional theory and practice by Argyris (1982) and Schon (1987).
As well as the literature on professions and professional education in general, there are the periodic major reports on specific professions.
Whereas the former attempt to generalize across all or at least some professions, the latter deal only with one field, such as medicine, engineering, law, social work, management or accountancy.
If the former are sometimes rather abstract and theoretical, the latter often show relatively little concern with trends or issues outside their own field, and tend to draw few parallels.
The need for such periodic major reports can perhaps be attributed to the structures of authority and seniority in the professions, which seem to necessitate periodic revolution rather than the research-led rolling evolution which is more typical of ‘academic’ subjects.
There are three main patterns of professional degree.
The first, consecutive pattern, in which a period of theoretical study is followed by a period of supervised practice, is associated mainly with some of the traditional professions such as medicine, dentistry, veterinary science, law and to a large extent engineering.
This pattern seems to have emerged historically for a number of reasons.
It is of course a plausible pattern in educational terms, particularly in fields where practice involves the application of theory, as is more the case with natural science-based professions.
Indeed, the growth of theoretical or basic knowledge in any field would logically push it towards this pattern.
A secondary factor may be the need to protect the public by guaranteeing a certain minimum level of competence before the trainee begins to practise (in both senses of the word!).
However, the emergence of this pattern may also have been related to the growth of higher education itself, and its increasing involvement in professional fields in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; for it was the practice element which existed first, in the form of on-the-job training, and the preparatory theoretical elements which were added subsequently, as higher education became more and more involved.
Once established, however, the theoretical stage seems to have grown in status and size, and  may even have led to a relative decline in the importance and quality of the practical stage.
The second main pattern one finds in professional education is the ‘sandwich degree’(Smithers 1976; DES 1985a).
Here, theory and practice alternate during the degree stage, in the form of one thick sandwich (T-P-T) or several thin ones (T-P-T-P-T).
Again, this is a plausible pattern in educational terms in certain circumstances.
Where the relationship between theory and practice is more dialectical than applied it allows a fruitful interaction between the two, although this does not always happen.
It may motivate students by allowing them to get their ‘hands on’ at an early stage.
It should counter any academic drift in the theoretical component.
It is not surprising, therefore, that one finds this pattern in some of the ‘softer’ professional fields, such as social work and teaching, where the theory-practice relationship may be less one-way than it is in the ‘harder’ones.
But the fact that sandwich courses are found in engineering in the polytechnics, colleges and some ‘ex-CAT’ universities (such as Aston, Bradford and Strathclyde) and in other fields such as architecture, planning and agriculture, points to an economic rather than educational rationale.
Many students of engineering and other professional or semi-professional fields were in the past part-time not full-time, and sandwich courses have grown out of a long tradition of first night-school, then day release and then block release — a pattern associated in the post-war period mainly with the non-university sector.
The third pattern is the post-experience one in which students come to theoretical or systematic study of the field after a period of practice.
In logical terms, this is the reverse of the first, consecutive pattern, but like it, it seems to have emerged for a mixture of educational and other reasons.
It is a defensible pattern in what might be called ‘low-theory’ fields, where people can learn to practise in some way and with some success without any theoretical preparation for what they are doing, although they may have had some relevant training at a lower level.
The post-experience pattern has emerged chiefly in the management and administrative fields, although it is also found in teaching (in post-school education and the proposed ‘licensed teacher’ scheme) and some other service professions (for example, voluntary social work experience is often a requirement for admission to social work courses).
There seem to be several reasons for its emergence: a backlog of untrained practitioners; a desire to certificate practice, for a variety of reasons, including status; labour shortages which require quick solutions; and a growth of theory or technology in the field itself, requiring more systematic training than has hitherto been necessary.
It is interesting to ask how far the particular pattern that exists in each field is the optimum in curricular terms.
To some extent, each pattern seems to have grown up for extraneous, though important, reasons to do with institutional or occupational history and student circumstances.
To what extent do the differences between these three patterns still make educational sense?
Is there any intrinsic reason why medicine should not  adopt a sandwich pattern, or management a traditional, consecutive one?
Why should sandwich courses in engineering exist in some institutions and not others?
The curricular answers to such questions must involve some analysis of the knowledge, skills and norms peculiar to each profession.
The preceding paragraphs have tentatively related the different patterns to different theory-practice relationships, associating ‘high-theory’ or applied fields with a consecutive pattern, ‘dialectical’fields with sandwich ones and ‘low-theory’ones with the post-experience one.
But other factors enter into the equation.
How do the different patterns affect student motivation?
How do they affect the balance between analysis and synthesis in professional work?
How do they relate to the balance between deductive and inductive approaches?
Do ‘problems’ provide a better focus for learning than ‘theories’?
What are the effects of each pattern on the balance between engagement and reflection, having hands on or standing back?
There are some signs that the three patterns are becoming less distinct.
For example, the distinction between pre-clinical and clinical studies has been eroded in some medical courses.
The general value of practical placements and projects during the first degree stage is becoming more widely recognized.
There are major changes on the way in nursing, as a result of the Project 2000 scheme (UKCC 1986), which will reduce the emphasis on trainee nurses as ‘pairs of hands’, and emphasize their student status.
But perhaps the main shift in all professional fields is the gradual introduction of recurrent, continuing education which implies that a professional degree (or even chartered and qualified status) is only the initial stage in a much longer process.
It is difficult to say exactly what impact — if any — this shift is currently having on undergraduate curricula, but its future importance cannot be doubted.
What are the main issues in professional higher education?
It is not easy to generalize, because the substantial differences between the various professions or semi-professions translate into differences in professional education.
Some problems seem peculiar to each profession: the balance between technology and human relations in medicine; the relationship between the two branches of the legal profession; the status of some branches of engineering; the balance between generic and specialized social work; the growing shortage of young nurses; the low morale in teaching; the uncertain identity of management; the crisis of confidence in architecture.
However, at the risk of underestimating such differences, certain current issues can be picked out.
First, there are the changes in the professions themselves which necessitate changes in professional education.
The increasing need for continuing professional education, to update and sometimes re-orientate practitioners has already been mentioned.
A subsidiary problem here is how or whether to institutionalize this, for example in the form of attendance or credit requirements.
But the development of continuing education must eventually have a backwash effect on initial professional education at the undergraduate stage.
How should such courses equip  people, both cognitively and affectively, to continue to learn and want to learn?
One of the problems with continuing education lies not in learning, but in unlearning.
A second change in many professions is the shift away from autonomous, individual practice to teamwork: group practices in law, primary health care teams in medicine, project teams in engineering, team-teaching in education, co-ordination and liaison in social work.
In principle, most people are in favour of more teamwork and better co-ordination, but in practise it often proves difficult, perhaps because it is at odds with the image of the autonomous professional who has a private relationship with his or her client.
There may also be inter-professional tensions, as well as intra-professional ones, for example in the case of primary health care teams.
The relationship between professional and client is also changing in other ways.
Members of the public are less deferential, better informed, and more litigious than they used to be.
They want to know not only what is to be done, but why.
The relationship between professionals and the state is also changing, as government imposes a more entrepreneurial and competitive pattern on what it perceives as genteel cartels.
It becomes more and more necessary for professionals to know about finance, management (including self-management) and even marketing.
Technological changes are also affecting not only the content of professional work, necessitating new competences such as computing, but even the structure of professions, in terms of the relationship between the generic practitioner and the specialist technician whose power grows with the growth of specialized technology in medicine, management and other fields.
All these general changes in the professions themselves have implications for professional education, even if their impact on undergraduate courses is not yet always apparent.
A second major issue in professional education is, and has always been, the control of the curriculum.
The main historical tension here has been between the institution (typically the university) and the professional body.
In practice, this tension has been modified by the common background, both educationally and socially, of both parties, the existence of ‘dual-practitioners’(who both teach and practice), the overlapping memberships of important committees, a long tradition of often discreet negotiation, and the fact that academics are also, in their way, professionals.
So the explosions have been rare, the exceptions which proved the rule.
But latterly, other policy actors have sought to enter the stage.
Government has not only turned its attention to the professions as economic entities, but in the 1980s adopted an increasingly dirigiste approach to higher education.
This tended to affect the capital-intensive professions, such as medicine and engineering, in the form of regulation of capital spending and student numbers, rather more than the cheaper ones, but there have been direct or indirect consequences for fields such as nursing, teaching and social work as well.
Institutions will not gain professional accreditation for their courses if their learning resources — laboratories, libraries, etc. — are deemed  inadequate by the relevant professional body.
The consumer's voice has been heard, if faintly and intermittently, usually when something goes badly wrong, for example in the medical or social work fields.
Student influence seems, by contrast, rather weaker than it was in the 1960s and 1970s, when more radical questions were asked, leading to the inclusion in some cases of courses to do with the social and environmental impacts of professional activities.
Theory and practice
In addition to these issues which arise from the nature of professional occupations and the control of professional courses, there are two other issues which lie at the heart of professional education, so much so indeed that they can be taken as defining characteristics of it.
They are the relationship between theory and practice and the balance between conservation and innovation.
Each has already been touched on in passing, but something more needs to be said.
Of all types of education, professional courses experience the tension between theory and practice most strongly, because they give considerable if not equal weight to each.
In craft and technician level courses, theory is seen merely as an adjunct of practice, while in purely academic courses practice, if it is a point of reference at all, is seen simply as a spin-off or by-product of theory.
The professional, however, can be defined as a person who practises theory or theoretizes practice; indeed, the very concept of professional expertise implies both knowledge and use.
As part of the present study, academics were asked: Is your subject typically conceptualized in terms of‘theory’ and ‘practice’?
If so, has the relationship between these elements changed in recent years?
The first response is from an ex-university lecturer now working in industry:
Pharmacology is basically a practical subject and if anything there is pressure for this part to increase.
However due to‘outside influences’ the opposite has occurred — practical classes have been greatly reduced in number and academic merit.
This makes them cheaper and less time consuming (academics' time).
Inevitably this means a reduction in the standard of graduate turned out.
Clearly, resource factors can influence the balance of theory and practice in some subjects, but other responses indicated that ‘internal’ subject factors and student preferences may be important also:
It is difficult to divide Business Studies courses so clearly.
This is because the subjects taught really fall into three types, namely, appropriate parts of basic disciplines taught on a theoretical basis, e.g. economics, psychology, sociology, mathematics; essentially practical, procedural subjects such as accounting, and problem areas which are a  mixture of theory, practice and problem solving, e.g. marketing, policy studies.
The position in Sociology is well known and I don't think I need to set it out.
We have always had a middle range approach (in Merton's sense) at — though we have always been weighted to social institutions and the applied end.
I don't think we have changed over the years in our teaching but student choice has greatly changed and we have found demand for our more theoretical courses has fallen away.
The reasons for this appear to be (a) what the students perceive as cashable cheques in the job market and (b) a genuine intellectual concern to understand what is going on in their society.
By (b) I'm not of course implying that I would necessarily agree with the judgement that pure theory is no use but I think that's the way the students see it.
Nevertheless I must admit to some sympathy with that view.
I think that without going into a lengthy treatise, I would have to argue that middle range theory springing out of empirical data is in general the best approach but you will see all the qualifications and nuances involved in such a view.
My own particular academic subject is geography.
In recent years it has moved far more towards conceptualization in terms of‘theory’ and ‘practice’, to the extent that in some areas (e.g. Iocational studies, certain parts of geomorphology) the theory dominates the practice.
There is some realisation of this, and many geographers now talk endlessly about ‘relevance’.
The curriculum is devised primarily according to the knowledge and skills required by the practising surveyor, and the theoretical content is that required to give the student the necessary understanding.
The content and blend has been improved over recent years, but I don't think that there has been a fundamental change.
Yes.
I would say it has, primarily as a consequence of the blurring of the distinction between theory and practice by computing and software.
There may even be a danger that CAD (Computer Aided Design) for example may largely replace ‘practice’.
(Engineering Science)
My subject — civil engineering — is very often seen as divisible into quite separate ‘theory’ and ‘practice’elements.
However this reflects more the wishes of the academics than their market and — in recent years great pressure has been brought to bear to remove this compartmentalisation.
With the advent of BEng courses, the teaching of ‘abstract’ theory is no longer acceptable or appropriate.
Theory is always taught in the context of real-life applications, preferably drawn from examples to be found in industry.
(Engineering)
Even the small number of comments quoted here — which represent the perceptions of individuals — signal a complex situation affected by both abstract and concrete factors.
Many professional fields seem to have got more ‘theoretical’ over time.
This can mean several things.
It can refer to the growth of influence of the natural and social sciences as bodies of knowledge which underpin practice in fields such as medicine, pharmacy, agriculture, engineering, architecture or social work; it can refer to the increased importance of mathematics or computing in some fields; it can refer to the attempt to develop models or theories of practice itself, for example in the fields of management, nursing or teaching, or it may simply reflect the enlargement of the off-the-job element in professional education.
This kind of academic-theoretical drift can yield benefits in terms of knowledge and academic status, but it can also produce a reaction which attacks the increasing irrelevance or distortion of such studies.
Practitioners, it is claimed, have their heads filled with jargon and are no longer adequately prepared for the ‘real world’; the ‘contributory disciplines’ do not contribute much; there is too much emphasis on analysis, not enough on decisions, relevance, etc.
Examples of this reaction against academic drift can be found in management (Revans 1982) and education (Hirst 1983).
It underlies the continuing tension in engineering between ‘engineering science’ and ‘engineering design’, and in social work between the social scientific and case-work elements in training.
It seems to lie behind recently announced plans for a new (private) school of architecture which will train mainly through practice.
It exists in other professional fields, especially those which deal with people rather than things, and may in time arise in nursing which is currently becoming more academically orientated.
In many cases, however, it is expressed as an intermittent grumbling of practitioners rather than as a systematic counter-argument.
The case for re-thinking what we mean by practice and its relation with theory has been made at an abstract level by writers who draw on the two very different philosophical traditions which contest the dichotomy, Marxism with its concept of praxis, and the American pragmatists who direct our attention to the consequences of our actions.
The main example of the first is Habermas' Theory and Practice (1974), which has had some influence in this country mainly on education, social work and the ‘caring’ professions, particularly at the radical edge.
Theorizing, according to Habermas, is not some free-floating intellectual activity, but has to be socially situated and contextualized just as much as practice; indeed, it is more accurately seen as theoretical practice.
The typical denigration of ‘practice’ arises largely from the social status of practitioners, which tends to be lower than that of theoreticians.
According to Habermas, the very distinction between theory and practice is at root a social rather than epistemological one.
The critique which draws on pragmatism is best exemplified by Argyris (1982) and Schon (1987) in a series of joint and individual works, the most  recent of which is Schon's Educating the Reflective Practitioner (but see also Usher and Bryant 1987; Boreham 1988).
Their argument is subtle, depends heavily on examples, and is therefore difficult to summarize, but is based essentially on the idea that practice itself generates approaches, artistries, strategies and operational (as distinct from espoused) theories and concepts which together constitute a kind of knowledge which is general without being abstract.
Their examples are drawn from various professions, including architecture, planning and management.
The problem facing writers like Schon who attempt to theorize about practice is that if they fail, practice remains particularistic or intuitive, and if they succeed, they simply generate more theory.
However, there seem to be four characteristics of practice — of ‘doing’— which tend to distinguish it from theorizing or ‘knowing’.
First, practitioners, lacking the time and resources to carry out exhaustive analyses, may have to operate on a more limited,probabilistic basis.
A GP, during a seven-minute consultation, may form a provisional hypothesis early on, rather than running through the whole gamut of possible examinations or tests; the engineer tracing a fault may have a hierarchy of probable causes in his mind and investigate these rather than embark on a text-book linear analysis.
Secondly, practitioners may become very aware of contextual factors which affect what they do, and implicitly develop contingent models of their work.
The doctor or engineer will become aware that the answer to a lot of his or her questions is ‘it depends’, and will take the relevant factors or variables into account.
Practice does not take place in a vacuum, and may be implicitly based on contingent theories which allow few across-the-board answers or approaches.
Thirdly, because of the constraints imposed not only by external factors but sometimes by the design problem itself, practitioners may engage in a complex set of trade-offs , rather than trying to optimize any one aspect of what they are doing.
There is often no optimal design, treatment or solution; better in one way means worse in another.
The practitioner may have to balance safety against economy, speed against certainty, appearance against strength, effect against side-effect; and there is no easy answer.
Professional judgement comes into play.
Fourthly, the pressures and experience of practice may eventually lead practitioners to condense — in psychological terms to ‘chunk’— the decision-making process to such an extent that it appears from the outside to become a matter of intuition, flair, or artistry.
It may be that the theory-practice issue in professional education has become over-polarized.
The notion of theory is itself relative, implying a statement with some degree of generality and some taxonomic, explanatory or predictive power.
But the generality and power can vary from the local and tentative to the universal and highly probable.
Practice can doubtless yield ‘theories’ of a limited or weaker kind, but once such theories are seen to apply more generally or with more force, they tend to become dignified with the name of ‘model’, ‘theory’or even ‘paradigm’.
Practical theories and theoretized practice meet somewhere in the middle, and it may be more fruitful to see them as a continuum than as a dichotomy.
But if this is so, why is the dichotomy such a familiar one in this country, and even more firmly entrenched on the continent?
And why are there associated dichotomies such as active/contemplative, pure/applied and even mental/manual which seem to reinforce and complicate the original one?
Unless one posits an inherent human tendency to comprehend the world in binary terms, one has to look for more sociological explanations.
Lobkowicz (1967) has argued that the original distinction was less epistemological than occupational, the difference between the life of the philosopher and that of the politician.
Be that as it may, we should perhaps pay more attention to the context rather than the content of the distinction, and the relationship between the two environments or worlds: the department and the firm, the laboratory and the field, the lecture-room and the ward.
As Figure 2.1 suggested, the difference may lie not so much in the knowledge per se as in the stance one adopts.
Conservation and innovation
The second major issue in professional courses is the balance between conservation and innovation.
It has already been suggested that whereas academic courses tend to change incrementally, perhaps under the influence of research, professional courses seem to need the new broom of a major report every so often to bring about change.
To be sure, this contrast is over-stated, and academic fields have periods of relative stagnation and sudden revolution, just as professional ones can evolve almost without anyone noticing in response to shifts in practice.
For example, computing has infiltrated most professions now without any great ballyhoo, and in many of the ‘people-professions’ the attitude to the client has shifted steadily towards a rather less authoritarian one.
Nevertheless, the apparent need for periodic spring-cleaning in the professions does pose some questions.
Is it simply that age and authority structures in the professions tend to reinforce stability, whereas in research authority has a dual and sometimes conflicting basis, in publications and seniority, e.g. the brilliant young physicist?
Is it simply that new knowledge keeps being added to professional fields without old knowledge being taken away?
Is it that institutions have to prepare people to work in traditional as well as up-to-date professional settings, and so cannot afford to be too ‘progressive’?
In any case, one must be aware of assuming that the angels are always on the side of innovation.
Intellectual fashions may work themselves through without any very serious consequences (what impact has structuralism had outside academe?), but professional fashions (for example, in architecture, child-rearing and teaching) can have far-reaching effects.
The issue points to a more fundamental tension at the heart of professional education, which is that it is concerned not only with  knowledge and skills but with norms and attitudes.
The problem is that the two may not change in tandem; the first may need to change rapidly, while the latter change only slowly if at all.
The notion of a profession implies some continuity of values and attitudes, which form the ground-rules for the transactions between colleagues and between practitioner and client.
Professions are sometimes referred to as institutions, but the interesting point is that compared to many institutions they function less on the basis of formal, explicit regulations and codes than on informal, tacit norms and expectations.
This makes the attitudinal and affective element of professional education especially important.
However, it is not just the fact that professional education involves value-education which tends to make it conservative; it is the way in which values and attitudes are learned.
Whereas knowledge can be acquired through lectures, seminars and reading, and skills are learned through demonstration and practice, the process of attitude-formation depends crucially on two things: role modelling and group socialization.
The learning is embodied.
The young doctor learns a great deal from what the older doctor is, not simply what he says or does, and from the sub-culture of the little group of medical students to which he or she belongs.
Such models and sub-cultures tend to be conservative because they are part of a process of long-term cultural transmission, going back through previous cohorts and even generations.
Academic curricula
If professional courses are geared ultimately to the external world of practice, the pattern and content of academic courses reflect the internal nature, logic or demands of the discipline.
But what kinds of demands are they?
And in what sense are they internal?
And what is a discipline?
There is surprisingly little literature which explores these questions in curricular terms.
There is of course the whole domain of theories of knowledge which was explored briefly in the last chapter, but there is typically little concrete reference to curricula or courses in such writing; it moves at a much more abstract level.
There is also a large and venerable literature on the nature and purposes of higher education, which rings with names such as Newman, Veblen, Ortega y Gasset, and Jaspers [see Powell's bibliography (1966, 1971), and there have been many more recent examples but such writing likewise tends to be rather general, and only by extension addresses the question of what is to be taught in curricular terms; but see Goodlad 1976; Barnett 1985].
Similarly, there is a small body of literature on the academic profession in this country (see Halsey and Trow 1971; Startup 1979; Whitburn et al .
1976), but again this deals only indirectly with what academics teach.
The most sustained recent discussion of the nature of the ‘academic’ is to be found in the journal Minerva (see Shils 1984; Lobkowicz 1984; Ruegg 1986) where it is explored in relation to concepts such as truth, inquiry, research, culture (Bildung ), community, rationality, disinterestedness, voluntary solidarity and equality among researchers; though one should not overlook Broady's (1978–9) stimulating attack on mere academicism.
The bulk of writing about academic disciplines is, however, specific to each discipline, and there are relatively few examples of attempts to extract generalities about the nature of the academic or the nature of disciplines.
Paradoxically, some of these attempts have arisen out of challenges to the very notion of a discipline, through ‘interdisciplinary’ work or ‘modular’schemes.
In general, however, the concept of an academic curriculum has been less well explored in recent years than that of a professional curriculum, and what follows here will reflect that fact.
Like professional courses, academic courses come in several sub-types.
First, there is the single-subject course, variously labelled (single honours, special honours, etc.) which concentrates on the study of a single academic discipline (e.g. mathematics, chemistry, economics, history, fine art) after shedding some ancillary or subsidiary courses in the first or second year.
The basic rationale for such courses derives from the discipline itself, and can be seen in its pure form in disciplines which have no obvious employment destination, such as philosophy or history.
However, many academic courses have or had an implicit point of reference in school-teaching, and many are organized in institutes or professional or subject associations.
There is thus no clear dividing-line between the ‘academic’ and ‘professional’degree.
Robbins (1963) presented dual-subject courses (joint honours, combined studies, etc.) as a variant on the single-subject pattern for those students who do not want such a specialized higher education, but that represents a university view, and a dated one at that.
The combined subject degree has a firm place in the polytechnics and colleges in its own right.
However, there seems to have been little empirical work done on such courses.
There is some anecdotal and a little firm evidence that dual-subject degrees are less well regarded by some employers (Gordon 1983).
There is again some anecdotal evidence that such degrees are less likely to lead on to postgraduate research, and some of the figures in Table 3.2 suggest this; but such assertions need to be tested empirically.
On the other hand, a broader education may provide a better preparation for some jobs and certain kinds of research.
It is also difficult to understand how what is sometimes believed to be the essential ‘minimum’ syllabus of the three-year single subject degree can be halved without loss of disciplinary integrity.
Presumably it can be done only where the essential core of each subject is no greater than half the total; or where the subjects overlap in some way; or where students are prepared to do more than 100 per cent of the work.
Of course, all this assumes that three years is a ‘natural’ rather than arbitrary period in which to reach ‘degree standard’.
Some of these issues surfaced in the responses of academics to the  question: Would you favour an increase or decrease in the proportion of students taking combined/joint degrees?
At present employers tend to see joint degrees as second class.
This is a pity.
Many companies want to employ specialists (e.g. statisticians, computer experts).
Only in ‘management’ is a broader course valuable.
(Mathematics)
I would very much favour an increase in the proportion of students taking joint degrees.
It does seem to me that philosophy is much more effective when combined with some ‘first order’ discipline, than when taught in isolation.
(Philosophy)
It depends on the subjects of the degree.
I think the proportion of students following joint honours physical science courses (physics/ maths, chemistry/physics, etc.) is about right, but there is room for more students on combined biological/physical science degrees.
(Physics)
I would favour a very substantial increase in the proportion of students taking combined and joint subject degrees where Business Studies are an important element.
I see every reason with the recent Handy report (NEDO/MSC/BIM) and other such reviews for a provision of Business Studies in adequate depth in combined degrees with any technology, with languages, and possibly with such other disciplines as history and geography.
The concept of the student with a broad scientific base is fine but in practice it does not work.
Combined degrees in e.g. Physiology and Pharmacology mean that the student (except for the very good ones) is master of neither and in terms of future employment (Ph.D.
or industry) is starting from a weak base.
On the other hand I do favour a greater amount of ‘non-scientific’ components — e.g. philosophy, history of science — which if taught well put the practical science into proper context.
(Pharmacology)
I think that the study of two languages concurrently is quite academically acceptable and may be of benefit to students with a strong linguistic interest.
I believe that it is important in most cases for each language to have parity; a language studied as a subsidiary subject seldom reaches a proper university standard.
I think that the continuing growth in demand for foreign languages justifies an increase in this type of degree.
One social scientist pointed out that the weighting of the two subjects does not have to be equal:
To answer this question adequately I think one would have to know the degree structures which one had in mind.
Also the answer would differ from subject to subject.
In the humanities and social ‘sciences’ I think some measure of broadening is desirable though it is important that the students are confronted with a discipline in some depth.
Width often leads to superficiality and depth may produce a blinkered approach and an intellectual treadmill.
I think that the old main+subsidiary subject is a good idea.
 At —we have an arrangement where students can choose flexibly any weighting from 50:50 to ⅔: ⅓ in composing their degree programme and most choose the latter weighting or something like it.
(Economic and Social Studies)
Others were more sceptical about the whole idea of combining subjects:
Ambivalent.
Can see advantages in terms of‘broadening horizons’ in theory.
But clearly can lead to loss of depth.
Specially prepared joint courses can be good but have very high set up costs (hard to argue for in current times!).
(Economics)
Few students seem to be able to integrate their joint studies; instead they read two, often incomplete, halves.
Frequently, the analytical courses are cut out in joint schemes, and the students gain only a superficial introduction to both subjects.
(Geography)
The third sub-type of academic course is less easy to describe, but it is broader or more general than the two-subject degree.
It may involve three or more subjects studied separately but in parallel, as in the Scottish general degree or some polytechnic/college ‘combined studies’ degrees; or it may integrate several subjects in relation to some area, period, theme or problem, in which case it may be called interdisciplinary; or it may consist of a more open, modular system of requirements and options.
These three types of academic curriculum are distributed unevenly across the higher education system.
The single-subject academic course is largely confined to the universities, reflecting their traditions of specialized scholarship and their stronger research orientation.
Dual-subject degrees exist in both the universities and polytechnics, but their place in each is subtly different; in the former they are seen largely in relation to the single honours degree, which constitutes a kind of academic gold standard, whereas in the latter they come under the general rubric of ‘combined studies’.
Combined studies courses may involve two, three or more disciplines.
Triple-subject courses are relatively rare, although some well-established ones exist [philosophy, politics and economics (PPE) and arguably classics].
They are more common in the polytechnics/colleges and Scottish universities than in the other universities.
Academic courses raise a number of important curricular issues, but  there are four which merit particular attention.
First, there is the question of the nature and definition of academic disciplines; secondly, and related to it, the concept of interdisciplinarity; thirdly, the issue of modularization of courses; and, finally, the relationship between ‘content’ and ‘process’in such disciplines.
Each of these will be addressed briefly in turn.
One can approach the delineation of disciplines in two ways.
The first is to try to classify them in terms of the kinds of knowledge, procedures and criteria of judgement they involve.
This was broadly speaking the approach adopted in Chapter 2, and it led to a model which located each discipline somewhere in a three-dimensional space, defined by its object, stance and mode, all of which may vary over time.
It was noted that there may be variations and tensions within disciplines as well as between them.
There is, however, a second, sociological approach to the understanding of disciplines.
A discipline, it has been noted, is a body of people as well as a body of knowledge.
It manifests itself in certain physical, professional and institutional forms: rooms, buildings, posts, chairs, departments, associations, journals, conferences, and so on.
One must therefore ask not only what knowledge is, but how it comes into being, how it becomes accepted, who produces it, who controls it, and why it changes or does not change.
These two approaches are often, though not necessarily, associated with two different views of knowledge which can be labelled, in simple terms, knowledge as structure and knowledge as construct .
The first is based on the assumption that there is a ‘real’ world, that that world can be known, and that the structures of knowledge should correspond to the structures of reality; thus any departure from them invites confusion.
The second view is that since we are always part of the knowledge equation, we can never know if there is a ‘real’ world, and hence knowledge is everywhere and always a human and social construction of, or placed upon, reality, whose form will vary; the organization of knowledge is therefore artificial and relative.
The first view is probably more common among natural scientists and technologists and the second among social scientists, but this is not always the case, and the debate goes on within disciplines as well as between them.
Interdisciplinarity
These two views of knowledge are rarely articulated in abstract form in undergraduate courses, although they do underlie arguments about the relationships between courses and departments.
However, they do surface, often in quite sharp form, in discussions about interdisiplinarity.
If the structures of knowledge that exist do reflect the structures of the real world, then any attempt to modify or erode them is likely to be unproductive.
It may be that several disciplines can be brought to bear fruitfully upon an area (Europe), period (Enlightenment), problem (traffic congestion), or theme (Pastoral) while still maintaining their distinct identity; in which case the term ‘multidisciplinary’(OECD 1972) becomes  appropriate.
But if knowledge is relative and ultimately a matter of human constructs, then such work may alter the very boundaries of our disciplines, and indeed help us to overcome the ‘artificial’ constraints of compartmentalized knowledge; and the appropriate label is ‘interdisciplinary’.
The dual nature of disciplines, as bodies of knowledge and bodies of people, means that the difficulties of interdisciplinary work often take a concrete rather than abstract form (Squires 1975; Levin and Lind 1985) Even when academics espouse ‘construct’ views of knowledge, they may find it difficult, in indefinable as well as definable ways, to work together in cross-disciplinary teams.
Little problems, to do with timetabling or prescribed reading or marking, can boil up into major issues.
It is rather like working with people from other countries; there may be good communication at one level, but at the same time one has the sense of the difference of cultures.
There may also be a deep sense of insecurity about venturing off one's own academic patch which makes people particularly sensitive.
On the other hand, there may be moments of real illumination and discovery, when someone makes a comment that springs from a quite different frame of reference from one's own.
The generally pragmatic ethos of British higher education in matters of course planning means that some basic, theoretical problems may never really be faced or thrashed out, although the process of having to formulate and present an interdisciplinary case to the CNAA may mean there is some difference between the polytechnics/colleges and universities in this respect.
But pragmatism also allows progress to be made where a more analytic approach might come to a halt, faced with some intractable epistemological obstacle.
As part of this study, academics were asked if they had had any experience of integrated/interdisciplinary degree courses, and whether it had been positive or negative.
Their responses exemplified the mixture of abstract and practical concerns described above:
Experience has been both positive and negative:(a) negative — often students feel inadequate in that other students always have more knowledge than them, and typically they have no firm home base;(b) positive — the combination of electronics and computing, for example, is seen as highly beneficial by employers.
(Computer Science)
The experience of my current joint studies programme — which is not strictly interdisciplinary — is mixed.
Students often find it difficult to move from the approach and conceptual basis of one subject to the other.
Several of the subjects offered — American Studies and Sports Studies — are interdisciplinary, and generally have worked quite well.
Within my CNAA experience, the success of these courses often related to the organisational structure of the degree programme as much as or rather than its academic integrity.
(Course Leader BA/BSc Joint Studies)
Another writer chronicled the re-emergence of disciplinary identities within an interdisciplinary scheme:
We began on a genuinely interdisciplinary basis with students taking, in effect, a series of one-term course units sometimes leading to joint honours but usually to a major-minor combination.
These was also an attempt to devise joint one-term units, e.g. where a philosopher and a sociologist would run the course between them.
As time has gone on this emphasis has diminished partly as a response to the pressures of the marketplace.
The economists, for example, have insisted on more and more technical emphasis in order to (as they see it) equip ‘their’ graduates to compete better in the marketplace.
The historians, confronted by a situation where history is spread across three schools have contrived a formula which allows students virtually to specialise in history….
My opinion on the basis of this experience is that interdisciplinary courses are a good idea but they do have to be worked at and the scheme defended strongly.
Also the proposals have to be thought through really well and new theory and concepts have to be developed.
This is all very time consuming.
We do still have a few such courses and they work quite well.
An additional payoff not to be sneezed at is that lecturers, forced to integrate, begin to rethink their subject!
So in summary, two cheers for integration.
(Sociology)
Another described some of the difficulties that can emerge in an arts course, and suggested that a core-plus-extension model might work best:
I have experience of teaching French as part of an interdisciplinary degree course in which the study of 1 or 2 modern languages is combined with (inter alia ) history and/or literature and/or linguistics.
By and large there are few links between the French course and other components and opinion among both staff and students seems divided as to the advisability of establishing such links.
There are practical difficulties due to a flexible system of options which allows students to determine the contents of their degree course relatively freely.
Moreover attempts to relate language classes to other strands systematically have not always been popular, many students preferring a language course which gives them an insight into cultural trends, with texts drawn from recent magazines, broadcasts, etc.
…. The best system in my opinion is not therefore full integration but a kind of core course with extensions varying according to the students' other studies.
(French)
And, finally, the views of a physicist who also teaches in the field of environmental science:
A course many years ago in materials science, involving physics, metallurgy and chemistry was highly successful.
Again, recent experience shows this kind of development to be unsaleable.
In environmental science, interdisciplinarity is all.
Experience here has shown it to be highly successful.
If one can hazard one generalization from the responses to this question, it is that the early enthusiasm for undergraduate interdisciplinary ventures which was evident in the 1970s has now given way to a more ambivalent attitude, perhaps because the practical institutional and professional problems have become more evident, a view found also in the OECD ‘Interdisciplinarity Revisited’ report (Levin and Lind 1985).
On the other hand, the growth of interdisciplinary research ventures, especially in the sciences, has been striking.
Modularization
If interdisciplinarity challenges the boundaries of disciplines, modularization seems to challenge their very core.
Modular or unit credit courses are currently the subject of much discussion in higher education, but interest in them in this country dates back to the 1970s (much earlier in the USA) when, for example, the Nuffield team produced a report on them rather facetiously called The Container Revolution (Mansell 1976).
But if the interest has returned, it is for different reasons this time.
Whereas in the 1970s, modularity was seen variously as a means of overcoming artificial subject boundaries, promoting student choice and clarifying course objectives, the main rationales now are administrative rationalization and the promotion of credit transfer between courses, institutions, modes of study, and between the educational system and ‘corporate classrooms’, to use Eurich's (1985) phrase, as exemplified by the CNAA Credit Accumulation and Transfer Scheme.
The latter argument is based partly on the growing importance to higher education of mature students and continuing education.
Modularization is not easy to define, but can be seen as one end of a spectrum of course structures which ranges from the linear to the modular, as follows:
Linear courses allow no options whatsoever, because of disciplinary logic, professional requirements, or staff shortages.
However, as we saw in Chapter 2, many degree courses seem to have something between a large core (66 per cent or more, typically in the natural sciences) and a small core (20–40 per cent, typically in the arts or social sciences).
It is when that figure falls below one-quarter that people begin to use the term ‘modular’, ‘unit-credit’, or its colloquial equivalents such as building-block, cafeteria, pick n'mix (or worse).
Each unit or module earns its own credit, which can be aggregated or ‘cashed in’ for a degree when one has accumulated enough.
I have explored some of the basic issues related to modular courses in two previous reports (Squires 1979, 1986) but academics were also asked as part of this study about the advantages and disadvantages of modularizing degree courses in their subject.
Modularising is good if it allows greater choice for students, and allows them to specialise in certain parts of a rather falsely unified subject.
It can deter students from seeing important links, and from studying methodological and philosophical issues that run across modules.
(Geography)
There is an advantage in modular courses, but I regard it as administrative and economic rather than academic.
I am increasingly concerned that validators increasingly fail to use as an important criterion the total experience of a student.
Or are we becoming more realistic in financial terms?
(Combined Studies)
I think in the light of future demographic changes, potential changes in government educational policy and the increasing problems of student finance, modular or credit based patterns of study are essential if degree courses and subjects are to survive in a much harsher higher education world.
I have personally pushed through a restructuring along these lines of the degree for which I am responsible…comprising eight subjects.
I think most of the arguments against ‘modular’ or ‘credit’based study are the product of misconception and prejudice — e.g. that they lead to cafeteria style education and do not allow progression.
Any well-structured course can build in progression where necessary and if it so wishes restrict the choice of menu on offer.
In other words, modular structures do not pose any major threat to subject competence or academic rigour if developed carefully.
They can also create greater choice and economy of teaching across different degree courses where appropriate.
(History and Politics)
I have personal doubts on the few modular courses I know well.
Obviously it is quite easy to split a subject into relatively free-standing elements, but in real life one has to use knowledge from various ‘packages’ to solve problems and some undergraduates do not seem to develop this ability on the modular courses.
(Construction)
The advantage would be that students could transfer between colleges.
A disadvantage is that mathematics is a ‘pyramid’ subject which makes  modularizing particularly difficult.
It could only be done with an unacceptable degree of course content imposition.
(Mathematics)
I have taught degree-level physics in both a modular and non-modular form.
An advantage of the modular form is the flexibility it gives to both staff and student in organising a suitable degree course.
Combined subject degrees are easy to implement under this scheme.
A disadvantage is that it is not always easy to ensure that a student gains ‘core’ knowledge of the subject.
(Physics)
There is a dilemma in building up modular degrees, whether undergraduate or postgraduate, on a discrete unit basis where the studies should be integrative across subjects.
This is especially true of some of the problem oriented components of Business Management courses.
In terms of conventional undergraduate courses, I see no great pressure for a further extension of the modular pattern, but so far as universities and colleges are concerned, I foresee an explosion in the modular approach at the Continuing Education level.
This particularly applies to MBA and similar types of course, which lend themselves both to credit systems and to distance learning.
(Management)
Another writer commented on the implications for staffing, recalling the importance of this contingency in course planning in Figure 1.1:
At a time of random contraction, there are considerable advantages in not being too dependent on others, who might leave or retire.
The modular system helps to make adjustments to unplanned contraction easier and makes staff work-loads more even.
(Politics)
Finally, another academic justified it on motivational and cognitive grounds:
I think that given that University work is supposed to encourage intellectual activity at the highest level of which any individual is capable it is very important to increase motivation by allowing those individuals to proceed at their own pace and to establish their cognitive frames as and when they feel capable of doing so.
(Sociology)
Apart from these kinds of arguments, there is one other consideration which impinges strongly on modularization, i.e. the attitude of professional bodies.
The recent study that I made (Squires 1986) attempted to get some reactions from such bodies on the subject, and while they were again mixed, a substantial number had reservations about modular schemes at the undergraduate stage, though more were in favour at the postgraduate or continuing stage.
The main worry is that modular schemes might undo  the progress towards an integrated approach to first degree studies which has been a feature of some professional subjects in recent years, notably in post-Finniston engineering courses.
It is worth noting that in the USA, where modular structures are the norm, most professional education occurs at the postgraduate stage.
Content and process
Both interdisciplinarity and modularity raise two other general questions about academic courses and the nature of disciplines.
The first is about how the discipline is presented to students, both explicitly and implicitly.
Is it presented as a given body of knowledge, which is somehow ‘there’ or as something which is the fragile and contingent outcome of human effort?
Is it endowed with some kind of abstract, almost Platonic existence, or is it seen in terms of its social context?
How far are students encouraged to ‘stand back’ from the discipline, and look at its philosophical implications?
To what extent do students study the history or sociology or economics of the discipline as a discipline, and the way in which these have changed over, say, the last century?
The second question raised by the dual nature of disciplines — as bodies of knowledge and bodies of people — takes us back to the very distinction between ‘academic’ and ‘professional’courses.
It is clear that the main, though not only, point of reference for the professional course is the external profession or occupation which absorbs the majority of its graduates.
By contrast, academic courses seem to be organized mainly around the intrinsic or internal demands of the discipline or disciplines.
But if disciplines are bodies of people as well as bodies of knowledge, are not academic courses also ‘professional’ in the sense of preparing people for entry to the academic professions ?
The relatively low percentage of graduates from such courses who do eventually make their way, via postgraduate and often in the sciences post-doctoral research, into the academic professions, should not disguise the fact that academic courses do provide a preparation for such work.
Indeed, the more one thinks about them, the more they conform to the conventional pattern of the apprenticeship, with their carefully graduated stages (apprentice, journeyman, master), their strict job demarcations, the emphasis on personal contact and role modelling, the gradual increase in responsibility, the mimicking of the activity of research in seminars, and library and project work.
Indeed, the origins of the concept of a degree (licence) suggest just such an occupational rationale.
There are few occupations which are so tightly professionalized as the academic profession (Perkin 1973, Neave 1979a); a fact which helps to explain why on the whole it seems to work fairly harmoniously with the ‘external’ professions.
Indeed, such professions are partly inside the higher education system themselves.
But if academic courses are a de facto preparation for a professional  occupation which few will ever actually enter, how is this rationalized and defended?
It would seem on the face of it rather perverse — not to say wasteful — to induct so many people into a non-career.
The typical justification for undergraduate courses involves the last of the issues related to academic courses: the distinction between ‘content’ and ‘process’.
The provision of specialized academic courses for students, and the take-up of such courses by students, need not of course be justified in instrumental terms at all.
One can argue that knowledge is good in itself, and the interest and motivation of students a sufficient justification for access to it.
This may sound rather woolly, but it is in fact the instrumental arguments which tend to be woolly in failing to show the relationship between instrumental means (more business studies graduates) and desirable ends (more happiness, justice, freedom).
Extrinsic arguments end up in intrinsic concepts.
But the knowledge-as-a-good-in-itself argument does not necessarily point to any particular kind of curriculum; it can be (and is in the USA) used to justify a more general curriculum in higher education.
The instrumental rationale for the specialized academic course depends on the distinction between the process and content of a discipline, a distinction made most succinctly by Bruner (1968, p. 72):
We teach a subject not to produce little living libraries on that subject, but rather to get a student to think mathematically for himself, to consider matters as an historian does, to take part in the process of knowledge-getting.
Knowing is a process, not a product.
There are two steps in this argument.
The first assumes that one can distinguish between process and content in a discipline, between methods or procedures on the one hand, and content or information on the other.
This may seem plausible enough, especially where one can identify an explicit methodological element in the discipline — experimental method in science, survey methods in sociology, design in technology, diagnosis in medicine.
More generally, people talk about teaching ‘analysis’, ‘planning’ or ‘problem-solving’(Birch 1986).
But the very idea of methodology is problematic; rather like the notion of skill, it implies something that is invariant and unaffected by the phenomenon with which one is dealing.
Pushed to its limit, the argument implies that content is merely a vehicle for process.
In practice, however, it is often difficult to disentangle the two: the choice, use and interpretation of a method are all associated with and contingent upon the object in question.
It is asking a good deal of students to abstract process from content if lecturers do not do it.
The same problem arises with Bruner's injunction that the curriculum should concentrate on the essential structure of a subject.
The ability to distinguish between structure and detail, essential and inessential is a function of one's knowledge of a subject.
The problem is one that faces every note-taker at the beginning of a course: What is important?
What do I leave out?
It is worth noting also that the ‘process’ argument is typically applied to academic rather than professional courses (Yudkin 1969), yet there is no logical reason for this.
If historians, philosophers and mathematicians ‘learn to think’, then so surely do engineers, doctors and managers.
Professional courses can be justified in terms of general problem-posing and problem-solving just as cogently as more academic courses, perhaps even more so; after all, they include the element of ‘design’(planning, selecting, disposing) in the broad sense used by Simon (1969) and the practical problems of implementation.
One suspects that the ‘process’ argument is sometimes deployed as a reserve justification when a mismatch between subject output and employment intake arises.
Such matches and mismatches change over time, and so therefore does the use of the argument, and subjects which were previously regarded as vocational even if only in relation to a teaching career — are now justified on general grounds.
General curricula
There is no sharp dividing-line between academic or professional courses on the one hand and general ones on the other; indeed some of the broader courses involving several disciplines which have been mentioned already may well be thought of as general — it is all a matter of degree.
General courses have so far been defined in mainly negative terms, as ones which are neither geared to a specific external profession or occupation nor provide a specialized preparation for postgraduate research and, implicitly, an academic career.
A general degree is sometimes seen as an alternative for students who are not up to honours standard; this is largely though not entirely the case with the Scottish ordinary degree.
There, in most courses, students divide into ordinary and honours streams only at the end of the second year, although their intentions may affect their choice of first- and second-year options.
One must distinguish, however, between general degrees, which are defined by their breadth of content, and ordinary or pass degrees, which although sometimes broad, are defined by their level.
The CNAA uses the category of pass degree both for courses which do not aim to achieve honours standard, and as a probationary validation category for courses which eventually acquire honours status; it should be noted that staffing and other learning resources are significant factors in such validation.
In the non-Scottish universities, pass degrees are often awarded to marginal failures on an honours course, although in medicine they are common.
Sometimes the difference has to do with the length and scope of the course: Open University pass degrees require six credits, while an honours degree requires eight.
As usual with the UK system, Topsy-like historical growth has led to many variations and anomalies.
It should be noted in passing that the situation in the USA is very  different (Squires 1976b; Gaff 1983).
Whereas in the UK a general degree is a particular type of undergraduate curriculum, in the USA general education has for long been part of everyone's undergraduate degree, along with electives (options) and a major subject.
The general education element is usually concentrated in the first two years ('lower division') of the four-year course, and takes the form either of distribution requirements which ensure that students cover a certain range of subjects, or else a common course organized around certain themes or topics, such as the ‘Great Books’ course or Boyer's (1987) suggested ‘integrated core’(language, art, heritage, institutions, nature, work, identity).
Much of the debate about general education in the USA concerns the pros and cons of these two approaches, although in the current vocational climate, the idea of general education itself is under considerable pressure.
Nevertheless, there is a long tradition of general education in higher education there (which suggests that it is England rather than Scotland which is atypical in this respect).
This may be due partly to the need consciously to establish common cultural references in a pluralistic society, whereas the historically narrow class base of British higher education meant that a lot of the cultural references could be taken for granted; the Robbins (1963, p. 7) reference to the ‘transmission of a common culture and common standards of citizenship’ was perhaps a sign that this cultural assumption was finally breaking down under the pressure of expansion and democratization.
We can distinguish between two kinds of rationale or emphasis in general degree courses: the general and the generic .
The first provides a more general form of academic course than the specialized academic degrees described above.
This may be organized and justified in various terms: as a group of cognate or faculty disciplines such as the social sciences or humanities; as a number of disciplines brought to bear on a common area (European Studies, Middle Eastern Studies) or period (Classics, The Enlightenment, Modern Studies) or problem or theme (Development Studies, Urban Studies); as a sampling of some or all of the main types of human knowledge, as provided by the foundation year at Keele University; or as a deliberate contrast between different types of knowledge (arts-science schemes).
Although general courses of various kinds are found in all kinds of institution, the prime examples are the Scottish general degree, the Open University with its foundation/modular structure, and the broader courses in the arts, social sciences and natural sciences in the polytechnics and above all the English and Welsh colleges.
While modular course choices may in fact be broader than many others, this is a reflection of the specialized nature of British first degrees rather than a consequence of modularity per se , which permits (within the limits of course requirements) either breadth or specialization.
Although the distinction between ‘general’ and ‘generic’may seem a fine one, it is useful to have a different label for courses which are broad in occupational rather than academic terms.
The importance of ‘generic skills’ has been stressed in recent years by the Manpower Services Commission  (now Training Agency) as a flexible response to and preparation for a fast-changing economy.
There have been attempts to classify broad ‘occupational training families’, and an emphasis on ‘multi-skilling’, particularly for those who work in the service sector.
Under the heading of ‘occupational generalist’, Brennan and McGeevor (1988) list polytechnic/college degrees in business studies, environmental planning, hotel and catering administration, textile and fashion design and 3D design, all of which prepare the student for work in a broad occupation rather than a specific job niche.
There are three main issues related to general curricula.
The first is the question of coherence , a worry which has already been encountered in connection with modular courses.
If a student is to study a number of different subjects or courses, what guarantee is there that they will all come together and form a coherent whole?
Surely there is a danger that the curriculum will simply degenerate into a rag-bag or mish-mash of different elements or soft options, with no particular logic or unity?
This kind of worry is expressed more often in relation to the newer modular or semi-modular structures than the more traditional general degree which may have well-established patterns and requirements, but it nevertheless seems to be a widespread one.
At this point one has to step back and note the strength of organic metaphors in British higher education.
Particularly in the universities, and even more particularly in those universities which have a strong residential and sometimes collegial tradition, the experience of higher education is regarded as a unity, a totality, an organic whole (or in more modern terms a package) which it is neither desirable nor possible to dissect.
In the past, that wholeness was to be found in the college or the institution and its organic community, but in modern times it tends to be located in the subject-department, which becomes in Burke's phrase the ‘little platoon’ which provides the student with his or her identity, base and purpose (Mansell 1976).
All this is now being challenged by the more aggregative metaphors associated with modular courses, student choice, accessibility and flexibility, credit transfer and part-time study (Squires 1979).
The ‘coherence’ argument about general courses is thus often an expression of a much deeper anxiety.
In reality, a well-conceived general course may be just as coherent as a narrower one; after all, the study of classics traditionally involves two languages and three disciplines and who is to say that classics is not both general and coherent?
There seems no reason why a broad area, problem or theme, such as Europe, third-world development or the environment, should not provide a coherent focus for study, although such courses no doubt require careful planning.
And even where the student has a lot of choice, why should he or she choose incoherence?
After all, logic inheres in people as well as subjects, and there may be good individual reasons for putting together what looks like an unlikely package.
One must also question the assumption that single-discipline degrees are  themselves immaculately unified.
The inexorable growth of specialization has meant that in many cases the concept of the discipline ‘as a whole’ is now largely historical, and the time has long gone when one person could command a general understanding of all its facets and branches.
The unity of the discipline is to some extent an external facade, a matter of appearance; from the inside, it may appear rather as a constellation of specialisms, more or less closely related.
Besides, does not the practice of carving up the syllabus and letting each lecturer get on with his or her own bit not lead to overlaps, duplication, lacunae and untied threads?
Of course, there may be co-ordination and team planning, but the conventions of academic autonomy, privacy and not treading on others' specialisms are strong.
It would seem that the real issue is not the imputed incoherence of general curricula, but the basic metaphors of higher education.
A second criticism made of general courses is that even if they are well-planned and coherent, they must lack depth (Squires et al .
1976).
It is argued that because they cover much more ground than the specialized academic or professional degree, they must inevitably be more superficial and lacking in rigour and depth; a kind of conceptual package tour.
There must be some truth in this.
Even if one does not believe in the principle of intellectual conservation of quantity, the same amount of study time is being poured into different shaped vessels, one tall and narrow, the other flat and wide.
The second may of course have its own advantages, in terms of pluralizing and relativizing the student's perspectives on the world.
But in the British system, rigour and depth are also powerful metaphors, though like many educational metaphors, difficult to unpack (Taylor 1984).
Both of them imply that the process of learning involves repetition, not in the simple rote sense, but as a repeated returning to the same ground, the same problems, in the end a living with, an immersion in the subject to the point where it becomes one's world.
In some cases, the process may be experienced as one of successive approximations, each one a little nearer to the mark.
In others, it discloses the provisionality and contingency of all interpretations, without any sense that there is a single point of truth.
Either way, the process opens up what Bernstein (1971, p. 57) has described as the ‘ultimate mystery of a subject…not coherence but incoherence…not order but disorder…the dialectic…of closure and openness’.
It is in this sense that higher education can be said to institutionalize not the structures of knowledge, but the experience of uncertainty.
How far can general degrees give students this kind of experience?
This depends on the interpretation of another common metaphor in higher education, that of ‘covering the ground’ or ‘field’, implicitly and perhaps originally agricultural.
The metaphor becomes airborne in the notions of ‘survey’ and ‘overview’.
Survey courses are much more common in the American system than in this country, where they are rather despised as the academic equivalent of Encyclopaedia Brittanica .
Yet a judicious use of some survey courses might paradoxically allow more depth in others.
Many  courses in the first and second year of degrees seem to try to strike their own balance between breadth and depth, in terms of the amount they cover, and the detail they go into; third-year courses typically cover less ground and go into more depth.
But there is no intrinsic reason why all parts of a course should try to strike that balance.
A varied menu of ‘survey’ courses, ‘normal’courses and ‘in-depth’courses might meet the conflicting demands of breadth and depth.
The third and perhaps chief problem related to general degrees is their status, which tends to be lower in the eyes of academics, and perhaps employers, than their academic or professional counterparts.
Status is a complex business, reflecting not only the content of the course, but the institution that provides it, the kinds of student it attracts, and their subsequent careers.
It is also bound up with the proximity of research.
The lower or uncertain status of general degrees is therefore not purely a matter of breadth of content; indeed, some relatively broad courses — classics, PPE (philosophy, politics and economics) at Oxford and the Cambridge Natural Science Tripos — have high status in the system.
The lower status of general courses may be more a function of the students who take them than of their content and the association with ordinary rather than honours degrees.
In Scotland, the ordinary degree has an honourable history and a recognized status, but it is still not honours; and in the rest of the country, ordinary degrees are often perceived as second-rate qualifications.
The problem of status is identified in a sharp form by Harland and Gibbs's (1986) study of the ‘diversified’ general curricula introduced into the English and Welsh colleges in the 1970s (see also Adelman and Gibbs 1980).
College graduates with broad arts, social science and science degrees had particular employment problems in the early 1980s, when the study was carried out, and the authors advance the idea that colleges should therefore move away from such curricula towards ones that are more obviously employment-oriented; in our terms, from general to generic courses.
However, the problem is to what extent the unemployment problem is a consequence of the kind of curriculum, or the kind of institution.
Here, we can perhaps refer back to the discussion of graduate employment presented early in the chapter.
Leaving aside for the moment differences in personal qualities and skills, which may or may not vary with the curriculum, it would seem that graduates who can offer both expertise and ability are in the strongest employment position, those who offer either one or the other may also find a job niche, but that those who offer neither are worst off.
The implication is that if college graduates are relatively weak on inferred ability, they should ensure that they are strong on relevant competence.
The status of general courses is thus as much a matter of context and clientele as content, and seems likely to change only if the latter change.
Altering the relative breadth, depth or pattern of courses seems likely to make only a marginal difference to their reputation inside and outside the  higher education system.
Three other factors could, however, lead to some change in status.
The first is the trend towards broader curricula in the schools, which seems likely to have a knock-on effect on A (and AS) levels and thence higher education.
The second is the need for a broader foundation for many graduate jobs, although in these again, process may be as important as content.
The third is the growth of modular-credit schemes reinforced by a shift from student grants to loans, from full-time to part-time study, from young to mature entrants, all of which may have an impact — though one difficult to discern — on the breadth and structure of studies.
The hidden curriculum
The bulk of this chapter has been taken up with a discussion of the relationship between the undergraduate curriculum and just two of Lawton's eight ‘cultural sub-systems’— the social and the economic although the latter has led us into areas which are a long way from the purely economic, and seems to yield a useful typology of undergraduate courses.
This emphasis could be justified on the grounds that economics or at least a version of it — lies currently at the heart of government discourse on higher education, but it also reflects the fact that there is more to go on, in terms of information and analysis, with this aspect of the undergraduate curriculum than with the other seven.
However, something must be said if only briefly about Lawton's other headings.
Higher education clearly has some impact on the ‘communication’ and ‘technological’aspects of the culture, the latter particularly through the application of research.
It may even affect current ‘aesthetic’ tastes and judgements, though it would be hazardous to speculate how, and the arts maintain important centres of influence outside the higher education system, in publishing, museums, galleries and the media.
Indeed, the creative and performing arts never seem to have become entirely integrated into the system — they do not quite fit standard CNAA validation procedures for example— and this is perhaps no bad thing.
A plurality of institutions underpins a plurality of values.
It is Lawton's three remaining headings — rationality, morality and belief — which raise some of the most interesting but elusive questions about the curriculum.
All three refer to culture in the sense of the pattern of thought and behaviour; and all three involve some consideration of the effects of the ‘hidden curriculum’ of undergraduate education.
What messages, overt or covert, does higher education transmit about how to think, how to behave and what to believe?
One possible answer is none.
Higher education, to many lecturers, is a matter of knowledge and skills consciously acquired and it eschews precisely those matters of thought, behaviour and belief which Lawton nominates.
Not to do so would be to infringe the essential autonomy of the student and objectivity of the  activity.
Others would admit, indeed require, that higher education should embody rationality, and in so far as one can believe or practice that, it becomes a cultural pattern.
But the relevance of the question perhaps becomes more obvious if one considers a few examples of the kind of indirect or hidden influence that higher education might have on the culture.
All these examples are speculative, but all have surfaced in the recent debate on higher education.
The first has to do with one of the central themes of this chapter, namely the professional nature of most undergraduate education.
Does this mean that the undergraduate curriculum essentially transmits professional norms and values, related to ideas such as expertise, autonomy, collegiality, service, and so on?
The contrast between professional norms and bureaucratic norms is a familiar theme in the literature on professions, and is to some extent exemplified in the ambiguous relationship between academics and administrators in higher education itself.
On the whole, however, professionals find ways of relating to bureaucrats; indeed, they have certain things in common, such as a belief in structure and continuity.
But what of the relationship between the professional and the entrepreneur?
One does come across entrepreneurial academics, but there is still something slightly suspect in the academic world about making, as distinct from earning, money which manifests itself in the grey area of consultancy.
And if the Training Agency (1989) thinks it necessary to introduce an ‘enterprise element’ into degree courses, is that an implicit recognition that such courses tend to inculcate some other set of values?
Anti-entrepreneurial attitudes must be distinguished from anti-industrial ones; although they may go together, they need not.
The charge that higher education has over a longer period contributed to an anti-industrial ethos among the educated classes in Britain has been laid by Wiener (1981) and countered in different ways by Sanderson (1972) who points to manifold examples of involvement with industry, and Shattock (1987) who tends to lay the blame elsewhere, at the door of government and industry itself.
Perhaps one needs to distinguish between different parts of the higher education system in such an argument; the current system after all comprises not one (Oxbridge) tradition but several.
But there can be no doubt that higher education is largely a mental rather than manual occupation: in terms of the classification in the US Department of Labor's Dictionary of Occupational Titles , it involves work with ideas rather than work with people or work with things.
There is much in Western culture which gives precedence to the first, regarding them not merely as more important but more real.
Within higher education, the mental/manual dichotomy is to some extent shadowed by the pure/applied one.
It would not be altogether surprising if higher education did inculcate a certain distaste for dirtying one's hands, for products and things (money, in this context, is not a thing).
And the ‘people professions’(such as management, social work and teaching) also seem to have a somewhat ambiguous status in the academic culture, which may lead them sometimes  to de-emphasize the human aspects of their work, and emphasize the theoretical, procedural or institutional.
The case of engineering is even more complex and more interesting.
Hutton and Lawrence (1981), in their comparisons of the training, careers and status of German and British engineers, argue that the relationship with pure science is different in the two countries (but see Chapter 2, note 1).
They go on to suggest that the characteristic British concern with the professional status of engineers is largely compensatory, and that the status of engineers is linked to the more general status of industry in the two countries.
Their data show that German engineers are more likely to be in key management positions than their British counterparts (who are relatively poorly paid even in UK terms), and they draw a general contrast between the ‘profit-centred’ approach which they find in Britain, and the ‘product-centred’one they find in Germany:
The corporate background for this kind of deportment by production managers is quite simply a very product-oriented one.
German managers ‘talk products’ and manufacturing more than their British colleagues do, and this applies to German managers generally, not just those associated with design and product development.
An easy way of putting this claim to the test is to ask senior German managers what, as representatives of their company, they are most proud of.
The answers tend to emphasize products, product quality, design, manufacturing techniques, and after sales service, and to de-emphasise profit, turnover, market share, and acquisitions.
(pp. 130–1)
Of course, concern with the product to the exclusion of everything else customer, market, cash-flow, productivity, and so on — can lead to the kind of product fetishism which allows ‘good’ engineering firms to go bust.
Nevertheless, one wonders to what extent higher education in the UK has played a role in creating not a military-industrial, but financial-bureaucratic complex, dominated by the City and the Treasury, which works to the long-term disadvantage of not simply manufacturing but all forms of ‘producer’ industries.
Even the Council for Industry and Higher Education notes the ‘magnetic attractions’ of the financial sector (CIHE 1987).
The situation may change as the nature of industry itself changes.
The old pattern of capital/resource/labour-intensive manufacturing is giving way to a more knowledge-intensive one, not only in the field of information technology, but in all forms of production.
One of the most interesting effects of the new technology (significantly called ‘high’) may be to modify the pure/applied distinction, and thereby bring higher education and industry naturally closer together.
What other kinds of messages may undergraduate curricula covertly or unconsciously transmit?
Another possible one has to do with time.
There has been a good deal of discussion recently of time-perspectives in industrial and economic policy, with both industry and the City being  accused of ‘short-termism’, sometimes in comparison with the Germans or Japanese.
Whatever the truth of this, higher education, by contrast, embodies a kind of ‘long-termism’.
It thinks in years, not months or weeks: the three or four years it takes to reach a degree; the similar or longer period needed for a doctorate; the intellectual shifts that occur over decades, even centuries.
To most academics, this sort of perspective seems perfectly natural, and they see nothing odd in someone working on a problem or book for years.
On the whole, academics will trade time for quality, although sometimes no doubt they use quality as an excuse for not being on time.
But such long-termism is out of step not only with the more immediate demands of industry, but the drum of government policy.
The pressure comes most obviously in terms of the recently imposed completion rates for postgraduate research, but there also seems to be a more general irritation in policy circles with what seems to be the leisurely pace of higher education, a pace which some would link with the original meaning of the word scholar.
The hidden curriculum may transmit messages not only about the time perspective of tasks, but about identification with them, and in particular the non-identification that is implied by the idea of scepticism.
This theme will be explored further in the next chapter.
To some extent the notion of academic scepticism is a caricature or even downright inaccurate; the advancement of knowledge requires emotional commitment just as much as detachment, and it is the ground-rules of public research rather than the temperament of academics which sustain objective criticism.
But the traditions and conventions of scepticism and proper doubt sit uneasily with the current politics of commitment and conviction, whether of the left or the right.
There seems also to be a feeling not only in government but in the mass media that academics lack conviction, that they are a bit‘wet’ or ‘wimpish’, that they produce, to use the Prime Minister's phrase, ‘guffy stuff’.
(This perception is if anything stronger in the popular culture in the USA, where it has bred an academic response in the form of the Extrovert Professor who can take on anybody, physically or mentally).
And of course such a perception produces its own reaction, in the emphasis on common sense and experience, in people who boast of having attended the University of Life, or feel it their duty to sort out young graduates when they enter their first job, or even in anti-intellectual or irrationalist currents in higher education itself (Shils 1984).
This aspect of the culture relates very closely to the final example of the ‘hidden curriculum’ of higher education.
Higher education is, if nothing else, analytic; it involves the inspection of assumptions, the questioning of conclusions, the detailed dissection of logical, empirical and interpretative processes.
When people say that higher education teaches one to ‘think’, they probably have in mind this induction into the habit of analysis.
The question really is what the opposite of ‘analytic’ is, what cultural patterns of thought and behaviour exist outside higher education with which it contrasts or even conflicts.
‘Synthetic’ is logical but wrong; ‘normative’is  possible; some might suggest ‘active’.
But the real contrast is surely with the tacit.
Is there an in-built tendency for continuous, unbroken cultures to become more compressed, assumptive, allusive and tacit over time?
The very continuity of patterns of thought and behaviour mean that the articulation of those patterns can become ever more economical, to the point where they are increasingly condensed in symbols, codes, rituals and obliquities.
(The process can also be observed in a marriage.)
English, as distinct from British, culture seems to provide a good example of such a tendency; it is a culture largely undisturbed by invasion or revolution, difficult for foreigners to plumb, subtle and rich in social allusion at every level.
Old, compressed cultures such as this can be notably cohesive and resilient, but they can find it increasingly difficult to adapt to radical, as distinct from incremental, changes.
Such rigidities can be observed in organizations and institutions as well as whole cultures: the small, traditional engineering or textile firm which fails to adapt to the market and goes out of business; the political party caught between renewal and betrayal; the institution so deeply set in its ways that it is hardly aware of them.
It would constitute a typically academic fallacy to believe that analysis on its own — the sheer power of thought — could change or reverse such a situation, but it could well affect it.
The effects of the undergraduate curriculum would in this sense always be counter-cultural, a necessary antithesis to prevailing patterns and norms.
The analytic ethos of higher education, diffused through its graduates, would challenge the tacit cultures of institutions and organizations, and in so doing perhaps makes their successful evolution that bit more likely.
If that were true, it would constitute a general economic as well as social rationale for higher education, and one that could be related to all of Lawton's eight headings.
But the notion of the ‘analytic’ graduate also raises some difficult questions about the impact of the undergraduate curriculum on student development, which leads us on to the next chapter.