

ABSTRACT
This report is an update to BNB Research Fund Report 46, The Emergence of the Electronic Book.
The report assumes readers will be familiar with the early main report and begins by reviewing the broad trends in electronic book development since early 1991, including the emergence of the first handheld systems based on optical storage rather than chips.
Following this, the report examines in detail developments since early 1991 of chip based electronic books, both in terms of new products and methods of distribution.
The final section focuses on the appearance of the Sony Data Discman, the world's first handheld based on an optical disc system, examining both the product and publishing initiatives supporting its launch.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Tony Feldman has had over twenty years wide-ranging experience of the publishing industry.
He was a director of Macmillan for ten years, first running their secondary schools division and then becoming Group Electronic Publishing Director.
He left Macmillan in 1989 to establish his own consultancy and training practice, specialising in electronic information media.
He has consulted widely and trained, lectured and organised major conferences and seminars both in the UK and overseas.
He is consultant editor of Interactive Media International and international editor of the US journals Multimedia Review and Virtual Reality Report.
His books include Secrets of Space (Aldus, 1980), A Publishers Guide to CD-ROM (Blueprint, 1987), Pocket Glossary of Publishing Terms (Blueprint, 1988), The Emergence of the Electronic Book (British Library, 1990), Everest Without Oxygen (Macmillan, 1990), Electronic Publishing Perspectives (Blueprint, 1990), and The Electronic Publishing Glossary (with Michael Card, Blueprint, 1991).
He is currently also Senior Consultant of Information Agents Limited, a new company established to help those who own major information assets to trade in electronic information markets through licensing deals, joint ventures or strategic acquisitions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This update reviews developments in the field of handheld electronic books since publication of BNB Research Fund Report 46, The Emergence of the Electronic Book, British Library, 1990.
There is little literature on the subject so the research has been carried out largely through interviews with the organisations and individuals influential in electronic book development and through a direct review by the author of a range of electronic book products.
This update does not repeat the contextual, background and speculative analysis provided in the original report and assumes that readers will approach this work as an addendum.
In other words, it is important that readers of this update are familiar with the original study.
The material in this update emphasises basic news of the developments taking place rather than overall strategic analysis.
This limitation in scope reflects the remit and funding of the update agreed with The British Library.
The author wishes to express his thanks for the cooperation of all those who have provided the information and views on which this current publication is based.
1 INTRODUCTION
Following the introductory assessment of the market context of handheld electronic books in this current section, this report provides two main areas of update.
In the next chapter, we deal with activity by chip-based electronic book publishers and review the latest products reaching the market.
In chapter 3, we examine the emergence of the first handheld CD-ROM systems and preview the first palmtop CD-I player, due for launch in 1992.
The emphasis throughout is on concrete information, updating the original report rather than on contextual or strategic analysis.
1.1 Change and Development
The original report on which this additional research is based began with a quotation by Hollywood movie mogul, Sam Goldwyn.
Asked once about how long he thought the movie industry could last, he snapped: ‘I never make predictions, especially about the future’.
Goldwyn's home spun wisdom is particularly refreshing today when rapid and fundamental changes are affecting all aspects of our lives.
Change and development have certainly been the keynote of the electronic information industry in 1991.
The trend towards the multimedia delivery of information has strengthened and powerful new products have emerged to address a wide range of international information markets.
In the world of handheld electronic information media, there has been a similar degree of change and development.
In particular, while the broad move towards smaller, more powerful pocket-sized computing has continued, there has been a major new entrant into the field of handheld information devices.
1.2 Palmtop Optical Memories
The focus throughout the original report was on the emergence of handheld electronic books based on ROM chip memories.
At the time of writing, there was little to suggest that viable palmtop optical media were about to appear.
Indeed, while some laptop devices had emerged such as the Cornucopia and the Dynabook, it seemed unlikely that handheld CD-ROM technology of any kind would make much impact in world markets for some years.
Within a few months of publication, however, Sony unveiled the first handheld, self-contained CD-ROM system, launching it first in Japan and then in Europe and the United States.
The Data Discman, as it was originally called, is described in detail in chapter 3 but it is clear that with upgraded devices now being launched by Sony and a multimedia player in the wings, Sony's handheld platform will be the basis of a new generation of powerful electronic book players.
Both in terms of price and utility, the players look as if they will be a major challenge to chip-based products.
1.3 The Commercial Climate for Electronic Books
No sector of industry or commerce has escaped the effects of the current global trade recession.
It is not surprising therefore that the growth of the electronic information industry has felt the impact of cutbacks both in corporate and domestic spending.
However, to place the rise of handheld electronic media in some context, it is worth noting that there are clear signs of electronic information markets overhauling traditional print-on-paper markets, at least in terms of the revenues they generate.
In the 1990 edition of the annual United States government review of domestic industrial activity, Industrial Outlook, the US Department of Commerce showed some striking growth rates in key sectors of information trading.
The figures are US revenues in US$ billions.
In the United Kingdom, the Publishers Association report roughly a 9 per cent growth in the British book market in the last few years while electronic sectors are showing growth rates of around 20 per cent.
We have to be cautious about growth rates in a relatively new industry.
Revenue figures necessarily start at a modest level and even 100 per cent growth leaves us with a level only slightly less modest.
However, the picture in the United States alone looks consistent enough to be significant.
In particular, the US book market shows an average annual growth rate of 8.25 per cent while the market for electronic information is growing at 20.30 per cent .
On this basis, by about 1996, sales of electronic information products will be generating more revenue than sales of books.
On its own this tells us nothing about the market for handheld media.
Indeed, although no industry figures are available, it is clear even from casual enquiries that the market for handheld media remains very small compared to other electronic sectors such as online databases and compact disc information products.
However, the steady growth of electronic markets provides an important context for the longer term growth of handheld media.
The upward trend in the market as a whole indicates the arrival both of products effectively exploiting the utilities of electronic media and a growing acceptance and appreciation among information users of the value of these utilities.
In this general context, handheld media are increasingly offering the same utilities which are helping to build the electronic information market globally, together with portability, an ingredient new to electronic media but for long one of the most cherished advantages of the printed word.
This suggests that handheld media can form a successful and expanding niche in the overall pattern of market growth which we are observing in electronic media more generally.
1.4 Commercial Positions of Chip-based and Optical Media
As we will see, this does not mean that the organisations now pioneering handheld products are going to have an easy path to commercial success.
On the contrary, in building a new product category they are accepting high levels of risk.
This is particularly true of the chip-based publishers.
Sony's position is less dangerous because it is building on the foundations of an already established physical format.
Their handheld CD audio players have at least familiarised the market place with both the concept of CD information on the move and the broad physical appearance of the player.
Not surprisingly, their Data Discman has a strong generic similarity to their music playing Discman, itself a logical development of the original and now ubiquitous Sony Walkman cassette player.
Moreover, CD-ROMs, the media the Data Discman plays, while hardly universally established, are by no means the radical innovation they would have seemed a few years ago.
In addition to these advantages, the Data Discman is also a generic player while most of the current chip-based handhelds remain dedicated devices offering only the body of information which a customer purchases with the hardware.
We will examine these commercial issues in more detail in the two main sections which follow.
2 BOOKS ON CHIPS
This chapter concentrates largely on the fortunes and activities of Franklin Electronic Publishers and SelecTronics, the two chip-based electronic book publishers.
2.1 The Effect of Competition
Basic linguistic products such as phonetic spellcheckers were the first electronic handhelds to be brought to market.
Franklin Electronic Publishers (formerly Franklin Computer) effectively created the product category with their Spelling Ace which appeared in 1986 and has since sold over three million units worldwide.
Since then, more sophisticated linguistic devices combining spellchecking with dictionary and thesaurus facilities have appeared and multilingual translators, some incorporating speech technology, have also begun to emerge.
Until recently, the principal players in the growing product category were the two US pioneers, Franklin and SelecTronics.
In the original report, however, we noted that it is not difficult to design, manufacture and market simple chip-based handhelds, especially straightforward spellcheckers.
The difficulty lies in building real quality into the products.
Different spellcheckers may look generically similar much as different electronic calculators do, but their performance can vary significantly.
The quality of the product depends on the wordlist it uses, the software which enables a user to check spellings phonetically against the wordlist and the basic reliability of the hardware components.
We indicated in the original report that leisure electronics generalists such as Seiko, Smith-Corona, Texas Instruments, and Aurora were hurriedly investing in spellchecker products and rapidly bringing ranges to the market at much lower prices than either Franklin or SelecTronics.
We warned at that time that the underlying quality of these products was questionable but that they might nonetheless enjoy success because quality or lack of it is not apparent in the external appearance of the products.
Our concerns have proven well founded.
During 1991 the spellchecker market has passed through a damaging cycle.
The wealth of low cost products have indeed reached international markets, some spellcheckers retailing at less than £25.
As we had suspected, however, for most of the new entrants, the new category was peripheral to their main business interests and relatively few resources were committed to ensure adequate software and hardware build quality.
Although the market has been swamped with the new product, a large number of returns were made as poor quality began to show up.
Consumers rapidly became aware that they had paid a low price because very little had been invested by manufacturers to ensure durability, integrity of the wordlist or good functionality as far as the software was concerned.
Wordlists are notorious for including bizarre mis-spellings.
In some cases, the same poor quality wordlist has been licensed for use by a number of different manufacturers.
It is reported that the Seiko wordlist, for example, can always be easily identified because it accepts M-O-W-S-E as a correct spelling of the word ‘mouse’!
Once returns began to grow and disillusion amongst consumers had set in, the new players began to withdraw from the market almost as quickly as they had entered.
Smith-Corona pulled out following legal disputes with Franklin while Texas Instruments, unwilling to anglicise their America-English wordlist, have withdrawn from the UK market.
Too much product of too little quality has meant that both manufacturers and retailers have become heavily overstocked.
Dumping of excess inventory by some manufacturers has exacerbated the problem.
Driven by unsophisticated and unsuccessful opportunism, this cycle has had very serious spin-off effects for both Franklin and SelecTronics.
Although their new competitors are now leaving the market place, they have caused considerable damage to the commercial position of Franklin and SelecTronics.
Neither company could compete with the newcomers by simple price reduction because Franklin and SelecTronics had both invested heavily in the underlying quality of their products and therefore had large costs to amortise.
The result was that by the middle of 1990, both companies were finding sales of their established ‘bread-and-butter’ linguistic product lines seriously eroded.
By the autumn, they were badly overstocked and suffering resulting cash difficulties.
This has clearly limited their rate of investment in new products, especially the more speculative general reference publications which both have been planning.
More importantly, it has brought the two companies close to the brink of financial disaster.
Franklin, much larger of the two, seems to have weathered the difficulties more easily.
Having divested themselves of their overstocks, they are now issuing some exciting new products and are showing signs of a return to profitability.
SelecTronics have had to struggle to survive the recent difficulties.
In May, 1991, the Digital Information Group's Software Industry Bulletin reported that SelecTronics expects to report a ‘significant loss’ for its financial year ended 31 March and that it is restructuring its business so that it manufactures handheld devices only when it has firm orders from its distribution channels.
Prior to this, SelecTronics had cut its work force by over 40 per cent to about 70 employees and the corporation's president, Jim Finke, had resigned.
Ironically, the company's Microlytics subsidiary which publishes microcomputer software, is reporting record sales and profits.
2.2 Franklin Electronic Publishers
Products
Franklin now categorise their products under six main headings.
The names and product numbers are those used by Franklin in the United States.
There are minor variations to names in Europe and the UK and different product numbers apply.
Their catalogue of titles shows careful organic development of both product features and underlying technology.
All the Spelling Correctors are based upon the excellent wordlist Franklin have licensed from Merriam Webster and on which the famous US dictionary is based.
For the British versions of their products, Franklin use an equally authoritative wordlist licensed from William Collins.
Franklin's range of thesaurus products has the same phonetic spellchecking built-in.
Their dictionaries combine word definitions with phonetic spellchecking and thesaurus capabilities.
Their general reference products include spellchecking and thesaurus facilities.
In addition to their organic approach to product development, Franklin also specialise in using speech technology and miniaturisation.
A number of their linguistic products appear in a form which incorporates a speech facility while some variants of the Spell Master and Word Master compress the products to the size of credit cards.
Franklin's latest product is the Electronic Encyclopaedia, based on the Concise Columbia Encyclopaedia.
Using data compression ratios in excess of 5:1, they have squeezed the text on the three 8 megabit ROM chips plus 32k of RAM.
The product uses an 8-line super twist LCD screen with adjustable contrast and gives excellent legibility.
The user interface looks like setting the standard for future electronic books of this kind.
Although brief, clear instructions for use accompany the product, its functions are intuitive and users can familiarise themselves with the search and retrieval functions by applying commonsense and trial and error.
Pull-down menus provide options allowing searches to be deepened or filtered by broad factors such as article type, geographical location, subject and time period.
Cross references for the search term chosen can also be selected by menu.
Users can track forward and back through cross references in the encyclopaedia articles themselves by using a single keystroke.
In the United States, the encyclopaedia was launched early in 1991 at US$399 but the price is expected to fall to about US$299 by the end of the year.
In the UK, it is priced at £375 by Franklin's exclusive distributor, Innovations International.
Marketing and distribution
Franklin's prices vary from US$29.95 for the cheapest spellchecker to US$399 for the encyclopaedia.
Their strategy has been to price relatively high and then, as the particular product ages, to increase functionality and reduce prices.
In markets outside the United States, local distributors determine pricing and have to base their policies on the price at which Franklin supply and the discount structures that exist locally.
For example, UK distributor, Innovations International, have to give average discounts of 40 per cent to retail outlets and 55 per cent for mail order.
This compares with only about 25 per cent for US retail and 40 per cent for US mail order.
These differences mean that UK prices of Franklin product have to be higher than their US counterparts.
In the United States, Franklin has long sold its product range through retail outlets.
In the United States, Franklin have traditionally been strong in retail marketing.
Today they have about 27,000 US outlets including department stores, drug stores, computer stores, airport shops and a few bookshops.
Franklin subscribe to the Apple philosophy that if you can encourage children to use your products, they will continue to use them when they are adults.
Consequently, Franklin are actively marketing their products to schools.
They use a separate division called Franklin Learning Resources and claim that at least some products are used by each of over 4,000 school districts.
Franklin employ their own teacher sales team to give advice and support to schools starting to use their products.
Franklin have appointed distributors in most major European countries and regions including Germany, France, Italy, Spain, United Kingdom, Belgium, Scandinavia.
They also have distributors in small markets such as Ireland, Greece, Hungary, Poland, Bulgaria and Turkey.
The largest non-US distributor is Innovations International in the UK.
In the year 1990–91, Innovation's Franklin business was worth £1.2 million out of their total turnover of £4 million and since taking on the distributorship in 1987 they claim to have sold close to 300,000 units of Franklin product.
Initially, most of these sales were made through mail order specialists but retail has become a growing sector and today accounts for about half of current sales.
Their largest retail client is Argos which accounted for over £400,000 of sales in the last year.
Other major UK retailers include Boots the Chemist, Menzies, Dixons and W.H. Smith.
So far, no traditional bookshops have stocked the products.
Innovations are an unusual and energetic company with considerable in-house technical know-how.
They have actually entered the handheld market themselves (and with Franklin's blessing) with their own excellent five-language, speaking interpreter.
Currently priced at £149, they have sold about 50,000 units in the year since it was first launched.
They expect to release a version priced at £50 during 1992.
The Interpreter features excellent quality, digitised speech and over 13,000 phrases.
Innovations believe that with the appropriate educationally designed software and the right database, the Interpreter can readily form the basis of a powerful new kind of language learning tool.
They are keen to establish links with publishers strong in this area to discuss joint venturing or licensing arrangements.
Both on their own behalf and on Franklin's, Innovations are making trial efforts to interest the education market in their handheld range both through limited direct mail and some direct representation by Oxford Educational Supplies.
In particular, they offer the Franklin Elementary Spellmaster with a 27,000 word database drawn from The Oxford Children's Dictionary, published by Oxford University Press, together with a free copy of the book.
The Spellmaster provides phonetic spellchecking using software designed specifically to correct the most common errors made by children and dyslexics.
The database cross-refers to the printed book, citing page numbers so children can examine the printed definitions of the words with accompanying illustrations.
Innovations report good initial response from schools and confirm that the education market is an area of their business they are expecting to expand in the UK.
2.3 SelecTronics
SelecTronics are Franklin's major competitor.
Like Franklin, they see their activities as electronic book publishing.
While their type of product closely parallels Franklin's, they are ahead of Franklin in moving towards a generic element in their product design.
Both their Electronic Bible and Electronic Encyclopaedia have slots which accept plug-in ROM cartridges.
They do not as yet allow the use of international standard cartridges such as those conforming to the specifications of the PCMCIA (Personal Computer Memory Card Industry Association) but SelecTronics will be offering their own proprietary cartridges enabling customers to use the SelecTronics' Bible and Encyclopaedia as ‘readers’ for other information products.
In the original report we mentioned a major licensing deal between SelecTronics and Berlitz and we can now see the concrete results of this in SelecTronics' product range.
Products
SelecTronics' range is smaller than Franklin's but similar in broad content.
Their WordFinder products represent the two main levels of linguistic utility — the 220 model provides phonetic spellchecking and a thesaurus (100,000 correctly spelled words and 660,000 synonyms) and the 224 model combines the spellchecking and thesaurus facilities with 50,000 dictionary definitions.
The WordCard is just a credit card-size phonetic spellchecker.
The SelecTronics' Electronic Bible is broadly similar to the Franklin product although Franklin favour hinged, flip-up screens rather than LCDs integrated with the keyboard.
Their Bible appears in only one edition, the highly successful New International Version, which they licensed from the world's largest bible publishers, Zondervan.
The Random House Encyclopaedia contains over 20,000 entries, about ten megabytes of data, before compression.
It has a recommended price in the United States of US$350 and is sold in the UK for £399.95 (compared to the UK SelecTronics' Bible price of £299.95).
Marketing and Distribution
SelecTronic's approach to marketing is broadly similar to Franklin's except that SelecTronics are much more inclined to develop partnership arrangements with their licensors and utilise the marketing muscle of such companies as Random House, Zondervan and Berlitz to maximise international sales.
These arrangements with established publishers also make it possible to reach bookshops through direct sales representation.
In the UK, SelecTronics has been exclusively represented for over three years by Zeon, best known as a distributor of watches.
Like Innovations, Zeon have traditionally sold their electronic book products through direct mail operations such as GUS, Kayes, Littlewoods and Grattons.
Increasingly, however, their business is switching towards retail sales.
Again like Innovations, their biggest retail account is now Argos but others include W.H. Smith, Comet, Dixons, Curry's and Littlewoods.
While their sales of SelecTronics' product was entirely mail order two years ago, it now represents only about 30 per cent of the total.
Zeon only carry two Berlitz products (the Berlitz EuroTraveller 10-language translator and the Berlitz Interpreter 5-language translator), the two main English language WordFinders and the Bible and Encyclopaedia.
2.4 Other Players
Megaword
In the original report, we gave extensive coverage of the Australian Smart Book development from Megaword.
The product still has not reached the market and, while spokespersons for the Australian companies avoid saying that the project has been shelved, there appears to be no clear launch plan or marketing strategy.
Sharp
Among the generalists, Sharp continue to lead the market for pocket electronic organisers with their IQs and have substantially extended the range of plug-in memory card applications.
They expect to have sold more than a million IQs worldwide by the end of 1991.
Some of the cards they have produced suggest a definite electronic book strand in their thinking, at least in terms of linguistic products.
Currently they offer a spellchecker, a dictionary/thesaurus, and the Harrap French/English dictionary.
The growth in the installed base of IQs suggests that the device is fast becoming a viable platform for third-party publishing.
However, Sharp have a highly restrictive policy which makes such development difficult.
So far, the card capacity has been largely limited to a mere 64 kilobytes and supply to third parties is controlled by Sharp which price them at up to £50 each, limiting the potential margin for would-be card publishers.
Langenscheidt
The world's largest bilingual dictionary publisher, Langenscheidt have been the only traditional print-on-paper publisher to enter the electronic handheld market with direct, independent investment.
Indeed, their first entry into these markets pre-dated even Franklin.
Langenscheidt's original German/English and German/French electronic dictionaries, known as the Alpha 8 series, were launched in 1983.
They were basic products with limited functionality.
For example, after picking the first letter of a word they were seeking, users had to scroll through all the words in the database beginning with that letter to find what they were after.
The Alpha 40 series superseded the earlier devices offering a four line LCD display, a good keyboard and a 40,000 word vocabulary.
Users can now search the database by entering whole words or parts of them.
The German/English and German/French Alpha 40s are each priced at DM298.
Langenscheidt have worked closely throughout their electronic book development with Sharp which do most of the programming, source the components and manufacture the products.
Langenscheidt's in-house staff have developed the product ideas and functionalities and handle marketing.
Most of their sales were originally through traditional bookshop outlets but they have increasingly developed distribution through department stores and leisure electronics stores.
The success of their handhelds has not yet encouraged them to plan further developments.
They regard the products as useful if modest additions to corporate revenues and useful publicity for their print products.
They believe sales of their books have actually gained from the existence of the electronic counterparts.
Clearly, however, their pioneering venture in electronic books is not permitted to distract the company from their core business of selling print on paper.
3 OPTICAL MEDIA
Even as recently as early 1990, it seemed unlikely that optical disc-based handhelds would have significant impact in the immediate future.
The position now is dramatically changed.
In July 1990, in Japan, Sony launched the world's first palmtop, fully integrated CD-ROM system, the Data Discman.
The first model, known as the DD-1, has been highly successful in Japan with nearly 200,000 units being sold at Y58,000 (about £225) within the first year following its launch.
3.1 The Sony Data Discman
The DD-1 is approximately 178 mm x 102 mm x 20 mm in size and weighs 550 g without its NiCam rechargeable batteries.
It has a hinged, flip-up, high resolution, monochrome, 8-line LCD screen and can be linked to a domestic television to provide a large screen display.
A single charging of the batteries allows about 2.5 hours of continuous use.
The device plays an 8 cm CD-ROM disc, the same physical format as CD audio ‘singles’(which, when headphones are used, the DD-1 also plays).
The storage capacity is about 230 megabytes or the equivalent of roughly 90,000 A4 pages of textual information.
Search and retrieval is proprietary to Sony and is built into the firmware of the system.
This means that whatever disc application is being run, the basic search and retrievable functionality remains the same.
There are four simple search modes.
Word Search: As the name suggests, this allows individual words — but not phrases — to be searched.
Endword Search: This allows searches for words ending in specified consecutive letters.
Multi-search: This enables publishers of individual discs to set subject headings which can then allow hierarchical menus for searches specifically suited to the publication.
Keyword Search: This allows the user to list up to five terms which can then be inter-related in order to combine the meanings of the word.
Clearly, this standardised approach to search and retrieval is a major publishing limitation, all the more significant because Sony do not think of themselves as publishers and are seeking third parties to support their platform.
Sony are also guarded about the technical specification of their search and retrieval engine which means that potential publishers must enter into confidentiality agreements before receiving even the essential information on which to base their preliminary data preparation costs.
The focus of the Japanese launch was the consumer market.
In order to make sure that a good catalogue of disc titles was available, some months before the launch, Sony had encouraged the formation of an Electronic Book Publishing Committee in Japan comprising 73 hardware manufacturers and software publishers.
The name is significant because Sony are determinedly working to rename their Data Discman in the public mind and to ensure it becomes known as the Electronic Book Player.
This astute move by Sony looks like capturing the attractive, generic ‘electronic book’ name for the benefit of their own platform.
The Japanese committee's work ensured that at launch there were 17 different discs available, including a multilingual dictionary bundled with the first players sold.
Since then a further 15 discs have been released.
At the time of writing, a further 22 titles have been announced for autumn 1991 and spring 1992.
Existing Japanese Data Discman titles, summer 1991
Bundled disc Current bundled disc contains Japanese dictionary, English-Japanese dictionary, Japanese-English dictionary, Foreign words in Japanese, Chinese character dictionary.
Kojien Japanese dictionary (Y7,500)
CD Word English/French/German/Japanese dictionary (Y12,000)
CD Word Technical Dictionary English/German/Japanese dictionary of current scientific and technical terms (Y19,800)
Anouta Konouta 3333 Songs for Karaoke (Y3,864)
Home Clinic Home medical guide (Y3,398)
Kotowaza meigen no izumi Guide to Chinese and Japanese proverbs (Y9,000)
Hyakunin isshu Famous Japanese poems (Y3,800)
Business Guide to North America Guide to business and travel in North America (Y9,700)
Business Guide to Asia Guide to business and travel in Asia (Y9,700)
Key Person Guide to the most influential figures in Japanese business, literature and science (Y9,700)
Pro Baseball Guide to professional baseball in Japan (Y3,800)
English Conversation Conversational dictionary (Y7,282)
Medical Dictionary Dictionary of medical words and terms (Y15,000)
Computer Words Dictionary of computer terms (Y9,700)
English-Japanese/Japanese-English Dictionary (Y6,019)
Tokyo Restaurant Guide 90 — 91 (Y2,718)
Today's Cooking Cookery book (Y3,883)
Pia Cinema Club Movie and video guide (Y4,078)
Pill Book Consumer prescription and non-prescription medicine guide (Y2,816)
JTB Accomodation Guide Hotels and inns in Japan (Y3,884)
Asahi Shimbun Column 1985–9 Editorial columns from one of Japan's most popular newspapers (Y2,800)
Tabigura Travel guide to Japan (Y5,000)
Nikkei Company Guide (1991) Information about leading Japanese companies — new edition for 1991 (Y6,602)
Dictionary of Modern Words (Y3,800)
Mohan Roppou Legal dictionary (Y5,825)
Compact Roppou Compact legal dictionary for 1991 (Y3,883)
All Country Golf Course Guide (Y5,631)
CD Jazz Book CD audio catalogue (Y8,800)
CD Classical Book 1982–1990 CD audio catalogue (Y8,800)
CD Popular Music Book (Japanese Music) CD audio catalogue (Y6,800)
CD Popular Music Book (Foreign Music) CD audio catalogue (Y6,800)
3.2 Data Discman Range
In the summer of 1991, the Sony Corporation announced further models of the Data Discman, products which clearly sharpen Sony's prospects in markets such as the United States and Europe.
Three new models are announced: the DD-1EX, the DD-10 and the DD-DR1.
DD-1EX
The DD-1EX has the following key features.
A brighter, larger LCD display than the original DD-1.
The new player has a 3.5 inch backlit screen.
The backlit facility can be switched on and off.
It displays simple graphics as well as text.
Using 256 x 200 pixel resolution, basic charts and illustrations can be displayed.
Each illustration is bit-mapped, displayed as a complete screen image and stored uncompressed.
At the resolution available, a single illustration accounts for 6.25 kilobytes of data.
This means that a Data Discman disc can store up to 32,000 separate images.
Graphical search interface.
The player allows search and retrieval functions to be selected by ikons or illustrations.
Exchangeable display language software.
The software can be changed so that, in addition to Japanese, the Data Discman can be operated in English, French, German, Spanish, Italian, Danish, Finnish, Swedish, Norwegian, Dutch and Portuguese.
Four possible power sources.
The player can be run from AC mains, car battery, rechargeable battery or dry cells.
The player comes with a disc comprising six dictionaries, two of which are illustrated.
The DD-1EX is priced at Y58,000 in Japan.
DD-10
The DD-10 has the same features as the DD-1EX plus the following.
Light, slimline casing offering even greater portability than the DD-1EX.
The enhanced model is just 34 mm thick and weighs 520 g without batteries.
It can retrieve and play audio from a CD-ROM in addition to text and graphics.
Headphones are supplied with the unit.
Electronic bookmark function.
This allows users to resume from the point they left by electronically ‘marking’ it before switching the unit off.
If the power is accidentally turned off in use or the power source runs out, the user's place is kept automatically in whatever application is running at the time.
The units comes with two bundled discs both with audio as well as text and graphics.
The audio facility is used as a pronunciation guide for six-language foreign language lessons (English, French, German, Spanish, Italian and Japanese).
Compatible with PAL/SECAM as well as NTSC televisions for large-screen playback.
The DD-10 is priced at Y65,000 in Japan.
DD-DR1
This player incorporates most of the features of the DD-10 but has no keyboard or screen.
Instead, it can be connected to a NEC 9800 personal computer.
In other words, it is effectively a ‘drive’ rather than a stand-alone device, enabling data from Data Discman CD-ROMs to be accessed from a NEC 9800.
Data can also be pasted into word processing documents.
The DD-DR1 will be priced at Y48,000.
The prospect of the full range being available in its entirety in Japan by the end of 1991, has spurred new disc development, some for the first time incorporating graphics and sound.
By September 1991, the following titles were amongst those announced for autumn and spring publication.
Titles with graphics are marked with one asterisk, titles with sound with two.
Graphics and sound are represented by * and **.
A range of non-information utilities has also been announced for the launch of the DD-DR1 drive, published and marketed by HAL Kenkyujo at prices ranging from Y12,000 to Y18,000.
3.3 The Data Discman in International Markets
The product first coming to markets outside Japan is the DD-1EX.
The first launch, in the United States in October 1991, at a price of US$549.95, was geared to the mass consumer market but with an emphasis towards middle class business users.
The first tranche of disc publications announced included the following.
In all these publications, Sony — through their recently formed Sony Electronic Publishing Company — control technical specification of the products, their packaging and distribution.
Three discs are bundled with the players: Compton's, the Wellness Encyclopaedia and the World Travel Translator.
In Europe, at the time of writing, only the German launch has taken place with most major European countries to follow.
In Germany, the players are priced at DM 998 including two bundled discs — a Bertelsmann German dictionary and a Langenscheidt English-German dictionary.
With Bertelsmann involved, it is not surprising that book clubs as well as electronics and book stores are being targeted as distribution channels.
In the UK, the situation has been confusing.
Early in 1991, Sony's UK company seemed to be firmly in charge of both hardware and software strategy.
They had contacted selected publishers to seek support for the platform and were forecasting a launch in the autumn with a consumer market focus at a player price of about £250.
From this point, the position has become confused, at least as far as external observers are concerned.
By the autumn, the launch had been moved to spring with the emphasis now on business and professional users.
The player price had increased and was expected to be about £350 at launch.
It is not clear whether this will be the final position or, more importantly, whether Sony UK have any firm and considered plans for stimulating disc development among British publishers in order to support the launch.
Perhaps Sony Electronic Publishing will take on this role, leaving Sony UK to deal with hardware distribution only.
At the time of writing, no indigenous British originated discs have been announced and, despite substantial potential interest on the part of British information publishers, there are few signs of a clear, decisive lead being given by Sony to encourage initial investments in disc development.
Activity to stimulate disc development more generally, however, was evident at the 1991 Frankfurt Book Fair and this may clarify and stimulate the British situation.
In the months before the Fair, Sansyusya, a publisher playing a leading role in Japanese disc development and influential in the original Electronic Book Committee of Japan, announced the formation of the International Electronic Book Publishers Committee (IEBPC).
Sansyusya's international efforts to create an ‘electronic book’(i.e. Data Discman) publishing community are sponsored by an impressive array of Japanese electronic publishing interests.
These include hardware companies Sony, Sanyo and Panasonic; printers active as data preparation companies Dai Nippon, Toppan, Kuyodo and Tosho; distributors Tohan and Nippan; and the publishing company, Iwanami.
A range of experienced print-on-paper publishers have been invited to join the board of directors of IEBPC including: Petri Arpi, Werner Soderstrom (Finland); Brian Blunden, IEPRC (Britain); Pierre-Henri Cousin, Larousse (France); Eric Dobby, Harrap (Britain); Lorenzo Enriques, Zanichelli Editore (Italy); Dr Stanley D. Frank, Britannnica Software (USA); Gunter H. Frohlen, Oscar Brandstetter Verlag (Germany); Gerard Lamy, Lamy SA (France); Michael Klett, Ernst Klett Verlag (Germany); Dr Andreas Langenscheidt, Langenscheidt KG (Germany); Bill Pattis, NTC Publishing (USA); Eva Rudman, Norstedts Forlag (Sweden); Sanchez Ruiperez, Grupo Anaya (Spain); Egon Schmidt, Gyldendal (Denmark); Egil Tveteras, Kunnskapsforlaget (Norway); Roel Velthuijs, Wolters Noordhoff (Netherlands); David Worlock, European Information Industry Association (Britain); and Ryosuke Yasue, Iwanami Publishing (Japan).
At the time of writing it is too early to determine whether the IEBPC's Frankfurt seminars, presentations and cocktail parties will lead to a significant international force stimulating a vigorous wave of Data Discman publishing.
There is, however, a clear momentum growing.
The Sony platform has struck a strong chord among normally highly conservative publishing organisations.
It will now be essential for Sony and its allies to maintain the gathering momentum and to spread its influence as widely as possible if their impressive new platform is to become — as they hope and intend — the de facto world standard for electronic book publishing in the 1990s and beyond.
3.4 Handheld Multimedia
It is clear that Sony are committed to pursuing and extending the Data Discman formula.
As early as spring 1990, they were demonstrating a prototype multimedia system based on Compact Disc Interactive (CD-I) technology that could deliver interactive, seamlessly integrated sound, text, and colour images including animations.
A year later, they have demonstrated a fully functioning, pre-production prototype with assurances of a launch in Japan at the beginning of 1992 at a price equivalent to US$1,000.
Apart from the astonishing technological feat of compressing the required CD-I hardware into a self-contained, palmtop device, Sony have also shown a strong grasp of the popular appeal of portable and personal information systems.
Strongly influenced by their worldwide sales to date of over 60 million ‘Walkman’ products, they believe they can similarly capture a huge mass market for personal, on-the-move, multimedia information and games.
Perhaps, with their background of the ‘Walkman’ success, Sony are, after all, the obvious people to produce the world's first mass market electronic book platform.
Little detail has been announced about the palmtop CD-I player.
Recent demonstrations show it has a keyboard reduced to just a few large buttons and a flip-up 4-inch, backlit colour LCD screen.
Physically, it looks similar to the Data Discman but weighs about 850 g without the battery.
It measures 135 mm x 54.5 mm x 160 mm.
It plays full-size discs and can therefore benefit from the international range of CD-I discs made available for full size, in situ CD-I players.
It is also, of course, a CD audio player and so purchasers will get both a Sony Discman and CD-I player combined in one device.
It is clear from unofficial remarks by Sony that they see the initial market in ‘interactive music’ applications and there is little doubt that the hi-fi stereo music capabilities of the player will be one of the keys to early mass market success.
Significantly, while Philips have been hurrying to launch the first full size CD-I players, Sony — notionally, Philips' CD-I partners — have made no announcements about CD-I plans other than to show the palmtop device and to speak obliquely about other announcements to follow.
It appears that Sony are likely to follow Philips' entry into the market place, not with their own full size Sony players, but with their handheld device.
This appears to be where Sony see the potential for the fastest growing CD-I market.
There is evidence that Philips believe Sony's move towards handheld CD-I could be of immediate complementary benefit to its in situ range of players.
Philips appear to take the view that the facility to play CD-I discs at home and away will speed the integration of CD-I media into everyday life.
This was confirmed by the recent joint Philips/Sony announcement that, via the bridge of CD-ROM ‘XA’, the Data Discman will soon become CD-I compatible.
It is clear that whatever the future of palmtop multimedia, the technology on which it will be based must, for the foreseeable future, rely on optical storage.
Although data compression techniques and ROM chip price/performances are improving steadily, it is unlikely that chip-based devices will ever be able to deliver continuous, effective multimedia.
3.5 The Electronic Book of the Future
Whatever the medium of delivery, the move towards multimedia currently evident throughout all forms of electronic information delivery, looks equally irresistible in electronic book development.
Sony's palmtop CD-I player looks like being the forerunner of the ultimate form of electronic book, offering sound, text, images — including full screen, full motion video — together with intuitive user interfaces and screen resolutions easily matching the traditional quality of the printed page.
The evolved platforms of the future, however, are also likely to feature global connectivity using broadband communication links, enabling multimedia networking worldwide.
Ultimately perhaps we are moving towards the concept of a single, personal, palmtop information centre, part electronic book, part computer, part global communications centre.
Curiously, this futuristic notion returns us to one of the earliest electronic book models which we described in the original report.
Over twenty years ago, US researcher Alan Kay conceived the ‘Dynabook’, a personal, handheld centrepiece of a complex worldwide information network.
Now in the early 1990s, an evolved form of the ‘Dynabook’ looks possible.
What will determine whether it emerges in one form or another is market demand — the same thing that will determine the pace and direction of electronic book development more generally.
Ultimately, electronic books need customers.
Today, we are observing the trail-blazing activities of hardware and software pioneers, using their development skills and investment nerve to kick start markets for radically new kinds of information products.
Tomorrow, if electronic books are to evolve, we will need to see a mature market emerging providing stable, ongoing demand for new products at prices that make sense for everyone involved in the new industry.
USEFUL CONTACTS
The following is a selected list of contacts arising from this report which may be of interest to readers, particularly those interested in commercial development.