

3
Social Representations and Rhetoric
Preface
For many years Serge Moscovici has been one of the leading critics of orthodoxies in social psychological thinking.
In Chapter 1 there were several references to Moscovici's theory of social representations.
On a number of key issues, his theory, which has become increasingly important among European social psychologists, addresses similar problems to the rhetorical approach.
Moscovici stresses the social creation of mental states and he has investigated how intellectual ideas become incorporated into common-sense thinking.
At first sight, the rhetorical approach's stress on argumentation could be inserted into Moscovici's vision of a reconstituted social psychology.
This chapter explores the points of contact between the theory of social representations and the rhetorical approach.
It does this by underlining the rhetorical and argumentative dimensions of what Moscovici identifies as ‘social representations’.
In this exploration, it is necessary to engage in some detailed and rather technical analyses of concepts.
Moscovici's use of concepts is not always straightforward; even the central concept of ‘social representations’ has eluded definition.
The discussions about what precisely Moscovici means by ‘anchoring’ and ‘objectification’might appear somewhat abstruse.
However, they are necessary if the similarities between the rhetorical approach and the theory of social representations are to be demonstrated.
Furthermore, by tidying up some of the conceptual issues, it is possible to pose more clearly some of the fundamental questions, which are raised by the theory of social representations.
What sort of social science should social psychology be?
Should it be a historical or an anthropological science?
Should it search for the universalities of psychological functioning or should it try to explicate the historical creation of consciousness?
These are not empirical questions to be resolved by the collection of data.
Instead, they are questions about the sort of social vision which social psychology should express.
One of the most important recent developments in European social psychology has been the emergence of the concept of ‘social  representations’.
The emergence of a new concept does not always indicate the formulation of a new idea.
Sometimes in social psychology a concept is created to describe a novelty of experimental procedure, and sometimes to accord scientific pretensions to a well-known truism.
By contrast, what has characterized the concept of social representations has been the intellectual ambitions of its adherents.
They have announced an intellectual revolution to shift social psychology from its roots in Anglo-Saxon, individual psychology to the traditions of European social science (Herzlich, 1972).
Serge Moscovici, who has been both the Marx and the Lenin of this revolutionary movement, has advocated a fundamental reorientation of social psychology around the concept of social representations.
This revolution, if successful, will affect both pure and applied social psychology.
In fact, the whole discipline will become more applied in the sense that the emphasis will be shifted from laboratory studies, which seek to isolate variables in the abstract, towards being a social science, which examines socially shared beliefs, or social representations, in their actual social context.
According to Moscovici, this reorientation would transform the discipline into ‘an anthropological and a historical science’(1984: 948)
The concept of social representation is central to this intellectual revolution but, like many revolutionary symbols, it lacks a precise definition.
Critics have not been slow to point this out (i.e. Potter and Litton, 1985; Eiser, 1986), or to dismiss curtly the novelty of the approach (McGuire, 1986).
In reply Moscovici (1985) has suggested that social representation theorists have deliberately avoided defining their central concept, because they wished to avoid tying the concept to a single experimental procedure, whose simplifications would distort social reality.
Moscovici's defence refers to the destructive power of operational definitions to restrict intellectual advance.
Understandable though this might be, it still leaves the problem of clarifying what is meant by ‘social representation’.
It will be suggested that the problem is compounded, because theorists have not always been consistent, but have used the concept of social representation in both particular and universal senses.
It is not the present intention to point to inconsistencies, in order to undermine the revolutionary claims.
Instead, it is hoped to clarify some central issues relating to the important, but difficult, concept of social representation.
The main emphasis will be on the two major social psychological processes, which it is claimed characterize social representations: objectification and anchoring.
The distinction between universal and particular conceptions is  necessary, in order to discuss the relation between these two processes and the two different conceptions of social representation.
In examining anchoring and objectification, a strategy central to the rhetorical approach (Billig, 1985, 1987) will be adopted.
This strategy recommends that, whenever psychological theorists consider a psychological process, they should also look for the counter-process.
It will be suggested that, if the concept of social representation is to be clarified, then analysts must search for processes which can be contrasted to objectification.
The nature of social representations, in the particular sense of the term, will become clarified by investigating the son of socially shared beliefs which can be distinguished from social representations.
The position with respect to anchoring is somewhat different, because it is a universal process.
Nevertheless the same basic strategy can be applied.
If anchoring, in its essentials, refers to the way that new information is categorized and rooted into cultural beliefs, then theorists must also take note of the way that information can be particularized and uprooted.
This itself leads directly to a rhetorical view, which stresses the importance of argumentation and negation.
The rhetorical perspective, it will be suggested, can complement that of the social representation theorists, regardless of whether the universal or particular concept of social representation is adopted.
Universal and Particular Concepts of Social Representations
In the social sciences, concepts can be distinguished as being universal or particular.
Universal concepts denote phenomena which are presumed to occur universally, regardless of historical epoch or type of society.
For example, the concept of ‘role’ is usually understood universally, in that social roles are presumed to be found in all societies, whether developed or pre-literate, modern or historical.
On the other hand, a concept such as‘bureaucracy’ is a particular one, for bureaucracies are only to be found in particular sons of societies.
It is not presumed that a hunting-gathering society will possess a bureaucracy.
As far as social psychological concepts are concerned, the distinction between universal and particular is not a trivial one.
The nature of theories will be affected depending on whether universal or particular concepts are employed as basic constructs.
For example, a social psychological theory based on universal conceptions will inevitably find itself stressing, either implicitly or explicitly, the universality of human psychological processes.
On the other hand, particular  theories will emphasize the extent to which the social psychological characteristics of societies, or historical epochs, differ from each other.
An important question to ask about any new movement in social psychology is whether it proposes a universal or particular perspective.
Moscovici's formula that the new social psychology should be both anthropological and historical seems to suggest both possibilities.
It could be universal in the way that many psychological anthropologies, from Frazer to Lévi-Strauss, have been.
These anthropologies have ignored differences of geography and economy, in order to show common patterns of psychological functioning underlying anthropological diversity.
The ethogenic approach, proposed by Harré and Secord (1972), Harré (1979) and Harré, Clarke and de Cario (1985), resembles such universal anthropologies, in that it searches for basic social psychological patterns of action.
Its key terms, such as‘action’ and ‘act’, are universal, and it is no coincidence that ethogenic theorists tend to select illustrative materials across the ranges of historical and anthropological sources.
On the other hand, the social representation approach might differ from ethogenics by focusing attention on the differences, or particularities, of historical epochs.
In this way it would accept the notion that social psychology produces historically relative knowledge (Gergen, 1973) and take this as its main point of theoretical departure.
The first basic question to be asked is whether theorists understand the concept of social representations to apply only to particular sons of society, or do they intend the concept to be a universal one?
Unfortunately, there is not a simple and immediate answer, because theorists have tended to use the term in both universal and particular senses.
Of course, the coexistence of these two meanings does little to help anyone puzzled by what exactly a social representation is.
Universal Concept of Social Representations
It is not difficult to find examples of theorists writing about social representations in universal terms.
For example, Denise Jodelet is expressing universal themes when she writes that ‘the concept of social representations denotes…the knowledge of common-sense’, and that it refers to ‘practical thought.
oriented to communication, comprehension and control of the social environment’(1984: 361).
This is a universal conception because it can be assumed that all societies and social groups possess, in some form or another, such common sense and practical knowledge.
Similarly, Moscovici (1973) characterizes social representations as  ‘cognitive systems with a logic and language of their own’, adding that they are ‘theories’ or ‘branches of knowledge’in their own right, for the discovery and organization of reality' (p. xiii).
He concludes, coming close to offering a definition, that ‘a social representation is a system of values, ideas and practices’(1973: xiii).
Moscovici (1984) suggests that social representations are elaborated in ‘theories'', ‘stories’, ‘rules’, ‘legends’ etc.’(p. 946).
Despite his present claim to have deliberately avoided definitions, Moscovici has, in fact, offered a definition of social representation in an article published over 20 years ago: ‘Social representation is defined as the elaborating of a social object by the community for the purpose of behaving and communicating’(1963: 251).
All these quotations suggest that social representations are universal.
It can be presumed that all societies possess their own values, stories, rules, theories about the world.
If all social life depends upon the existence of some son of culture, common sense and practical knowledge, then, accordingly, social representations will be found in all social contexts.
The universality of social representations is expressed by Aebischer and Thommen (1983), when they characterize social representations as ‘all the knowledge and understanding that a society, or subgroup of the society, has about a given object’(p. 5).
According to this characterization there cannot be a society without social representations.
The universality of social representations is also expressed when theorists draw general implications for the discipline of social psychology.
Frequently it is claimed that the very nature of social psychology will be changed by the insights of social representation theory.
More is being suggested than that social psychologists studying a particular society or subgroup of a society should attend to social representations.
Instead, general principles are formulated, and these are intended to characterize social psychological processes universally.
For instance, theorists of social representation have developed Durkheim's postulate that collective representations should have theoretical primacy over individual representations.
Moscovici (1983) has expressed the position clearly:
Our postulate has a wide significance.
Rather than motivations, aspirations, cognitive principles and the other factors that are usually put forward, it is our representations which, in the last resort, determine our reactions, and their significance is, thus, of an actual cause (Moscovici, 1983: 65).
Here Moscovici is offering a universal postulate about social psychological processes.
He is not claiming that representations  have their causal significance only in some societies or in some epochs, but he is making a general assumption about psychological functioning and, thereby, about human nature.
Particular Concept of Social Representation
The concept of social representations is also used in a particular way, in order to suggest that social representations are only to be found in certain societies.
Moscovici uses the concept in a particular sense when he argues that social representations are peculiar to modern societies, for they are a ‘specifically modern social phenomenon’(1984: 952–3).
According to Moscovici, social representations ‘are, in certain respects, specific to our society’(1983: 23).
He has suggested that the socially held beliefs of modern society are qualitatively different from those of previous societies.
According to Moscovici, so great is the qualitative difference that the widespread beliefs of modern society should not even be called ‘common sense’: ‘In societies like ours, there are no longer myths, nor even ‘common sense’, in the correct meaning of these terms' (Moscovici, 1984: 953).
In these quotations social representations are not being equated universally with common sense or with practical social knowledge, but they are specifically located in modern society.
In claiming that there is a qualitative difference between modern social representations and older common sense, Moscovici highlights the effect of science upon everyday consciousness.
He asserts that modern common sense has been derived from the popular spread of scientific notions: ‘now common sense is science made common’(1983: 29).
Terms have passed from scientific and technical discourse into lay language, altering their meanings in the passage and, in their turn, affecting the nature of common sense.
The typical social representation is said to have originated from an abstract, technical concept: ‘Social representations generally come into being during transformations of this kind, whether by an intervention of the mass media or by the act of individuals’(Moscovici, 1984: 964).
Moscovici has offered the examples of ‘charisma’ and ‘split brain' and particularly psychoanalytic terms, in order to illustrate the passage from science to social representation: ‘In each of these cases and in many others we are confronted with social representations that are created and shared by the members of our society as myths and ‘common sense’were shared in the past’(Moscovici, 1984: 954).
In limiting the concept of social representations to these sons of phenomena, Moscovici is denying that social representations can be found in all societies, and suggesting that they only emerge under  certain social conditions.
To date, the social representation theorists have tended to be somewhat vague about the social conditions which foster the development of social representations, as understood in the particular sense.
General remarks have been made about the role of mass media, pluralism, breakdown of traditional morality, etc., but theorists have not as yet developed their ideas with historical precision.
One project for the future would be to investigate the necessary social conditions for social representations.
If theorists attempted this task it is likely that they would find themselves following in the footsteps of the more deterministic elements of Durkheim's sociology, which have not the aspects they have favoured so far (Deutscher, 1984; Farr, 1984).
This would not arise if the universal conception were to be theoretically dominant in a social psychology which resembled a universal anthropology more than it did a historical social science.
Anchoring and Objectification
In the light of there being two different uses of the concept of social representation, there is a temptation to make a prescriptive decision in favour of one or other of the uses.
However, such a decision on its own would hardly further the present aim of seeking to elucidate underlying issues.
Therefore it is necessary to go beyond general statements about the nature of social representations in order to look at the theoretical ideas about how social representations might operate.
This is particularly necessary, given that Moscovici has repeatedly stressed that there is a theory of social representations (Moscovici, 1983, 1985).
The theory not only describes the nature of social representations, but also discusses the processes by which social representations are generated.
Moscovici draws special attention to two social psychological processes involved in the creation and maintenance of social representations: anchoring and objectification.
In discussing these two processes it will be helpful still to bear in mind the distinction between universal and particular concepts, because it will be suggested that anchoring is a universal process, whilst objectification is a particular one.
Anchoring
According to the theory of social representation, anchoring is a mechanism which ‘strives to anchor strange ideas, to reduce them to ordinary categories and images, to set them in a familiar context’(Moscovici, ‘1983: 29, emphasis in original).
Things which are ‘unclassified and unnamed are alien, non-existent and at the  same time threatening’(p. 30), and anchoring is the mechanism for reducing this threat by imposing familiar classifications.
Systems of social representations can provide familiar classifications, and for this reason a social representation ‘fosters ready-made opinions and usually leads to over-hasty decisions’(1983: 33).
All in all, anchoring permits ‘the cognitive integration of the represented object in the pre-existing system of thought’(Jodelet, 1984: 371).
Such comments reveal anchoring to be a universal process.
The categorization of information, the naming of things which are alien to pre-existing frameworks, the fostering of ready-made opinions are all phenomena which might be presumed to occur in any son of social arrangement.
In describing anchoring, social representation theorists seem to display a similarity with some of the ideas of mainstream cognitive social psychology, despite Moscovici's penetrating critique of cognitivism (Moscovici, 1982).
Cognitive theorists have stressed how schemata permit the rapid processing of information, just as Jodelet (1984) says that social representations do.
Similarly, cognitive theorists emphasize that categorization leads to the distortion of stimulus material and over-hasty generalization (i.e. Hamilton, 1981; Taylor and Crocker, 1981; Fiske and Taylor, 1984).
In general, cognitive studies on bias and preconception would support Moscovici's point that anchoring ‘involves the priority of the verdict over the trial’(1983: 32).
Nevertheless, there is a crucial difference between the cognitive approach and that of social representations.
Cognitive social psychologists tend to view categorization in terms of individual functioning.
By contrast, social representation theorists examine the social functioning of anchoring.
What is represented is a social object, and anchoring draws the individual into the cultural traditions of the group, whilst at the same time developing those traditions.
In this way, representation is rooted ‘in the life of groups’(Jodelet, 1984: 372).
Despite this difference, both the classification processes described by cognitive social psychologists and the anchoring of social representation theorists share a common feature: they are both universal processes.
Cognitive social psychologists assume that it is pan of human nature to reduce uncertainty by processing the external stimulus world through schemata.
Whatever cultural context is taken, there will be schemata.
Similarly anchoring is not confined to the life of certain specified societies.
It is presumed to operate across historical and anthropological divisions.
Thus, Moscovici is able to draw universal implications about social psychological functioning.
For example, he states that the theory of representations ‘excludes the idea of thought or perception  which is without anchor’(1983: 36).
All groups and all societies have systems of naming and categorizing, and, therefore, anchoring, as a constituent process of thinking and perceiving, refers to a social psychological universal.
Objectification
Moscovici has referred to the second process by which social representations are produced as objectification .
Like anchoring, objectification is presumed to turn the unfamiliar into the familiar.
The term specifically refers to the way that social representations transform unfamiliar abstract concepts into familiar, concrete experiences, and thus it describes the ‘materialization of an abstraction’(Moscovici, 1983: 38).
By the process of objectification the ‘invisible’ becomes ‘perceptible’(Farr, 1984: 386).
Unlike anchoring, objectification is a particular process.
Whereas any belief can be anchored, regardless of the content of the belief, only certain sons of belief could be said to be objectified.
These are beliefs which are essentially non-religious, and which have originated from abstract, but non-religious, concepts.
The passage from esoteric scientific theory into everyday discourse describes the prototype of objectification.
The particular nature of objectification can be illustrated by following the strategy of considering the counter-process One might imagine beliefs which turn the material world into non-material abstractions.
For instance, the everyday ‘theories’ or common sense of a religious society would illustrate the opposite of objectification.
Perhaps such beliefs might have originated in theological theorizing of a technical nature.
Their effect, when translated into everyday discourse, is not to make the abstract material, but to make the material abstract.
An example from traditional Jewish theology can be given.
The Jewish sages discussed why the Almighty talked to Moses from a burning bush.
One reason given was ‘to teach that there is no place void of Divine Presence, even so lowly a thing as a bush’(Mishnah , Exodus Rabbah, II, 5, quoted in Cohen, 1949: 9).
The pious Jew, when observing an ordinary bush, should then be reminded of the burning bush and should attempt to see the imperceptible workings of the Divine Presence within the ordinary bush.
Thus the invisible is to be observed within the perceptible.
In this way the common sense of a religious society differs from that of a society with objectified social representations.
In the former the ideas of theology seek to transform concrete experience into something which transcends the material world and sees abstract forces within material objects.
with objectified  consciousness, the transcendental or abstract elements have been made concrete, and the ultimate reality is a perceptible reality.
Objectification can therefore be seen as a process which produces the particular sort of common experience in which the abstract is translated into the world of objects.
It could be distinguished from an opposing process, which produces a non-material consciousness.
Perhaps this opposing process could be called that of ‘transcendentalization’, in order to describe the social psychological process by which the world of objects is transcended.
It is possible to formulate a conceptual summary, which shows how the processes of anchoring and objectification relate to the two conceptions of social representation.
The universal conception envisages social representations as functioning through anchoring, but not necessarily through objectification.
The particular conception sees both processes as necessary features of a social representation.
According to the universal conception, the traditional Jew might possess a social representation of a bush.
According to the particular conception, the traditional Jewish beliefs about bushes are not social representations, for they are not generated through objectification, in addition to anchoring.
Thus, transcendentalist patterns of belief should not count as social representations.
Only those groups, possessing objectified consciousness, can be said to anchor their thoughts and perceptions by social representations.
Those groups with other forms of consciousness anchor their thoughts and perceptions into ‘common sense’, ‘mythology’, etc., but not in social representations.
As regards discovering the nature of social representations by contrasting them with phenomena which are not social representations, we can see an immediate difference between the universal and particular conceptions.
In the case of the universal conception such contrasts will be difficult, for the temptation will be to see all beliefs, images, myths — in short all elements of culture — as being social representations or elements of social representation.
As such the concept of social representation will necessarily be some son of general, background concept, and it will be difficult to find elements of socially shared consciousness, which are not social representations and which can be used for contrastive purposes.
On the other hand, the particular conception, which embodies both a universal process (anchoring) and a particular one (objectification), encourages such contrasts.
It invites the contrast to be made on the particular process, so that objectified social consciousness can be compared with non-objectified, and social representations can be contrasted with those commonsensical beliefs which are not social representations.
Social Representations and Common Sense
It is clear that Moscovici originally intended the concept of social representation to be interpreted particularly, rather than universally.
He formulated the notion to elucidate the particular problem of how scientific ideas become represented in popular consciousness.
His study on psychoanalysis was crucial in this respect and it still provides the basic model for the particular notion of social representation (Moscovici, 1976).
In this work Moscovici showed how concepts such as‘neurosis’ were altered as they passed from intellectual circles to common consciousness, and, moreover, this passage changed common consciousness.
One might describe the process of objectification in schematically simplified terms.
Intellectual and scientific ideas are formulated by small groups (minorities) of professionals.
Sometimes these ideas are diffused to become anchored into wider belief patterns.
Historically, one might say that scientific notions in the modern age have become anchored into common sense.
However, this formulation is, according to social representation theory, strictly speaking inaccurate.
Whereas most novel beliefs can become anchored into the cultural patterns of common sense, there is something special about the transmission of scientific ideas in the modern age.
Firstly the scientific ideas are altered in a particular way by their transmission.
They are represented (perhaps, more accurately, mis-represented) in a particular way so that when they become anchored they must become objectified.
Secondly, their process of anchoring changes fundamentally the nature of common sense.
So great is the change that common sense, with these new anchored elements, is no longer, properly speaking, common sense: it is a social representation.
Thus, there is a unique form of social consciousness in modern society.
if common sense had not been so uniquely transformed, then there would be little reason to formulate this new, specific concept of social representation.
For these ideas to be pursued in a way which will revolutionize social psychology, it is apparent that the contrast between social representations and common sense must be developed.
Three different elements of such a contrast can be identified:(a) the historical contrast between modern society and former societies;(b) the investigation of modern consciousness to discover the extent of objectification;(c) speculations about the future nature of social consciousness.
(a) The Contrast between Modern and Traditional Consciousness
Clearly social representation theorists will need to develop their theoretical framework to distinguish between common sense and social representation.
This will not be achieved by promulgating definitions, but by developing research which investigates both sets of phenomena, looking for similarities and differences.
One obvious problem is whether social representations are peculiar to the modern age, or indeed to scientific thinking, or whether they appeared previously.
Whilst this is a major problem, a short illustrative example can be given.
In Aristophanes' play The Clouds Strepsiades is debating with Socrates about the causes of thunder, rain and other meteorological events.
Strepsiades enunciates the common-sense theory and these are all products of Zeus' body.
Socrates, on the other hand, chatters about ‘hydroelectric spheres’ and such like.
It is clear from the dialogue that this Socrates is not talking like a scientist who actually understands the phenomena, but is using grand-sounding words without genuine understanding.
One can ask whether Aristophanes is depicting a debate between the common sense of Strepsiades and the social representations of Socrates.
The question is whether it was possible for an ancient Athenian to possess a social representation in this sense, or whether we have to wait until the modern age for social representations to appear.
If social psychology is to become a historical science, then this is the son of problem which can be expected to be posed.
(b) The Extent of the Objectification of Modern Consciousness
At times social representation theorists assume that modern consciousness is unique, because it is permeated by representations from science.
For example, Moscovici claims that scientifically originated concepts ‘fill our minds and our conversations, our mass media, popular books and political discourses’(Moscovici, 1984: 953).
We cannot merely assume that our minds are so filled, but this must be treated as an object for empirical enquiry.
Moscovici's own study of psychoanalysis represents an important start.
However, the evidence that one set of abstract concepts has made the transition from scientific to popular consciousness does not imply that modern consciousness is dominated by such similar notions.
In fact, the new ideas may not have totally changed, and thereby displaced, older notions, but the old and the new may coexist in modern consciousness.
Some of Moscovici's notions about objectification resemble those of Gramsci.
In his Prison 
Notebooks
(1971) Gramsci suggested that intellectual ideology is reflected in modern everyday reality: the modern ideologist creates, or attempts to create, a cultural hegemony.
However, Gramsci also recognized the persistence of traditional common sense, which often conflicts with the ideologically based hegemony.
The empirical question, then, is whether common sense has been so changed by the new materialist hegemony, or whether, as Gramsci believed, it still has an independent existence in modern consciousness.
By assuming that modern consciousness is filled by objectified representations, social representation theorists may be in danger of overemphasizing the internal homogeneity of the contemporary popular outlook.
It may be too simple to suppose that scientifically originated concepts are some son of cuckoo in the nest of traditional common sense.
A brief example, taken from Barthes' Mythologies (1972), might illustrate the issue.
Barthes considered the symbol of ‘Einstein' in modern culture.
He noted that there were two contrasting myths attached to the symbol: the myth of Einstein as the Brain and the myth of Einstein as the Human Being.
One might say that Barthes was examining the social representation of Einstein, yet to say this might be to use ‘social representation’ in a loose sense.
It is the myth of Einstein as the Brain, which prima facie could be said to have been derived, albeit tenuously, from modern scientific notions.
The myth of Einstein as the Human Being seems to be much older and traditionally commonsensical.
Moreover, the symbol of Einstein is different from the symbol of ‘neurosis’, or the other psychoanalytic terms studied by Moscovici (1976), in that it is a representation not of scientific concepts, but of science itself.
The crucial point is that the very potent symbol of Einstein was not a representation of the theory of relativity.
In fact, all notions about the theory of relativity seem to have been extracted from the symbol.
Thus, the symbol of science in this case seems to have lost its scientific elements and have become anchored in much older images (perhaps even in the image of a wise man, who has constructed his own Golem within his own brain).
What this does suggest, at a very superficial reading, is that the transformations from science have not swept all before them, but they themselves may have been captured, and made familiar and thereby totally unscientific in content, by much older symbolic systems.
Thus the process of anchoring scientifically originated notions may not have such a devastating effect upon traditional beliefs.
It should be a task of social representation theory to investigate those strands of contemporary culture which, properly  speaking, might be called objectified social representations, as well as those other elements, which are not objectified representations.
It cannot be assumed at the outset that all elements are the product of similar processes of objectification.
(c) Speculations about the Future
Some passages in Moscovici's writings suggest that, although present popular consciousness may not be composed entirely of social representations, it is moving towards an objectified character.
For example he has written of ‘the coming era of social representations’(1982), as if traditional commonsensical notions are, at best, an endangered species on the verge of extinction.
However, it would be wrong to assume that the future will be dominated by a material, objectified consciousness.
One of the most significant trends in recent years may prove to be the growth of religious consciousness in the West.
Transcendentalization may be challenging objectification, as once again Creationism challenges Darwinism (Handberg, 1984; Stempein and Coleman, 1985; Eve and Harroid, 1986).
The key point, nevertheless, is not a speculation about the future, but an understanding of the present.
One might assume that, for transcendentalized beliefs to be increasing at present, they must be anchored in cultural frameworks.
These frameworks cannot have been so utterly objectified, if they provide the elements which permit the growth of religious belief.
In other words, the hegemony of the social representation of science cannot possibly be total, and there is even evidence that it may be on the wane.
There is a factor common to the discussion of the three issues outlined in this section.
In all three there is the implication that theorists of social representations must do more than study social representations.
Theorists must also study what are not social representations.
The paradox is that social representation theorists must search for those aspects of socially shared beliefs which would not classify as social representations, just as much as they study social representations.
This involves a change of research strategy.
At present there is a tendency for researchers to define their field of study at the outset as being, for example, ‘An investigation of the social representation of X.’ They then include uncritically beliefs and dialogues about X as being aspects of the social representation.
This research strategy will not permit the concept of social representation to develop a critical edge, for it does not force the researcher to give instances of socially shared beliefs about X which are not social representations.
Without a strategy which forces the researcher to make contrasts, there will  be a tendency to slide into a more universal conception of social representation, as more and more diffuse phenomena become labelled as ‘social representations’.
The concept itself will become increasingly amorphous.
It may serve a useful purpose for a universalized anthropological social psychology, but it will lack the necessary focus to be a key theoretical notion in a particular, historical social psychology.
Of possible contrasts, the most obvious would be the historical one between the socially shared beliefs of traditional and modern societies.
However, from a social psychological point of view this might not be the most interesting contrast.
The brief comments on modern social beliefs have suggested that contemporary consciousness may not be as internally homogeneous as is implied by some of the writings of social representation theorists.
Therefore, important contrasts should be possible within modern society.
This need not involve contrasts between different population groups, for instance between samples of atheists and religious believers.
There are also the contrasts to be made between those elements of contemporary consciousness which might be shared by the same people.
Modern consciousness may include its objectified and transcendentalized elements, its materialist and superstitious beliefs, its scientized common sense and its older patterns of belief.
These contrasting strands can be expected to be found within the same minds.
In talking of the contradictory elements of social consciousness, social representation theorists would be addressing an issue which is central to the rhetorical approach to social psychology.
Rhetoric and Social Representations
Moscovici (1983) has suggested that the basic issue for social representation research is to understand ‘the thinking society’.
That being so, one should ask what are the preconditions for there to be a thinking society.
The rhetorical approach to social psychology would emphasize the importance of contrary themes within what can be loosely termed common sense.
It is because a social group's stock of commonsensical beliefs contains contrary elements that argument, and thereby thought, is possible.
Here the rhetorical approach is not drawing attention to arguments between cultures, or between ideologies, but the arguments which occur within cultures or ideologies.
In short, it is assumed that, because common sense, or social representations, have such contrary themes, they provide matters for discussion and for thought.
If all were clear, undilemmatic and utterly consistent for the members of  a society, there would be nothing for them to argue about, and thereby nothing about which to deliberate.
This assumption suggests that researchers should look for the contrary, but socially shared, themes within the thinking of members of social groups.
There are also implications for the study of the processes of social thinking.
The rhetorical approach links the processes of thinking to those of argumentation, for it suggests that deliberative thought is internalized argumentation.
Above all, the rhetorical approach draws attention to the importance of the capacity to negate.
In arguing, one not only expresses one's own position, but seeks to criticize, and thereby to negate, the counter-position.
Billig (1985, 1987) suggests that, in order to understand this capacity for negation, social psychologists should describe the processes of social thinking in terms of opposing pairs: every process should be understood in terms of a counter-process.
As will be suggested, this has implications for the process of anchoring.
The ancient rhetoricians knew that the common-places of common sense (or sensus communis ) can be brought into argumentative opposition with each other.
In fact, the clash of common-places constitutes the essence of rhetorical argument (Perelman and Olbreehts-Tyteca, 1971; Billig, 1987).
The same clash of common-places can be said to provide the possibility for everyday thinking, or deliberation.
For instance, a community might possess common-places (or social representations) of ‘justice’.
It might also possess social representations of ‘mercy’.
Because of the tension between justice and mercy, common sense will be the source of dilemmas and arguments.
In this way everyday thinking about justice and mercy will be dilemmatic (Billig el al .,
1988).
The same basic point holds even if the theory of social representations makes a distinction between the common sense of former times and modern, non-commonsensical thinking.
One would expect modern social representations to incorporate opposing themes (see Billig, 1982, for a discussion of the internally contradictory themes of modern ideology).
In fact, as suggested above, modern ideology might embrace the contradictory themes of objectified consciousness (or social representations in the strict sense) and non-objectified consciousness.
It is such contrary themes which can provide the content for the internalized dialogue, which could be said to constitute deliberative thinking (Billig, 1987).
Therefore, if one wishes to study ‘the thinking society’, one should pay particular attention to the contrary themes of common sense or of social representations, and to the argumentative processes by which the thinking society expresses such contrary themes.
It is this consideration which leads directly to the way that social representation theorists conceive of the process of anchoring, and the need to widen this conception, so that everyday thinking can be understood in terms of opposing psychological processes.
The rhetorical perspective has explicitly criticized the one-sidedness of much cognitive social psychological theory and its emphasis upon schematic categorization.
If, as suggested above, there is a similarity between the way cognitive social psychologists talk about categorization and the social representation theorists' talk about anchoring, then the rhetorical critique can be extended from the former to the latter.
As was suggested in Chapter 2, cognitive social psychology falls to study the ‘thinking individual’.
Through a one-sided emphasis upon the processes of categorization, cognitivists omit the importance of argumentation.
They overlook the human ability to negate, which lies at the root of thinking.
By concentrating upon information-processing, cognitivists end up by describing the unthinking individual, who thoughtlessly responds to the stimulus world.
Similarly, if social representation theorists stress anchoring one-sidedly, they will find themselves describing the ways in which individuals anchor themselves to social knowledge: the thinking individual will be perceived as someone who unthinkingly seeks to avoid novelty by automatically categorizing fresh information in terms of familiar schemata.
There is a danger that this picture will omit the role of argumentation and the clash between justification and criticism in the maintenance of social knowledge.
If the faculty of negation is crucial to thinking, then it can be assumed that each cognitive strategy is potentially negateable.
For each cognitive skill which humans possess, they must also possess its opposite.
Thus if we can categorize or anchor information, we can also do the opposite: we can particularize information and treat it as a special case, thereby negating, or criticizing, a strategy of categorization.
Moscovici (1983: 32–3) does not entirely neglect particularization but, interestingly, he treats it as a means of anchoring or classification, rather than as a means of ‘turning round’ our schemata, to use Bartlett's appropriate phrase (Bartlett, 1932).
In this way particularization is viewed as operating in the service of categorization, rather than as the counterpart, which provides the possibility of negation.
As a result, negation falls to take a central place in the ‘thinking society’, and anchoring, as a cognitive process, is not contrasted by an equally important counter-process.
The metaphor of the anchor might illustrate the rhetorical critique.
At present the social representation theorists illustrate how we  cast our anchors.
But anchors not only can be cast, but they can be hauled up.
Common-sense, or rhetorical, thinking involves the raising and dropping of anchors, not to mention the continual arguments about whether to raise or lower the metaphorical anchor at any given moment.
This raising and lowering of anchors will provide the argumentative forms for the debates, whose content may be provided by the contrary themes of the sensus communis .
In this son of argumentative thinking, more is involved than the dropping of anchors, for it is situated in the context of argumentation.
For instance, we might attempt to sink our own anchors in the sandy sea-bed of mercy, whilst at the same time hauling up our opponents' anchors from the rocks of justice.
These comments are not offered as a refutation of the theory of anchoring, but as a possible extension to the theory of social representation.
A rhetorical approach would encourage the concept of anchoring, which is presently somewhat broad, to become clarified, through the contrast with opposing processes of thinking.
Certainly the rhetorical approach does not dispute the general theoretical aims of the social representation theorists, especially when they emphasize that social beliefs are rooted in the life of groups and that dialogue is crucial for their creation and maintenance (Moscovici, 1983).
What the rhetorical approach points out is that such dialogue expresses the contrary themes of cultural and ideological life.
Because of the stress on argumentation, the rhetorical approach warns against assuming the internal consistency of social consciousness or social representations.
If thinking is internalized argumentative dialogue, then there is a cognitive implication: theorists should be cautious lest they consider a single cognitive process, such as anchoring, without giving equal weight to an opposing counter-process.
The difference between the rhetorical and social representational approaches can be illustrated by considering a quotation from Moscovici (1984), in which he is discussing the social nature of social representations: ‘The word ‘social’ was meant to indicate that representations are the outcome of an unceasing babble and a permanent dialogue between individuals, a dialogue that is both internal and external, during which representations are echoed or complemented’(Moscovici, 1984: 950).
The rhetorical theorist would not dissent from a single word, but would feel impelled to add a further remark.
‘Echoing’ and ‘complementing’may have their places in the unceasing babble, but the babble would not be a babble if dialogue were based purely on repetition and agreement.
Just as unceasingly are the sounds of argumentation and negation to be heard.
Lastly, it needs to be pointed out that the rhetorical or argumentative dimensions are, from a theoretical point of view, universal ones.
The rhetorical theorist does not assume that only some societies possess the rhetorical capacity to argue.
The characterization of deliberative thinking as internal argument is a universal characterization.
Therefore the rhetorical recommendation to study the importance of negation applies equally whether the concept of social representation is understood universally or particularly.
The social representation theorist, who wishes to build a social psychology from a universal anthropology, might look universally for examples of the contrary themes of common sense, tracing, for example, the argumentative dialectic between justice and mercy across historical, geographical and economic space.
On the other hand, if theorists adopt a particular conception, then they should look at the way that contemporary social representations have developed their particular qualities through argument and how, in turn, these representations set the agenda for further argumentation.
In doing this, researchers will be investigating the extent to which the topics of modern thinking, and thereby of modern everyday argument, differ qualitatively from those of previous ages.
Whichever conception of social representation is adopted, the importance of argumentation remains, for the thinking society must be an arguing society.
However, the choice between universal and particular conceptions of social representation might have an important bearing on another issue: whether in the new historical or anthropological social psychology the relations between ‘pure’ and ‘applied’social psychology will be affected.
As conventionally understood, pure social psychological theory is universal in its aspirations.
General theories are formulated about supposedly universal topics, for instance, about attribution of emotions, or friendship formation or schematic information-processing, etc.
The theories are ‘pure’ inasmuch as they are not, in the abstract, limited to particular manifestations of these phenomena.
Instead, the ‘purity’ of pure theory stems from its projected universality, so that theories, if correct, can be applied to friendship formations, emotional attributions or information-processing of all historical eras and contexts without restriction.
The same relation between pure and applied social psychology can be continued in a social psychology, which might be built around a universal conception of social representation, with or without a rhetorical emphasis.
To be sure, such a reconstituted social psychology will be more ‘social’ than much of current social psychology, and a rhetorical emphasis would direct attention to problems which currently tend to be overlooked.
Nevertheless, the universal aspirations of such a social psychology's theory will permit the formulation of ‘pure’, or universal, theoretical propositions, which can then be applied to historical manifestations of the topic in question.
On the other hand, the distinction between pure and applied work is likely to collapse, if social psychology becomes a historical discipline, with its key theoretical concepts being explicitly particular concepts.
Such a social psychology would be intrinsically applied, in that its theories and key concepts would be applicable only to particular, historical contexts.
It would not be based upon theoretical ideas which were held to have generality beyond a socio-historical context.
If social psychology were to become a historical discipline, then it would make as little sense to conceive of pure and applied historical social psychology, as it is to talk of pure and applied history.
The abolition of the distinction would not occur because historical social psychologists would be uninterested in theoretical issues, but because theory could not be other than historically applicable.
For example, the question whether the common sense of advanced capitalist societies is qualitatively similar to the common sense of medieval society is not a question to be answered by the application of universal notions.
Instead, the issue calls for the development of historically bound theory to show how common-sense ideas are socially developed in different socio-economic contexts.
Above all, the theorists would seek to show the social psychological dynamics by which the unique features of advanced capitalist society have given rise to the particularities of modern consciousness, or social representations.
It is because such a historical social psychology would cut through the conventional distinction between pure and applied social psychology, and because it would not lay claim to universal psychological principles, that it would involve a more radical change in orientation that a universal anthropological social psychology.
In this way the choice between a particular and a universal interpretation of the concept of social representation can involve more than a preference for one son of definition over another.
it can represent a choice between a social psychology which seeks to uphold pure and applied distinctions and one which will abolish the distinction itself.
4
The Very Ordinary Life of Young Conservatives
Preface
The first of the empirical studies concentrates upon the lives of ‘ordinary’ members of the Young Conservatives.
In order to reconstruct these lives, the techniques of ethnography are used.
The ethnographic investigator spends time observing the lives as they are being led, piecing together patterns of activity and elements of conversations.
In this case, the aim is not to collect mundane detail for its own sake — to say what it was like to be a Young Conservative at the time of the fieldwork in the early 1980s.
The theoretical aims always concerned the analysis of ideology.
The ethnography was a means of observing how the wider patterns of society — its inequalities and histories of domination — flow through patterns of living and thinking which seem so ordinary.
As the young individuals of the Young Conservatives voice their ambitions and settle for so much less, so the operations of ideology are to be observed.
Of course, any ethnographic study is bound by time and place.
In this instance the fieldwork was conducted during the first period of Margaret Thatcher's administration.
Since that time, there have been changes affecting the Young Conservatives.
A repetition of the study at the start of the 1990s might reveal some differences.
For example, there might be more politics in the branches of the Young Conservatives, with the activities of committed freemarket ideologists in greater evidence.
Details might differ, but there will be underlying ideological continuities.
The ordinariness of the ordinary lives will still be continuing its ideological history.
In order to show the relations between power and the ‘ordinariness’ of ordinary living, the chapter picks out a particular ideological moment.
At one of the regular meetings, the worlds of finance and neo-colonialism came into direct contact with the suburban world of the Young Conservatives.
There were no ruptures of meaning, as the different worlds were momentarily juxtaposed.
Conversational theme slotted into conversational theme, opinion into opinion.
Rhetoric slid gently against rhetoric.
Ideology had added another small moment to its history of moments.
Social scientists take it as axiomatic that our dally lives are not entirely fortuitous.
Our thoughts, everyday routines and even our dreams reflect the son of society in which we live.
That much is easy to assume.
The difficulty starts when one tries to say exactly what is the relationship between everyday life and the structure of society.
Historically one important assumption has been that our ordinary lives serve the interests of the powers that be.
This view was forcefully expressed by Marx and Engels in The German Ideology .
Their statement that ‘the ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas’(1970/1846: 64) has been much quoted both by Marxists and non-Marxists.
If correct, it might imply that in a capitalist society our ordinary thoughts are part of a ‘capitalist ideology’, which ensures that capitalists reap their profits whilst the rest of us are kept in obedient subordination.
Quite apart from the simplification contained in the notion of a ‘capitalist ideology’(Abercrombie et al .,
1980), the connection between everyday thought and the mechanics of capitalism would have to be demonstrated.
Here is the problem: much of ordinary life appears quite ordinary and remote from the power centres of the world.
So ordinary is ordinary life that it would seem paranoid to see the hidden influence of capitalists, or whoever, behind it.
In addition, there is another problem for social scientists.
Ordinary life, by definition, is ordinary, and therefore rather dull.
There seems to be little that can be said about things which are familiar to writer and reader alike.
Much more impact can be made by delving into the remote corners of society in pursuit of the exotic.
Since most social scientists and the readers of their works belong to the middle class, this pursuit typically leads to the lower and more desperate edges of society.
The upper classes, who are just as exotic and who theoretically are of crucial importance for understanding the mechanism of social structure, tend to shut their doors on the enquiring social scientist.
In consequence, the social scientists have much to say about teenagers becoming prostitutes, football hooligans, drug-addicts and jobless; they have little to say about young people seeking middle-class respectability and nothing whatsoever about heirs to dukedoms or oil fortunes.
The present account concerns that middle stratum and how its views might relate to wider and more powerful forces of society.
The young people in question are members of the Young Conservatives, enjoying their youth before becoming pillars, or rather semi-detached havens, of respectability.
It might seem strange that one should need to justify such a choice of topic.
Had the young  people been law-breakers of the son which writer and reader would seldom encounter socially, no such justification would have been necessary.
At second hand we could have enjoyed the thrill of dangerous living or shown magnanimous sympathy with the victims of oppression.
We might even have experienced a glow of self-righteousness, believing that we were helping to solve a, social problem'.
No such emotions are on offer in a study of the Young Conservatives.
On the other hand, a look at a small group of Young Conservatives might be able to throw light upon ideological issues, which tend not to arise in studies of society's victims.
This can be illustrated by considering a metaphor used by Marx and Engels in The German Ideology .
They describe how our conceptions of reality are distorted by ideology: ‘in all ideology men and their circumstances appear upside-down as in a camera obscura ’(p. 47).
In a way the camera obscura can be a rather misleading metaphor, for the obscurity of the camera arose not from its images but its mechanisms; in fact, Victorians were charmed by the sharpness and, indeed, accuracy of the images thrown onto the screen by the camera obscura .
However, to modern readers, accustomed to associating cameras with photography, the term has a more appropriate implication.
The desperate or the disillusioned have poor vantage points on society; their view is continually obscured, and they are constantly peering through the clouded lenses of a camera lacking high-quality focusing mechanisms.
The social scientist, equipped with powerfully zooming lenses, not to mention other specially designed equipment, is confident of taking more accurate pictures, and uses these to interpret the obscure images of the unfortunate.
In fact, as a social scientist it is frequently difficult not to make this son of assumption (for a discussion of the analogy between psychology and photography, as well as the power relations between photographer and subject, see Beloff, 1985).
The investigation of the Young Conservatives, as part of a wider study of political attitudes, conducted by Raymond Cochrane and myself.
As part of this study, we listened at length to adolescent schoolchildren discussing political issues.
These schoolchildren talked very differently about the nature of society than the way a social scientist would.
In fact, the social scientist would necessarily consider the schoolchildren's views of society as being extremely naive.
For example, we continually came across white schoolchildren, who were perplexed by the diminishing prospects of employment and who searched for explanations and  solutions.
They admitted they understood little about politics, and often they could only see, with a certain amount of reluctance, racial interpretations.
One young girl, who had Asian friends and kept saying ‘I'm not being colour prejudiced, you know’, complained that things were slipping out of control: ‘I mean, we're leaving school soon, and half the jobs have gone.
You try and get into a factory, it's just all Indians’(Cochrane and Billig, 1984).
The focus has narrowed so much that all background has become murky.
The social scientist knows that, as a picture of reality, this is a distortion, produced by someone whose vision is obscured by the immediate pressures weighing them down.
As far as politics is concerned, it is possible to look at those who are deliberately attempting to construct their own ideological cameras.
Distrusting the accuracy of the commercially available products, those in ideological groups build their own machinery for picturing the world.
Typically, these painfully created cameras take two sons of pictures: there are the pictures which seek a harsh exposure of the evils of the present, and there are the pictures which depict the calm, blue skies of a perfect future.
Many social scientists have found the closed world of political extremists to be an exotic topic of study.
All too often, however, the study of such groups falls to reveal much about ordinary ideology, for one is observing an extraordinary one.
The members of such groups typically believe that their specially created cameras are the only camerae lucidae ; if only people could be persuaded to peep at the world through their lenses, all other cameras would be condemned to political obscurity.
Our study also included observation of a branch of Young Socialists.
These ideologists were dedicated to formulating correct views of world problems, as a prelude to changing the world.
However, they often only saw through their own lenses the magnified fist of authority, threatening to smash camera and photographer.
The tragedy was that the fist usually belonged to officials of their own party.
These specially created ideologies more often than not give the believer a clear place in the scheme of things, by providing a definite identity.
If the ideology provides.a new point of view, it also defines favourably the identity of those who occupy this new vantage position.
For example, left-wing ideologists might identify themselves as members of the working class, or fascists will experience their own selves as members of the master race.
Religious ideologies also might prepare their adherents to believe that they are the élite chosen to be saved.
Because of this, some social scientists have argued that it is those people with uncertain personal identities who are attracted by such ideological groups.
Personal doubts, about one's identity and one's worth, will be settled by the provision of an ideological camera conferring an unambiguous and privileged identity upon all its users (see, for example, Feuer, 1975; Hoffer, 1952).
Whatever the merits of this approach for studying the members of exotic ideological groups, it would seem inappropriate for analysing the ordinariness of the Young Conservatives.
As will be suggested, this is a group characterized by ordinariness rather than by the extraordinary creation of new identities.
It might be the case that the activities of the Young Conservatives make the young people involved feel better: to use the curious language of modern psychologists, participation might improve the young members'’ sense of self-esteem' or ‘actualize their inner identities’.
However, such psychological analyses, concentrating upon the individual's feelings, do not typically take into account the wider, ideological context.
Therefore, the emphasis of the present discussion is not upon whether the individuals benefit psychologically from being members of the Young Conservatives: it can be assumed that those who remain members do so because they enjoy being so.
Instead, the emphasis is upon these individuals' relations to the wider patterns of society, especially those patterns of power typically neglected by social psychologists.
These patterns are at one and the same time both common-place and elusive.
As far as identity is concerned, this does not involve looking primarily for some smug sense of having arrived at a particular social position.
It means noticing the various identities which join the ordinary, non-rebellious individual to those distant powers who are capable of altering the scenery, photographed by both special and ordinary cameras.
Getting into Politics
At the outset, it can be asserted the Young Conservatives we studied in no way constituted an ideological group like the Young Socialists.
The Young Conservatives were not attempting to create or preserve, a distinct ideological view, nor were they battling with the ideas of ordinary common sense.
This does not mean that all Conservatives, or indeed all young members of the Conservative Party, are similarly uninvolved in constructing ideological cameras.
In fact, the Conservative Party is currently going through one of its infrequent ideological phases, with the growth of ‘libertarian philosophy’.
Like the ideologists of the left, the libertarians are concerned to elaborate a political philosophy and then drastically transform the world in accordance with that philosophy.
Whereas  the left might base itself on the thoughts of Karl Marx, the libertarians look back to Adam Smith and an extreme ideology of laissez-faire capitalism.
The libertarians, in common with the ideologists of the left, whose tactics they often self-consciously copy, frequently find themselves in conflict with their own party, which they claim is insufficiently ideological (Durham, 1985; Gamble, 1986).
Although libertarianism at present constitutes the main driving force for the Federation of Conservative Students, there was no evidence of this ideological philosophy in the branches we studied.
Two branches in Birmingham were visited regularly for over a year between 1980 and 1981.
In fact, libertarian ideologists seem to be scarce in the Young Conservatives over the whole West Midland region.
Recently, a leading member of the West Midlands Area Young Conservatives has written in the national press: ‘ln the course of the last twelve months 1 have travelled extensively throughout the area in question and, with the exception of extremely isolated individuals, have found no evidence of sympathy for the ‘libertarian’ position’(The Observer , May 1985).
The members of the two branches felt no need to formulate a new philosophy or design an ideological camera.
They would stress that their outlook was that of the ordinary person, and that it was sufficient to understand the world.
They had no need to empty their minds of conventional images in order to build a purer system of thought, but instead they were perfectly at home with the conventional.
However, because this ordinary outlook was brought into contact with the extraordinary world of organized power-politics, certain aspects are thrown into sharper focus.
In addition, it becomes possible to notice certain movements, just out of focus on the horizon.
Most of the members had not joined for political reasons but quite openly admitted the social attractions of the YCs.
The larger of the two branches met in a community centre near a council estate.
There was a bar on the premises, and on a YCs night it would be filled with the laughter and gossip of young drinkers, some below the legal age of drinking.
There was no better meeting place in the locality.
Most of the members lived on the council estate and were from working-class or lower-middle-class backgrounds.
Many of them, however, were attending, or had left, grammar schools, and thus were entering the middle classes.
Alan, who was still at school taking his ‘A’ levels, said that he and other rugby-playing friends used to attend the discos of the Young Liberals.
There was nothing political in this, and, when the Young  Liberals branch had closed down, they all started coming to the YCs.
He commented that ‘the rugby club I play for is just like the Conservatives’.
It was a good way to meet people, especially girls.
The political dimension was played down in their speech.
According to Alan, they would always say ‘I'm going down the Quimbourne tonight’(the name of the community centre), as if visiting a pub or club, and not ‘I'm going to the Young Conservatives.’
Again and again it became apparent that politics had not brought most of these youngsters to the YCs.
Dave, a serious young man, whose family was solidly Labour, said he too was a Labour supporter when he first joined.
After leaving school, most of his friends moved away to university.
He started attending regularly in order to get to know more people.
He was now engaged to the sister of the chairman of the neighbouring branch.
Things were little different in this branch.
Situated in a more middle-class neighbourhood, the branch met in the offices of a local solicitor.
A large framed photograph of Margaret Thatcher beamed down on the proceedings, as the members sat in their seats in the high-ceilinged meeting-room.
Slightly embarrassed by the formality of these surroundings, they would relax in the pub, to which they always retired when the official business had been completed.
Nigel had been a Liberal when he joined, and now was the chairman.
His whole social life revolved around the YCs.
His best friend, Simon, was one of six children and all had been members in their turn.
It was a family tradition.
New members would stress social reasons for joining.
A young woman, who was a final-year student at teacher's training college, said she had just moved into the area, and knew very few people.
She had seen a leaflet about the YCs and thought that this would provide a good way of getting to know people.
Another new face, in the pub after a meeting, approached Simon and Nigel, saying he wanted to join.
He was doing ‘A’ level politics and was interested in ‘the political side and in getting involved in the Party’.
There was a pause, before Simon said with a smile, ‘Well, that's a bit difficult; there's nothing to do between elections.’
There were those, very much in the minority, who were interested in the political side of things.
In the two branches studied, these tended to the left of the Party.
Charles and James used to go to the national conferences and there meet other like-minded ‘wets’ concerned about the right-wing drift to Thatcherism.
In the pub, quietly, so as not to be overheard, they would complain about the lack of compassion and the ingrained racism of the Party.
Both admitted that they had much in common with the Liberals, but both dreamt of political careers with the Conservatives.
Socially  they were on the fringe of things.
Whilst the others joked, drank and flirted, they would sit in awkward seriousness.
When they reported back to the branch about the National Conference of Young Conservatives, they were questioned about just the things they had failed to notice.
Had cabinet minister X put on even more weight from last year?
Was his wife wearing a low cut dress which showed off her…(giggle, giggle)?
Who danced with Maggie?
Charles and James might wish that the YCs would be more political, but most meetings were non-political.
Talks on parachuting, wine-making and family-planning (that attracted a big crowd) were more frequent than the occasional visit by a councillor.
Even the attendant social psychologist was urged to give talks on psychology.
On these occasions the audiences particularly enjoyed filling out questionnaires.
Alan commented that his branch had only had one political talk in the previous year, and even then the councillor had spoken about aircraft.
Alan had forgotten the councillor, s name.
In any case, he added, people did not show up for the political meetings, only arriving in time for the drinking afterwards.
The political speakers, who would have been YCs in their day, knew that they should be brief.
Typically, they would introduce their talks: ‘I won't speak for too long, so we can all get to the bar afterwards.’
For these YCs membership of the political party was only tangentially political.
For most it was a pan of ordinary life.
Whereas members of the Young Socialists tended to be absorbed in politics and their views were well to the left of average, the views of the YCs were marked by an ordinariness.
During one of the psychological talks, delivered to an audience of eleven, the members filled in the Wilson-Patterson Scale of Conservatism (Wilson and Patterson, 1968).
They were required to respond Yes, No or ‘?’ to fifty stimuli.
Possible scores range from zero (absolute radicalism) to a hundred (maximum conservatism).
Their responses showed little indication of an overwhelming conservatism, as measured by this scale.
Their average score was jun below the mid-point of conservatism (48.55).
Their responses to some of the items were predictably conservative.
All eleven responded Yes to ‘Royalty’ and ‘Patriotism’, and, with one eccentric exception, they replied No to ‘Socialism’.
They tended, but not overwhelmingly so, to be in favour of‘Death Penalty’ and ‘Birching’.
On issues such as‘Women Judges’, ‘Working Mothers’ and ‘Co-education’they responded in the liberal direction.
There was a tendency to be liberal on the sexual items such as‘Chastity’, ‘Birth Control’ and ‘Striptease Shows’, as well as ‘Divorce’.
On race they were divided.
The majority responded No to ‘Apartheid’(six, as opposed to three yesses and two queries), but they were divided on ‘White Superiority’(five yesses, five noes and one query).
However, they were generally in favour of‘Mixed Marriage’(nine yesses and two noes).
On one of the more curious items of this scale, they answered liberally: there were nine yesses and two noes to ‘Pyjama Parties’.
Statistically there is nothing extraordinary about these responses on the Conservatism Scale (Wilson, 1973; although see the criticisms of Robertson and Cochrane, 1973, about the validity of this scale).
There is nothing which indicates a small band of activists, dedicated to an articulated philosophy of conservatism.
Nor should there be, given the haphazardness of entry into the Party and the lack of indoctrination, or political education, inside the Party.
What this indicates, on the other hand, is a continuity between the political culture of conservatism and the culture of these members ordinary lives.
Conventional middle-class leisure pursuits can fit comfortably into the political orbit.
Nigel's branch would only meet at its formal headquarters every other week.
In the intervening week a social activity would be arranged; perhaps it would be a visit to a bowling alley, or to a cinema, or a coach tour to a nearby stately home.
There was no lack of opportunities for fun.
Sometimes activities would be arranged jointly with other branches, so that there would be new occasions for gossip and flirting.
For example, there was a much-enjoyed Monopoly competition.
All this contrasts with the Young Socialists.
Rejecting the politics of capitalism, they also rejected much of its culture.
A visit to a stately home and certainly a game of Monopoly could not be pure fun, divorced from politics.
In the products of capitalism, designed for fun, the Young Socialists would see the workings of ideology.
In this hostile ideological jungle, little clearings of socialist culture had to be created painfully.
All would be aware of the difficulty of finding ideologically acceptable forms of fun.
On one occasion, a socialist game was played, in which players took the parts of rich and poor countries.
Unlike Monopoly, in which all start equally and the roil of dice and the daring of the players bring fortune or ruin, this game, like the world it was illustrating, was biased in favour of the rich.
And this brought problems for the game-players.
Those condemned to lose soon became irritated by the game; and to the extent that the winners enjoyed the game, they ceased acting in a comradely spirit.
Socialism and fun were here colliding, whereas conservatism and fun seem to bounce along happily in the YCs.
Party and Class
All this fun and games is not looked upon with disapproval by the seniors in the Conservative Party.
To be sure, there was a time when the Party had hoped to recruit large numbers of keen and politically sophisticated young members, and thereby change the YCs from a social club into a political movement.
The Macleod Report of 1965 had set the Young Conservatives a target of a quarter of a million members, and it had declared the importance of political involvement.
In the event membership declined through the 1960s and 1970s, and social activity has continued to outweigh political activism as it did when Abrams and Little (1965) studied the YCs.
The Macleod Report had specifically advocated increasing political debate and discussion amongst the YCs.
However, as Norton and Aughey (1981) comment of Conservative Party members in general, whether young or not so young, ‘generally party activists tend not to devote their energies to political discussion, not because they are discouraged from doing so, but because they themselves prefer to do other things’(pp. 219–20).
Although most of the activities of the Young Conservatives may be ostensibly apolitical, nevertheless a tacit deal has been struck, which is of great political value to the main Party.
As pan of its side of the deal, the senior branch allows the fun to continue; it aids the YCs in material ways, by providing premises, helping with the occasional financial loan and generally keeping a benign eye on things.
In return for the fun and games, the youthful members, whether or not interested in politics, are expected to help with the electioneering.
In this way, the Party furnishes itself with an army of willing and uncomplaining helpers for the vital tasks of conducting electoral campaigns.
In marginal constituencies the smoothness of the campaigning machine can make the difference between success or failure, and the Conservative Party generally has a reputation for efficient, well-financed organization.
The two branches studied, however, were in the same moderately safe Conservative constituency.
Even in a traditionally Conservative parliamentary constituency, the youthful team could be crucially important.
During a General Election, Party members might be encouraged to lend a hand in nearby marginal constituencies.
In addition, there were local elections, and overall control of the city council regularly shifted between Conservatives and Labour.
Therefore, the mobile teams of young Party workers had important parts to play in the business of electioneering, whether addressing envelopes, delivering manifestos, knocking on doors canvassing, or driving known elderly supporters to the polls.
All  these chores, if efficiently organized, can tilt the balance in a close-run contest.
The combination of fun and electioneering was clearly admitted in Looking Right , the official magazine of Birmingham District Young Conservatives.
Glossily produced and containing lots of advertisements from local businesses (eighteen of the thirty pages were advertising),Looking Right delighted in flippancy.
A mock letter, which would have been totally out of place in the serious political context of the Young Socialists, declared:
I would like to see more idiots in the Young Conservatives.
Perhaps a locally organized competition to find a suitable challenger for the ‘National Idiot of the Year’.
You know, like the Miss World, but with bigger boobs!
A serious article discussed the problems of recruitment.
Potential recruits often object to joining on the grounds that they are uninterested in politics.
That should be no barrier, according to Looking Right : ‘What we must do here is to explain that the political side of things mainly involves what is little more than Party donkeywork.
And we can have considerable fun doing just that.’
The article continues with a rhetorical question: ‘How many branch chairmen would be worried about having a membership consisting of non-political marons [sic]if they turned up one hundred per cent to every leaflet drop and fund raising event?’(10/1, June 1980).
The very phrase ‘the political side’— a phrase also used by the new member to Simon and Nigel — implies a lack of centrality, or at most an equality with the non-political side.
Simon, in his answer, had indicated that there was little political activity between elections.
During an election campaign, whether national or local, the meetings of the YCs would be suspended.
All members were expected to pull their weight.
Even Graham, one of the few members who had left home and lived in a flat, would be helping in the campaign, although he would not be voting Conservative, so much did he dislike the personality and politics of the local MP.
All said that electioneering could itself be fun.
They liked to tell stories of funny replies to canvass enquiries or of japes played against the socialists, when putting up or pulling down posters.
Hard work it was, but good, clean fun.
As in all tacit agreements, there can be moments of tension when one side believes that the other is overstepping the mark.
From time to time the main Party had to intervene to help out the youngsters or to curb their youthful enthusiasms.
Here again a contrast can be drawn with the Young Socialists and their relations  with the senior branch.
The Young Socialists were in a state of constant conflict with their elders, and they fought bitterly against any intervention in their political initiatives.
However, the Young Conservatives accepted, with hardly a murmur, any curtailment from above.
Nigel told how his branch had once decided to mount a recruitment campaign by publicizing their opposition to ‘problem families’ being housed in a middle-class area.
There was a street petition and coverage on local radio and in the local newspaper.
Then sharp words from on high were whispered in youthful ears.
None of the YCs had realized that the decision to rehouse the families was being taken by the Conservative council.
The campaign was quickly dropped.
Those involved were told that they should have consulted the senior branch before starting anything like that.
Nigel did not seem to mind that his autonomous political activity had been abruptly curtailed.
In any case, its rationale had not really been political; the campaign had been designed to attract new recruits.
On that score, Nigel added with a smile, it had been highly successful.
Occasionally the demands of senior politics and junior fun could clash in a more direct way.
The YCs often have difficulty in persuading their members to agree to perform administrative offices.
Of course, this is quite unlike the Young Socialists, who keenly contest the chairpersonships, vice-chairpersonships, and so on , seeing political significance in the victory of this or that candidate.
Amongst the YCs, the lack of suitable volunteers can lead to surprising results.
One speaker, who came to talk about his hobby of flying, told of his experiences in a neighbouring group.
No one wanted the chairpersonship, and in the event it went to someone who was ‘socially unacceptable’.
The new chairman upset visiting speakers by introducing them incorrectly; he ‘picked his nose and wore jumpers with holes and even wrote to a local newspaper saying that new members should be on s; weeks probation, and if they missed a meeting they should be expelled’.
Not least of this chairman's social misdemeanours was that he tried to introduce a special charge for members who missed the meeting, but who came to the pub afterwards: ‘Imagine it: jackboots in the YCs!’
Anyway, the outcome was that the other members tried to expel him from the branch.
Bad publicity threatened as the chairman started to write to MPs.
The senior branch stepped in: local bigwigs, including councillors and the local constituency chairman, defended the errant chairman.
Apparently, as a hardworking council candidate, who stressed community politics, he had increased the vote in an unpromising working-class constituency.
He remained in the branch.
As the visiting speaker told his tale, others  chipped in with humorous stories about the nose-picking chairman: failed English ‘O’ level seven times…sent his car for a Ministry of Transport Test with both headlights out of order and no brakes…a complete nut-case.
In all this there was not a hint of political criticism; it was a matter of personality.
However, in this instance, but not in the episode of the rehousing campaign, an underlying resentment against the actions of the seniors was detectable.
It was as if the Party had failed in this instance to honour the tacit bargain and had allowed heavy-handed politics to intrude seriously upon fun.
The Macleod Report had specifically recommended that the Party should attempt to recruit from a wider class basis.
Previously the bulk of members had been recruited from the upper ranks of the middle classes.
Both the branches studied had been influenced by this political directive.
The establishment of the branch near a council estate, in addition to the provision for popular social events, was clearly in line with the Macleod policy.
Simon and Nigel spoke of the history of their branch.
Apparently, six years previously, when both joined the YCs, the branch had been, to use Simon's words, ‘very upper crust’.
Both Simon and Nigel had felt very uncomfortable, and the old bunch had been ‘cliquey’, having little time for these less-affluent and state-educated newcomers.
According to Simon, the old YCs were ‘all driving daddy's Jaguars’.
His own father was a clerk, who, unable to afford a car, travelled over thirty miles by public transport each day for work.
An initiative came from above.
The constituency agent had suggested that the old bunch ‘had had their time’.
The branch was closed down, and then Nigel and Simon were encouraged to restart.
Neither knew what had happened to the upper-crust types, only that they would not be welcome now.
Sometimes the Party establishment, in its political moods, falls to judge the mood of its new recruits.
Dave, a committee member of the council estate branch, said how unpopular the local MP was with the members.
They thought her snobbish.
She once visited the branch and made some disparaging remarks about council houses and ‘that didn't go down too well’.
In one of the political meetings at the second branch a councillor had voiced typically conservative views on education, stressing the need to encourage the brightest and discourage bad behaviour by the cane.
Most of the males in the audience had left school.
More of the girls, who tended on average to be slightly younger than the boys, were still at school.
This, as one of the very few occasions, when, during a meeting, the girls did not sit traditionally silent or whisper amongst themselves.
They participated forthrightly, rejecting the councillor's  views on discipline.
Moreover, he seemed taken aback by their liberalism, which showed concern with the problems of those who failed to pass examinations at school.
Significantly, it was the schoolgirls, more so than the working males, who took the councillor to task.
They knew how his preoccupations with ‘the high-flyers’ and with discipline would affect themselves.
Although, as Dave said, their branches had a ‘youth-club, table-tennis image, rather than a fox-hunting image’, there were tensions with other branches.
And these reflected class tensions, and the members' ambivalence towards class.
Outwardly there was a refusal to identify themselves with a class label.
Many times the members of the two branches studied expressed impatience with class differences.
Dennis said he thought that class was ‘out of date’, and he preferred to judge people by their intelligence.
Simon, likewise, declared that ‘there's no such thing as class; you're only as good as you are’.
He continued: ‘class doesn't exist for me’.
In this way, they would stress their identity as ‘ordinary people’, or emphasize their individuality, thereby refusing a class identification of their selves.
Sometimes this rejection of a class identification was given a political edge.
They might complain that the Labour Party and trades unions thought of politics in terms of divisive class matters.
Some believed that the politics of class would bring little advantage to themselves.
For example, Simon believed that his salary would suffer if there were unions at his place of work: he worked in the sales department of a small company manufacturing aluminium products.
However, the oven rejection of a class identity was related to a resentment against those who used, or were perceived to use, class as a way of belittling the ‘ordinary person’.
When they talked about fellow YCs, class resentment often surfaced.
Simon, s brother, John, saw himself as one of the new breed of Conservatives, who were not bound by class; yet he complained at length about other branches who ‘look down their noses at us’.
He named a couple of branches in particular that were ‘snobbish’ and would keep their distance even at communal events such as Balis, organized by the whole district.
There also was resentment in the way that this recently qualified teacher talked of the rich.
Contrary to Party philosophy, he advocated higher taxation of the wealthy.
He spoke of a well-off socialist he knew at college; what irked him was not the socialist views, some of which he agreed with, but the fact that here was a wealthy socialist telling working people what they should think.
John also objected to the fact that most of the Party officials, particularly at a local level, were ‘snobs’.
He added defiantly: ‘I'm a Conservative as much as them.’
Although Simon  might declare that classes no longer exist (’ denims have destroyed classes,), he, like his brother, had no hesitation in defining his social position as ‘lower-middle class’.
In this way, the resented class identity was not so easily discarded.
Simon was not reticent in expressing his dislike for the Jaguar-driving members who had previously snubbed him.
In the light of such feelings, the denial of the existence of class takes on the force of a moral imperative, rather than a statement of fact.
Class might exist, but it should not exist.
On the one hand, it leads to socialist unionism and the politics of class envy.
On the other hand, class produces the son of snobbery and élitism which is personally threatening.
From above and from below the pressures of class, existing at present, could be resentfully felt and wished away.
In this sense, the description of themselves as ‘ordinary’ was an identity which simultaneously expressed two things: it indicated their own class position, between the extraordinary highly placed and the extraordinarily lowly placed, and at the same time, by its yearning to transcend class identity, it expressed the tensions of that position.
In this way, the word ‘ordinary’, much used by John and others, contained a wish for the future as well as a simple description of their own selves, their tastes, their conventional senses of fun and their lack of wealth.
Hopes and Achievements
In the pub, after a meeting devoted to tasting home-made wine, Nigel and Simon were asked what they thought was the basis of conservatism.
These two close friends replied similarly.
According to Nigel, ‘everyone wants to get as much for himself and hang on to it: that's the definition of conservatism’.
Simon spoke in the same way: ‘greed and freedom, they're the basis of conservatism’.
If this is the perceived basis of conservatism, then there is a problem for these Young Conservatives: by and large they were not ambitiously greedy, nor were they the ‘high-flyers’ the councillor had talked glowingly about.
The ideological camera may capture a landscape, peaceful in its ordinariness, but the lie of the land indicates a fissure between philosophy and reality.
None of the members already mentioned seemed on the brink of glorious success.
Nigel had left school in the lower sixth, without taking his ‘A’ levels.
He realized that he ‘wasn't cut out for academic work’.
He joined Lloyds Bank and now, at 22, works in Overseas Securities as a Grade 3 clerical worker.
Although he was satisfied with his progress, he did not see much possibility for immediate promotion.
In fact, he may have already turned down  his opportunity for advancement.
The company had wanted him to transfer to London, in order to resume the computer studies he had been taking at school.
However, Nigel had not wished to leave his family and friends for the loneliness of the big city, even though he would have been earning a lot more money.
When asked how this fitted in with his Conservative views on incentives, he laughed: ‘It contradicts them.’
Simon had failed his eleven plus, and then gone to a Catholic school.
He had left at 16 with two ‘O’ levels.
He, too, felt that academic study was not for him.
Charles and James, who both dreamt of political futures, were both graduates.
James had studied law at university but now was working in the personnel department of Cadbury's.
He did not wish to pursue law, preferring more practical, less ‘theoretical’ work.
Graham, too, looked down on theoretical work; he did not like examinations.
Although he worked in accounts, he had not taken any examinations towards becoming a certified accountant.
He rationalized: ‘I always admire someone who goes far without qualifications.’
Alan was still at school, as was his girlfriend, Sharon.
Neither would be going to university; they had had enough of studying.
Dave had failed his ‘A’ levels.
He had briefly been in the Army but had left when it became clear that he would not get commissioned.
He now worked for the Water Board as a clerical officer.
Laura, who was engaged to Dave and whose brother was Nigel, was a primary-school teacher, qualifying like John in a training college rather than university.
On the other hand, Clara would have fitted into the Jaguar-driving clique.
She was studying at public school for her ‘O’ levels, and had a clear idea of which university she would go to and what she would study there.
Her father owned a factory.
She tolerated, but did not take seriously, the attentions of Nigel.
One episode illustrates the gap between the philosophy of achievement and the personal uncertainties of these YCs.
As was mentioned earlier, they enjoyed filling out psychological tests and had requested the opportunity to fill out an IQ test.
Perhaps of all psychological instruments, the IQ test symbolizes the philosophy of personal advancement and Dennis's notion that intelligence was more important than class.
Here was a real ‘scientific’ way of discovering the ‘high-flyers’.
However, as soon as the Raven's Progressive Matrices were distributed, the excuses began.
Edward, an infrequent attender, complained that he was at a disadvantage, having been to a public school; the others, who had been to state schools had unfair practice at this sort of thing.
Simon gave up half way through, but of course, he could have finished, if he had wished: he just did not feel like it.
Charles complained of  ‘astigmatism’, and exaggeratedly squinted at the matrices, removing and putting back his glasses continually.
The light was bad as well, he complained.
They were relieved to be told that they had done well, and also that these tests were not that accurate after all.
Those living in the interregnum between school and marriage often still harboured dreams of success, although real-life was closing in quickly.
Simon imagined himself as a successful salesman.
He would like to transfer from administrative work to the sales staff of the aluminium company for which he worked.
One evening he was particularly buoyant.
A woman had enquired at the factory about the possibility of making an aluminium gang-plank for her private barge.
That had set Simon thinking.
There must be lots of barge owners wanting similar gang-planks.
A whole untapped market awaited him.
Another week he was devising a scheme for selling obscene paper weights: well, not so much obscene, more humorous really.
At a later period he missed meetings and seemed strangely distant in the pub.
It was not girl trouble, the others said.
He was worried about being made redundant at work.
This was not a problem he felt he could share openly with the other members.
Mike, who worked at Barclays Bank, was more ambitious.
He would like to be a director.
He noted that the son of a senior Conservative aristocrat had walked into a directorship without previous training or experience.
He was not resentful, because he would get there in the end.
Nigel, by opting out of the computer course, had already made his compromise with ambitious dreams.
The demands of responsibility had already closed upon Dave and Laura.
They had managed to buy the son of inexpensive terrace house which had been built at the end of the nineteenth century for workers and which still continued to be in a working-class area.
It needed considerable refurbishment; weekends and evenings would be spent decorating.
And that cost money.
Fun would have to take second place to the serious business of home-making and saving money.
Dreams for the future had not been abandoned, for Dave hoped to move into the management side at work.
He had prospects, but it would be hard work.
Paul Willis, in his book Learning to Labour (1977), noted a brief period of exhilarating freedom in the lives of working-class lads.
The fun to be had by larking about at school would be a contrast with the grind of labouring jobs.
The middle-class YCs had been far more serious at school than Willis' lads.
They had struggled, with differing degrees of success, with the requirements of examinations.
Their fun, courtesy of the Conservative Party, was to come at a later stage.
It was also a stage of ambitious dreams  being overtaken by reality.
Charles and James would find that, despite the publicized openness of the modern Conservative Party, the lower middle class still tends to be restricted to the lower political positions; even at a local level, power continues to be unevenly distributed in favour of the upper middle class (Butler and Pinto-Duschinsky, 1980).
It is doubtful whether Mike will ever make it to the director's dining-room, to share a table with sons of Conservative peers.
Simon, even if he manages to hold his position, will find that aluminium gang-planks, built to the specifications of canal barges, are not the magic formula for wealth and independence.
Perhaps political attitudes will become altered as dreams are discarded.
Certainly experience had driven some members in a leftwards direction.
Dennis had experienced a period of unemployment, and this, he admitted, had made him much more sympathetic to social-security claimants and even to strikers.
James mentioned that he had never understood why people went on strike until he became a wage-earner.
Both were still Conservatives, but both were troubled by the ethic of greed.
On the other hand, the experience of disappointment could move views in an opposite direction.
As the fun of the YCs recedes into the distance, to be replaced by the disappointing seriousness of ordinary life, the not-so-young Conservative may experience a conflict between the philosophy of ambition and unrealized hopes.
There may then be a need to find targets to blame.
The position of the middle class, especially the lower middle class, has always been an ambiguous one, caught as it is between pressures from below and from above.
A harsh edge can enter into the political discourse of this class, especially when respectability seems to go unrewarded by superiors and unrecognized by supposedly inferiors (see Garrard, 1978).
However, bitterness was not apparent in the views of the YCs.
Politics was still fun, and there was no need to be concerned with blame, yet.
Ideology of Non-Politics
Membership of the YCs is not just a matter of obtaining an ordinary social life.
Certainly the young middle-class, or rising middle-class person can be guaranteed to meet others of the same age who are respectable but not too serious.
So long as one is not a dedicated socialist, politics is not initially important; in any case, the dedicated socialist is unlikely to want to join.
After joining, the Liberals and even the Labour supporters seem to drift into the Conservative way of thinking.
Perhaps this is a matter of bringing  beliefs into line with actions, as dissonance theorists predict (Festinger, 1957; Wicklund and Brehm, 1976).
Having acted in a Conservative manner, especially at election times, one starts to take oneself for a Conservative (i.e. Bem, 1967).
More likely, it is also a matter of picking up Conservative habits in a Conservative environment.
Slowly, common turns of speech, and thereby common turns of thought, are adopted, and the member drifts into conservatism without having made a conscious political choice.
After all, the member can see at first hand what nice people the Conservatives are.
This Conservative environment may be one which encourages the development of an ordinary social life, but it is also an extraordinary environment.
Behind the ordinariness is an organization devoted to the pursuit of power.
That much is obvious to all.
There is no need for an efficient ideological camera to spot the underlying politics.
However, there are also aspects of ideology which are not quite so obvious.
Having put themselves in an extraordinary environment, which nevertheless feels so homely and ordinary, the members occasionally come into contact with wider, more powerful and less homely influences.
In their clear, and rather boring, pictures of the ideological landscape, something suddenly moves on the horizon, too quickly for sure identification.
All one knows is that there is activity; just beyond the range of focus.
Such moments, when the extraordinary intrudes upon the vision of the ordinary, can be quite subtle in themselves, and certainly in their effects.
Probably they are best illustrated, not by any general theoretical terms to cover a range of occurrences, but by a detailed example.
For one of the political talks at Nigel's branch, the chairman of the local ward had been invited.
This bluff businessman was a familiar figure to most of the small audience.
He began his talk with the almost obligatory words: ‘If I finish early, there'll be more drinking time.’
He then continued: ‘Instead of boring you with yet more politics, I thought I'd talk to you about my recent trip to Southern Africa.’
In this way, the speaker made a distinction between what was boringly political and what was interestingly non-political.
Amongst the Young Socialists, no talk about Southern Africa, especially one delivered by a Conservative Party official, could fail to be political.
For them politics permeated the whole world.
On the other hand, the Conservative speaker was narrowing the range of ‘the political’ to Party matters.
Beyond contentious politics lay something else, something non-political like the natural geography of a region.
If, as Anthony Giddens suggests in Central Problems in Social Theory (1979), one of the  characteristics of ideology is that it makes the present appear natural, then this something else may be the province of ideology.
Moreover, in this province, if one looks carefully, one should see the quiet operation of power.
The speaker had just returned from a ‘little-known place, in Southern Africa — Lesotho, or ‘Basutoland, as it used to be called’.
His was the voice of a tourist, who has remembered the words of the guidebooks.
Historical and geographical facts were intertwined: the country had been ‘founded in 1821 after fighting between the Zulus and the Boers’; it was surrounded on all sides by South Africa and contained mountain ranges, and so on.
The tourist style was emphasized by the glossy travel-book which was handed around the audience.
When mountains were mentioned, the speaker turned to the relevant, highly toned, invariably sunny, photograph.
Historical dates and scenery all conveyed the objective, factual nature of the non-political world.
As the historical narrative approached the present, political themes were unavoidable: ‘In 1965, we, in our wisdom, decided to allow it to get independence.’
The ironic ‘in our wisdom’ implied, but did not pursue, the possibility that decolonization was a political, and thereby contestable, decision.
The speaker did not mention that the government in 1965 was Labour.
The ‘we’ was a non-political reference to Britain as a nation, as opposed to a partisan reference to the Party which would have undermined the factual nature of the non-political.
Facts about Lesothan agriculture followed: lack of irrigation and lack of freehold tenure produced the contrast between the brown barrenness of Lesotho and the green fertility of South Africa.
The contrast was visibly apparent and could be photographed from an aircraft.
As Berger and Luckmann (1967) have described the sense of facticity in ideological thought, ‘the world of institutions appears to merge with the world of nature’(p. 108).
As the talk developed, it became apparent that there were things which ‘we’ could do to alter matters in Lesotho.
Subthemes began to emerge, relating to the unelaborated ‘we’, which is a notoriously ambiguous word in political discourse (Seidel, 1975, 1978; and see particularly Seidel, 1986, for an analysis of the ambivalent ways that the libertarian right uses the concepts of ‘nation’ and ‘race’).
The speaker had not been in Lesotho as a tourist but as the representative of a road-building company on a contract funded by the World Bank.
He gave some economic facts about Lesotho.
The fact that the country is surrounded on all sides by South Africa is ‘not a bad thing’: it enables 50,000 Lesothan men to work in South African mines, returning with their ‘pockets bursting with rands’.
Of course, the women are left behind on their own.
But they are ‘remarkably independent’(whether ‘remarkably’ for Africans or for women is left tactfully ambiguous).
They make good employees for ‘us’: a transfer has now occurred, for the pronoun now refers to commercial enterprises, financed by the World Bank.
The absence of the Lesothan men creates further opportunity for Lesothan economic advancement.
Tourists, all male, flock across the border ‘to sleep with black women’, thereby providing a ‘major source of income’ to the Lesothan exchequer.
The word ‘prostitution’ is avoided; its moral implications would have disturbed the economic tale, besides which there were girls in the audience.
Anyway, the speaker added, with a grin, the women are willing cooperators, for they ‘cannot understand why their visitors expect to pay for sex’.
In this way, the economic facts have preserved older mythology: the black woman is both a sexual object and a trustworthy employee (no longer a domestic servant, but now perhaps a typist or tea-lady).
It is now time for a little joke.
The speaker says ‘the whole nation is quite intelligent anyway, as you can see’: the picture book is opened and the audience can see an ample, bare-breasted, black girl.
The males snigger; the girls, on the other hand, show conventional signs of mild disapproval, tut-tutting with a quick flick of their heads.
The joke is interpreted sexually, as a man's joke which they are not supposed to share.
The racial themes, based upon stereotypes of African sensuality, primitiveness and limitations of intelligence, are unquestioned.
The speaker was much taken by the Lesothans.
Speaking like a guidebook, he said that they were ‘charming, friendly folk’ with picturesque customs.
Exotically, the women ‘carry everything on their heads, even tin baths’(laughter, this time from both sexes).
Charming people are not threatening and the heritage of imperial mythology is incorporated into a modern picture: ‘Surprisingly, there's a very strong Roman Catholic element; the churches are packed on Sundays; the missionaries must have done their stuff.’
Surprising when you consider that it's ‘not so very long ago’ that they were eating each other(laughter).
A precise date is given to the last recorded act of cannibalism: 1821, the year when ‘we’ founded Basutoland.
In this way, nineteenth-century imagery is comfortably at home in the factual discourse, describing, not the imperial system (which ‘we’ in our wisdom gave away), but contemporary international capitalism.
Of course, ‘capitalism’ is not identified as such, just as Barthes (1972) has claimed that the bourgeoisie is ‘the social class which does not want to be named’, and just as the YCs themselves preferred the label of ‘ordinary’to a class identification.
Instead, capitalism is the helping and unobtrusive friend, not quite visible itself but arranging the scenery to everyone's satisfaction.
The helping friend provides mining money for men, as well as independence and sex for women.
Nevertheless, the country still needs further help; roads need to be built and fields to be irrigated.
The World Bank is at hand, providing ‘handouts’ for all manner of necessary projects.
It was at this point that the facts ceased to have their air of permanent naturalness.
Economics and geography could be altered by human, at least European, agency: ‘Reversing the trend of people going over the border is the long-term objective’(whose objective — whether that of the World Bank, of Britain, of other unnamed financial interests, or even perhaps of the Lesothans themselves — is left unclear).
In any case, the World Bank is ‘pouring money’ into Lesotho.
During the lecture the speaker did not say why Lesotho was being developed, beyond saying that it was a contingency ‘in case of emergency if South Africa closes its door’ on the 50,000 miners.
Further elucidation came during question time.
Questions stuck to the appropriate non-political mood: ‘What crops can be grown?’
’ Are there any mineral deposits?’
To the latter question came a rambling reply which encompassed various themes: the economic, the scientific, the geographical, the touristic and, lastly, the ideological.
There were references to ‘wild flowers’, ‘picturesque rivers’ and ‘snow-capped mountains’(with the guidebook opened at the appropriate photographs).
The answer did not finish with the statement that for all the natural beauty above ground, Lesotho had no wealth below.
In an apparent non sequitur , the speaker added: ‘They've got intransigent problems, but so far they haven't succumbed to the blandishments of the communists; that's why the west pours money in’.
The possibility that the Lesothans might turn to the communists is ‘what everyone's afraid of’.
Again an ambiguous referent was used, with ‘everybody’ remaining themselves.
The danger was a communist enclave existing within the heart of South Africa: ‘We might hate South Africa's policies but it is tremendously important to the west.’
Returning to the theme of the question, the speaker emphasized that much of South Africa's importance lay in its mineral wealth.
‘Everybody’ was more inclusive than the ‘we’who hate South Africa, for everybody included the South Africans.
The ‘we’ was left ambiguous, indicating, by its imprecision, a unity of feeling between the speaker and the audience, between high-level finance and the ordinariness of the YCs.
The ambiguous ‘we’ illustrates that neither speaker nor audience  possessed one simple identity.
All were simultaneously members of ‘we, the British’, ‘we, the Conservatives’, ‘we, the right-thinking people’, and so on.
Moreover, the subtle semantic shifts of the speaker's ‘we’ showed that membership of multiple ‘we's’created no bewilderment, or ‘crisis of identity’, to use a psychological term.
In other words, the audience were comfortable in this world of many identities.
This comfort assumes that the identities, which can be so effortlessly, even unconsciously, adopted in listening to a speech, are not in serious conflict: the categories of ‘Conservative’, ‘British’, ‘right-thinking’ all overlap and, in fact, without reflection might be assumed to be virtually synonymous.
The speaker's ambiguous pronouns, shifting their referents, helped foster this feeling of harmonious identity.
However, for all dominant themes of harmony, within the noisy ambiguity there might also be quieter, discordant notes.
According to Giddens (1979), a second aspect of ideology, besides presenting the present as natural, is the presentation of sectional interests as universal ones.
The ambiguous ‘we’ suggests a universal interest shared by all right-thinking people.
The speaker's sectional interests, as a businessman, are seen to coincide with the wider interests of everybody else.
It also suggests a unity of interest between the various forces of finance and conservatism.
There is nothing peculiar in this, for different interests can be expressed within the same political party.
However, these interests cannot conflict too directly, but must appear to be consonant.
As Harris (1972) has written in his analysis of British conservatism, ‘the aura of Conservatism must remain ambiguous, for intellectual clarity — that is, the clear expression of one set of interests before all others — is the enemy of cooperation between diverse groups,(pp. 13–14).
The YCs speaker was implicitly emphasizing the commonality between national and international interests within capitalism (or ‘the west’, as he would have preferred a term which suggest geography rather than politics).
His ‘we’ sometimes hinted at the nationalist ‘we’of Britain, in a way which would appeal directly to the sentiments of the audience.
Whereas ‘Support British Industry’ might be a slogan to rouse the YCs, ‘Support the World Bank’would lack immediacy.
Indeed, its appeal to internationalism may have conflicted with the ready nationalism of the audience.
Nigel, for one, often used to exaggerate his nationalism, much to the annoyance of his older sister, Laura; he would blimpishly express contempt for foreigners, in particular the French.
On such occasions his half-serious xenophobia could not conceal the seriousness of his patriotic sentiments (a patriotism which was  revealed unambiguously in the responses to the Wilson-Patterson Scale of Conservatism).
In his profound analyses of modern political symbols, Murray Edelman argues that politicians tend to use symbols to gloss over contradictory interests.
A symbol condenses opposing meanings by presenting the image of unity (Edeiman, 1964, 1977).
Two symbols, in particular, united the speaker with his audience.
First, there was the image of communism as the threatening enemy.
All YCs were unambiguous in their rejection of communism.
In fact, just the week before, Nigel had angrily rebuked Graham, who had doubted the menace of Russia.
Graham, the doubter who would not vote for the local Conservative MP, had even expressed indifference about the Russians taking over South Africa.
Nigel was shocked and declared that he would rather be dead than red.
Graham then back-tracked and said it was China, rather than Russia, which worried him.
Thus an anti-communist accord was preserved in the face of one of the very few political disagreements to intrude on the fun at drinks' time.
The second symbol was that of race.
The stereotype of African simplicity suggested the need for benevolent western help.
The symbol of race, however, was not so unambiguous as the symbol of communism.
Racialism was to be rejected, whilst the symbol of race was simultaneously evoked.
‘We’ ali hate South Africa's system, but it must be protected.
Here the very structure of the speaker's discourse matched the way the YCs talked about race, not in Africa, but in Birmingham.
In a discussion on race, Nigel had declared that ‘we all hate racism’, but it was the anti-racists who were stirring up things.
Similarly, Simon had said that he detested the National Front, but it was always the left-wingers who started the violence.
On another occasion, Nigel had said that he rejected Enoch Powell's provocative remarks on race, but you had to admit that what he predicted had come true.
These statements share a common style with the speaker and his (or ‘our’) hatred of apartheid.
A declaration of anti-racist principle is made, but is unable to stand on its own: it is quickly followed by a neutralizing qualification, which allows the racial themes to enter the conversation under the protection of an apparently anti-racist banner (see Billig, 1982, for a discussion of this ‘two-sided’ form of discourse).
After the talk was finished and the last questions had been answered, speaker and audience retired to the pub.
The speaker bought a round of drinks, with non-alcoholic cordial for those under the drinking age.
He stayed for as long as it took him to finish his beer.
Claiming another engagement, he took his leave.
Later in the evening, without any reference to the earlier talk, the  conversation drifted towards the topic of race.
To ask whether the meeting had caused this conversation is meaningless, for spontaneously arising conversations can be said to have many different causes.
What is important is not a simple concept of cause, but the coincidence of themes.
More often than not, racial themes enter the conversation of the YCs under the aegis of fun.
Their racism did not take the form of embittered prejudice.
Rather, it was typically expressed in the form of jokes.
They would adopt silly voices, impersonating West Indian or Asian accents.
By and large these youngsters had few social contacts with non-whites.
There were no non-whites in either branch studied.
Laura, on the other hand, disapproved of the jokes her brother made.
She taught in a racially mixed school and was at pains to correct simple stereotypes and unthinking prejudices.
Charles and John, the politically minded liberals, seldom made jokes at all and never racist jokes.
For the rest, the joking made use of a wide number of stereotypes, such as Irish stupidity and Jewish cupidity.
Nigel liked to accompany his asides about Jewish meanness with an exaggerated shrugging of shoulders and palms open to the heavens.
That night, however, there were more jokes than usual about needing passports to visit Asian areas of the city.
In addition, there were stories of a ‘factual’ nature, which mirrored in a different context the tone and content of the speaker's talk.
Stories, invariably gathered at second-hand, were told about blacks who had misunderstood various situations.
Simon mentioned a Nigerian who had given inappropriate measures for a length of aluminium (laughter).
Nigel mentioned that his father had been a teacher in Zambia, and then adopting a humorous intonation, as if to cover himself, he added that some ‘of these chappies were none too bright’.
Simon, having made the joke about passports, commented that ‘that sounds terribly racist’, only to add that the immigrants were the real racists: the West Indians hate the Asians, and the Asians hate the West Indians.
And so on.
The racism which these YCs were sharing, did not have the tone of bitterness or fear, which was frequently encountered in the talks with white working-class youngsters.
In fact, its jokiness ensured that the racist themes were part of the fun.
However, similar racial themes and stereotypes had entered the account of capitalist enterprise in Southern Africa, and this enterprise was serious, not for fun.
It would be an absurd simplification to claim that the stereotypes were part of a deliberate plot to conceal ideological contradictions by Some form of crude scapegoating.
On the other hand, the ordinary and the extraordinary seemed to coincide at the  same point.
It was as if the ideological camera had lucidly snapped a scene in which the foreground harmoniously blended into the distance in a continuous perspective.
Because of the harmony between foreground and distance, the photographers would perceive little need to blow up the barely perceptible shapes in the distance into ambiguous and grainy enlargements.
Of course, such enlargements would have none of the glossy prettiness of the snaps in the guidebook.
Besides, straining one's eyes over these distant shapes cannot compete with the fun available so near at hand.
5
Arguments in Fascist Propaganda
Preface
In this chapter, the politics move from the ordinarily right wing to the extraordinarily extreme; and the methodology shifts from ethnography to the analysis of printed texts.
A small aspect of the small world of fascist politics in Britain is examined.
So small is this world, and so insignificant are its participants, that detailed attention might be considered unnecessary.
Nevertheless, events of this century have shown how suddenly and dangerously a fascist group can burst from the fringes of political life.
The most dramatic example was, of course, the rise of Hitler's NSDAP in Germany.
Today, the Front National in France has achieved electoral success and national prominence, which would have seemed incredible fifteen years ago.
By contrast, the British extreme right wing has not known similar success in recent years.
Presently, it is split into small groups, who battle jealously amongst themselves.
As this chapter reveals, even the National Front has its different factions
The extreme right provides a sort of ideological laboratory in miniature.
It is a world within a world.
The production of ideas and the rhetorics of their transmission can be observed on a small scale.
As will be seen, this laboratory reproduces the bizarre, antisemitic ideology of the conspiracy theory.
The chapter concentrates upon a particular moment in the story of British fascism, when this ideological tradition seemed to be taking a new turn.
One faction of the National Front appeared to be adopting a pro-Zionist line.
Several questions are raised by the appearance of this new theme in the propaganda.
Has the tradition of antisemitism been broken?
How easily can an ideological tradition be reversed?
How can the disingenuous message be detected?
These questions concern rhetorical issues, for the reconstruction of ideological meaning is a reconstruction of rhetoric.
The beliefs o the extreme right should not be seen merely as schizoid reflections of paranoid personalities.
However strange such beliefs might be they too have a rhetorical context.
The conspiracy theory, which lies at the root of National Front ideology, is an argument; it propounds an uncommon sense, which argues against the commonly shared sense.
As will be seen in this chapter, the context of  argumentation can be more complex than this: there can be arguments within arguments.
The analysis might concentrate on a small moment within a restricted world.
But there is a general point.
To understand a text, especially a political text, it is necessary to understand its argumentative context.
Furthermore, the theory of rhetoric can have practical application.
It can help decipher the messages of propagandists, who seek to mislead by covering up their own argumentative contexts.
Under these circumstances, rhetorical analysis can aid the practical argument against those enemies of freedom who would destroy the very possibility of open argumentation.
A curious feature of extreme right-wing groups in Western Europe since the last war has been their adherence to anti-semitism.
Contemporary fascist parties overtly campaign on anti-immigrant platforms, appealing to racist sentiments to oppose the latest wave of ‘foreign’ arrivals, and at the same time frequently preserve a deeply antisemitic view of the world.
In Britain during the 1970s, the National Front attempted to become a mass party, but its public campaigns against Asians and West Indians did not deflect the party leaders from the ideology that the ‘real’ enemies of the party were Jews.
In Holland in the early 1980s the same pattern was repeated with the Centrum Party.
With an anti-immigrant message appealing principally to racist working-class males, the party nevertheless retained an antisemitic ideology.
The case of Jean-Marie Le Pen in France provides the most dramatic illustration of this duality.
His party, the Front National, has achieved electoral success, unparalleled by any other newly formed fascist group in post-war Europe: ten representatives in the European parliament, thirty-five in the French National Assembly, and over four million votes in the presidential election.
This has been achieved by a rhetoric which unfavourably contrasts present-day France and its sizeable population of North African immigrants with the myth of a former, well-ordered France, devoid of Arabs.
However, Le Pen's onward march appeared to run into trouble when, in a radio interview in September 1987, he revealed the ideological traditions of his party.
When asked about the Holocaust, Le Pen, in common with other antisemitic ideologists of the extreme right, questioned whether the mass murder of Jews during the Second World War actually took place.
Le Pen's outburst illustrates just how curious is this retention of antisemitism.
Parties on the extreme right have nothing to gain in electoral terms from such antisemitism: their appeal is to ethnocentric fears of groups other than Jews.
In fact, fascist parties seeking  mass support have much to lose from the taint of antisemitism and Nazism, as the case of Le Pen vividly shows.
During the 1970s, the British National Front denied that it was a fascist party, and its former leader, John Tyndall, always publicly claimed to have broken away from his antisemitic and Nazi political past.
However, the propaganda of the party showed a duality.
While publications designed for mass appeal concentrated upon the issue of immigration, the more esoteric magazines and recommended books promoted the antisemitic notion of a world Jewish conspiracy.
The separation of these themes illustrated that, for tactical reasons, the party did not wish to draw attention to the full nature of its ideology.
The form which the antisemitic ideology perpetuated by the fascist parties has taken is the conspiracy theory.
Jews or Zionists are seen as prime movers in a plot to take over the world, by destroying nations and manipulating the minds of ordinary people.
In articulating such an ideology, the fascist groups are continuing a political tradition with its own classic texts and mythology.
The denial of the Holocaust is the latest twist in this tale of conspiracy and deception.
Authors such as Arthur Butz in The Hoax of the Twentieth Century or Richard Harwood in Did Six Million Really Die ?, who suggest that the Holocaust never occurred, are offering a conspiracy theory in arguing that the Holocaust was a deliberate lie spread by Zionists to achieve their plan to dominate totally the minds of Gentile populations.
Thus, when Le Pen entertained the possibility of the non-existence of the Holocaust, he not only revealed his attitude toward past events but demonstrated his attitude towards the antisemitic conspiracy theory of politics.
As the sudden dip in the opinion polls after the broadcast revealed, the public expression of this attitude proved detrimental to a politician seeking mass support.
The tenacity with which fascist groups have retained the antisemitic conspiracy theory raises important questions about the nature of contemporary antisemitism.
Two opposing explanations can be offered.
On the one hand, the antisemitism of ‘anti-immigrant’ fascist parties might be seen as an anachronism, arising from the fact that for a number of years such parties were led by a generation who were raised in conditions of widespread antisemitism.
This implies that in time the antisemitic ideology will disappear, as a young post-war generation takes over the leadership of the far right.
This generation, not having directly experienced large populations of immigrant, foreign-looking Jews, will abandon the preoccupations of former leaders and will encourage fascist parties to concentrate on prejudices for which there might  be direct electoral advantage.
On the other hand, an opposing view might be suggested.
The tenacity of antisemitism reveals the peculiarity of this form of prejudice.
Historically, antisemitism has existed in countries without Jews.
What we might be seeing on the extreme right is not the last stages of antisemitism, but its continuation in a climate without Jewish issues, or, to be precise, without the son of Jewish issues which can mobilize the support which the extreme right seeks.
Because the antisemitism of the extreme right raises such questions about the future of antisemitism, it is often necessary to pay attention to small extremist groups, which in themselves possess little political importance.
However, such groups possess a wider significance if they are seen either as representing the last stages of a long, discreditable history, or as one of the means by which this history is transmitted into the future.
For this reason it is worthwhile paying attention to current developments within the National Front.
The party has now discarded the leaders with overly Nazi political pasts who controlled it in the 1970s.
Today the National Front is in the hands of a young, often well-educated leadership which belongs to the post-war generation and might be expected to abandon the antisemitic heritage as an embarrassing relic of fascism.
At present the party seems to be divided into two factions, representing different specialist prejudices.
One faction seems to have abandoned the crude racist message and concentrates on antisemitism, whilst the other seems to be taking the opposite position.
However, it is necessary to analyse the rhetoric of both factions carefully in order to understand the argument occurring within the National Front.
From a rhetorical analysis, it will be concluded that, despite some of the oven rhetoric, the ideological traditions of antisemitism are not being discarded.
The National Front and Zionism
In early 1988 is seemed as if the conflicts of the Middle East had spilled over into the strange world of British fascism.
Two factions claim to represent the ‘real’ National Front, and both issue their own magazines.
Each faction seems prima facie to have chosen a different side to support in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Nationalism Today and its more tabloid partner National Front News have opted for the Palestinian cause, whilst Vanguard seems, at first sight, to be overturning a whole tradition of fascist ideology by advocating what appears to be a pro-Zionist position.
The pro-Palestinian stance of Nationalism Today is clearly expressed in issue number forty-two (undated, but published in  early 1988): ‘The eradication of Zionism, by the liberation of Palestine, remains the only hope for true peace in the Middle East’(p. 10).
The article concludes with a declaration that British members of the National Front should identify themselves with the struggle of the Palestinians: ‘We must draw inspiration from people such as the Palestinians who having lost so much more than us, still continue to fight for national sovereignty, and stubbornly refuse to relinquish their national identity.’
This stance was not new but has for a while been taken by Nationalism Today .
It is not uncommon on the extreme right.
On the other hand,Vanguard , published by the rival faction, took the opposite position in its January 1988 issue.
Addressing what is called ‘The Jewish Question’, the magazine proposed its own answer.
The ‘solution’ was to send all Jews ‘to a nation of their own — Israel’.
It was recommended that the National Front should recognize ‘Israel's right to exist’, and, the magazine added, its own ‘solution’ was the one ‘favoured by many Jews themselves, including the Zionists’.
The difference between the two factions touches on basic questions of the National Front's ideology.
In particular, it touches on the issue of conspiracy.
For the antisemitic conspiracy theorist, Zionism is not merely the movement of Jewish nationalism directed towards Israel, but it is the evil force of conspiracy itself, whose ambitions are global.
The pro-Palestinian faction of the National Front expressed this view when it asserted that Zionism was an empire ‘which menaces the whole world’; Zionism was ‘an iceberg of hidden power of which the bandit state of Israel is only the cruel tip…
The tentacles of Zionist power grip the mass media, economies and political life of the Western world.’
The imagery of ‘tips of icebergs’ and ‘tentacles’is common among conspiracy theorists, who assert that Zionism, or Jewish power, lies hidden behind the seemingly opposed forces of communism and capitalism.
Nationalism Today (no. 39) used familiar graphic imagery to express a similar notion.
St George is seen to slay a twin-headed dragon: on the one head is a hammer and sickle, on the other a dollar sign, and both heads emerge from a body bearing the Star of David.
As N. Cohn has shown, the image of the multi-headed dragon was a common illustration in the most notorious of the conspiracy texts —The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion .
In outlining its attitude towards ‘the Jewish Question’,Vanguard seemed prima facie to be taking a stance which rejected the whole conspiracy theory of politics.
The authors of the article in question, Steve Brady and Tom Acton, the editors of the magazine, specifically criticized those who believe ‘Protocols-style, that the Jews are the cause of every problem’.
The phrase ‘Protocols-style’ carries a critical rhetoric, suggesting that the authors wished to distance themselves from the traditions of the conspiracy theory.
The authors continued to assert that ‘conspiracy theories which range from the unprovable to the incredible do nothing to cast light on the Jewish Question or credibility on the Nationalist movement’.
The previous (December 1987) issues of Vanguard had used a similar rhetoric.
An article by Joe Pearce reviewed the book Intercourse by the feminist writer Andrea Dworkin.
In the course of his review, Pearce condemned the book by comparing its argument to irrational antisemitism: ‘Taken to its logical conclusion of course,Intercourse makes the antisemitic rantings of Julius Streicher or The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion appear positively tame by comparison.’
The rhetoric suggests that the author is distancing himself from antisemitism and from the absurdities of the conspiratorial interpretation of politics.
It is as if the past is being rejected with the author adopting a rhetoric commonly used by anti-fascists.
Yet the next sentence which ostensibly continues the argument re-introduces a familiar theme under the guise of the critique: ‘After all, at least antisemites restrict their hatred to one group of people representing a small, if powerful, minority of the world's population’, while Ms Dworkin ‘spits hatred at half the entire human species!’
In other words, whilst appearing to criticize the antisemitism of Streicher and The Protocols , the author does not wholly distance himself from the traditions of antisemitism.
Not only are antisemites preferable to feminists, but, most crucially, they are battling against a ‘powerful’ minority.
As a result, not all the imagery of antisemitism has been discarded; the image of ‘powerful’ Jews is retained, even at the instant when the conspiracy tradition appears to be criticized.
Argumentation and Attitudes
To understand the expression of political attitudes it is necessary to place them in their argumentative context.
This point is emphasized by social psychologists who stress the rhetorical aspects of attitudes in general.
The rhetorical approach emphasizes that any attitude is more than an expression in favour of a position: it is also implicitly or explicitly an argument against a counter-position.
Thus, in order to understand an attitudinal position, one must know the counter-attitudinal position.
This is particularly relevant to the conspiracy theory of politics.
There have been a number of attempts to understand the social-psychological dynamics of the belief in a world conspiracy.
Some theorists have drawn attention  to the repressed motivations, which may be expressed by this ‘paranoid’ system of beliefs.
Cognitive psychologists have also shown how belief in an overarching conspiracy can organize an individual's perception of the social world by providing an integrated and self-sustaining system of explanation.
However, there is a further dimension beyond the motivational and cognitive factors: the conspiracy interpretation of politics is an argument and is to be found in the argumentative context of political discourse.
This is true both in relation to the conspiracy interpretation of politics in general and the specific discussions about conspiracy in the current publications of the National Front.
This has a number of implications for analysing conspiracy theories.
First, there is the general point that political discourse must be understood in its argumentative context.
Rhetorical theorists have emphasized that the phrasing of a panicular piece of discourse may be dependent on what position is being opposed.
For example, a liberal politician may use radical rhetoric when counteracting a conservative position, but this does not mean that the same politician will always use radical rhetoric.
When arguing against radicalism, the rhetoric of conservatism may be employed.
This phenomenon of switching rhetoric to deal with different argumentative targets can be seen as ‘Taking the side of the other’.
The ‘pro-Zionism’ of Vanguard should not be accepted without enquiring whether the rhetoric of ‘pro-Zionism’might be a specific strategy for a particular argument, rather than a constant rhetoric.
In the case of Vanguard , the argumentative context refers to an argument, not primarily against the outside enemies of the National Front, but against the rival faction, which is currently using anti-Zionist, pro-Palestinian rhetoric.
It is no coincidence that expressions of the ‘pro-Palestinian’ and ‘pro-Zionist’factions have occurred in rival publications at more or less the same time.
They are expressions of an argument which is taking place within the party.
Moreover, the argument concerns tactics as well as ideology.
The ‘pro-Palestinian’ faction has been suggesting that the National Front abandon the pretence of attempting to build a mass party.
Instead, it is suggested that the party concentrate upon training ‘political soldiers’ for a professional revolutionary elite which will have links with similar, military-style elites in other countries.
A series of articles outlining this strategy of revolutionary quality rather than quantity was published in Nationalism Today throughout 1987.
Moreover, this strategy of revolutionary elitism has been accompanied by a reversal of the tactic of campaigning on the basis of crude, ethnocentric prejudices.
In fact, on one level the racism has been reversed.
The anti-semitic black separatist leader, Louis Farrakhan, has been championed and emphasis paid to his remarks on Jews and Zionism.
Nationalism Today (no. 42) published an article by Abdul Wali Muharnmad in praise of Farrakhan, stressing the black Muslim leader's opposition to Zionism.
Conspiratorial imagery was used: ‘The Zionists continue to attack and criticize Mialster Farrakhan and they pull the strings of their Black and White political marionettes to do the same.’
Similarly, this faction of the National Front expresses its support for Libya and Colonel Gadaffi.
The Libyan leader's Green Book is distributed as a work of major ideological significance: ‘Encapsulated within the Green Book is the ideology of the people, of government by the masses for the masses in a true democracy, one which renders obsolete the reactionary twin-sisters of Capitalism and Communism’(no. 41).
Neither the figure of Farrakhan nor that of Gadaffi is likely to appeal to the ethnocentric constituency, whose votes the National Front has traditionally sought.
In fact, the support for these figures represents the very antithesis of the anti-black, anti-foreigner message, which brought the National Front its success in the 1970s and, more recently, Le Pen his votes in France.
The Vanguard faction, on the other hand, does not discard populist nationalism and racism.
It mocks the ‘Colonel Gadaffi Appreciation Society’ and pointedly identifies Islam as ‘a deadly enemy of the White race’.
Moreover Vanguard specifically criticized its rivals within the National Front for seeing Gadaffi as a ‘national revolutionary, freedom fighter and advocate of the armed people’.
Vanguard , hinting at possible pragmatic advantages to the pro-Libyan stance, declared it was taking a populist, anti-terrorist position: ‘We must condemn all terrorism even if it means upsetting the Libyans and getting no money from their Embassy’(January 1987).
The anti-conspiratorial rhetoric of the Vanguard argument has its place in the general National Front argument about tactics.
For example, one article, entitled ‘Strategy — the way forward’, discussed whether the party should have a secret/clandestine leadership, which would be a ‘revolutionary elite cadre’, or whether, as Vanguard advocated, the National Front should present itself as a ‘democratic, electoral/community party’(January 1987).
The writer, Steve Brady, criticized the notion of the state being so powerful and monolithic that a secret leadership was necessary to prevent MI5 spies from taking over the party.
‘The ‘monolith’ theory with MI5 spies everywhere is a passport to paranoia', he wrote, introducing rhetoric which mocked the  conspiracy theory: ‘If a ‘revolutionary elite cadre’poses a real threat to their power, obviously the Learned Elders of Whitehall will make sure they control it too!’
Again, an ironic reference to The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion is used as a rhetorical device to criticize opponents.
However, the ideological meaning of this rhetoric is not necessarily clear.
The anti-conspiratorial rhetoric might have been used to sharpen tactical differences and to make opponents look absurdly paranoid.
Of course, the differences over strategy and party structure may reflect different assessments of the nature of state power.
However, the branding of opponents as ‘paranoid’ and the mockery of their views a possessing the irrationality of The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion does not, in itself, indicate a disengagement from the conspiracy theory of politics.
What needs to be established is whether the rhetoric is being used in an argument which is taking place within the conspiracy tradition between rival theorists, or whether, the tactical differences have arisen because one faction is firmly arguing against the conspiracy tradition.
In this way, the ostensibly pro-Zionist sentiments, as well as the ostensible abandonment of crude racism by the Nationalism Today faction, need to be set in a wider argumentative context.
The Conspiracy Theory as Argument
If the conspiracy theory is an argument, then it is not directed rhetorically against its obvious object.
Conspiracy theorists do not address their argument to the enemies identified by the theory, for they are deemed to be beyond argument.
Nothing will dissuade them from their evil plans.
Besides, in any case, they know about the conspiracy, and consequently the conspiracy theorist has no hidden truths to announce to the conspirators.
By contrast, the conspiracy theorist, in claiming to have discovered the hidden truth about the world, is offering an argument against ordinary, non-conspiratorial interpretations of the world.
As conspiracy theorists outline their tales of mass deception, they cannot but criticize the views of those who have allowed themselves to be fooled by the conspirators.
Thus,Nationalism Today (no. 42) asserts proudly that ‘we are not hoodwinked as are so many of our countrymen’(emphasis in original).
However, a conspiracy theory may not only be arguing against those who are blind to, or specifically reject, the notion that a worldwide conspiracy explains most political events.
A particular theorist may argue with the interpretations of other conspiracy theorists, because by no means all theorists agree with one another.
In fact, they sometimes declare that rival theories have been produced by the conspirators themselves as part of the general strategy of confusion.
Even close sympathizers can receive this treatment.
One brief example can be given.
A pamphlet,Christianity Exposed , written by Christine Johns and published in 1985 in London by Truth Enterprises, outlines the sadly familiar tale of Jewish conspiracy.
Johns bases her pamphlet upon Ben Klassen's Nature's Eternal Religion , which also asserted that Jews have created Christianity to dupe the masses.
Yet having cited Klassen's deeply antisemitic arguments as the authoritative source for all her ‘proofs’, Johns then mentions that Klassen wanted to replace Christianity by a religion based on reason.
But this, she notes, was similar to the aims of Freemasonry, which, of course, she believes, is controlled by Jews.
This is sufficient to sow a seed of doubt: ‘Perhaps Klassen is not an honourable man after all and is in fact on their side trying to deceive us’(p. 19).
If a conspiracy theorist can make such a suggestion about a fellow theorist whose views are being closely followed, then there is wide scope for argumentation within the conspiracy tradition.
Certainly there is a variety of ways in which the central idea of conspiracy is expressed.
Not all conspiracy texts outline their theme with the directness of The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion whose simplicity derives from two main factors.
First, the conspirators are clearly identified: they are the Jews, and the Jews alone.
Second, the conspiracy has a simple structure: the ‘King of the Jews’ issues direct commands to his underlings.
It is possible for conspiracy theorists to criticize both aspects of this simplicity without discarding the basic notion that there is a Jewish/Zionist conspiracy.
A theorist might suggest that the conspirators are principally, but not exclusively, Jewish: for example, there might be some Gentile Freemasons caught up in the conspiratorial network.
Second, the theorist might claim that the mechanisms of conspiracy are far more complex than those outlined in The Protocols .
For example, one text which has been widely circulated on the extreme right in recent years is Gary Allen's None Dare Call It Conspiracy .
This tells a shadowy tale of deception perpetrated by a group called ‘The Insiders’ through a complex network of international organizations.
The precise identity of ‘The Insiders’ is left vague, and Allen's is not an overtly antisemitic account.
The complexity of his image of conspiracy is illustrated literally by his charts which have interlocking arrows shifting back and found from multinational corporations, international banks, and large foundations such as Carnegie and Rockefeller.
It is not a simple matter of a king giving his orders which then pass smoothly down an  organized chain of command.
The image of a complex conspiracy can be found in other conspiracy theories containing the antisemitic themes which are lacking in None Dare Call It Conspiracy .
For example, in The New Unhappy Lords , written by A.K. Chesterton, the first chairman of the National Front, a complex web of deception and intrigue is described and only when Chapter 25 is reached does he suggest, almost as an afterthought, that the ‘master-manipulators and master-conspirators’ were Jewish, with the proviso that not all Jews were implicated in the conspiracy.
It would be possible to mount two sorts of argument against the Protocols style of conspiracy theory from within the conspiracy tradition itself.
First, it could be argued that despite the existence of an evil, worldwide conspiracy its manipulators, or insiders, were not principally or exclusively Jewish.
Second, it could be argued that, even if the master manipulators were Jewish or Zionist, their means of operation are much more sophisticated than that imagined in The Protocols .
The anti-conspiratorial, and ostensibly pro-Zionist, rhetoric of Vanguard must be examined in terms of these argumentative possibilities.
The ‘pro-Zionism’ of Vanguard is not pan of an ideological renunciation of either the notion of a financial conspiracy or of the notion that Jews play leading roses in the financial world.
The article in Vanguard announcing the ‘pro-Zionist’ position was preceded, in the previous issue, by an editorial announcing that the magazine would be writing directly on ‘our policies concerning Judaism, Zionism and the Jewish people’(November/December 1987).
This declaration followed a denunciation of the City of London, drawing attention to the chief actors in the Guinness scandal: ‘It can hardly be a coincidence that those in the dock are all Jews.’
Through innuendo, rather than direct statement, the impression is created that the City of London is controlled by Jews.
In an article in February 1987 entitled ‘Where Greed is God’ a call was made for ‘a return to a self-sufficient Britain, free from foreign control and free from greed-is-good amorality which is the raison d'etre of the City of London’.
The writer complained that the City of London ‘is essentially blind’, contains few Christians and ‘can't see beyond the end of its (hooked ) nose’(emphasis in original).
The rhetorical innuendo suggests that a foreign religion (Judaism) has taken control of the financial life of the country.
The strategy of ‘pro-Zionism’ is not pro-Zionist in the usual sense, for Zionism is still seen as more than Jewish nationalism — as an immensely powerful force controlling the minds of the public.
Vanguard (October 1987) complained of ‘a corrupt and  Zionist dominated media’, thereby repeating the conspiracy theorists' argument against ordinary people who have been blinded by Jewish opinion-makers.
Jews are seen as a powerful threat to the nation: ‘The presence of a large and powerful Jewish community in any country, such as we have in Britain today, is, and inherently must always be, a threat to the aspirations and best national interests of the host population.’
The strategy of ‘pro-Zionism’, therefore, does not follow from any positive feeling towards Jews, but is directed towards ridding the country of a dangerously powerful, dominating and alien group.
Moreover, because Zionism is seen as an international force, it can be combated all the more easily once Jews are concentrated in Israel and ‘nationalists’ have strengthened themselves and their countries by being Jew-free.
In this way, the strategy proceeds from the same antisemitic assumptions and stereotypes as the more familiar and anti-Zionist conspiracy theories.
And its aims travel in the same direction, albeit by a slightly different strategic route.
If Vanguard has not deviated from the previous ideology of the National Front in identifying Jews as a powerful enemy, it has also not departed significantly from the conspiracy traditions.
If the anti-conspiracy rhetoric were pan of an argument against the tradition, as opposed to an argument within it, then one would expect a disengagement from the ideology of conspiracy.
This would involve, at least disengagement from the published material which regularly circulates in fascist groups and which ‘exposes’ the Jewish/Zionist conspiracy.
However, there has been no such disengagement, let alone direct argument against such texts in general.
The February 1987 issue printed a list of books which could be obtained from Vanguard Books.
The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Lion might not be on this book list, but in the short sub-section of ‘Finance and Government’ were old conspiratorial favourites: F.J. Irsigier's Who Makes Our Money ?,
J.C.
Scott's Hidden Government and Leon de Poncins' State Secrets .
All these are antisemitic texts, telling a tale of conspiracy only slightly more sophisticated than the Protocols .
Under the heading of ‘Race and Racial Science’ is Elizabeth Dilling's The Jewish Religion: Its Influence Today , which is described as ‘a detailed analysis of the role of Judaism in contemporary society’.
Also offered, under the heading of ‘Political Ideology’, are Revilo Oliver's deeply antisemitic Conspiracy of Degeneracy , and one of the most antisemitic of recent conspiracy publications, William Grimstad's Antizion .
The latter is advertised as revealing ‘the long suppressed opinions of almost 600 of history's greatest minds on Zionism and its backers’.
Thus, the booklist gives every indication that the Vanguard faction continues to exist well within the ideological traditions of the antisemitic conspiracy theory.
What seems to be occurring is not so much a shift away from the conspiracy tradition, but a shift — for reasons of tactics and internal politics — in the way the conspiracy theory is to be presented.
In fact, the structure of Vanguards propaganda is similar to that of the National Front in the 1970s, when the antisemitism was muted in the party's magazines, but more directly expressed in recommended books.
In the same way, the Flag today concentrates on an anti-immigrant message.
Superficially,Vanguard appears to be attacking the conspiracy ideology and the anti-Zionism of its rival Nationalism Today , but it continues to attack unspecifically, banking and the powers of finance capitalism.
However, the serious party ideologist is provided with reading matter which is oven in reproducing the mythology of Jewish conspiracy.
All this suggests that it is necessary to understand the argumentative context and structure of the extreme right's rhetoric about conspiracy.
The rhetoric of pro-Zionism or criticism of conspiracy theory should not simply be interpreted at face value.
This rhetoric needs to be understood in terms of the battle for control of the party, as rival factions take up distinctive stances.
Thus, ‘pro-Zionism’ is a rhetorical move which serves to fuel the argument against the ‘pro-Palestinians’.
Furthermore, the analysis of extreme right-wing discourse can be held to illustrate a more general point about the need to understand political communication in terms of rhetoric.
Since rhetoric involves argumentation, then a basic question should be asked of any political discourse which appears to be using a rhetoric traditionally associated with the critics, rather than supporters, of the discourse: is the speaker or writer actually arguing against their own ideological tradition, or are they using a complex rhetoric to conduct an argument within their own tradition?
In the case of the extreme right, there may be particular reasons why the internal argument has a particularly complex structure.
There can be tactical reasons for specifically presenting an argument within the traditions of antisemitism as if it were an argument against those traditions.
Therefore, what at first sight may appear to be a departure from antisemitism can, in fact, be a continuation of this strange and dangerous ideological tradition.
The ideological postures, currently being enacted within the National Front, may throw light upon the important question raised earlier: why should fascist groups cling to their traditions of antisemitism, even though no direct political advantage would seem to accrue from their continuation?
To judge from the faction of  Nationalism Today , there might nowadays be financial or other advantages to be gained from a particular presentation of the conspiracy tradition.
Thus, the combination of the anti-Zionist conspiracy theory with pro-Palestinian rhetoric and an absence of crude, anti-black rhetoric may be seen as a tactic designed to qualify for Libyan funds.
However, the Nationalism Today faction has not adopted the antisemitic conspiracy theory of politics in order to attract financial support, but it may attempt to seek such support because it holds antisemitic beliefs.
As such, the current editors of Nationalism Today continue to be pan of the same political tradition as their rivals in the National Front.
And it is the continuation of this tradition which needs explanation.
What examination of the rhetoric of the National Front magazines shows is that this tradition is wider than the beliefs of the individual editors.
In presenting, or in half-concealing their beliefs, the editors can call upon booklists and libraries of conspiracy material, much of which is already familiar to their specialized readership.
In this we can see the continuing influence of a cultural tradition.
Because these books continue to exist, and because they continue to be read, the tradition continues.
Those who have absorbed this cultural tradition by long association with the extreme right, are not likely to discard easily the assumptions of their political ideology.
In consequence, one might make two predictions.
The first suggests that so long as the leadership of extreme right-wing groups continues to be held by those who have absorbed the culture of these groups, then the traditions of the antisemitic ideology of conspiracy will continue in such groups.
The second proposition might state that only those who have absorbed the culture of such groups are likely to rise to positions of leadership.
Taken together these two propositions suggest that the traditions of conspiracy are liable to continue into the future on the extreme right, for no better reason than that this is where these traditions have existed and where they presently continue to exist.
6
The Concept of ‘Prejudice'
Preface
Fascist politics, of the sort discussed in the previous chapter, might represent the extremes of prejudice.
its ideology might be an uncommon sense, branded as bizarre by the norms of more general common sense.
However, prejudices are not confined to fascism.
The prejudices of common sense must be acknowledged, and this includes the notion of ‘prejudice’ itself.
The examination of ‘prejudice’ needs to take into account the meaning of this ordinary word.
An ideological history can be seen to flow through contemporary thinking.
As will be seen, it even affects the thinking of fascist ideologists.
Chapter 1 mentioned Gramsci's notion that philosophy becomes sedimented in common sense.
As was seen in Chapter 3, Moscovici's theory of social representations also deals with the translation of intellectual notions into common sense.
This chapter illustrates these notions with respect to the ideological history of ‘prejudice’.
As will be seen, the word ‘prejudice’ is used to protect the sort of biased discourse about other groups, which ostensibly it seems to be criticizing.
In this way, the ideological history of ‘prejudice’ is reproduced in the present, as inequalities are perpetuated in the rhetoric of common-sense thought and practice.
A recent issue of a magazine published by the National Front contained an article entitled ‘Patterns of prejudice’.
It began with the statement: ‘Perhaps the favourite accusation thrown at the National Front by its multi-racialist critics is that we are simply a bunch of bigots, that our stance on Race, the very heart and core of our political being, is no more than ignorant prejudice against Coloured people’(Vanguard , April 1987).
The tone of the article was pseudo-academic.
The author, in the style of a scholar, defined ‘prejudice’ in his second paragraph: ‘It is generally taken to mean forming an opinion, especially about an issue or person or group of people, without knowing, or without taking into account, ali the relevant facts.’
The main pan of the article was devoted to arguing that the National Front had taken into account the relevant facts in coming to its conclusions that Britain should be populated solely  by white-skinned people.
The author cited psychological books, which claimed that black people were intellectually inferior on average to white people: ‘Read The Inequality of Man by H.J. Eysenck, Professor of Psychology at the University of London for the facts here.’
A couple of paragraphs of lay anthropology were added to suggest that black people in Africa had accomplished ‘virtually nothing’ before ‘the White Man came’.
The references to professors and their books led to the predictable conclusion: ‘On the Black issue our verdict is based on the facts, we have judged the case on the evidence, fairly, and come to the only just conclusions.’
It was the National Front's liberal opponents, who were avoiding the ‘facts’: ‘They can't site (sic ) a mass of scientific evidence to support their beliefs.’
Having defined the key term and having cited relevant facts, the author's final sentence points the accusing finger at liberals: ‘Dare we say it — it is they, not we, who are prejudiced.’
In an obvious sense, this article is an unremarkable piece of fascist writing.
Pre-war German Nazi propaganda cited academic, and pseudo-academic, sources in elaborating racial themes.
In fact, the individuals who wrote the ‘academic’ pieces were often the people who drew the political conclusions (e.g. Cohn, 1967; Lutzhoft, 1971; Poliakov, 1974).
Similarly, post-war fascists have been using psychological and anthropological material in their racist ideology (Billig, 1978, 1981; Seidel, 1986).
The booklists of post-war fascist groups have long stocked the sources used by Vanguard's author.
However, the theme which deserves more attention is the basic argument of the article: the author is claiming not to be prejudiced and is attributing prejudice to those who oppose the National Front.
In other words, the author is turning round an obvious accusation made against fascists.
in so doing, he is not denying the value at the root of the accusation — namely, that prejudice is wrong.
In fact, one might say that the article, with its defence of National Front thinking and its attack on liberalism, is reinforcing the value that one should be unprejudiced, for both the attack and the defence are based, in essence, upon deciding who should be called ‘prejudiced’.
Denial of Prejudice
In the way that the author of the National Front article denied his own prejudice, his writing resembled much other discourse on race in contemporary politics.
Those who argue against black interests or against non-white immigration typically deny that they are prejudiced.
Reeves (1983), in his study of contemporary British  political discourse, uses the term ‘discoursive deracialisation’ to describe the strategy by which politicians avoid using racial categories.
Acts of Parliament, designed to restrict the immigration of non-whites, are phrased in such a way that race is never mentioned.
Other criteria are used, and it is, as if by magic, that these ‘fair-minded’ criteria result in the exclusion of non-whites.
Denials of prejudice and racism are made by politicians on the New Right (Gordon and Klug, 1986; see also, Schoen, 1977, and Studlar, 1974, for examples from Enoch Powell's speeches).
On the New Right the denial is often accompanied by the claim that it is the anti-racists who are the real racists (Barker, 1981).
It is not only in the discourse of politicians that one finds the denial of prejudice.
There is evidence, from a variety of sources, that ordinary people voicing anti-black sentiments typically deny their own prejudices.
American researchers have referred to the ‘new racism’, which denies being racist, in contrast to ‘old-fashioned red-necked racism’, which unambiguously trumpeted racial values (McConahay and Hough, 1976; McConahay, 1981, 1982; McConahay et al .,
1981; Kinder and Sears, 1981; Kinder, 1986; Jacobson, 1985).
The attitudes held by the modern racists are deracialized in that the attitudes are justified by traditional values, such as equality and fairness, and not by oven racial themes.
It has been suggested that the racism of the new racist is not so new and that even so-called red-necks justified segregation in deracialized terms (Weigel and Howes, 1985; see also the criticisms of Sniderman and Tetlock, 1986a, 1986b).
Certainly, Gunnar Myrdal's great work The American Dilemma provides evidence that, even in the deep South, during the days of segregation, the expression of racism was not completely uninhibited.
Myrdal found that Southern whites, defending discrimination, picked their words with care, showing an indirectness in the way they talked about blacks: ‘When talking about the Negro problem, everybody — not only the intellectual liberals — is thus anxious to locate race prejudice outside himself’(1944: 37).
Myrdal was able to pick up this anxiety from unstructured conversations he held with individual Americans.
In this respect his research resembles modern studies of discourse, which alm to capture the flow and tone of remarks as they are made, rather than confine respondents within a narrow matrix of pre-set responses.
Van Dijk's studies of discourse of the Dutch white working-class show a similar pattern to that of the American studies of ‘modern racism’, in that racist sentiments are simultaneously expressed and denied (for example, van Dijk, 1983, 1984, 1985a).
For example, one respondent declared: ‘I have nothing against foreigners.
But  their attitude, their aggression is scaring’(van Dijk, 1984: 65).
The same pattern was found in the discourse of white, middle-class New Zealanders, when they talked of Maoris (Wetherell and Potter, 1986; McFadyen and Wetherell, 1986).
Similarly, Cochrane and Billig (1984) and Billig et al .
(1988) also report working-class white youths in Britain, who deny prejudice (they have nothing against blacks) as a preface to complaining about blacks.
One complaint, which often occurred, was that it is the blacks who hold the real prejudices.
Even some young supporters of the National Front showed this pattern of ambivalence in their discourse.
Chapter 4, in this volume, describes a similar pattern in groups of young middle-class Conservatives, who also attribute the real prejudice to blacks.
The same pattern is also to be found in the discourse of parliamentary debates about apartheid (Seidel, 1988).
Evidence from different nationalities and different class backgrounds suggests an overall pattern to discourse about race and prejudice.
There is a denial of prejudice, which fits the pattern of a ‘disclaimer’(Hewitt and Stokes, 1975): ‘I'm not prejudiced.’
This statement does not stand unqualified: it is typically followed by a ‘but’, which announces the expression of anti-black sentiments or anecdotes.
All this suggests the obvious, but perhaps rather neglected point, that there is a general cultural norm against ‘prejudice’.
So general is this norm that the value of not being ‘prejudiced’ is even shared by the fascist writer who is at pains to deny his own prejudice but to pin the label upon liberal opponents.
If this value has permeated even the discourse of fascist ideologists, then its importance should not be underestimated when attempting to understand the ideology of modern racism.
Above all, we should not expect the ideology to be straightforward, for it is an ideology, which includes the word ‘prejudice’ and the associated value attached to the word.
Thus any analysis of modern racism should not be focused entirely upon majority groups' images and stereotypes of minority groups.
It should also include an analysis of what modern people understand by the very concept of ‘prejudice’, for it is a concept, which is not only used by social scientists, but which is also significant in ordinary discourse.
The Norm against Prejudice
The phraseology ‘I'm not prejudiced but…’, and its variants, suggest a cognitive, or attitudinal, ambivalence, for the phraseology simultaneously expresses two contrary themes.
From a theoretical point of view, social psychologists have often been unhappy in dealing with cognitive ambivalence.
Influenced by  balance theories, they have often tended to assume that ambivalence must be resolved into a cognitively unitary consonance (see Billig, 1982a and Billig et al .,
1988, for criticisms of such mainstream social psychological theory).
There has been a temptation to assume that there is an underlying cognitive consonance.
This can be seen in attempts to divide the contrary themes of ‘I'm not prejudiced but…’ into separate levels; by claiming that one of the contrary themes possesses a deeper psychological significance, one resolves the apparent contradiction.
For instance, it has been suggested that the prejudiced themes exist at a psychologically deeper level than the denial of prejudice.
Therefore, the prejudiced themes are held to indicate the ‘genuine’ attitudinal structure.
Such a division into higher and lower (genuine and superficial) themes can be seen in the classic work on the psychology of prejudice,The Authoritarian Personality (Adorno et al .,
1950).
Recognizing that authoritarians did not phrase their bigotry in unqualified statements, Adorno et al .
suggested that they were paying lip-service to the wider social norms of tolerance, which conflicted with their inner psychological motives.
In arguing thus, Adorno et al .
were in effect suggesting that the inner psychological motivations for racism existed at a deeper level of social reality than the socially shared norms of tolerance.
The drawback to this sort of analysis is that it distinguishes between the superficial norms of society, and the deeper, perhaps partially hidden, forces of the psyche.
Such a distinction can lead to an over-psychologization of the study of ideology, for obvious social norms are seen to possess less significance than personal motivations.
There is also the assumption that an ideology must possess an internal unity.
Paradoxically this assumption of ideological unity was not made by Adorno when collaborating with Horkheimer to write The Dialectic of Enlightenment .
The work probed the fact that the ideology of modern capitalist society expressed the philosophy of the Enlightenment in a way that simultaneously proclaimed and negated liberalism.
The work of discourse analysis also shows that the denials of prejudice should not be dismissed so facilely, as lacking social significance.
Van Dijk has analysed the language of racism, thereby building up a picture of modern ideology which pays particular attention to the way that elite messages can be transformed into ordinary discourse (van Dijk, 1985b, 1987).
There is no doubt that this work has been enormously fruitful in pointing out the detailed strategies and rhetorical manoeuvres involved in the expression of racism.
Moreover, it is socially important for the way that it demystifies such manoeuvres.
Van Dijk raises the  question as to whether the denials of prejudice should be treated as expressions of impression-management rather than of genuine attitudes.
For example, van Dijk (1983) distinguishes between ‘the effective expression of semantic macrostructures (themes)’ and the ‘interactional and social goal’of creating the desired impression in the hearer.
He goes on to assert that ‘these two different sets of goals may be sometimes in conflict: a direct or ‘honest’ expression of the beliefs or the opinions from the speaker's situation model may lead to negative social evaluation of the speaker by the hearer' (1983: 384).
The disjunction between honest attitudinal expression and impression-management is again expressed in van Dijk (1984) when discussing the linguistic devices involved in the denial of prejudice.
The denial of prejudice is strategic, but ‘we thereby want to convey that the move is strategical only relative to the goal of ‘making a good impression’, rather than to the goal of being ‘sincere and honest’(p. 127).
Although this might sometimes occur in discourse, and van Dijk's own data reveal the complexity of racial discourse, it cannot be the full story.
Van Dijk's analyses, with their emphasis upon the creation of ideology (e.g. van Dijk, 1986b, 1987), do not make the mistake of assuming that impression-management follows culturally universal laws (e.g. Tedeschi, 1981).
It cannot be assumed that in all cultures and historical epochs the expression of disparaging remarks about other peoples creates a bad impression.
Such an impression can only be created when there are social norms.
This is clearly recognized by van Dijk, who writes that ‘on the one hand people want to express possibly negative experiences or evaluations, but on the other hand social norms force them to make a good impression, and not appear as racists’(1985a: 69–70).
Yet, again there is the contrast between personal inclinations and social norms.
From a social psychological perspective, there is a further step to be taken, in order to link the social norms to individual consciousness.
The social norms cannot merely exist as constraints existing outside individuals.
For social norms to function as social pressures, they must be internalized, and thereby form part of the individual's cognitive beliefs.
Thus the conflict behind ‘I'm not prejudiced but…’ is merely the conflict between the individual and extraneous social customs (or perhaps, other people), but a conflict within individuals, who have two contrasting ideological themes upon which to draw.
To use Althusser's (1971) terminology it is this ideological contradiction which ‘interpellates’ the subject.
Evidence for this comes from the fact that the ambivalent expression does not seem to be confined to a limited range of situations, in which individuals find themselves on public display, especially to an audience from a higher social class or more advanced educational attainment.
Chapter 4 in this volume recounts an ethnographic observation of Young Conservatives relaxing in their own social environment.
In this situation, where all participants are presumed to have similar viewpoints, prejudice is still not freed from its ambivalent expression.
All have accepted the social norm, which they would use to condemn others and by which they would not wish to be condemned.
The article in the fascist publication, referred to earlier in this chapter, also shows the ideological force of the concept of ‘prejudice’.
This article was primarily directed at fellow members of the National Front.
Within a social circle in which direct expression of crude prejudice is not discouraged, one can find, nevertheless, an argument which draws upon the prevailing images, or social norms, of prejudice.
The author was keen that neither himself nor his readership should be considered prejudiced.
In order to understand the force of this social norm, it is necessary to look beyond social presentation.
The ideological roots of the concept also need to be explored, for it is one half of an ideology, an internalized consciousness, which doubly sanctions prejudice.
It is sanctioned to the extent that it is allowed and it is sanctioned to the extent that it is penalized.
The Meaning of ‘Prejudice'
Much of the research into the social psychology of racism has been narrow to the extent to which it has concentrated upon images of outgroups, rather than on the image of ‘prejudice’ or ‘racism’itself.
Social psychologists have conducted thousands of studies about stereotypes of outgroups or desired social distance from outgroup members, etc.
They have built up an enormous collection of data about the images which subjects, especially white male Americans, have about outgroups.
The more recent studies of discourse analysis have captured the tones which people use to talk of others.
In the main, such studies, especially the traditional stereotype research, are narrowly focused, in that they seek to examine respondents' views on a narrow topic, or towards a single ‘stimulus object’.
With the exception of the discourse studies, they do not week to construct an image of the contemporary ideology of racism, by which is meant the socially shared pattern of ideas about race and nationality circulating in contemporary society.
If analysis of this wider ideology is sought, then the focus of attention must be directed beyond the restricted studies of stereotypes or social distance.
It must also be directed towards the images of ‘prejudice’.
The very phrase ‘I'm not prejudiced but…’ indicates the connection between the concept of ‘prejudice’and those views of outgroups, which social psychologists typically accept as indicators of prejudice.
The fact that the social desirability of not appearing to be prejudiced is linked in discourse to its expression means that an analysis of the ideology, or the wider pattern of ideas, should not avoid the theme of ‘prejudice’.
To use the language of Moscovici and his co-workers (Moscovici, 1982, 1983, 1984; Jodelet, 1984) social psychologists need to gather information about the social representation of ‘prejudice’ in majority discourse, just as they have studied the social representation of minority groups.
As has been suggested, ‘prejudice’, as an everyday concept, as well as a social-scientific one, represents a strong cultural value: even racist theorists of a fascist party appear to wish to avoid being labelled as prejudiced and do not care to think of themselves as prejudiced.
Consequently, the ideological and social psychological significance of the concept needs to be examined, in the context of the ideology of race.
In order to do this, a rhetorical perspective is recommended.
The central feature of the rhetorical perspective proposed by Billig (1985, 1987) is that it studies the argumentative aspects of discourse (see also Shotter, 1987).
Central to this perspective is the analysis of ‘common-places’, or those everyday phrases which express values (Rokeach, 1973; Ehninger and Hauser, 1984), and which, according to Aristotle, add ‘a moral quality to our speech’(Rhetoric , 1909).
Typically these common-places are not employed untendentiously, but are used to justify the self against actual, or potential, criticisms of others.
A rhetorical approach would point directly at the argumentative nature of racist discourse.
This is an aspect which has been emphasized by van Dijk (1984, 1986a; see also Schiffrin, 1985).
Argumentative discourse is to be found in the context of justification and criticism (Ferelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca, 1971).
The stories told by respondents are used to justify a particular position, as well as to criticize the characters in the stories.
Similarly, the phrase ‘I'm not prejudiced but…’ represents an advance justification (or prolepsis ) against the criticism of being prejudiced (see Billig, 1987, for further discussion of this point).
By using the formula, the speaker not only seeks to deflect criticism, but also lays claim to be a member of the moral community of the unprejudiced.
Even the fascist is laying claim to membership of this community, as he seeks to rebut ‘the favourite accusation thrown at the National Front’.
More is involved in the denial of prejudice than the rebuttal of actual criticisms, which might be made by specific others.
It is not  merely that the speaker wants to create a good impression in the sight of others, who might have a different set of values.
Speakers also justify themselves to those who might be perceived as being similar to the self.
Thus, Billig's ethnographic study of Young Conservatives (reprinted in this volume, Chapter 4) showed that the denial of prejudice occurred in a situation where all shared similar views.
Similarly, the National Front writer was addressing fellow members of his party.
Since the audience is presumed to possess similar views to the speaker, the speaker, in a real sense, is literally engaging in self-justification: the self is being justified by the self to the self.
In this respect, the internal discourses of the self resemble external arguments between selves (Billig, 1987).
In order to engage in such self-justification, the speaker must possess the ideological and argumentative tools for criticizing ‘prejudice’, for the speaker wishes to escape from criticisms which could come equally from both self and audience.
it is this aspect of the speaker's self-justification and criticism of ‘prejudice’, which is omitted in any explanation which relies exclusively on the notion of impression-management.
The ideological basis of this self-justification lies in a claim to being rational, and, as such, the semantic use of ‘prejudice, involves lay notions of the philosophy and psychology of rationality.
This can be seen by considering the concept of ‘prejudice’ itself and its transformation from being a concept of Enlightenment philosophy to a concept, which permits, by its apparent criticism, the expression of prejudice in everyday discourse.
It can be argued that the ordinary use of the word ‘prejudice’ indicates that the traditions of liberalism have passed into everyday discourse.
On the other hand, the frequent use of the concept in the formula ‘I'm not prejudiced but…’ implies the limits of these traditions, at least as instantiated in everyday reality.
The word ‘prejudice’ attracted the meaning of irrationality during the Enlightenment, as philosophers adapted a legal term in their dispute with unreasoning faith.
Gadamer has claimed that ‘it is not until the Enlightenment that the concept of prejudice acquires the negative aspect we are all familiar with’(1979: 240).
He goes on to connect the semantic change with ‘the general tendency of the Enlightenment not to accept any authority and to decide everything before the judgement seat of reason’(p. 241).
Voltaire provides a good example of the way in which the philosophy of rationality implied a theory of irrationality, which was based upon psychological ideas about the source of erroneous thought.
In his Philosophical Dictionary Voltaire included an item for ‘prejudice’.
The entry started with the statement that ‘prejudice  is an opinion without judgement’(p. 351): i.e., the processes of reasoning have not been applied to the prejudiced opinion.
In this way, an opinion is prejudiced, if the judgements on which the opinion is based are faulty or even totally lacking.
The person who uses the phrase ‘I'm not prejudiced but…’ implies some image of what the ‘prejudiced’person is like, and this image is similar to that held by Voltaire, in that the prejudiced person is presumed to hold views, which have not been formed rationally.
The semantic influence of the Enlightenment can even be seen in the discourse of the fascist writer quoted earlier.
Although ostensibly criticizing the traditions of liberalism, the fascist writer, nevertheless, employs the discourse of these traditions when discussing ‘prejudice’.
His definition of this Enlightenment concept is similar to Voltaire in that he suggests that the prejudiced person comes to a conclusion without bothering about the facts of the matter.
There was a distinction between positions which were ‘merely expressions of bigoted dislike’ and those which are ‘solidly buttressed by reality’.
In making the distinction the writer was upholding the Enlightenment philosophy that conclusions should be based upon rationality and not upon psychological dispositions.
The distinction between the rationality of the self and the irrationality of the ‘prejudiced’ also appears in the comments of the teenagers interviewed by Cochrane and Billig (1984) and Billig et al .
(1988).
Even supporters of the National Front, and its policy of expelling non-whites, felt impelled to justify their views.
The persons claiming to lack prejudices, but to oppose the presence of non-white immigrants, offer justifications for their positions.
As van Dijk (1984) has shown, they typically tell stories about immigrants or use abstract reasonings, such as that ‘; if there were less blacks, there would be more jobs or housing’.
Either way, the prejudiced persons are attempting to justify their position by adopting either a theoretical or empirical perspective.
The reasons for the position are externalized, as the speaker, in effect, says that it is the empirical nature of the world, rather than the preferences of the self, which has led to the conclusion.
In speaking thus, there is a claim to rational discourse and an implicit defence against any criticism of being irrational.
In this way, the discourse is argumentative in both senses of the term: arguments are given to bolster a conclusion and these arguments are justifications against the potential criticism of being irrational.
The speaker's seif-image (or rather, self-justification) of reasonableness depends upon a contrast with what is unreasonable.
The fascist writer exemplified his image of unreasonableness with  examples of anti-racists.
Similarly Billig et al .
describe ‘reasonable’ white teenagers, some of whom were sympathizers of the National Front, as distancing themselves from the ‘skinheads’or ‘lunatics’.
The very term ‘lunatic’, which was widely used in this discourse, implies a lay psychological theory: the term denotes people whose thinking is disrupted from logicality by personality or stupidity.
The ‘lunatics’, in contrast to those who proclaimed their rationality, offered no justifications beyond a dislike for non-whites or a liking for violence.
In this way, the use of justifications itself was the defence against the attribution of irrational ‘lunacy’, for, if speakers were unable to offer ‘factual’ justifications for their views on immigrants, they too would be irrationally ‘lunatic’.
Voltaire's use of ‘prejudice’ differs from the current use in two ways, in that it was less firmly tied to negative evaluations and to images of outgroups.
Because the negative evaluation was not as strong as it is now, Voltaire was able to talk about justifiable prejudices, such as those that a child might have in favour of a teacher.
The target of the Enlightenment philosophers was the prejudices of religion and it is possible to find the term being used in other contexts without the negative connotation.
Two examples, neither taken from philosophical discourse, but both from English sources, will illustrate this usage.
The Annual Register for 1787 included a short essay entitled ‘On Prejudice’, reprinted from the third volume of The Observer .
The essay was quite clear in condemning the prejudices of religions, whilst distinguishing these from other prejudices.
Thus, the author asserted that the ‘prejudices of education are less dangerous than religious ones’(1788: 182) and even that ‘national prejudice’ should be seen as a ‘virtue’(p. 181).
The second example is taken from the early years of the nineteenth century.
It concerns the reaction of the Whig politician, Lord Brougham, to the Prince Regent's sympathy for the House of Stewart.
Lord Brougham reminded His Majesty of the misdemeanours of the Stewart kings, which had included ‘thwarting the prejudices and opposing the wishes’ of the nation (quoted in Priestley, 1971: 159).
Semantically these quotations must appear curious to the modern reader, who would see a contradiction of terms in the notion of virtuous prejudice and who would expect the thwarting of prejudices to be a matter for praise not blame.
Both Brougham and the author in The Annual Register , as supporters of the liberal Enlightenment's battle with traditional religious authority, were prepared to defend national, and nationalist, sentiments.
Yet these are feelings which seem to contradict the universalist, rational aspirations of liberalism.
This is not a contradiction which has  been resolved.
Nowadays such national sentiments are also defended by those who place themselves within the traditions of liberalism.
As Barker (1981) has shown, this combination is typical of thinkers on the new Conservative right.
However, there has been a shift of semantics, concerning the notion of ‘prejudice’.
Among the writers of the new right, it would be untypical to find an explicit defence of ‘national prejudice’, for the concept of prejudice has largely been conceded in the wish to avoid the criticism of being irrationally bigoted.
National sentiments, instincts, feelings, etc. might be defended, and indeed be given a ‘rational’(non-instinctual, etc.) justification in terms of biology, social function or whatever (Seidel, 1985).
In outlining an argument against multi-racial immigration, such new right authors might justify themselves in terms of so-called ‘national feelings’ but argumentative rhetoric and semantic history combine to leave such a phrase as ‘national prejudices’to their opponents.
One reason why the modern reader has difficulty with a positive evaluation of the term ‘national prejudices’ is that, in the twentieth century, prejudice has taken on a substantive meaning.
Its prototype is not any opinion formed without judgement, but nationalist, or racist, opinions in particular.
As such, the phrase, ‘I'm not prejudiced but…’ is not merely a defence of rationality in general, but is a defence against that particular son of irrationality which leads to hostility against individuals based upon the colour of their skin or the provenance of their passport.
Samelson (1978) has documented the growth of interest by social scientists in the topic of ‘prejudice’.
In the early years of the century the term prejudice was rarely left unqualified: for instance, psychologists would study ‘race prejudice’ or ‘national prejudice’.
In the early post-war years, a semantic change is detectable.
When Gordon Allport wrote his classic work The Nature of Prejudice , he left ‘prejudice’ unqualified as he wished to include general principles of psychological functioning in his analysis.
Nevertheless, the main emphasis of the book is upon the prejudices of racism, antisemitism and nationalism, so much so that the unqualified term is sufficient to evoke these exemplifications.
Had Voltaire used such a title as The Nature of Prejudice , his readers may have expected criticisms of clerics.
In the mid-twentieth century, Allport's title invites his readers to expect the arguments of liberalism to be directed against different targets.
This semantic shift should not necessarily be interpreted as indicating a decline in nationalism or racism.
What it does indicate is the demands of liberal ideology that the virtues of ‘national prejudice’ be justified and thereby translated from the category of  ‘prejudice’.
The contradictory demands of justifying and criticizing national prejudice can be seen in the everyday discourse of racism.
Justification and Denial of Prejudice
If there is a social taboo against expressing unjustified negative views against outgroups, then the speaker who wishes to express discriminatory views must be ready to search for, and find, suitable reasons.
Considerable ingenuity may be required to discover non-racial criteria for racial discrimination and non-racial reasons for criticizing other races.
In consequence, one should not expect the discourse of racism to be necessarily marked by the ponderous unsubtlety of thought described by Adorno et al .
(1950).
In fact, there are good reasons for supposing that the classic authoritarians of the study by Adorno et al .
(1950) were much more cognitively supple than was supposed (Billig, 1982b, 1985).
Similarly, the distinction between ‘old-fashioned’ and ‘modern racism’may not always be a distinction in kind, but may reflect an ability to provide justifications, often post hoc , for views and positions.
Education may enhance the ability to produce justifications, rather than eliminate racism tout court .
Thus there is evidence that the better educated do not show a greater consonance between general principles of fairness and particular stances on racial issues, but may show greater flexibility in justifying the laying aside of abstract principles (Sniderman et al .,
1984).
In addition, if in this century racism has become the prototypical instantiation of the concept of ‘prejudice’, then similar justificatory strategies can be expected, when people deny racism and prejudice: in denying that one is racist, one is denying that one is prejudiced, and vice versa .
The images, or social representations, of prejudice and racism will be similar.
The racist will be seen as being irrationally prejudiced, harbouring irrational violence and hatred.
Those who deny their own prejudice and racism will need this image, for their protestations of rationality depend upon a contrast with irrationality.
Thus, right-wing politicians will use the image of irrationally violent Nazis, in order that their own policies on race will appear reasonable by contrast (Billig, 1982b).
These themes can be illustrated in a newspaper report about discrimination in the British Army.
The Observer newspaper published a lengthy investigation which claimed that there was substantial discrimination by elite regiments against potential black recruits.
It followed a report by the Commission of Racial Equality on the same topic.
The Observer reported that ‘seven regiments of the Household Division — protectors of the Royal Family, Colonel-in-Chief, Her Majesty the Queen — operate an unofficial colour bar’(8.6.1986).
The newspaper recorded the comments of some serving Guardsmen:
One serving senior Guards NCO told us: ‘There are no Blacks in the Guards.
There have never been and never will be.
People do not want to see a black face under a bearskin.
Blacks are generally persuaded to go elsewhere.’
A Guards officer who left recently told us: ‘Blacks do not get to the depot.
It has become a tradition not to have Blacks.’
He added, apparently unaware of the illogicality of his statement: ‘There is no racial discrimination.’
The Director of Army Recruiting…denied last week there was any colour bar on black or Asian Guardsmen.
‘The Guards have the same requirements for recruits as any infantry or Royal Armoured Corps regiment’, he said.
He believed that there were ‘some’, but he couldn't name a Guards regiment with a black soldier in it.
(The Observer , 8.6.1986).
There are several points which can be noted about these quoted remarks.
In an obvious respect all three are similar: all seek to justify the same discriminatory practice and all three have emerged from the same institution which practices discrimination.
This similarity should caution against making too firm a distinction between the three; for example one might have sought to make distinctions in terms of being instances of either ‘new’ or ‘old’racism, especially on the grounds that new racists, unlike old racists, will justify their position by citing non-racial general principles (Sniderman and Tetlock, 1986a, 1986b; see also Potter and Wetherell, 1987, for arguments against deducing ‘true’attitudes from discourse).
Nevertheless, there are differences in the ways that the speakers express their views, particularly with respect to the justifications they offer.
The three were presented in ascending order of rank and this order matches the extent to which the views are given ‘non-prejudiced’ justification.
The Non-Commissioned Officer does not seek to deny prejudice.
In fact, his comments seemingly invite the charge, for he describes the lack of black guardsmen in terms of feelings rather than in terms of the discourse of external factuality: ‘People do not want to see a black face under a bearskin.’
The speaker is not critic; zing ‘people’ for having these wants, nor is a justification given for them.
He is, of course, assuming that ‘people’ are white.
Without a justification being given, these ‘wants’ constitute the son of psychological state which is said to characterize prejudice.
The teenage respondents of Cochrane and Billig (1984) and Billig et al .
(1988), implied that it was the prejudiced people who did not ‘like’ black people or did not ‘want’them in Britain.
By contrast, they implied that the unprejudiced personally did not mind black people (some of their best friends were black…)’ but there were all sons of other reasons, beyond their personal feelings, why regrettably it was better if there were no black people in Britain.
The quoted comments of the NCO are too short to indicate whether he might in fact justify his comments in this way, if he were personally accused of prejudice.
It should be noted that he remarks that ‘people’ do not want to see a black face, not that he personally objects to such a sight.
The second quoted soldier, unlike the first one, actually denies prejudice: ‘There is no discrimination’ he contends.
This comment depends upon having some rough idea what would count as racial discrimination.
Unfortunately, the newspaper reporter did not press him on the point.
More crucially there is little social scientific work to fall back upon, in order to demonstrate what people consider to be prototypical examples of prejudice and discrimination.
There is survey evidence that, whatever people imagine ‘racial prejudice’ to be, they conceive that it is others, not themselves, who are prejudiced (Airey, 1984).
The ex-soldier's comment suggests, contrary to the interpretation of the reporter, that there might be a perceived connection between tradition and the absence of discrimination.
If the speaker identifies discrimination with irrational feelings of hostility against blacks, then there exists the basis for a denial of prejudice: if the regiment is motivated by the desire to uphold tradition, then it is not motivated by feelings of antipathy towards blacks, and therefore it is not prejudiced.
More detailed questioning might have revealed whether the soldier's discourse would have taken this argumentative tack.
The third comment of the three gives the most sophisticated defence.
An account is given which explains present practices without recourse to justifying the feelings of anyone who might be implicated in the practices.
In fact, the account is a lay, sociological' one: it describes how a system works and all those psychological states, which might be indicative of a prejudiced mentality, have no place in this system.
There was no colour bar, because normal rules are applied for the selection of recruits and it just happens that black and Asian people fall the tests.
Here is an example of the deracialization of discourse (Reeves, 1983).
The rules are deracialized, for they do not forbid black and Asian success.
Those who operate the rules are not racist, for they merely follow procedures in a colour-blind way.
In fact, it is something of a mystery how black and Asian people fail the test.
The unstated implication is that there is something about the aptitude of the  potential recruits themselves which leads to their failure.
Sometimes, in this sort of deracialized discourse, the speaker can reveal racist assumptions and unexamined stereotypes.
A senior London police officer was attempting to attract black recruits into the police force, whilst denying that racism in the force might have deterred black people from joining in the past: ‘Racism in the force is not the main reason for black people preferring not to apply.
Being a police officer entails working long and difficult hours’(The Guardian , 3.6. 1986).
The police officer, like the Director of Army Recruiting, offers an explanation, which specifically seeks to rule out racist motivations.
In this way there is a denial of prejudice, not only on the pan of the speaker, but also on the pan of the institution which the speaker is justifying.
By equating ‘prejudice’ or ‘racism’with individual psychological states, ‘institutional racism’becomes a logical impossibility: for how can institutions harbour irrational hatreds?
By making institutional racism an impossibility in theory, this son of discourse justifies it in practice.
The line of argument depends upon two principal features:(a) there is a need to produce an oven justification for practices which might be criticized and this justification must explain racial discrimination in terms of anything other than irrational preferences;(b) the discourse implies that irrational preference would be morally bad and the good intentions of the speaker, and those whom the speaker justifies, are guaranteed if they are shown to differ from those who might act on the basis of irrational prejudices.
Both these two factors can be seen in an editorial in the right-wing newspaper The Daily Telegraph (12.6.1986) on the same issue of discrimination in the army.
Like the army officers, the writer attempted to justify the recruitment practices of the Guards, and, as might be expected from a serious organ of right-wing opinion, more ingenuity was shown in the search for justificatory reasons than was by the lower-ranking quoted officers.
The main direction of the editorial's argument was that positive discrimination was ‘dangerous muddling’.
There was also the defence of present practices.
It was true, conceded the newspaper, that black faces were not to be found in the ranks of the Household Division of the Guards.
But this was not racism, because there are ‘reasons’ for the non-recruitment.
By ‘reasons’, the newspaper meant reasons which are ‘reasonable’ and, thus, other than prejudiced preferences.
An explanation was needed and one was to hand: ‘What seems to inhibit the Guards from varying their recruiting policy is a concern to preserve the uniform appearance of the ranks on ceremonial occasions.’
However, as the writer recognized, perhaps this was no longer a convincing reason.
The newspaper concluded: ‘Soldiers might take time to consider whether in this attitude they are not just fixed in the past’(The Daily Telegraph , 12.6.1986).
In other words, the worst criticism which could be levelled against the failure to recruit blacks was that of falling to move with the times.
In this instance, the discourse of prejudice, with its mixture of simultaneous denial and justification, ended with a declaration of the classic liberal imperative of historical progress.
Conclusion
Horkheimer and Adorno in The Dialectic of Enlightenment insisted upon seeing the development of irrational racism as being the development of liberalism, as practised in an illiberal society.
In the phrase of Horkheimer, it is the ‘tendency of liberalism to tilt over into fascism’(1947: 20).
Whether this diagnosis is historically or sociologically true is one matter, but the relations between liberalism and racism cannot be dismissed.
The fascist writer, denying all prejudice, shows how the discourse of liberalism can tilt over into that of fascism.
Moreover, one should not expect the liberal ideology of today, as revealed in ordinary discourse, to reflect the universalistic aspirations of the Enlightenment.
Marx and Engels may have predicted in The Communist Manifesto that capitalism would abolish the particularities of nations and make outdated narrow national consciousness.
However, international economic arrangements have not totally superseded national ones.
If ideology reflects economic organization, then one might expect that modern consciousness should contain its universalistic and its particularistic common-places.
There are the tolerant themes of international brotherhood (and nowadays of sisterhood) to draw upon, to add the moral flavour of liberalism to arguments.
Again, there are narrower considerations to be justified in terms of other common-places.
If liberalism has triumphed, then it is not in eradicating the prejudices of the nation, except in name.
Its triumph in everyday discourse is the demand for rational or empirical justification.
The paradox is that the more prejudices are criticized, the more prejudices of liberalism are justified.
7
Rhetorical and Historical Aspects of Attitudes: The Case of the British Monarchy
Preface
The study of attitudes has been a major topic, if not the major topic, in social psychology.
As was discussed in Chapter 1, social psychologists have typically ignored the rhetorical and historical aspects of attitudes.
They have concentrated upon the characteristics of the individual attitude-holder.
In consequence, social and ideological factors have slipped beyond the theoretical horizon.
By contrast, the rhetorical perspective demands a re examination of the nature of attitudes.
What it means to ‘hold an attitude’ cannot be taken for granted, but the rhetorical dimensions of taking a stance need to be considered.
Such a re-examination is particularly necessary, if social psychology is to be turned into a historical science, as discussed in Chapter 3.
The present chapter reconsiders the historical and rhetorical nature of attitudes in relation to a specific issue: opinions about the British monarchy.
By selecting such an issue, the historical dimension is stressed twofold.
First, the issue itself is placed within a historical context, as stances, or attitudes, are seen to have a historical location.
Second, the individual's stance has a history: the ‘attitude’ is not fixed, but rhetorically unfolds as the historical context of controversy unfolds.
In this way, the paradox of ideology, discussed in the opening chapter, is visible.
Individuals are neither slaves to their attitudes, nor are they necessarily masters of their own destiny.
Introduction
The rhetorical approach to social psychology points to the importance of argumentation in social life and draws a connection between arguing and thinking (see also Miller, 1986; Shotter, 1987).
Although Billig (1987a) outlines the sorts of issues which a rhetorical social psychology might highlight, there is a need to develop the key theoretical terms.
It would be possible to attempt such theoretical development by conceptual analysis, in order to  produce in the abstract a theoretical structure, which could then be tested empirically.
However, a different tactic is adopted here.
Theoretical issues relating to the concept of attitudes will be considered in relation to an actual social issue — British attitudes towards the monarchy.
This tactic, which blurs the conventional distinction between pure theory and applied work, stems from the belief that theory in social psychology is neither produced as an end in itself, nor to generate research programmes.
It exists to help understand social reality.
If a rhetorical approach to social psychology is to prove worthwhile, it must be able to illuminate issues relating to the structure of ideology and the movement of public opinion.
Therefore, it hardly seems sensible to adopt, whilst attempting to elaborate theoretical issues, a removed philosophical stance, which ignores the very issues that theory should be addressing.
The rhetorical approach stresses that ideologies do not necessarily function to suppress argumentation and thinking, but provide the elements with which people can think and argue about everyday life (Billig et al .,
1988).
This position carries direct implications for the study of attitudes.
If the argumentative aspects of attitudes are stressed, then attitudes are not to be viewed solely as individual evaluative responses towards a given stimulus object.
Instead, attitudes are stances taken in matters of controversy: they are positions in arguments (Billig, 1987a; Billig, in press).
Every attitude in favour of a position is also, implicitly but more often explicitly, also a stance against the counter-position.
Because attitudes are stances on matters of controversy, we can expect attitude holders to justify their position and to criticize the counter-position.
Attitudinal justifications and criticisms are not to be seen as epiphenomena, tacked onto some more basic psychological predisposition, but are integral to attitudes qua attitudes.
Recently, there has been discussion whether the concept of ‘attitude’, as used by social psychologists, should be essentially an individual or social concept.
Advocates of the ‘social representation’ school of thought have criticized mainstream attitude research for possessing an individualist bias (see, Billig, in press; Jaspars and Fraser, 1983; Moscovici, 1963, 1983).
The rhetorical approach sides with such critics, to the extent that it advocates that the social, and particularly the rhetorical, context of attitudes should not be ignored.
It is one of the present assumptions that the meaning of an attitudinal stance depends upon the social controversy in which the stance is taken: changes in this argumentative context result in changes in the meaning of the individual stance.
The social nature of attitudes can be seen, not only by their context, but also by their content.
Billig (1987a), specifically drawing upon the traditions of ancient rhetoric, discusses how justifications and criticisms are typically constructed upon social ‘common-places’.
These are the values and maxims which are common to a community and thereby constitute its ‘common sense,(see also Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca, 1971; Ferelman, 1979).
If attitudinal justifications, and criticisms of counter-attitudes, are based upon such common-places, then attitudes by their content are socially shared and thereby possess a social significance beyond the motivations and affective reactions of the individual attitude-holder.
At first glance, this rhetorical approach seems to direct the study of attitudes to that of public argument and controversy.
If, as McGuire (1986) has argued, social psychologists need to study the structure of attitudes, then rhetorical theorists seem to suggest that one should study the structure of public debate on social issues, in order to determine the structure of attitudes.
However, it will be one of the major themes of this article that, from a social psychological point of view, one needs to look beyond the explicit arguments, which are produced in the course of actual controversies.
One needs also to take into account implicit dimensions, for these are very much a part of the rhetorical structure of attitudes.
These are the elements which might be brought into play in future controversies.
The distinction between implicit and explicit aspects is not a clear-cut one, which has been established by a sharp definition.
Instead, the distinction will be explored by examples from contemporary and past attitudes towards the monarchy.
A contrast will be made between the conclusions of the public pollsters, who suggest an unqualified support exists for the British monarchy today, and a rhetorical analysis, which suggests a more complex reaction between explicit and implicit features.
In the analysis, and especially in the examples given, there is a strong historical dimension.
For instance, one example will concern monarchical attitudes in the eighteenth century.
This historical aspect is something which is not common in most social psychological writing today.
However, a historical focus is appropriate for understanding the meaning of attitudes, for the rhetorical context of attitudes is also a historical context.
If the meaning of attitudes changes as the rhetorical context changes, then it is necessary to take a historical perspective to note changes over time.
The type of laboratory study, frequently used in the social psychological study of attitudes, may have the benefit of greater precision than the use of historical examples.
Yet, the sweep of history is necessarily excluded from the laboratory.
From a  rhetorical perspective, one needs to relate attitudinal expressions to the wider movements of public opinion, because historical changes, and the continual movement in the point of public controversy, can determine the structures of implicit and explicit aspects of attitudes.
The very notion of development and change over time is contained within the notion of implicit and explicit aspects of attitudes.
Thus, the examples, which examine the historical development of attitudes, are intended to show that present explicit attitudes must contain their implicit potentialities for future circumstances.
There is a further reason for adopting a historical perspective.
The topic of the British monarchy is an intrinsically historical topic.
The monarchy itself is a symbol, which proclaims its own historicity.
It is strange to relate that this well-known symbol has been comparatively neglected by social scientists and especially by social psychologists.
The neglect has occurred despite royalty being one of the wealthiest families in the world, arguably the most well-known family, and certainly the object of the most public interest.
In neglecting this overt symbol of statehood and hereditary privilege, social scientists have turned their back upon an important puzzle: how can the British public simultaneously cherish their heritage of hereditary privilege and their heritage of parliamentary democracy?
In raising the issue of the monarchy, it has not been the intention to select a bizarre, perhaps even frivolous topic, but one, the examination of which should raise important issues about contemporary ideology.
Taking the Side of the Other
The assumption, that the meaning of an attitude must be understood in relation to the wider argumentative context, has a number of social psychological implications.
In the first place, alterations in one's attitudinal stance cannot just be related to the internal affective state of the attitude-holder, but should be understood in terms of the rhetorical context of controversy.
This is particularly necessary to make sense of the phenomenon called by Billig (1987a) Taking the Side of the Other.
Examples of this phenomenon will be discussed later with respect to monarchical attitudes, but for the present some general words of explication are necessary.
Billig (1987a) illustrates Taking the Side of the Other by examples where people, who have generally argued for a particular stance and against the counter-stance, seem to turn around and use the arguments of their former opponents: in this way, they take up the side of the other.
Billig (1987a) suggests that this occurs when  the rhetorical context has altered and there are different counter-attitudes to criticize.
Under this circumstance, the ‘old’ attitudinal stance must take on a new meaning, if it is to be repeated in the changed context, inasmuch as it will be directed against different counter-attitudes.
Attitude-holders, aware of this changed context, may not wish their former stance to be directed against the new counter-arguments.
Consequently, they may change the direction of their attitudinal expressions.
In the next section a historical example will be given, and this will show how a critic of the British monarchy became a firm justifier, because in an altered rhetor; cal climate the former stance took on a new, and fiercer, meaning.
It needs to be emphasized that Taking the Side of the Other differs from attitude-change, as conventionally conceived by social psychologists.
At first sight Taking the Side of the Other would seem to be an instance of attitude-change: at time (1) a person can be heard to defend attitudinal position X, whilst later, at time (2), the same person criticizes X, without there being any deliberate deceit or hypocrisy on either occasion.
There would seem to be an ‘attitude-change’ between times (1) and (2).
However, if what has happened is that the person has Taken the Side of the Other, then there need not have been attitude-change in the traditional sense.
According to social psychological theory, attitudes are changed when a basic cognitive or evaluative component is reversed, usually by the reception of new, persuasive information.
To use lay language, there is a change mind on the pan of the attitude-holder (see e.g. the discussion of Crocker et al .,
1984; McGuire, 1969; Montmollin, 1984; Petty and Cacioppo, 1981).
For example, McGuire's (1964) classic study demonstrated how laboratory subjects could be induced to reject unconsidered assumptions when receiving new information (see also, Szybillo and Heslin, 1973).
Taking the Side of the Other is different in that there is not a reversal of the past position, provoked by new, persuasive information.
Moreover, Taking the Side of the Other relates to changes in the social context of public controversy, whereas attitude-change theorists have tended to concentrate primarily upon changes within the individual attitude-holder.
A consideration of how Taking the Side of the Other might occur should bring attention to what here will be called the ‘implicit features’ of attitudes.
These refer to those aspects of beliefs, which may not currently be used in explicit argument to justify one's own position or to criticize counter-positions, but which possess the potential to be used in future argument.
Thus it is assumed that the attitude-holder might possess certain beliefs, whose content implicitly can be taken as a criticism of counter-stances , but these stances may not yet have been historically realized in argument.
When they are so realized then the attitude-holder may draw upon, and develop, these implicit argumentative aspects of belief.
In this way, Taking the Side of the Other can involve making explicit what may have been previously implicit.
When someone Takes the Side of the Other they may not be developing something totally novel, in the sense that the classic experimental subject, who shows attitude-change, incorporates a totally new piece of information.
Taking the Side of the Other involves building upon attitudinal elements which may have been implicit previously.
There is a change in the sense that argumentative qualifications may be discovered, as implicit qualifications are made explicit.
However, this is not the same as the reversal, described by attitude-change.
If a rhetorical approach is to understand a phenomenon such as Taking the Side of the Other, then it must accept that at any time there are both explicit and implicit argumentative features to attitudes.
Moreover, as will be suggested, the implicit features may well be contrary to the explicit ones.
Thus, one should not expect that the themes of an ideology or pattern of beliefs should be internally consistent (Billig, 1982).
In fact, as the later examples will show, consistency itself may be a rhetorical strategy, and part of the argumentative context, rather than a social psychological property of beliefs (see also Billig, 1987a).
The rhetorical perspective proposed does not view attitudes as being static, for an attitude is not seen as a fixed response pattern located within an individual.
In this respect the approach is similar to that of discourse analysts (Potter and Wetherell, 1987) and social representation theorists (Moscovici, 1983, 1984); both these two approaches also are critical of assumptions that ‘attitudinal systems’ possess some sort of internal dynamic towards consistency.
The stress upon implicit and explicit features also suggests a similarity with the work of those developmental psychologists, who examine how social conditions can create and realize implicit aspects of the developmental process (Edwards and Mercer, 1987; Griffin and Cole, 1984; Shotter, 1989).
As regards attitudes, there is the assumption that attitudinal positions, and thereby attitudinal structures, cannot be fully developed, for, although they might be developed for given argumentative contexts, they must also look forward to contexts as yet unrealized.
Since not all circumstances can be envisaged in advance, there must be a provisional element within attitudes, which allows for their development, as the context of controversy develops and changes.
Only a small fraction of potentialities can be historically realized, and, therefore, the attitude-holder possesses belief themes, whose implicit argumentative meaning will never be realized.
It is because it is part of the structure of attitudes to possess such unrealized, implicit potentialities, that the implicit aspects can be termed the unstructured pan of the attitudinal structure.
Implicit Meaning
The discussion of Taking the Side of the Other suggests that there is a need to make a theoretical distinction between the explicit and the implicit argumentative aspects of attitudes.
The explicit aspects are those which are expressed by the attitude-holder about an issue should the issue in question be a matter of public controversy.
In this sense, attitudes explicitly justify a particular stance, and criticize the counter-stance on a controversial issue.
The attitude-holder, in expressing the attitude, may not actually be engaged in face-to-face debate, for what matters is the general context of controversy, not the specific interpersonal context.
For example, the attitude-holder, filling out an opinion survey individually, is, according to this definition, engaged in an explicit controversy if a stance is indicated on an issue of public debate.
If questioned about the response, the attitude-holder can be expected to engage in explicit justification of their stance and to offer criticism of the counter-stance.
This expectation, from a rhetorical point of view, is pan of what it means to hold an attitude, because the attitude exists within the wider social context of explicit controversy.
However, the structure of attitudes does not only comprise the explicit justifications and criticisms which might be advanced by the attitude-holder.
There are also the implicit elements, from which new justifications and criticisms can be developed, should the argumentative context change.
in order to uncover these implicit elements, it may be necessary to adopt a diachronic perspective, which considers the expression of attitudinal positions across history.
In this way it might be possible to discover the implicit features, which may be made explicit at some later date.
Consequently, the implicit features are not the fully formulated justifications and criticisms which can be produced to deal with present arguments.
Instead they represent the themes for potential criticisms and justification.
To cite Francis Bacon's description of rhetorical common-places, they represent the ‘seeds , not flowers of arguments’(1858/1605: 492, emphasis in original).
It will be suggested that when the context of controversy changes, the attitude-holder may draw upon these implicit themes.
The process of nurturing the seeds to flowers, to continue Bacon's metaphor, is one of the translating implicit arguments into explicit ones.
Unless the distinction between implicit and explicit aspects is made, the structure of attitudinal positions may be greatly over-simplified and rendered overly static.
As will be shown, the search for the implicit features of argumentative positions is often a search for implicit counter-themes.
This has implications for the generally study of ideology and the counter-themes of ideology (Billig, 1982; and Billig et al .,
1988).
Billig (1987a) suggests that common sense also possesses its own contradictory themes.
Therefore individuals, who seem to be taking a consistent explicit attitudinal stance, may implicitly be accepted ideologically determined counter-themes.
The existence of such counter-themes can enable Taking the Side of the Other to occur.
This will be illustrated by the historical example of the next section, where a critic of monarchy was able to turn implicit justifications into explicit ones, in an altered context of controversy.
There are good reasons why a historical, or at least a diachronic, approach is particularly appropriate for studying implicit attitudinal meaning and Taking the Side of the Other.
In the first place, the rhetorical perspective advocates understanding attitudes in terms of the wider social context.
In this respect it is in agreement with those theorists who claim that social psychology should be an historical discipline.
For example, Gergen (1973) argues that social psychologists should treat their contemporary data as if they were historical.
Moscovici (1984) has claimed that social psychology should become ‘an anthropological and a historical science’(p. 984).
Over and above general considerations about the desirability of taking history seriously, there is a particular reason why an historical, or at least a diachronic, perspective is appropriate in the present case.
Taking the Side of the Other is revealed over time, as individuals react to the changed rhetorical conditions produced by historical change.
Therefore, a synchronic approach would be inappropriate for investigating a phenomenon which is essentially diachronic.
By considering the historical example, and later by considering contemporary attitudes in a diachronic context, it will be possible to make further comments about the nature of the implicit attitudinal structure, or perhaps, its lack of structure qua structure.
As is so often the case in the social sciences, it is more helpful to develop theoretical notions in relation to actual, specific issues, rather than to posit theoretical distinctions in the abstract.
James Gillray: Critic and Defender of Monarchy
The historical example of Taking the Side of the Other is that of the great English political cartoonist, James Gillray.
The sudden change in his satirical targets from 1792 to 1793 illustrates how public opinion can shift dramatically in response to the changing circumstances of controversy.
More than any other single individual, James Gillray (1756–1815) developed the an of the satirical caricature.
His savage etchings of the leading figures of English society brought him fame, if not fortune.
His prints, produced at a furious rate, were eagerly bought and crowds would gather outside his publishers whenever a new etching was displayed.
Never before had the images of the great and respected been so irreverently and so widely circulated.
This was a new an, which was able to give expression to popular attitudes.
In an obvious sense Gillray was not the creator of such attitudes.
He would never have achieved his popularity, if he had been unable to give expression to the existing moods of his audience.
Yet, it was his originality that he could represent prevailing moods, drawing together themes in striking images and captions, thereby intensifying the attitudes from which his an emerged.
Some of Gillray's most famous, and most daring, cartoons were those of royalty.
He was able to convey in grotesque terms the characters of George III and his family.
It is important to remember the political position of the monarchy in England at the time.
The monarch had not yet become what Walter Bagehot was to describe as the ‘dignified’ part of the Constitution.
In 1867 Bagehot may have been able to write that ‘a republic has insinuated itself beneath the folds of a Monarchy’(1965/1867: 94).
However, in the late eighteenth century the monarch still wielded considerable political power, appointing and dismissing governments according to choice.
George III favoured the Tories, and in so going attracted the criticism of Whigs and radicals.
Critics could barely keep to the constitutional pretence that the monarch was above political error.
For example, the monarch was not spared by the pseudonymous critic Junius, who has been described by one historian as ‘perhaps the ablest and most devastating political commentator’ that England has ever produced (Plumb, 1966: 118).
At the start of one of his denunciations, Junius went through the motions of excepting the monarch from his attack: ‘The doctrine inculcated by our laws,That the King can do no wrong , is admitted without reluctance’(1779: 100, emphasis in original).
Despite this, Junius soon got down to the business of casting aspersions against the King's character.
Junius ended this particular outburst  with a threat, which drew its force from the common knowledge that the Hanoverian dynasty had usurped the Stuarts.
Junius wrote that while the King ‘plumes himself upon the security of his title to the crown,[he]should remember, that, as it was acquired by one revolution, it may be lost by another’(1779: 111–12).
Junius's main targets may have been the King's ministers, but in 1792 Gillray's satirical alm was most surely directed against royal personages.
In that year he produced an outpouring of anti-royalist cartoons, with twenty-six lampoons of royalty being etched in all (Hill, 1965: 44).
Amongst the 1792 output was a pair of portraits, which attracted great attention.
The first, entitled ‘A Voluptuary Under the Horrors of Digestion’, shows the Prince of Wales, in an advanced state of dissolution, having eaten and drunk to excess with his belly bursting through his breeches.
Bills for gambling debts are stuffed beneath an overflowing chamber-pot and the Prince is surrounded by medications for indigestion and the pox.
The companion print, ‘Temperance Enjoying a Frugal Meal’, depicts the King and Queen as mean as their eldest son was spend-thrift.
The royal couple, in patched clothes, are eating a meal of boiled eggs, water and sauerkraut (the last item drawing attention to the un-English origins of Hanoverians).
There is no fire in the grate; the King economizes on napkins by tucking the table cloth around his neck.
A note pinned to the wall, as if it were a restaurant menu, informs the King of the rate of interest on his fortune.
The twin caricatures of the King hoarding the nation's wealth and the Prince dissipating it had appeared in other Gillray etchings, but nowhere with greater effect than in these two productions of July 1792.
However, this great satirical onslaught on the Royal Family came to an abrupt end.
Suddenly the anti-royalist themes were replaced by defences of the monarchy.
Later productions, which returned to earlier themes, were to be gentler, as for example the almost sentimental etchings of the Prince of Wales dreaming on the eve of his wedding (24 January 1795; reproduced in Hill, 1966).
One might ask why this sudden change occurred, and whether there was a change of attitude by Gillray, perhaps even a conversion pushing him from critic to defender of monarchy.
In fact, there was no attitude change in the simple sense, but there was an historical event, which necessitated a re-evaluation of previous positions.
In January 1793 the King of France was executed by the Jacobins and in February the French republic declared war on England.
Gillray responded with a strong anti-republican cartoon, showing the guillotining of Louis XVI.
A grinning sansculotte, identifiable by his bare rump, fiddles whilst  churches burn and nuns are hanged: the savage scene is given the ironical title of ‘The Zenith of French Glory: the Pinnacle of Liberty’(12 February 1793).
The sansculotte was as familiar a subject in Gillray's 1793 output, as had been the inadequacies of the British Royal Family in the previous year.
Anti-republican themes appeared in no fewer than ten of Gillray's cartoons of 1793.
The shift from critic to justifier cannot be considered in isolation from the historical context of controversy.
After the execution of Louis XVI, anti-royalist criticism took on a new meaning.
In 1793 caricatures of George III and the Prince of Wales would have contained more radical, and even unpatriotic, implications than they did in 1792.
The drawings might be the same, but in 1793 the etched line of the Prince of Wales's belly would have inevitably expressed Jacobin, and regicidal, sympathies.
Gillray, in common with the vast majority of his public, did not want to take the Jacobin side.
In fact, he even contributed to a magazine explicitly called The Anti-Jacobin Review .
All this does not necessarily suggest that Gillray was rejecting his previous attitudes, including his early support for the French Revolution.
Gillray had not suddenly discovered the munificence of the English monarch nor the seriousness of his heir.
Rather he had discovered, or had been forced by historical development, to discover the limitations of his anti-royalism.
With the changed context of controversy, Gillray had turned to deal with an argumentative challenge from the left.
To counter this, he was Taking the Side of the Other, using the national symbols of kingship, which he had previously derided.
Gillray may have formulated new images, and new arguments, to deal with the changed situation, but his novelty was not constructed from a sudden conversion.
To understand how his new stance was formulated, one must search for implicit features in the previous stance, when his target was the English monarchy.
There were aspects of his previous work which contained the implicit basis of his anti-Jacobinism.
In 1790, a cartoon in praise of the French Revolution and the Fail of the Bastille, depicts Liberty handing back the crown to Louis XVI with the words ‘Receive from Liberty your crown again' (see Hill, 1965: 42).
Here implicitly is a defence of limited monarchy, and thereby an implicit critique of the rigid anti-monarchism to be revealed in Jacobinism.
Similarly, the earlier threat of Junius contains an implicit defence of monarchy: a revolution may overthrow the Hanoverians, Junius had threatened, but he then implied that the Hanoverians would be replaced, not by Jacobinism, but by a more benevolent, or weaker, monarchy.
Of course, this theme could not be made explicit, for  the time of Jacobinism had not arrived.
But such themes remain, just below the surface of explicit argumentation, as potential resources for future controversies, should the context change and the arguer need to Take the Side of the Other.
One may ask whether the person who takes the Side of the Other is being inconsistent.
This itself may be a matter of argumentative debate.
Critics may claim inconsistency, but the person involved may justify themself by claiming total consistency.
The justification can imply an awareness of how the meaning of attitudinal positions depends upon the wider context of controversy, and cannot just be understood in terms of the individual's uttered attitudinal statements.
We have no record of Gillray defending himself in this way against charges of inconsistency, but an example can be given of another public figure of those times.
Robert Bisset (1800) produced such a defence of his hero Edmund Burke.
Before the French Revolution Burke had supported the popular cause against undue monarchical power; in fact, he had even been rumoured to have been the author of Junius's letters.
Yet, according to Bisset, ‘soon after the French revolution, doctrines prevailed, tending to elevate the popular branch much beyond its proportion’ and Burke's targets changed.
Bisset protested that it was wrong to accuse Burke of inconsistency, because of the change of his arguments.
Burke's conduct ‘arose from an identity of principles, varying its operations in diversity of circumstances’.
Bisset, using a description of Taking the Side of the Other as a justification for the tactic, concluded that ‘there are states of society in which it would be proper to contract the very opinions that it would be right to cherish in other circumstances’(Bisset, 1800: 269).
In all this, we are dealing with the implicit, contrary themes of attitudinal arguments and the contexts in which they might be developed explicitly.
In fact, the implicit themes may have been much more complex than described.
The implicit monarchical themes may also have their own republican counterparts, which could have been made explicit in further contexts.
If monarchs abuse liberty, or if revolutions succeed only in replacing one unreasonable sovereign by another, then critics such as Gillray, Junius or even Burke might have been drawn to the republican camp.
The time might have come when they would find reasons why the King could do no right and why no kingly head deserved to wear the cap of Liberty.
Of course, only one set of historical circumstances, from all the infinite potentialities, was to emerge.
However, from a social psychological perspective, which seeks to examine attitudinal structure, it is necessary to recognize those  implicit features whose seeds might have been nurtured to flowering under other circumstances.
These implicit features contain counter-themes to the themes of explicit arguments, and even possibly implicit counter-counter-themes.
Unless this implicit argumentative dimension is recognized, it is not possible to understand how the actual historical events were able to realize into explicitness a particular set of implicit half-formed justifications.
Contemporary Attitudes: Justification and Rationalization
It is possible to identify in Gillray's positions a number of ideological themes, such as nationalism, anti-authoritarianism, traditionalism, libertarianism, etc.
These themes are not integrated into a tight ideological system, which can compute attitudinal positions with the precision of a mathematical formula.
Instead there is a tension, as themes pull in opposing ideological directions.
In this respect, there is a sense of modernity in Gillray's thinking.
In modern British public opinion similar conflicting ideological themes persist.
Radical and conservative values continue to co-exist and are not so much the properties of different populations but are to be found within the thinking of the same people (Billig, 1982; Billig et al .,
1988; Edelman, 1977).
Of course, there are major differences between eighteenth and twentieth century in relation to attitudes towards the monarchy.
In the eighteenth century the role of the monarchy was a topic of oven controversy, as the monarch's role was fiercely debated and contested.
In order to join in the atmosphere of controversy, explicit justifications or criticisms must be made.
However, as the example of Gillray shows, the existence of explicit criticisms does not preclude the continuation of implicit justifications, and vice versa.
Moreover, the balance between explicit criticism and justification can change as the context of controversy develops historically.
Today the position regarding the monarchy is quite different.
There is little political controversy attached to the figure of the sovereign, for as Bagehot recognized in the nineteenth century, the successful constitutional monarch should be seen to be removed from politics.
Republicanism is not an issue in contemporary political debate (Harris, 1966; Ziegler, 1978).
Studlar (1984) has remarked that all established institutions in Britain have been the objects of critical attack in recent times except for the monarchy: ‘Only the monarchy seems safe from challenge, secure in its substantive weakness’(p. 5).
The weakness is not financial, nor is it a weakness that comes from being ignored.
Yet, the constitutional  position of the monarchy escapes controversy, although the personalities of the Royal Family, their dress sense and leisure pursuits are all topics of debate.
In this atmosphere, one would not expect the criticisms and justifications of the monarchy,qua monarchy, to be sharpened into explicitness, for they are not presently needed in debate.
On the other hand, there is a general warm acceptance of the monarchy, which has been revealed time and time again by public opinion polls (e.g. National Opinion Poll, 1986; Gallup, 1976; see surveys of polls in Harris, 1966; Norton, 1984; Ziegler, 1978).
Young (1984), in discussing the results from the British Social Attitudes Survey, comments that ‘attitudes to the monarchy are strongly in the direction of uncritical support among all social groups’(p. 30).
So strong and consensual was this support that Young (1984) advocated dropping the relevant question on royalty from this annual survey.
Although the number of academic studies looking at British monarchical attitudes is surprisingly low, those which have been conducted confirm the consensual nature of public acceptance (see Blumier et al .,
1971; Rose and Kavanagh, 1976; Billig, 1987b).
A number of researchers have concentrated upon public relations to ceremonial occasions (Bocock, 1974; Dayan and Katz, 1985; Shils and Young, 1975).
An emphasis upon such occasions, taken in conjunction with the opinion surveys, could lead to the son of conclusion proposed by Shils and Young (1975): the British people love their monarchy and this love is expressed during coronations and suchlike ceremonies with an intensity which borders on the mystical and which strengthens the sense of national community.
Although it is clearly the case that coronations and royal weddings seem to evoke strong emotional responses (Jennings and Madge, 1987; Ziegler, 1978) a rhetorical approach cannot rest content with a description, which suggests that British attitudes are quite so straightforward.
If the lack of challenge depends upon the monarchy being perceived as ‘substantially weak’, then behind the overt support may lie implicit criticism.
Under changed circumstances, implicit themes, both justificatory and critical, could be jerked into argumentative explicitness.
In the absence of controversy about the institution of monarchy, one might expect that the consensual British attitude would be one of unthinking acceptance.
It would be unthinking, because the acceptance has not been tested in argument.
Therefore, the desirability of the monarchy might resemble what McGuire (1964) called a ‘cultural truism’.
As McGuire's experiments on  inoculation showed, such truisms can be defenceless against criticism, because the holder of a  cultural truism has not developed justifications to defend the truism when under argumentative attack.
However, applying such a model directly to the topic of attitudes towards the monarchy would neglect the role of implicit factors, especially the implicit justifications which could be called upon should an argumentative attack be mounted or the implicit criticisms which would surface into explicitness under changed historical circumstances.
Studies on attitudes towards the monarchy reveal that respondents do not resemble McGuire's subjects (1964), who were totally unarmed when called upon to defend their cultural truism.
Instead, respondents reveal that they possess the basic elements of a justificatory argument for the monarchy.
The ideological nature of this implicit justification contains some interesting features.
Billig (1987b) asked respondents to list the advantages of a monarchy, and he found that common responses were to cite financial benefits from the tourist trade and the importance of the monarchy for creating social unity.
Blumler et al .
(1971) presented respondents with a number of pro-royalist statements.
The statement which received the strongest approval was one that claimed that the monarchy benefited tourism.
Ziegler (1978), in his discussion of the Mass Observation records on the coronation of Elizabeth II in 1953, records that the two most commonly cited reasons for supporting the coronation were that it created wealth and that it united the nation.
These reasons were not given in order to deal with explicit criticisms, for explicit criticisms are rare.
As such the reasons were not explicit justifications.
Nevertheless, they could be said to be implicit justifications of an almost fully formulated nature, in that they provide reasons for the existence of the monarchy and its ceremonial occasions.
They represent socially shared justifications which are ready to hand should the explicit argumentative occasion arise.
It is necessary to ask why such implicit justifications might have been developed in the absence of oven criticisms.
The question could be asked why should the topic of monarchy in Britain not resemble the cultural truisms of McGuire (1964), which lacked even an implicit defence?
In answer, one might presume that implicit justifications can exist to deal with implicit criticisms.
Moreover, the implicit criticisms may not come from sources external to the attitude-holder, but may originate from within the ideology shared by the attitude-holder.
If so, they would co-exist with implicit justifications within the implicit part of the structure of attitudes, just as, for example, Junius's position contained implicit themes, their counter-themes and even counter-counter-themes.
In other words, there may exist, at an implicit level, an  internalized dialectic between criticism and justification.
This point can be taken further by considering the nature of contemporary implicit justifications for monarchy.
More can be said about the justification, found by both Blumler et al .
(1971) and Billig (1987b) to be the most prominent: that of benefit to the tourist trade.
In an obvious sense, this is a most surprising justification.
We are considering an institution supposedly deeply loved and revered by the British public almost to the point of mystical attachment.
Yet the most common justification, or implicit justification, is to claim that the institution brings in money because foreigners love to watch its parades.
Here we are dealing with a rationalization, in two senses of the word: the psychological and the ideological.
Psychological Rationalization
A psychological rationalization could be said to be a justification for a position, which is held for reasons not related to the justification.
In particular, emotional attachments may be given a justification which psychologically does not explain why the individual holds the attachments.
The implicit justification for the monarchy suggests that the financial gains of the monarchy far outweigh its obvious expense on the public purse.
Yet, the people, who might assert this, will not have done a careful costing of royal finances.
They have not arrived at a favourable view of the monarchy because the balance sheet falls in the black.
Developmental evidence suggests that an attachment to the symbols of monarchy occurs at an early stage, well before sophisticated cost-benefit analyses of national revenue are possible (Abramson and Inglehan, 1970).
In other words, the implicit justification is a rationalization, existing to ward off criticism.
It preserve the attachment, but is not its cause.
Ideological Rationalization
In contrast to the psychological rationalization, an ideological rationalization can refer to the socially shared content of ideology: in particular it can refer to the son of ideology, which seeks to explain the social world by making it seem rational.
The implicit justification, which cites the financial benefits of the nation possessing a monarchy, is a rationalization in this sense.
An institution, which is recognized by commentators from Bagehot to Shils and Young as appealing to irrational sentiments, is given a rational justification.
It is seen to serve the purpose of creating national wealth.
The attitude-holder becomes a ‘lay-economist’ in making such a judgement: it is as if rational calculations have been made.
The implicit justification in terms of national unity is also a rationalization in this sense.
In this case, the attitude-holder becomes a ‘lay sociologist’ rather than‘lay economist’.
Following Bagehot or modern functional sociology, the assertion is made that the figure of the sovereign binds together the national collective.
Again, the mystic forces are said to serve a rational function, and, in this way, they are rationalized.
The need for monarchy to be functionally rationalized, at least implicitly, can be seen in the official programme to the Coronation of 1953.
This was the pageant, which marked a high spot of national communion, celebrated with deep intensity (Shils and Young, 1975).
The official programme, filled with traditional symbols, religious imagery and even a gushing poem from the Poet Laureate, contained an article explaining ‘The Queen's Majesty’(Bryant, 1953).
The author declared that the Crown was the symbol of national unity.
As such, it was able to produce ‘a more wonderful miracle than the greatest achievement of science’, for ‘it enables millions who have never set eyes on one another to act together in peaceful and mutual co-operation and makes them glad and proud to do so’(p. 8).
Even at this moment of patriotic and quasi-mystical emotion, rationalized functionalism is expressed.
The miracle is not the monarchy itself, but what it achieves.
All the irrationality of pomp and circumstance has a perfectly rational justification: ‘There can be no greater service to humanity than to preserve such a union, and prevent those millions from dissolving into antagonistic and destructive groups’(p. 8).
Thus, the author felt it appropriate to justify the monarchy, without explicitly rebutting a critical challenge, for none explicitly seemed to exist.
From a rhetorical perspective one might say that the monarchy is not defended in terms of its own monarchical common-places, but in terms of other common-places.
It is as if the monarchy is not a value in itself, but needs to be justified by more basic and universally accepted values.
The creation of wealth and national harmony represent such values, and as rhetorical common-places, they provide the non-controversial sources for justifying matters which might be points of controversy (Billig, 1987a).
The result is that the monarchy is immediately, and rationally, justified, when it is implied that the institution creates wealth or nationality.
Yet this very claim for monarchy implies a limitation: the irrational and reverential institution is to be tolerated so long as it serves its function.
This implicit justification also contains the seeds of its own implicit criticism.
Implicit Justifications and Ideological Contradictions
The major themes of modern ideology can be said to contain the potentiality for criticism of royalty, for values of individual achievement and democratic equality must contain their own implicit potentiality for criticizing inherited privilege and aristocratic power.
The modern monarch is not a figure, which is to be unquestioningly revered, and who with a magical touch can cure scrofula (Bloch, 1973).
To survive in a rational era, the irrational institution must have a function, and must appeal to the population.
Certainly, modern royalty is aware of this.
The current Prince of Wales has been quoted as saying that ‘something as curious as the monarchy won't survive unless you take account of people's attitudes…after all, if people don't want it, they won't have it’(quoted in Rose, 1985: 75).
If the monarchy is perceived as fulfilling a function, then royalty have a job to do.
The language of professionalism is not inappropriate.
Edward VII, who seriously feared that his son would be the last King of England (Nicolson, 1952), used to talk of kingship as his métier , drawing a parallel with the jobs of ‘labourers and professional men’(Andrews, 1975: 182).
In his younger days Edward VII might not have taken his calling so seriously.
A series of scandals, involving gambling and divorces, upset the moral demands made by the bourgeois conscience on the morality of the royals.
However, the republican movement of the 1870s seems to have been more concerned with the failures of Victoria, rather than with the peccadilloes of her son (Roby, 1975).
In her state of exaggerated mourning, the Queen was refusing to fulfil her public duties.
She might be falling to do her job, but she was continuing to take her generous wages.
It was as if Gillray's avaricious monarch was more of an affront than the voluptuary suffering from the horrors of dissipation.
Modern surveys have revealed the extent to which the public expects the Royal Family to earn its privileged position.
The very questions used in public opinion surveys indicate the importance of the assumption.
For example, a recent survey of young people's attitude towards the monarchy asked which were the most hardworking royals (’ Young Guardian Garrick James Youth Survey',Guardian , 29.4.1987).
There was a clear relation between the linked individuals and the amount of work they were perceived to do.
The popular press echoes the belief that royalty ought to earn its way, if not from being royal, then at least from other activities: ‘Face it Charles, you need a job!’ declared the front page of the tabloid Star in a message to the Prince of Wales (6.5.1987).
If the  public opinion surveys reveal a near consensus about supporting the monarchy, they frequently reveal division about which members of the Royal Family should be supported financially and, in particular, there is support for the withdrawal of public finance from those members who are perceived as not working hard enough (see, e.g. Pearson, 1986: 227ff.).
One example can be given to show how this attitude contains its own potentiality for tilting from implicit justification to explicit criticism, should the balance between cost and benefit be thought to be changed.
The example is taken from the feature story in the tabloid newspaper The Sun , which claims to be royalist but which delights in uncovering royal gossip.
In the issue of 3 December 1971 The Sun commented upon a parliamentary report that the members of the Royal Family should be granted large increases in their allowances.
The headline set the tone: ‘Sure, It's the Greatest Show on Earth — But Need It Cost the Earth?’
The newspaper was demanding that the public be given a good show for their money: ‘It is still necessary to ask ourselves whether we are getting value for money.
And The Sun for one is not convinced.’
With great hyperbole, the newspaper predicted justifications turning to sour criticism: ‘The government should recognise that the report may well make a lot of Loyalists into Republicans.’
The newspaper's criticisms of the report were a thinly disguised threat that its own loyalty had limits.
The threat was almost explicit, although it hid behind a prediction about other people's reactions.
In making its threat it was recognizing that altered circumstances might drive it, and ‘a lot of Loyalists’, to Take the Side of the Other.
Any change in position could be attributed to external factors, and so a defence of one's own consistency could be mounted, whilst apparently changing sides from loyalism to republicanism.
Of course, as is usual with the particular newspaper in question, the issue is treated with over-exaggeration.
Its strident headlines implied that the march of modern Jacobinism was about to be started by an obscure parliamentary report.
But where the newspaper story has significance is in describing, and indeed representing, the limitations of a present position, which on one level is based upon an explicitly favourable stance, yet which contains its own implicit limitations.
Without these limitations, there would be no need for the implicit functional justifications, which themselves contain the implicit potentiality for criticism should circumstances change.
There is another aspect of The Sun 's story which is worthy of note.
The royal pageantry is demystified: it is described as a ‘circus’ and a ‘show’with a paying audience, who demand that the  performers fulfil their roles professionally.
A number of observers have claimed that modern ideology is marked by the ruthless demystification of tradition (i.e. Horkheimer and Adorno, 1973; Horkheimer, 1978; Abercrombie et al .,
1980).
Bagehot (1965/1867) may have believed that the monarchy, with its pomp and evocations of antiquity, was a ‘disguise’ of real politics, necessary for retaining the loyalty of the uneducated masses (p. 97).
However, the modern public is capable of seeing through the disguise.
It knows that the pageant derives its reality from being a circus and it demands that the circus fulfils rationalized functions.
This may sound overstated, and, certainly detailed social psychological investigation, probably of a qualitative nature, is necessary to sustain the point.
However, there is a further piece of evidence, which can be used to show how historical circumstances can produce a dramatic demystification of the monarchy, which would not be possible if people did not already possess the ideological tools for critical demystification.
One of the most remarkable of the Mass Observation's files is the report taken in September 1940 (Report 247).
The report is based upon comments about royalty collected during the early part of the Second World War.
Here, one might think, was an occasion when the symbol of national unity would be at its most needed, as citizens prepare to sacrifice their lives for King and Country: under conditions of national threat, the psychological strength of the symbol could be expected to be intensified (Edelman, 1964; Sherif, 1966).
Instead, the mood, revealed by the Mass Observation report, is one of indifference to royalty.
A middle-aged working-class woman commented: ‘I think it's all a bit silly — Kings and Queens in wartime.
I don't think they're wanted.
All of them things are all right in peacetime — we like to have ceremonies and royal robes — but now it's up to us ali — not Kings and Queens.’
Another man commented that ‘Kings and Queens don't make much difference when it comes to wars and so on.
Ours are just figureheads and that shows more than ever in wartime.’
One might make the assumption that these are the same son of people who a few years earlier had enjoyed and had been moved by the pageantry of George V's Jubilee and by George VI's Coronation.
Similarly they would show those same feelings again, probably with renewed intensity, in 1953.
Again, one might assume that the change of position occurred without any feelings of attitude-change or dissonance.
Moreover, one might predict further that had royalty in 1940 continued with the rich pageants of peacetime (as the Prince Regent had done during the Napoleonic wars), the indifference might have turned to explicit criticism.
Royalty themselves, aware of the limits of the loyalty of their subjects, were able to make the necessary adjustments to their job.
A wartime usefulness was found and implicit criticisms were not developed.
Conclusions
The theoretical analysis, as well as the discussion of monarchical attitudes, has drawn attention to the distinction between implicit and explicit argumentative aspects of attitudes.
It is not sufficient for social psychologists merely to define attitudes in terms of a stance taken at a particular time, with the assumption that such a stance has a fixity, which is only to be shifted by the reception of ‘persuasive information’.
The implicit aspects must be taken into account, especially if a phenomenon such as Taking the Side of the Other is to be distinguished from conventional attitude-change.
The case of James Gillray illustrated this.
In 1792 he was taking an anti-monarchist stance, whilst in 1793 he was not.
The change depended upon changes in the wider context of controversy, which provoked the development of formerly implicit attitudinal aspects.
The topic of contemporary attitudes towards the monarchy shows that the distinction between implicit and explicit features can be taken further.
Today the institution of monarchy is not a topic of controversy in Britain.
That being so, one would not expect there to be fully formulated justifications.
If a controversy were to arise, and if republicanism were to gain its vocal adherents, then it could be predicted that supporters would sharpen their justifications, as implicit themes become explicitly developed in the course of argumentative debate.
Vague notions about the tourist benefits of the monarchy might become more fully articulated, in order to combat contrary republican notions.
The paradox is that argumentative positions sometimes become justified only when they are criticized (Billig, 1987a).
Despite the lack of overt justifications of monarchy, there are still implicit justifications.
These do not exist to deal with virtually non-existent external challenges, but are necessary because the implicit justifiers of monarchy also possess the ideological wherewithal for implicit criticism.
In this sense, the ideology allows for the possibility of an implicit, internalized dialectic.
The present supporter of monarchy possesses the implicit themes, which will permit support to be translated into criticism should the monarchy fail to perform its job or should the economic books be seen not to balance.
The dominant response may at present be a favourable one, but this is only maintained so long as it implicitly accepted  that functions are being successfully and rationally fulfilled.
This present position should not be accorded a psychological fixity, which is somehow removed from the fluidity of historical development.
The ideological themes and counter-themes may at any one time resemble undeveloped seeds, in that they contain the possibilities for future argumentative responses, including those son of reversals when the Side of the Other is to be taken.
In this, there is a general point about the nature of attitudes, which extends beyond the specific issue of the monarchy.
The structure of present attitudinal stances will contain implicit potentialities for the future.
If this points to the importance of the implicit dimension, then there are reasons for not emphasizing an absolute and rigid distinction between the implicit and the explicit.
Rather than being a dichotomy between the two, there may be a continuum.
The beliefs about the financial gains from the monarchy were described as being almost fully formulated justifications, as if they were situated towards the explicit end but were not yet fully explicit.
Further investigations on this topic and on others might enable researchers to construct fine typographies of explicitness and implicitness and their relations to differing argumentative contexts.
Researchers might also address themselves to studying the processes by which the implicit is translated into explicitness.
Such investigations could be conducted historically, and even experimentally.
For example, in the laboratory, experimental subjects might be asked to role-play in hypothetical future situations, in order to discover under what types of circumstance they might Take the Role of the Other.
Royalists might be asked to image what their reaction would be if the monarch started to revive ancient powers to dismiss governments or began refusing to give their assent to acts of parliament.
Or royalist subjects might be faced by a fellow subject who argues that the monarch should revive these former powers.
Under such circumstances, one might predict that implicit critical themes would be brought to the explicit surface of debate, and the royalists' arguments would draw upon anti-royalist traditions of rhetoric.
However, it should not be thought that a methodology can be devised to raise ali implicit themes to the level of explicitness, or that only the explicit aspects have attitudinal reality.
At any stage, one's attitudes will contain their implicit themes, and these are part of the attitudinal structure.
Therefore, social psychologists need to study implicit themes in their own right.
This is probably a hermeneutic task, and could possibly be well achieved through discourse analysis (Potter and Wetherell, 1987).
One needs to look  directly for the seeds of potential attitudinal positions.
To continue with the floral metaphor, it could be said that researchers must search the fully flowered attitudinal stances of this year for the seeds of next year's crop.
Social psychologists need to train their eyes to look beyond the brightly coloured petals or luxuriant foliage to examine these small seeds contained within the presently flowering plant.
If they wish to make predictions, they should remember that the seeds will be developed under climatic conditions, which are currently unknown.
However, the floral metaphor breaks down, for the attitudinal seeds contain the makings of the negation, as well as the repetition, of present growth.
In particular, the implicit counter-themes, and indeed counter-counter-themes, are potentially of great theoretical interest.
This means recognizing that in a strict sense attitudes are indeterminate, or, rather, that their meaning cannot be fully determined.
They always contain indeterminate, implicit meanings.
This theoretical position can be compared to the ethnomethodological account of social rules (e.g. Coulter, 1983; Garfunkel, 1967; Wieder, 1971).
Ethnomethodological theorists suggest that social rules cannot be fully determined, but that their meaning is often discovered post hoc through their application.
One might say that attitudes can be discovered post hoc .
Gillray discovered the limits of his anti-royalism after the French Revolution and the Mass Observation respondents discovered the limits of their royalism in the early years of the Second World War.
However, the notion of discovery might itself be slightly misleading, if it implies that all the indeterminate, implicit meanings have been made determinate and explicit.
Similarly, it should not be assumed that the discovered attitude is necessarily any ‘truer’ than the preceding one, rather as if an unconscious motivation had been dragged from the gloom of the id into the bright light of the ego.
One set of potentialities was historically realized, but this itself creates new potentialities, and, of course, leaves many more possibilities still unfulfilled.
In this way, the area of implicitness has not been eroded, for it is a necessary part of attitudinal meaning.
There is a difference between the ethnomethodological treatment of rules and the present discussion of attitudes.
In the ethnomethodological account, rules become more precise as new precedents are encountered.
There is no exact equivalent of Taking the Side of the Other.
In the case of attitudinal expressions, there are reversals, as rhetorical and historical contexts change.
It is these contexts which provide the contexts for social attitudes.
In turn, such attitudes must inevitably remain indeterminate, so long as history has more roads down which to stumble.
8
The Argumentative Nature of Holding Strong Views
Preface
This chapter continues with the topic of monarchy, an issue about which British people can talk readily and lengthily.
There is a shift from the wider historical sweep of the previous chapter, to the details of present conversation.
This chapter examines what it means rhetorically to express an opinion.
For this purpose, it employs some of the methodological techniques of conversation analysis, although they are recruited into a slightly different theoretical cause than in the hands of the conversation analysts