

New Year's Eve, and the end of a decade.
A portentous moment, for those who pay attention to portents.
Guests were invited for nine.
Some are already on their way, travelling towards Harley Street from outlying districts, from Oxford and Tonbridge and Wantage, worried already about the drive home.
Others are dining, on the cautious assumption that a nine o'clock party might not provide adequate food.
Some are uncertainly eating a sandwich or a slice of toast.
In front of mirrors women try on dresses, men select ties.
As it is a night of many parties, the more social, the more gregarious, the more invited of the guests are wondering whether to go to Harley Street first, or whether to arrive there later, after sampling other offerings.
A few are wondering whether to go at all, whether the festive season has not after all been too tiring, whether a night in slippers in front of the television with a bowl of soup might not be a wiser choice than the doubtful prospect of a crowded room.
Most of them will go: the communal celebration draws them, they need to gather together to bid farewell to the 1970s, they need to reinforce their own expectations by witnessing those of others, by observing who is in, who is out, who is up, who is down.
They need one another.
Liz and Charles Headleand have invited them, and obediently, expectantly, they will go, dragging along their tired flat feet, their aching heads, their over-fed bellies and complaining livers, their exhausted opinions, their weary small talk, their professional and personal deformities, their doubts and enmities, their blurring vision and thickening ankles, in the hope of a miracle, in the hope of a midnight transformation, in the hope of a new self, a new life, a new, redeemed decade.
Alix Bowen has always known that she will have to go to the party, because she is one of Liz Headleand's two closest friends, and she has pledged her support, for what it is worth.
She has promised, even, to go early, but cannot persuade her husband Brian to go early with her.
A couple of hours of any party is enough for me, Brian has said, and we'll have to stay until  midnight, so I'm certainly not turning up before ten.
All right, I'll go alone, said Alix.
She thought Brian was quite reasonable not to want to go early.
She herself is not a reasonable person, she suspects, a suspicion confirmed that evening in the bathroom as she tries, out of respect to Liz's party, to apply a little of a substance called Fluid Foundation to the winter-dry skin of her face.
This is what people do before parties: she has seen them doing it on television: indeed, she used to do it herself when she was young, when she had no need of such substances, before she reverted so inexorably to her ancestral type.
The Fluid Foundation comes in a little opaque beige plastic container, and is labelled, in gold lettering, Teint Naturel.
She bought it a year ago and recalls that it cost a great deal of money.
She uses it infrequently.
Now she cautiously squeezes the container.
Nothing happens.
Is it dry?
Is it empty?
How can one tell?
She squeezes again, and this time a great glob of Teint Naturel extrudes itself from the narrow aperture on to her middle finger.
She gazes at it in mild dislike.
It glistens, pinky-brown, faintly obscene, on her finger.
Common sense, reason, tell her to wash this away down the wash bowl, but thrift forbids.
Thrift is one of Alix's familiars.
Thrift does not often leave her side.
Thrift has nearly killed her on several occasions, through the agency of old sausages, slow-punctured tyres, rusty blades.
Thrift now recommends that she apply the rest of this blob to her complexion rather than wastefully flush it away.
Thrift disguised as Reason speciously suggests than an excess of Fluid Foundation on one's face, unlike a poisoned sausage, will cause no harm.
Thrift apologizes, whingeing, for the poisoned sausage, reminding Alix that she ate it twenty years ago, when she had no money and needed the sausage.
Alix hesitates, then splats the rest of the glob on to her face and begins to work it in, angrily.
She blames the manufacturers for the poor design of the container: probably deliberate, she reflects, probably calculated to make people splurge out far more than they need of the stuff.
She is slightly cheered by the thought of how little reward they would reap from their dishonesty if all consumers were as moderate as she.
(She wonders, in parenthesis, how much of the nation's income is spent on cosmetics, and whether the statistics will be provided in the New Year issue  of Social Trends .)
She is more cheered, although at first puzzled, by the fact that as she works the excess of Teint Naturel on her skin, her appearance begins to improve.
Instead of turning brick-red or prawn-cocktail-pink, as she had feared, she is turning a pleasant beige, a natural beige, she is beginning to look the same colour that people look in television advertisements.
A pleasant, mat, smooth beige.
It is remarkable.
So this, perhaps, is what the manufacturers had always intended?
She apologizes to Thrift for having been angry, then remembers that it was Thrift that had dictated her previous parsimonious, sparing applications, and is confused.
She gazes at herself in wonder.
Vanished are her healthy pink cheeks, her slightly red winter nose, her mole, her little freckles and blemishes: she is smooth, new made.
She dabs a little powder on top, and stands back to admire the effect.
It is pleasing, she decides.
She wonders what it will look like by midnight.
Will she be transformed into an uneven, red-faced, patchy, blotchy clown?
An ugly sister?
Alix has always felt rather sorry for the poor competitive disappointed Ugly Sisters.
Indeed, she feels sorry for almost everybody.
It is one of her weaknesses.
But she does not feel sorry for her friend Liz Headleand.
As she struggles into her blue dress, she wonders idly if she is so fond of Liz because she does not have to feel sorry for her, or if she does not have to feel sorry for her because she is so fond of her?
Or are the two considerations quite distinct?
She feels she is on the verge of some interesting illumination here, but has to abandon it in order to search for Brian, to ask him to fasten the back of her dress: if she does not leave soon, she will be late for her early arrival, and moreover she has promised to meet Esther Breuer at eight thirty precisely on the corner of Harley Street and Weymouth Street.
They plan to effect a double entry.
Esther Breuer has decided to walk to the intersection of Harley Street and Weymouth Street.
She often walks alone at night.
She walks from her flat at the wrong end of Ladbroke Grove, along the Harrow Road, under various stretches of motorway, past the Metropole Hotel where she calls in to buy herself a drink in the Cosmo-Cocktail Bar (she is perversely fond of the Metropole Hotel), and then through various increasingly handsome although gloomy back streets, until she arrives at the arranged  corner.
As she approaches it, she cannot at first see Alix, but she believes that Alix will be there, and indeed momently she is: they converge, Esther from the west, Alix from the south, and moderate their pace (Esther accelerating slightly, Alix marginally slowing down) so that they meet upon the very corner itself.
They are both delighted by this small achievement of co-ordination.
They congratulate themselves upon it, as they walk north towards Liz's house in Harley Street, towards the invisible green of Regent's Park.
Liz Headleand sits at her dressing-table in her dressing-room.
Her gold watch and her digital clock agree that it is nineteen minutes past eight.
At half past eight she will go downstairs to see what is happening in the kitchen, to see if Charles is in his place, to see if any of her children or stepchildren have yet descended, to prepare to receive her guests.
Meanwhile, she has eleven minutes in hand.
She knows that she ought to ring her mother, that there is still a faint possibility that she might ring her mother, but that possibility is already fading, and as the admonitory red glare of the clock clicks silently to 20.20 it gasps and dies within her.
She will not ring her mother.
She has not time.
Instead, she sits there and for a moment contemplates the prospect of her party, the gathering of her guests.
She knows them, their reluctance, their need, their larger hopes.
She can hear their conversations, in cars, in bedrooms, in restaurants, at other parties, as time draws them nearer to her, to one another, to her house.
She eats a pistachio nut, and fastens her locket.
New Year's Eve.
A significant night, at least in journalistic terms, and there would be journalists here this evening, no doubt comparing their analyses of the bygone seventies, their predictions for the 1980s.
And for her, too, significant in other, superstitious ways.
Since childhood, since her early school days, New Year's Eve had possessed for her a mournful terror: she had elected it to represent the Nothingness which was her own life, the solid, cheerful festival which had seemed to be the lives of others.
New Year's Eve in those early years had possessed a dull religious sheen, a pewter glimmer, which by much effort and polishing  and dedication of the will could bring her a little light, a little hope, a little perseverance: but she had longed for the flames and the candles, the cut glass and the singing.
Disproportionately she had longed, in the interminable wastes of adolescence, in the grey and monotonous steppes, and some of the longing had attached itself to this night, this one night of the year, when others (she knew from school friends, from the radio, from novels), when others went to parties and celebrated whatever was about to be.
She had longed to be invited to a party, a longing which presented itself to her as a weakness and a wickedness, as well as an impossibility.
She had comforted herself with her own severity.
Finally, after long years, she had become a party-goer.
How those oblong cards with her own name upon them had delighted her!
Crazily, disproportionately.
And now she was a party-giver as well as a party-goer.
Her dressing-table glitters and shimmers, it is festive like the night.
It is white and gold, quietly ornate.
Beneath the protective glass lies, imprisoned, flattened, a circle of Venetian lace, elaborate, fine, rose embossed, cream coloured, expensive, hand worked, beautiful, useless: a gift, though not of this year's giving.
On the table lie a silver-backed hand-mirror, a silver-backed brush, an ivory paper-knife with a silver handle.
Over a little carved corner of the large oval mirror into which she absently stares, not seeing herself, hang necklaces: amber, pearl, paste.
She rarely wears them: she wears her little locket, superstitiously.
The blond shells of the pistachio nuts, with their seductive little green gleaming cracks, repose in a small Sheffield plate dish on a stem, an oval dish which echoes, satisfactorily, elegantly, the shape of the nuts: the surface of its lining is tinily scratched, pitted and polished, golden, antique, dull but shining.
Behind the dish stands this year's Christmas gift, from her eldest stepson Jonathan: a tiny, cut-glass snowdrop vase which holds a posy of cold hothouse snowdrops, white and green, delicately streaked, fragile, hopeful, a promise of futurity.
Liz Headleand is known to like cut glass, so people give it to her, on occasions, pleased to have their gift problem thus simply solved.
Liz Headleand stares into the mirror, as though entranced.
She does not see herself or the objects on her dressing-table.
The clock abruptly jerks to 20.21.
She and Charles have never given a party on New Year's Eve before.
They have given many parties in their time, but on New Year's Eve they have always gone out to the gatherings of others — sometimes to several gatherings in the course of the evening, and some years separately, not always meeting even for the magic chimes.
A modern marriage, and some of its twenty-odd years had been more modern than others.
Maybe, Liz reflects (for this is what she contemplates, through the oval mirror), maybe this is why they decided to have such a party, this year, at the end of this decade: as a sign that they had weathered so much, and were now entering a new phase?
A phase of tranquillity and knowledge, of acceptance and harmony, when jealousies and rivalries would drop away from them like dead leaves?
Well, why not?
After twenty-one years, one is allowed a celebration.
Charles will be fifty, she herself is forty-five.
There is a symmetry about this, about their relationship with the clock of the century, that calls for celebration.
And therefore grumbling couples complain in cars on their way to Harley Street from the Home Counties and beg one another not to let them drink too much: therefore Esther and Alix meet and laugh on a street corner a few hundred yards away: therefore stepchildren muster and stepparents-in-law assemble: therefore Liz Headleand's mother sits alone, ever alone untelephoned, distant, incomprehending, incomprehended, remote, mad, long mad, imprisoned, secret, silent, silenced, listening to the silence of her house.
Charles and Liz, naturally, did not construct the notion of a New Year's Eve party in this spirit, as a portent, as a symbol, as a landmark in the journey of their lives.
As far as Liz can remember the idea came upon them rather more casually, one Saturday morning in early November over breakfast.
Charles and Liz rarely breakfast together, they are both far too busy: Liz often sees patients at eight in the morning and Charles's working hours are wildly irregular.
But at weekends, they attempt to rendezvous over the Oxford marmalade, and on this occasion had succeeded.
Charles, eating his toast, opening his mail, had suddenly exclaimed with a parody of fury, ‘Christ , it's the Venables again!’
‘What have they done to you now?’ she had mildly enquired, looking up from a photocopy of an article on The Compulsion to Public Prayer: a study of religious neurosis in a post-Christian  society which she had just received in her own post, and Charles had said, ‘Asked us to a New Year's Eve party.’
‘What,now , in November?’
He pushed the invitation over to her: she regarded it with mock distaste.
‘It's got pictures of little cocktail glasses and tinsel spots on,’ she observed.
‘I could see that for myself,’ said Charles.
‘I refuse to invite them to dinner,’ she said.
‘Of course we don't have to invite them to dinner.
Ludicrous couple.
Ludicrous.’
Liz smiled.
She enjoyed Charles's little displays of anger, especially when she was in sympathy with them — as, on matters such as the Venables, she usually was.
A good judge of character, Charles, she would sometimes with surprise reflect.
‘I think we should retaliate,’ she said, a few minutes later, after skimming through public prayer and the letters page of The Times .
‘I think we should have a New Year's Eve party of our own.
That would serve them right.’
‘It certainly would,’ Charles agreed.
‘Yes, it certainly would.’
And they smiled at one another, collusively, captivated by this broad new concept of social vengeance, and began to plan their guest list: they owed hospitality to half London, they agreed, it was time for a party, it would kill many birds with one big stone.
A vision of dead, flattened, feathered guests rose in both their minds, as they plotted and planned.
That was how it had been, perhaps that was where it had started, thought Liz, as she stared into past and future, before jerking herself back into the present, which now stood at 20.22.
The red clock from the bedroom reflected in the dressing-room mirror, at an interesting, an unlikely angle.
Her eyes focused upon her own image.
She looked all right, she concluded, without much interest.
She bared her teeth at herself, pointlessly.
Her teeth were quite large, but there was not much she could do about that now.
Her interest in cosmetics, like that of her friend Alix Bowen, was minimal, but, like Alix Bowen, she decided that it was after all a festive occasion, and she began at this late moment to apply a little mascara.
Her mascara container, like Alix's Fluid Foundation, was rarely called upon, and appeared to  have dried up.
She licked the curved brush, and tried again.
A big black dry grainy nodule stuck itself unobligingly to her lashes.
Impatiently she reached for a tissue and wiped it off.
It left a small black smear.
She licked the tissue and removed the black smear, restoring herself to her former state which had been, and still was, in her own view, quite satisfactory.
20.23.
In a few minutes she would go down.
She could have borrowed some mascara from her daughter Sally, but it was too late.
She should have rung her mother in Northam, but it was too late.
Seven minutes of solitude she had, and then she would descend.
As she sat there, she experienced a sense of what seemed to be preternatural power.
She had summoned these people up, these ghosts would materialize, even now they were converging upon her in their finery at her bidding, each of them willing to surrender a separate self for an evening, to eat, to drink, to talk, to exchange embraces, to wait for the witching hour.
Soon their possible presences would become real presences, and here, under this roof, at her command, patterns would form and dissolve and form again, dramas would be enacted, hard and soft words exchanged, friendships formed, acquaintances renewed.
The dance would be to her tune.
A pity, in a way, that the dancing would be merely metaphorical: this was a house large enough to accommodate dancing, but their friends were not of the dancing classes, would gaze in astonishment, alarm, sophisticated horror, intellectual condemnation, at dancing in a private house…another year, perhaps, for the dancing.
This year, the dying year, the social dance would suffice.
It would be a large assembly: some two hundred had accepted, and more would come.
She had encouraged her stepchildren and her daughter Sally to invite their friends: they would add colour, diversion, eccentricity, noise.
She liked the mixing of ages, she even liked a little friction, and friction there would be: Ivan Warner alone was usually enough to raise the temperature of any social gathering to conflagration point, and Ivan in conjunction with Charles's Fleet Street friends and television moguls, with a few publishers and poets and novelists, with an actress or two, with a clutch of psychologists and psychotherapists and art historians and civil servants and lawyers and extremely quarrelsome  politicians, would surely manage to set the place on fire?
Surely this night the unexpected would happen, surely she had summoned up the unexpected.
She had, of late, felt herself uncannily able to predict the next word, the next move, in any dialogue: she could hear and take in three conversations at once: she could see remotely as through a two-way mirror the private lives of her patients, sometimes of her friends: she had felt reality to be revealed to her at times in flashes beyond even the possibility of rational calculation: had felt in danger (why danger?) of too much knowledge, of a kind of powerlessness and sadness that is born of knowledge: for these reasons, perhaps, was it that she had decided to multiply the possibilities so recklessly, to construct a situation beyond her own grasping?
A situation of which not even she could guess the outcome?
Had she wished to test her powers, or, a little, to lose control and stand aside?
To be defeated, honourably, by the multiplicity of the unpredictable, instead of living with the power of her knowingness?
With the limits of the known?
She had thought, back in November, that the party was merely a celebration, a celebration of having survived, so long, with Charles: twenty-one years, unique in the circle of their acquaintance.
Battle and bloodshed and betrayal lay behind them, and now they met peacefully in this large house, and slept peacefully in their separate rooms, and met at weekends over the marmalade, and would continue to do so until Charles's new appointment took him, in a couple of months, to New York.
He would return to visit her, she would fly out to visit him, they would speak on the telephone, they would not miss one another.
This was understood.
Nobody expected Liz to uproot herself, like a woman, like a wife, and follow her husband to America: she was expected to stay where she was, pursuing her own career and pursuing her own inner life, whatever that might be.
A modern marriage.
Charles and Liz Headleand.
Liz knew how they were regarded: as a powerful couple who, by breaking the rules, had become representative.
They represented a solidity, a security, a stamp of survival on the unquiet experiments of two decades, a proof that two disparate spirits can wrestle and diverge and mingle and separate and remain distinct, without a loss of brightness, without a loss of self, without emasculation, submission, obligation.
And the image, the public image, is not wholly false, although naturally its firm talismanic outlines conceal a great deal of past pain and confusion, of dirty bargaining, of occasional childishnesses, of outright disagreements: and the present is not wholly peaceful.
If it were, it would be dead, Liz tells herself.
Conflict is invigorating, it renews energy.
So she tells herself.
She disapproves of a great deal of Charles's life, these days; she thinks his ambitions misplaced, his goals suspect, his methods dangerous, his new political alignments deplorable: but she is loyal to Charles, to Charles himself, to the man that these manifestations in her view misrepresent.
She believes in Charles, in her own fashion, and believes that he believes in her.
Their past, with all its secrets, is solid behind them, and cannot be disowned.
Their union has a high, embattled, ideological glamour; their dissent is a bond.
Her loyalty, she believes, is worth a great deal to Charles: it gives him plausibility.
Or is this line of thought simply a rationalization of the truth, which is that these days she and Charles disagree about almost everything?
A celebration, a farewell party.
Charles will be away for at least a year.
She is glad he is going, she thinks.
The strain of living up to the lofty concept of marriage that they have invented is tiring, at times, and she is a busy woman.
A year off will not come amiss.
It will give her peace, privacy.
She eats another nut, and needlessly, absently, combs her hair.
She finds it hard to think clearly about Charles.
The time span of the thinking is too long, it makes the present moment arbitrary, a point on a graph that is in itself meaningless.
She looks down at her shopping-and-memo list, to find a nearer focus.
Perrier water , it says.
Poinsettia.
Prunes.
Remind Deirdre about tabasco.
Japanese seminar, Metropole Hotel.
Ask Ivan about R. P .
R. P.?
Who or what was R. P.?
She must have known last night, while constructing this list.
Maybe it will come back to her, when she sees Ivan.
She suspects that Charles suspects that she had once had an affair with Ivan, but of course she had not, though she concedes that Ivan is so unpleasant that only a degree of past sexual intimacy could plausibly explain the kind of relationship that he and Liz have over the years established.
Charles had not wished to invite  Ivan to the party.
Wherever that man goes, there is trouble, he said.
But that is the point of him, Liz had replied.
Liz prided herself on her tolerance of Ivan's appalling behaviour.
Anyway, she said, we'll have to ask him, or he'll be even ruder about us in his next article.
I don't give a damn about Ivan's ridiculous rag, said Charles, but of course he did, he cared much more than she did, and with reason, for Ivan usually managed to deliver her some backhanded compliment, whereas Charles always got it in the neck: ‘HEADLEAND CRASHES HEADLONG’ had been the headline of Ivan's latest piece of gossip, which had consisted of a dangerous account of Charles's behaviour at a meeting of a board of directors, laced with unfounded but inventive innuendo about a country house which he and Liz were said to be purchasing as a tax dodge.
There had also been offensive remarks about Charles's ageing toothless bite.
Charles had been particularly annoyed about the toothlessness, she could tell, although he tried to conceal it: he had in fact been without his two front teeth that week, while having their thirty-year-old caps replaced, caps that marked a heroic accident long ago in a swimming pool in Sevenoaks.
He had proved remarkably (to her, touchingly) sensitive about their temporary absence.
Losing two front teeth, even two false front teeth, at the age of fifty, even if only for a week, had distressed him: he had sat opposite her at the breakfast table with a napkin over his mouth, and she knew that it had taken some courage to go to the board meeting at all.
No, Charles certainly did object to Ivan's insults, and Ivan's divination of Charles's weak spots was uncannily accurate.
She, for her part, was of the opinion that she did not object to Ivan's insults at all.
She saw them as emanations of his own tormented, neurotic, anally fixated personality, and nothing to do with herself.
She was convinced that he was in reality quite fond of them both.
Particularly of herself.
He was grateful to her for her power of forgiveness, she suspected, for the absolution she continued to extend.
Such an ugly, red-faced, no, worse, blue-faced little man.
Small, squashed, snub, stout.
She had known him for many years.
One would have thought that the principle of people living in glass houses not throwing stones would have warned Ivan off a career as a journalist, gossip, and so-called satirist, but it did not seem to occur to him that he was  asking for trouble of a kind that she knew would cause him the most intimate anguish: but in fact, so appalling were Ivan's features and physique that comment on them was rare, even his worst enemies (and he had hundreds) not considering them fair game.
Comment on his dreadful behaviour, by contrast, flourished.
Maybe, she idly wondered, as she drew a red biro daisy by the Metropole Hotel, maybe he chooses to be so offensive verbally in order to divert attention from his appearance?
An interesting conjecture.
Though Ivan claimed success with women, despite or because of his natural handicaps, and Liz herself, though she had not slept with him, had on one occasion in the early years of her marriage to Charles found herself, to her own surprise, sitting on a table in a flat in Belsize Park Gardens with Ivan's hand inside her bra.
She could remember the incident quite clearly, although the circumstances surrounding it had vanished into oblivion, beyond recall of any form of analysis: it had been early afternoon, so clearly not a party incident — maybe they had had lunch together?— and she had been anxious about picking up children from school.
She kept telling Ivan that she had to leave, and he kept telling her that he was a great lover although his prick was only six inches long.
Or something to that effect.
And all the time his hand had been inside her bra.
She could remember the bra, it had been rather a good black lace wired Kayser Bondor, of a line that appeared to have been discontinued, as she'd never been able to find another.
But why had they been sitting on a table?
And in whose flat?
These were mysteries now known only to God.
She had not slept with Ivan, nor ever would, but was deriving a secret satisfaction from the knowledge that present at her party that night would be all the men with whom she had ever slept: or all save one, and he had been from another country, and she had not known his name.
There were not so many of them: five, to be precise, and one of those was Charles, and another her first husband Edgar Lintot, to whom she had remained married for less than a year.
Of the other three, one had been revenge, one an escapade, and one half serious, but all had now merged into a sentimental distance, an affectionate presence.
She had set much store by retaining or restoring her relations with these men, and thought she knew why.
After the sickening shock of the rapid  deterioration of her first childish marriage, she had been so afraid of ever again being engulfed by hatred and violence that she had maintained a resolute pleasantness even through the worst of times, even with Charles, who was not an easy man.
She had called it maturity, this pleasantness.
She was determined never again to be a party to the hideous transformation which overcomes the partners of a bad marriage, who grow fangs and horns and sprout black monstrous wolfish hair, who claw and cling and bite and suck.
There would be no more of that: she would see the person as he was, and see him steadily, setting aside her own long shadow as it fell.
Her success in this enterprise had fortified her in her career as psychotherapist, had given her confidence in her right to pursue it, in the rightness of her pursuing it.
Even her first husband she had regained from that dreadful hinterland of marsh and bog and storm cloud: and now they were good friends, she and Edgar, in the sunlight, harmlessly friends, and on some subjects (the National Health Service, the pathology of multiple murderers, the ethics of reporting violent crime) had struck up alliances that excluded, that increasingly and dramatically excluded, her husband Charles.
So there they would be, all friends together.
Edgar, Roy, Charles, Philip and Jules.
A pity about that Dutchman: their union had taken place in a narrow cabin on the North Sea, crossing from The Hague to Harwich in a Force Nine gale, and they had omitted to exchange names and addresses.
Would he have enjoyed her party?
Would he have raised a knowing glass?
They had rolled around in the narrow berth on the unanchored sheet, slipping on the shiny much-worn cheap leatherette surface of the bunk, lurching in and out of one another in a determined kind of way, the only passengers on the boat not to be paralysed with seasickness.
The selection of the fittest.
The crossing had lasted eighteen hours instead of eight.
An epic.
Did he remember, where was he, who was he?
Too late to recall him now, he was one ghost who could not obey her summons.
Edgar, Roy, Charles, Philip and Jules.
She had finished with them all.
Maybe she had finished with sexual intercourse for ever, maybe it was this possibility that gave her this peculiar conviction of strength, this sense of invulnerability, of certainty, of power.
They would attack her no more, weaken her no more.
She had closed the gates.
This was not orthodox, but then, although a Freudian, she was not an orthodox Freudian, and her vision of futurity did not exclude celibacy.
From within herself, she would survey.
An observer, a non-combatant.
As a child, reading her mother's collection of Victorian novels, Edwardian novels, she had wondered how women could bear to renounce their position in the centre of the matrimonial stage, the sexual arena, how they could bring themselves to consent to adopt the role of chaperon, to sit at the edge of the dance on little gilt-legged chairs gossiping and watching, spectators, as the younger ones innocently paired, as the older ones not so innocently paired, in the ever-changing formations of the floor.
How could one bear to be on the sidelines?
Not to be invited to the waltz?
Not ever again to be invited to the waltz?
But now she could see the charm, could read the meaning, of the observer's role, a meaning inaccessible to a sixteen-year-old, to a thirty-year-old — for the observer was not, as she had from the vantage, the disadvantage of childhood supposed, charged with an envious and impotent malice, and consumed with a fear of imminent death: no, the observer was filled and informed with a quick and lively and long-established interest in all those that passed before, in all those that moved and circled and wheeled around, was filled with intimate connections and loving memories and hopes and concerns and prospects.
Nor was the observer impotent, for it was through the potency of the observer that these children took their being and took the floor.
Actual children, children of the heart and the imagination, old friends, new friends, the children of friends, they circle, they weave, and the pattern is both one's own and not one's own, it is of the making of generations.
One is no longer the hopeful or the despairing guest: one is host in the house of oneself.
So thought Liz Headleand, as she sat at her dressing-table, in her yellow-walled, her yellow marble-veined dressing-room, eating nuts.
She put her glasses on to peer once more at the vanished smear of mascara, and was amused to see the print of her face leap into sharp relief: a new trick, for her glasses are quite new.
She dabbed again with the tissue.
Her glasses amused her.
So did the amusing little sag of her incipient double chin, the veining on her cheeks (which, unlike Alix, she does not think to  cover with Liquid Foundation), the slight plump soft dimpling of her upper arm, the raised veins in the backs of her hands, the broadening of her hips, the decreasing flexibility of her joints.
These signs of age, of the ageing process, she greeted and greets with curiosity, with a resolute welcome.
One might as well welcome them, after all: there is not much point in rejecting them.
It is all intended, it is all part of the plan.
There is a goal to this journey, there will be an arrival, Liz Headleand believes.
It is only by refusing to move onwards that we truly die.
She truly believes this.
She has good reason to believe it.
Her mother sits in Northam, listening to what?
Liz stands up, regards herself, inspects her hemline, adjusts the safety pin fastening her gold leather belt, admires her gold sandals, pats her silver locket, and smooths the limp, cross-cut, loose-woven cream Moroccan cotton over her broadening hips.
She looks upon her broadening hips as an affirmation of life.
(Her mother is a scraggy old thing, starved and skinny.)
She pulls in her stomach, smartly, as she will remember to do, episodically, throughout the evening, when not too deeply engaged in other pursuits.
Now Charles, he is a different case, she acknowledges.
For him, weight is no longer perhaps a laughing matter.
He ought to take more care.
He is getting solid, even fat, and that reddish tinge to his face has become permanent rather than intermittent.
Too many lunches, too many dinners, too many glasses of port at the club beam betrayal from Charles's complexion, bulge from his shirt front.
His hair is receding, too.
She wonders where he is.
She has not seen him since half past six, when they met in the kitchen over a salami sandwich.
He was preoccupied, and spoke of trouble with the Home Office and a documentary on prison conditions.
The fatter and balder Charles becomes, the more formidable he looks.
She supposes that this is only natural.
He is probably downstairs, knocking back a stiff gin and tonic before submitting himself to the milder offering of champagne.
20.35 says the little red clock.
She has lost five minutes, somewhere.
It is time to go downstairs, to see how Deirdre is getting on in the kitchen, to make sure the butlers are not drinking too much.
So down the wide staircase she goes, past the oak chest with its  bowl of white roses on the half-landing, past the Albers squares, past the dim varnished portrait of a full-bosomed crimson gowned pearl-decked eighteenth-century woman who some take to be an ancestor, though she had in fact come with the house, down through the black and white tiled hall with its marble and gilt claw-legged table strewn with Christmas cards, gloves, and glossy free advertising magazines, and into the broad high first floor drawing-room, where sat Charles, drinking a gin and tonic, which she had expected, and talking to Esther and Alix, which she had not.
Three floors up, on the top floor of the large house, Sally Headleand sat on her bedroom floor painting her toe-nails a pale silvery green and listening to her stepbrother Alan trying to explain about inflation and unemployment and monetarism and the economic implications of the new rhetoric praising the Victorian values of family life.
In the background, Tom Robinson on a new Christmas cassette sang ‘The Winter of Seventy-Nine’.
Sally liked listening to Alan, though she understood only one word in a hundred.
He was loyal to the old Left, was Alan, unlike their turncoat father who had in recent years been wooed by, and had, it seemed, espoused, the radical Right.
The unions had driven him to infidelity.
Alan reassured her.
Her father upset her.
Her mother said it was stimulating to be upset, and maybe it was, but that didn't prevent her from preferring the solace of the old wisdom.
It had surrounded her at her progressive private school, it surrounded her still at her fashionable newish university, but she herself lacked economic grasp and was uncomfortably aware of having lost, of late, a few arguments with outsiders, of having been thrown back on arguments about personalities.
She was too intelligent to enjoy this position, and too much of a feminist not to be made uncomfortable by its sexist implications.
So it comforted her to see Alan lying there on her bed, his huge ancient unpolished cracked shoes nestling comfortably in the tangled mess of her grey sheets and leaking duvet and discarded purple socks, his eager owl face shining with enlightenment as he spoke abstractly of public spending projects and the American New Deal and tight fiscal policy.
One could never tell when or whether  Alan was wholly serious, for he found ideas exciting in themselves, too exciting, perhaps, ever to be put into practice: there he lay, smoking, waving, occasionally running his fingers through his thick black curly hair, and dropping cigarette ash through the slit into an old Coca-Cola tin.
He spoke of the state as mother, of the history of those who clung to the state as mother, of the psychology of those who wished to orphan themselves from the mother, of the novel oddity of a woman prime minister who was in fact a mother but was not nevertheless thereby motherly.
Sally listened, entranced.
She didn't see enough of Alan, now he had moved to Manchester.
She needed a regular fix from Alan, to reassure her that the world was still familiar, manageable, subject to known laws.
Alan himself had never known his mother.
His mother had died in a car crash when he was three months old.
He, with his two elder brothers, had been brought up by a nanny, until, three years later, his father married Liz.
Liz had taken on Alan and his brothers.
The three boys had always assumed, as soon as they reached the age for such assumptions, that Charles had married Liz in order to provide the three motherless babes with a proper family life.
Sally, of course, had never assumed anything of the sort.
It was shortly after Sally's birth, in 1960, that Charles had purchased this large house.
It had seemed, at the time, a daring gesture.
Forty thousand pounds he had paid for it, a sum which now seemed laughably small, but which in those days had been a vast amount to pay for a private house, even in such a prime position.
It had been financed by blood money, blood money from the wealthy parents of Charles's dead wife.
Liz had been keen on the transaction.
The house had been in an appalling condition, full of junk and rubbish, its elegant lines unreadable through years of accretions and demolitions.
It had been used for many years as a staff hostel for an Oxford Street department store.
Five floors, and broad, with an eighteenth-century spaciousness.
A challenge.
They needed a large house, with four  children already, possibly more to come, with a housekeeper and an au pair girl: impossible to survive much longer in their cramped, narrow, bijou terrace in Fulham.
From Fulham to Harley Street was an extravagant removal, not the kind of move that young professional couples made, in those days, but the Headleands, ambitious, imaginative, self-appointed pioneers of they knew not what, had done it, and with aplomb.
The house, in 1980, would be worth, their friends enviously muttered, perhaps a million, perhaps more.
True, the rates had soared, but so had the Headleands' incomes.
It now lodged not only what was left of the Headleand family, but also the private part of Liz's practice, and the practices of two of her colleagues: a shared secretary had taken over what had once been the au pair girl's flat.
A going concern, a successful enterprise.
Liz loved the house, she loved the neighbourhood.
It gave her great delight, to see her children and Charles's, here, thus, in the centre.
Her own childhood had been lived on the margins: she had wanted theirs to be calm, to be spared the indignities of fighting unnecessary territorial and social wars.
They would have greater freedom thus, she argued.
Charles shared this faith.
His own childhood, though markedly less strenuous, less arduous than Liz's, had not been without its privations, its humiliations.
He liked the centre as much as Liz herself.
Liz still, after all these years, found satisfaction in giving her address.
Each time a shop assistant or a clerk or a tradesman wrote down Dr E. Headleand, Harley Street, the same thrill of self-affirmation, of self-definition would be re-enacted.
Liz Ablewhite of Abercorn Avenue had become Liz Headleand of Harley Street, London W1.
Nobody could argue with that, nobody could question it, it was so.
Her largest dreams, her most foolish fantasies, had been enacted in bricks and mortar and mantelshelves and tiled floors and plaster ceilings.
It seemed improbable, but it was so.
The Headleands of Harley Street.
Resonant, exemplary.
A myriad uncertainties and hesitations were buried beneath that solid pile, banished by the invocation of a street name.
Vanished suburbia, vanished the provinces, vanished forever solitude and insignificance and social fear.
No wonder that she and Charles felt that they led a charmed life, that the times were on their side.
It was not fairy gold that had fallen into their open laps: the first Mrs Headleand, it was true, had conveniently died, but Charles and Liz thereafter had worked for their position.
They had studied long hours, both of them, they had burned the midnight oil while munching their way through textbooks and qualifications, through overtime and late-night meetings.
They had taken professional risks, had survived personal disasters.
And now they inhabited their house.
It had taken some labour to restore: a gang of builders had spent months ripping down hardboard partitions, taking out gas meters, attempting to rescue old parquet flooring, refitting windows, stripping paint from tiles.
The most unpleasant discoveries were made during the process of clearance: cupboards full of urine-encrusted chamber pots, of ancient patent medicine, of dead mice, of moth-infested garments, of fossilized scraps of nineteenth-century food: Hogarthian, Dickensian relics of an oppressed and squalid past.
In one room there was a plastic sack full of used sanitary towels.
Liz had joked that they were sure, in the rafters, to discover a dead baby, and indeed they did find there a mummified cat, which a pathologist friend hazarded to be at least a hundred years old.
Uncertain, profoundly and with reason uncertain of her own taste, she had entrusted redecoration to a professional, then an acquaintance of Esther's, now Liz's friend, who had transformed the glum greens and browns into white and cream and yellow and gold.
This vision she had adopted, cultivated, and now it seemed her own, although she would never have conceived of it herself.
She sometimes remembered this and gave it thought.
Others sometimes pondered it too.
White and cream and yellow and gold did not to everyone seem entirely appropriate shades to represent the Headleands, whose natural colouring, as in a party game, might have been supposed to be more primary, more violent, more extreme, more robust.
The untransformed house had contained treasures as well as horrors, including the portrait on the stairs, and the restored chandelier which now hung, glittering and refracting, from the centre of the ornate ceiling, above the heads of Charles and Alix, who sat disposed, glass in hand, at either end of one of the long settees, and above Esther, who stood by the fireplace reading the  Headleand invitations to parties and lectures and public meetings.
‘Esther,’ said Liz, in the doorway.
‘Alix.
I didn't know you were here.
You should have called me.’
‘You said to be early, and we were,’ said Alix.
She did not rise, nor did Liz cross to greet her: they were the oldest of old friends, and did not kiss on meeting.
Esther put down the Venables' invitation, and turned into the room.
‘You were talking to Charles,’ said Liz, accusing, as she crossed to the sideboard to pour herself a drink.
‘We don't often get the chance,’ said Alix.
‘The opportunity, I mean.’
All four of them laughed, for no very evident reason, and Charles shifted his weight on the settee.
‘We were saying,’ said Charles, ‘that it must be over a year since I last saw Esther.
And six months since I saw Alix.’
‘And now Charles is off to New York,’ said Esther, crossing the room to perch on a low stool by Alix's knee.
‘In a couple of months.
Or less, possibly.
So he says.’
‘So he says,’ echoed Liz, with a note of mild surprise.
They spoke of Charles as though he were not there, as though he belonged to another world of logic from their own, as though he belonged, almost, to another species.
It was an affectation that had developed over the years.
It appeared that Charles did not find it offensive.
‘Men,’ said Esther, ‘are an unpredictable lot.
One has no way of knowing how their minds work.’
‘If they have minds,’ said Charles, who knew the rules of the game.
‘Well,’ said Esther, changing tack abruptly, as was her way, ‘what do we think we are going to think of the 1980s?
I think I might go to live in the country, in the 1980s.
I've had enough of the town.’
‘You've said that before,’ said Liz.
‘You probably said it at the end of the 1960s.’
‘Yes, I probably did.
But I didn't mean it then, and who knows, I may mean it now.
I could go and live in the country.
Or I could go and live in Italy.’
‘You could, but you won't,’ said Liz, comfortably.
‘One can live very cheaply in Italy,’ said Esther.
‘One can live very cheaply in London,’ said Liz.
‘Yes,’ said Esther.
‘Some do.
I do, for one.’
And she looked round, ostentatiously, at the large drawing-room, the heavy tasselled curtains, the pale shining cushions, the cut glass, the silver trays, the paintings, the flowers, the deep white rugs.
Alix's eyes followed Esther's.
They enjoyed teasing Liz about her pretensions, and rarely had an opportunity to tease her in the presence of Charles.
‘This evening,’ said Liz, leaning forward, lowering her voice confidentially with mock importance across the yards of space, ‘we have butlers.
And what I think is called catering.
And vintage — I think it's vintage — champagne.
Is that right, Charles, is there such a thing as vintage champagne?’
Esther laughed.
Charles, who appeared momentarily not to have been listening, laughed absently.
‘In fact,’ said Liz, ‘I'd better go and see what the butlers are up to.
They are foreigners and they appear to be drinking.
I've a feeling that they might be the same lot that I saw at Geraldine's party last month.
One of them fell over a coffee table and threw a whole trayful of bits and pieces on Carrie Donovan and Harry Pritchett.
Crudités and avocado dip.
Quite messy.
We don't want too much of that.
Or not too early in the evening.
No, you both stay here and talk to Charles.
Esther can tell him what paintings to look at in New York.
Charles is not as indifferent to paintings as he pretends.
Are you, Charles?’
And she made her exit, to the kitchen, where her real worry was not so much the butlers as the cook, Deirdre Kavanagh, ex-girlfriend of her eldest stepson Jonathan, a mad and dreadful girl with a talent for puff pastry and a conviction that she was a femme fatale , a conviction alas supported by her authentic Irish beauty and her seductive Irish brogue.
Deirdre was not her real name, but her billowing copper-red hair was real enough, and so was her solid, even, dun-cream skin and her lavishly presented bosom.
She was somewhere in her thirties: Jonathan had been nineteen when she had seduced him.
They would never, as a family, be rid of her now, for she had now fallen in love with Liz and moped sadly and dangerously when excluded from Harley Street for too long.
Now she stood there, one hand on her hip, the  other holding a knife dramatically poised over an oblong platter of an anchovy- and pepper-covered layered confection, watched by an admiring audience of Mediterraneans.
She was wearing a low-cut green silk dress, partially covered by a charming little white broderie anglaise nonsense of an apron, the sort of apron that features in blue movies.
Really, thought Liz, really: Deirdre was exactly the kind of neurotic that she did her best, professionally, to avoid — narcissistic, exhibitionistic, selfish, manipulative, childish, unreliable, unpunctual, self-satisfied even in the depths of self-reproach, and yet there she somehow managed to stand, in the middle of Liz's own kitchen, brandishing a pie knife.
She had not yet noticed Liz's arrival.
‘One, two,three ,’ said Deirdre, and the knife descended.
The inner layers were perfect.
One white, one green, one red.
‘Now look at that now,’ exclaimed Deirdre triumphantly, ‘now look at that, isn't it a darling?’
The audience nodded, and Liz from the doorway nodded, for she had to admit that for the moment at least everything looked under control: pretty parsley-sprigged snacks awaited distribution, bottles of wine stood in attentive ranks, glasses were lined up, wiped and polished, piles of white napkins lay neatly folded in readiness.
Deirdre had a sprig of parsley tucked jauntily behind one ear.
Her real name was Nora Molloy.
She had confided this to Liz in a tearful moment, not long after Jonathan had run off with the Williams girl.
Now, seeing Liz on the threshold, she waved her knife in greeting: ‘So there you are, Liz darling,’ she cried, ‘and a Happy New Year to you, and I'll be telling you something about 1980, you mark my words, you mark my words, all of you — broccoli will go out of fashion, that's what will happen in 1980, and no mistaking!’
And she proceeded to press upon Liz various samples of her skill, but Liz was unable to eat, nervous, wishing that it would all begin, that the curtain would rise, that the house would fill and the thick conversation rise like smoke through the thin, empty air.
When she returned to the drawing-room, she found that Charles, Alix and Esther were discussing, with much animation, the Italian economy.
They did not pause on her arrival, though Alix, ever polite, waved obliquely to welcome her back: watching them, it occurred to Liz that perhaps in all the years they had all  known one another, this was one of the very few occasions on which they had all been in the same room.
She, Esther and Alix had known one another since their Cambridge days, and often met, but an evening with them necessarily excluded Charles: Esther and Alix did not much care for the world that Charles represented, and his presence inhibited all three of them .
Did they despise Charles's world?
She did not know.
But suspected that they enjoyed their glimpses of it, on occasions such as this.
A male world, a world of suits and ties and speeches, of meetings and money.
Charles had conquered it.
First he had mocked it, then he had joined it, and now he represented it.
A normal progression.
Whereas Esther, intellectually more gifted than Charles, chose to live in a small flat just off the wrong end of Ladbroke Grove, earning a pittance from odd lectures, odd articles, a little teaching.
Perversity, purity, cowardice, dedication: no, none of these.
There she sat, in her familiar party outfit, an eccentric, much-worn, embroidered Chinese garment, her neat, solidly cut, smartly sloping black hair as tidy as a doll's, looking perhaps faintly Chinese rather than Jewish, diminutive as she was, and with those high cheek-bones: and there sat Alix, also by Charles's standards impoverished, though not by her own, which were more austere.
Alix was wearing a deep bright blue Indian dress with smocking.
She looked exceptionally well, glowing with health, almost as though she had been on holiday, which Liz knew she had not.
Liz wondered if Brian would come later.
None of us, thought Liz, is wearing a dress made in England.
Moroccan, Chinese, Indian.
I wonder what that means, thought Liz.
It was the kind of thought that Alix might have been more likely to articulate.
She quite often found herself thinking Alix's thoughts.
Esther's more rarely.
And Esther, now, suddenly tired of the Italian economy, dismissed it and Charles ('You don't seem to realize, Charles, that I live below the reach of the economy, as an economic unit I simply don't exist'), and peremptorily turned on Liz, demanding to know details of the guest list.
Esther's mind moved quickly, apparently at random; she had a habit of introducing subjects and growing bored, within minutes, of the interchanges she had herself provoked.
Abruptness was her most familiar mode, and  Liz sometimes fancied that she practised it with peculiar pleasure on Charles, whenever she got the chance: and Charles, accustomed to being listened to with reverence, took it in good part.
Though now, as Liz recited names of guests, she saw Charles drift away into what she took to be some private realm of financial speculation and morose managerial debate: he started to bite the inside of his lip, as he did when preoccupied, and to drum his fingers on the silvery-yellow brocade of the settee.
These tics, these traits, had become more pronounced since he had given up smoking.
Was it a freak of physiognomy, that even in such off-moments he looked so pugnacious, so determined?
The square set of his British jaw was hardly disturbed by the neurotic chewing.
A gift from nature, such a countenance.
It expressed resolution.
She could not read it: what was he turning over in there, on the eve of their party?
The social life of New York?
The restrictions on independent broadcasting?
The possibilities of cable television?
Or whether or not to have another gin and tonic?
Who could tell?
The faces of Esther and Alix were mobile, expressive, changeable; they were open to the weather, responsive, at least superficially, even if their darker motives remained obscure.
Her own face was also open, she fancied.
They had no public faces, the three of them, no public talk.
So she fancied.
Impossible to tell, however, despite this openness, what Alix and Esther really made of Charles.
They teased him, tolerated him, avoided him.
Women were easily captivated by Charles, when he bothered to make any effort to captivate: they humbly smiled when he turned his head to pay them attention.
But not Esther and Alix.
They were impervious both to his charm and to his aggression: they had neutralized him.
And so he sat there, a tame lion, drumming his fingers, while Esther and Alix and Liz his wife chattered on, about scandals and liaisons, about breaking marriages and delinquent children, about Ivan the Terrible, about the Post-Impressionist exhibition at the Royal Academy, about the Arts Council, about the Beaubourg, about modernism in architecture, about Brian Bowen's views on his reactionary boss at the Adult Education Institute, about what the word quango might be said to mean, about Kate Armstrong's latest article on the single-parent family and child benefits: chatter, chatter, female chatter, unstructured, shimmering, malicious, appreciative, acute, indulgent, shifting, rapid, unpunctuated, glancing, a light bright surface ripple on a deeper current, and Charles sat on, biting his inner lip.
‘You don't mean to say that this chap Edward Lazenby we keep reading about and hearing on the radio is the same chap as that persistent creep Teddy who used to edit Focus when we were at Cambridge?’
Esther was saying, returning to the guest list, recalling scores not settled a quarter of a century ago: ‘Yes, the very man, he's a something or other in the DES, he's a very important chap now, you ought to have a go at him,’ Liz replied, and as she spoke the doorbell rang, and there was the first guest, on the dot of two minutes past nine o'clock, tall, thin, grey, anxious, clutching a bunch of yellow roses, ex-priest turned analyst Joseph O'Toole, standing stranded on the black and white marble tiles, not knowing where to turn, how to divest himself of his coat, to whom to deliver his roses, a lost man, gazing mildly at the unexpected butler, waiting for the arrival of familiar Liz Headleand, who advanced upon him, took the roses, embraced him, restored him, and led him in to Charles, Alix and Esther: a quarter of an hour earlier she had predicted the time of his arrival accurately, to the minute, and now smiled triumphantly as she effected the introductions, a smile of complicity in which Joseph O'Toole, who was acutely aware of his own punctuality problem, was able with a pleasant relief to share.
Here he was, safely: the party could begin .
By half past ten, Deirdre (Molloy) Kavanagh had parted with all her little triangles of tricoloured pastry, taken off her apron, drunk a few glasses of champagne, told several guests that broccoli was out of fashion, and was busily engaged in conversation with a television journalist who had just returned from making a programme for Charles in Iran.
He was telling her about the Ayatollah, and she was telling him about her convent days.
Their words fluttered between them like lubricious little doves.
At Deirdre's elbow stood the faithless Jonathan Headleand, who was trying to explain to his stepmother's first husband Edgar why he'd decided, after all his protests, to follow in his father's footsteps, while simultaneously trying to keep one eye on  Deirdre (for whom he felt responsible) and the other on his girlfriend Kate Williams who was being harangued by a Tory backbencher about Marxist infiltration of the Open University.
The Open University was also the subject of debate between Alix Bowen and Teddy Lazenby of the Department of Education and Science: Alix's face was expressing a most delicate mixture of disbelief, disapprobation and polite attention as Teddy, somewhat indiscreetly presuming on their long, if long-interrupted, acquaintance, revealed what were clearly his own opinions on the inadvisability of wasting money on the education of housewives and taxi drivers.
In other corners and other rooms, dozens of other topics floated gaily on the lively, slightly choppy waters, their pennants bobbing and fluttering in the end-of-year, the terminal breeze: the approaching steel strike, the brave new era of threatened privatization, the abuse of North Sea oil resources, the situation in Afghanistan, the Annan report, the prospect of a fourth television channel, the viability of Charles's attempt to conquer the United States, the Cambridge Apostles, the disarray of the Labour Party, the deplorable vogue for Buck's Fizz as a party drink, the Yorkshire Ripper, the Harrow Road murderer, the Prince of Wales.
In a doorway, wedged between a Guardian leader writer and a Kleinian analyst, Alan Headleand and his ex-tutor Otto Werner from the LSE were debating with a fine abstraction and a noble disregard of interruption the question as to whether or not a television programme was a primary product or a service, and whether, by implication or extension, Charles's production company, Global Information Network (Telex GIN) was allied in ideological terms with the manufacturing or the service industries: with equal commitment Esther Breuer and Jules Griffin (colleague of Liz Headleand) were discussing the nature of ancestral voices in schizophrenic patients and in the Homeric and Biblical epic, and the portrayal of the Holy Ghost in Anglo-Saxon manuscripts.
Liz, moving from group to group, surveying from the stairway, engaging and disengaging, tacking and occasionally swooping, was pleased with what she saw.
They were mixing and mingling, her guests; the young were speaking to the old, men were speaking to women, Left was speaking to Right, art unto science, and only a few impossible old dullards of the financial world had  drifted together to talk about pay comparability and public sector borrowing and the GNP.
She left them to it: interventionist though she was, she knew the limits of her power.
Nothing would stop them, nothing would prise them apart, and she was glad to have them there: she liked to think that she and Charles had a comprehensive acquaintance, that in one house they could assemble representatives of most of the intersecting circles that make up society.
One needed a little dullness, to set off the buoyancy, the festivity, the movement.
And there, at last, was Alix's husband Brian: she was glad he had turned up, had not spurned her party, had paid her this respect.
Brian came from her own home town, though she had not known him there: this had some significance, both acknowledged, though Liz could not have said what it was.
Brian did not like parties, according to Alix, and had expressed fears that he would know nobody at the Headleands', but this was not so, for he had already engaged himself with his habitual courtesy with old Sir Anthony.
She saw him as he listened attentively to Sir Anthony; she caught his eye, waved at him across the sea of heads, abandoned him to the tide: he was an old friend of Otto Werner's, whom he could seek out if in need of relief.
The tide was flowing to the Right, according to Charles: could one feel, here, now, its tug, its undertow?
She paused, wondered.
Brian was a gentleman of the Left; what of this new breed of non-gentlemen of the Right?
She moved on, overhearing talk of broccoli, of death in Kabul, of the phenomenal transatlantic success of Pete Petrie's new novel, and there was Petrie himself talking to that little monster Ivan about his meeting with Norman Mailer, whooping with laughter, and hitting his own bald head with emphatic glee.
There was Charles, talking to the new proprietor of the Informer (plotting no doubt) and there was her daughter Sally arm in arm with Nat Higsby from the Tavistock: they seemed to be singing a duet.
There was Roy Strangeways, who was now, implausibly, surely prematurely, a High Court judge, talking to — no, it couldn't be, but it was.
Liz fell silent in mid-word of a vague murmured greeting to stare.
Yes, it was, how extraordinary, it was her own ex-patient Hilda Stark,diseuse , comedienne and would-be infanticide, whose career had been violently interrupted when in a fit of madness (to put it non-technically) she had nearly strangled her baby in its cradle: and here she was, laughing and drinking champagne, a guest; how improper, how indiscreet; was she married to somebody, had she come as somebody's wife ?
How brave of her, how bold of her, was she perhaps even now reciting to Roy the interesting medical and legal details of her case?
There she stood, in a dove-grey suede dress, looped and hung with a dozen necklaces of amethyst and rock crystal and pearl, her thick black-grey hair piled heavily, pinned with silver, attending a party in the very house where as patient she once in many hour-long sessions had disclosed to Liz on the ground floor the very secrets of her murderous mother's heart.
How could she have come here, who could have brought her, and would Roy feel compelled to divulge his and Liz's own smaller, milder secrets in return?
Should she intervene, should she break them up, or should she ignore her uninvited guest, pretend, professionally, never to have set eyes on her before?
As she considered this, Hilda intercepted her gaze, saluted her, and majestically, graciously, demonstratively, voluptuously blew a kiss across the room: Liz waved back, less flamboyantly but with equal composure, for what did it matter, after all, that Hilda Stark was there, was it not a tribute to them both, to the efficacy of the cure?
Hilda brought no shadows with her, she smiled innocently in her dove grey; the scandalous rumours had been, as Liz had predicted, forgotten.
It was a credit to them all.
And the nearly murdered baby, how was it, where was it, Liz wondered, and found herself involuntarily doing a head count of her own stepchildren and children: she could see Jonathan, Alan and Sally; her younger daughter Stella was away in Florence studying Italian, for her A levels, and staying safely and respectably as paying guest with art-historical friends of Esther; but where was her middle stepson, Aaron?
She had not seen him for an hour or more, he had been here earlier, had he left in a fit of boredom, was he sulking in
The energy generated from running upstairs and laughing with Stella in distant Florence flowed over into the impulse to ring, in turn, her own mother: a pointless act, but one that nevertheless in the context seemed pious, necessary, propitiatory, and a gesture at least towards her sister, who bore so much heavier a filial burden, who would (in theory at least) be pleased to know that Liz had remembered.
When Liz came downstairs again to her party, after a ritual exchange (how could her sister bear such intercourse? how could it go on?) she found that she had lost her velocity.
The brisk social wind that had driven her lightly from guest to guest had dropped, stilled by telephonic contact with the tiny scratching clicking silence of the voiceless house of the long ordeal of her childhood: she found herself becalmed, for a whole dull stretch, talking to old Peter Binns, a charming old boy, but a bore, and so slow of speech that Liz could hardly restrain herself from finishing all his ponderous sentences.
When she finally shook herself away, she found herself sailing into yet more stagnant waters, for there, directly in her way, unavoidable, smiling passively, uncomfortably, yet unavoidably, was Lady Henrietta, dutifully offering herself for an exchange with her hostess.
Lady Henrietta knew what was right: everything about her was right, from her tightly bound dark hair to her dark-blue satin slippers.
The sight of her filled Liz with a subdued and dreary panic.
Henrietta (Hetty to her friends, of whom Liz was not one) embarrassed her, she could never say why: she represented pain, failure, tedium, though not in her own person: somehow, magically, she managed to transfer these attributes to those with whom she conversed, while herself remaining poised and indeed complacent, secure of admiration.
Liz had never admired, and had at times expressed somewhat freely (and in her own view wittily) her lack of response to Henrietta's frigid style and vapid conversation, but nevertheless felt herself, in Henrietta's presence, rendered almost as dull as Henrietta, and moreover uneasily aware that in other houses, in other milieux, at a distance, in other circles, she had seen Henrietta sparkling, laughing, surrounded by life — vacuous life, feverish small talk, no doubt, but life — a life that froze in Liz as she contemplated her guest's stiff blue taffeta gown (this was surely a gown, not a dress, and, not even English, probably French), her exposed  white bosom, her diamond necklace (well, probably diamonds, why not?), her high white forehead, her thin dark-red lips.
Henrietta's brow was high, and her hair was scraped back from it and secured by an intricate velvet ribbon in a smooth, elaborate chignon: a Bambi head, a skull head, a too, too thin head, an over-bred head, a painful head.
Liz's own forehead was villainously low, coarsely low.
She did not know how to address Henrietta, she felt the fault her own, she knew herself to be disadvantaged.
A chill, heavy waste of water lay between them, and in it floated the drowned empty skins of past attempts at rapport.
Across this, the neat Henrietta politely presented a hand and a cheek.
Cheek brushed against cheek.
Each muttered some conventional phrase.
It appeared that more was required and Liz, resenting the inanity thus forced upon her even as it passed her lips, found herself saying ‘And how are you looking forward to the 1980s?’
‘Oh yes,’ said Henrietta, smiling meaninglessly, confirming Liz's view that she never listened to a word that Liz said to her.
Silence fell, during which Liz inspected Henrietta's blue dress: it was poutily, boldly cut, made of the kind of shot, stiff, shiny non-absorbent kind of fabric that Liz herself avoided, for it made her sweat; indeed it made her sweat to look at it.
She was given to sweat: Henrietta, clearly, not.
Perhaps the upper classes did not sweat?
She was herself, biologically, a peasant, but was rarely made to feel this to be an eccentricity as she now felt.
Gazing at the blue fabric, she noted that Ivan, ever present when least wanted, was intently watching this less than interesting encounter from a position just behind and below Henrietta's left shoulder.
His frankly delighted countenance spurred her on to effort: ‘I myself,’ she heard herself saying, ‘am very much looking forward to going to Japan for the first time.
Have you ever been to Japan?’
‘No,’ said Lady Henrietta, unhelpfully.
Ivan laughed.
‘I am attending,’ continued Liz, ‘a conference.’
‘Really?’ said Lady Henrietta.
‘How long do you go for?’
This seemingly innocuous question acted upon Liz with the effect of an instant anaesthetic: as she began to answer, she could feel her jaw growing rigid in mid-word.
‘Two weeks,’ she managed to articulate, and then stood there, mouth clamped, feet rooted, as though turned to a pillar of salt, as though the deep deep boredom of childhood had reclaimed her, had rendered her helpless and speechless and powerless, the child in the attic, praying for time to pass and blood to flow.
Which, of course, momentarily, it did: ‘Two weeks,’ she boldly and brightly continued, breaking the trance like stillness with a frisky movement of her head and braceleted right arm, ‘yes, two weeks, in Kyoto and Osaka, it should be quite fascinating, quite an opportunity to see a completely different culture, of course it relates to our own work at the Institute in a very particular way, it seems that there has been a considerable amount of research done in the department we are visiting on the problems of adoption and stepparents.
…’ And on she prattled, watching with some satisfaction the slight tightening professional impatience of Lady Henrietta's lip and the altering glaze of her china-blue eye.
Honour was satisfied, the courtesies had been observed, they could smile and part.
Though I really cannot imagine, thought Liz, as she turned away, rubbing her hands together as though the cold had truly bitten her, as though the Ice Queen had truly touched her, why we continue to ask her round.
Is it just because everyone else does, because she is the kind of person that people ask to parties, because her name inscribes itself by automatic writing on guest lists?
Are Charles and I really so susceptible to propriety, to the conventional?
Do we like to have people with titles at our parties?
What on earth is her title?
Who is she?
What a mystery it is, the way we carry on, thought Liz, as she moved on to more congenial entertainment: remembering, suddenly, the oft-repeated claim of an Austrian refugee analyst of her acquaintance, who frequently and unashamedly rejoiced in having had in his house at one time no less than five Nobel Prize winners, a claim which she had always found endearing, ridiculous, foolish, alarming, comic, in its nai¨veté, its precision, its ruthlessness: remembering the alarms and excitement of her own early encounters with the famous, the great, the titled, the rich: remembering the ancient yearning to crowd her life with people, with voices, with telephone calls, invitations, children, friends of children: remembering, in short the dread of solitude, the dread of reliving her mother's unending, inexplicable, still-enduring loneliness: and across these  memories, flitting in a half second, as she made her way, for light relief, towards Kate Armstrong, fortifying Kate, came the question — why did Henrietta Latchett, who must have been invited to a hundred parties tonight, who could never have known a lonely evening, why did she choose to come to us ?
Liz smiled to herself, triumphant, and ploughed on towards Kate.
Conventional, unconventional: in the last half-hour of 1979 several of Liz and Charles Headleand's guests attempted to formulate what, for them, had seemed to be the conventions of an eclectic, fragmented, purposeless decade; some attempted to prophesy for the next.
The house was full of trend-spotters, from gossip columnist Ivan Warner and irritable feminist Kate Armstrong to Treasury adviser Philip, worried about pension projections in an increasingly elderly society: from information vendor Charles Headleand to epidemiologist Ted Stennett, across whose horizon the science-fiction disease of AIDS was already casting a faint red ominous glow: from forensic psychiatrist Edgar Lintot (who had not yet heard of AIDS, but who had heard rumours about changing views in high places on the sentencing of the criminally insane) to Alix Bowen, worried on a mundane level about the future funding of her own job and on a less selfish level about the implications for the rehabilitation of female offenders of cuts in that funding: from theatre director Alison Peacock, anxious about her Arts Council subsidy, to Representative Public Figure, Sir Anthony Bland, the aptly named Chairman (or so Ivan alleged) of the Royal Commission on Royal Commissions, who was thinking that for various reasons he might have to resign, and from more bodies than one, before the jostling and the hinting pushed him into an undignified retreat.
Not all were anxious, apprehensive, ill at ease.
Many congratulated themselves on having found a new sense of purpose, a new realism: after years of drifting, of idle ebb and flow, there seemed to be a current.
Tentatively, some dipped their toes to test the water.
Others had already leaped boldly in the expectation that others would follow, that it would prove wise to have been seen to take the plunge first.
Old opinions were  shed, stuffy woolly shabby old liberal vests and comforters were left piled on the shore.
Some shivered in the cold breeze of change: others struck out boldly, with a sense of freedom, glad to be unencumbered by out-of-date gear and padding, glad to cast off notions that had never seemed to themselves to be smart or necessary: naked into the stream, exhilarated, the new emerging race.
Cutting, paring, slimming, reducing, rationalizing: out swam the slim hard new streamlined man, in the emperor's new clothes, out of the gritty carapace, the muddy camouflaged swoon, casting off the old ways, the old crawling, sinking ways.
The conventions were changing, assumptions were changing, though not everybody was to enjoy or to survive the metamorphosis, the plunge, the leap into water or air; change is painful, transition is painful, and the social world had not yet reached a stage which could have greeted as conventional, precisely, even at a much-mixed, smart, Bohemian-flavoured cosmopolitan New Year's Eve party, the excessively raised voices of two journalist-historians, once friends and allies and fellow contributors to the current of immortal truth and to the New Statesman , now locked in bitter dispute about that ghastly, trailing decaying albatross-corpse of the Left, Public Ownership and Clause 4: ‘You squint-eyed git, you treacherous, turncoat, lying, statistic-faking git,’ shouted Giles, the man of the Left, who appeared to be losing the argument, his voice rising above the more amiable party hubbub in a shriek of despair, a shriek that summoned to his side Liz Headleand, with Kate Armstrong and Ivan Warner in quick attendance.
Giles's straw-yellow hair was fierce above his veined brick-red face, his grey eyes glittered with truculent frustrated aggression, the rage of a thousand ideologically committed drinking sessions in dirty pubs surged in his weeping Camden-Lock-shirted chest.
‘Giles, Giles,’ cried Liz, ‘don't shout so, it's nearly the New Year, we can't bring in the New Year howling like wolves .’
‘Giles, Giles,’ echoed Kate, throwing restraining arms around him.
‘Wolves!’ shouted Giles drunkenly, ‘wolves, that's what they are, the pack of them, they're traitors to the human race, scavengers, look at them, look at them, wolves is too good a word for them, jackals, hyenas, that's what they are, hyenas!’
‘Oh, don't be ridiculous, Giles, calm down, calm down, come  and have a nice Perrier water,’ said Liz, taking his other arm, and, with Kate, attempting to lead him away from the fracas, as one would a child in a playground from its tormentor (for Giles's antagonist Paul Hargreaves, pale faced, dark suited, silver-grey tied, was smiling calmly with a horrible amusement at this distressing scene): but the desperate Giles was beyond leading, and fell back heavily as he attempted to disengage himself from his two intercessors, crashing into a large fern and some pots of bulbs and sending earth and splashes of champagne over the carpet.
‘There go the 1970s,’ commented Hargreaves, ‘there go the drinking seventies,’a comment which earned him a slap in the eye from Giles's girlfriend Venetia: ‘Drunkard yourself!’she shouted, ‘drunkard yourself!’
Whereupon Hargreaves threw his arms around Venetia and kissed her violently, pausing for breath only to make some comment about Public Ownership, as Giles sprawled upon the floor.
Ivan Warner was delighted.
He looked as though he had stage-managed the whole incident.
Liz Headleand stared at the scene with a marked lack of dismay, as Kate Armstrong knelt down and started to dust the earth off Giles, looking up to ask anyone who might be interested about the little blobs of white polystyrene that always seem to come mixed with bulb fibre: ‘What is this stuff?’ asked Kate, ‘I've often wondered,’as she proceeded to re-pot a hyacinth with one hand while stroking Giles's shoulder with the other.
Giles's girlfriend Venetia, meanwhile, encircled by the arms of Hargreaves, had started to laugh, and Giles began to laugh too: ‘Oh Christ, sorry, Liz, sorry, Kate,’ he declared, as he organized himself into a sitting position, his arms around his knees, ‘I should never have had those two whiskies at the Venables’.’
‘Breathe deeply,’ said Liz, ‘breathe deeply and relax, and I'll get you a Perrier to drink in the New Year.’
‘Calm down, calm down, Giles,’ said Hargreaves.
‘Calm down, young chap.’
‘Now you keep out of this,’ said Liz and Venetia simultaneously to Hargreaves, while, in another corner of the room, Deirdre Molloy lifted her voice in an Irish lament.
‘Mother, it's ten to midnight!’ called Sally from the doorway, and Liz, looking around the confusion she had summoned into being, the  scattered earth, the scattered people, the murmuring, the singing, the clustering, thought yes, this was a party, yes, this was living rather than not living, this was permitted, this was planned disorder, this was cathartic, this was therapeutic, this was admired misrule.
‘Piano, Aaron, piano!’ she called, and her middle stepson, with his mobile thin white clown's face, emerged from the crowd and seated himself at the instrument, as Liz called to Deirdre and the butlers to fill glasses and then join the guests for a toast: Jonathan turned on the radio, the eagle-crowned clock over the marble mantelshelf struck, some joined hands and some did not, Aaron struck up Auld Lang Syne, Big Ben struck, some sang and some did not, voices rose straggling, pure and impure, strong and weak, tuneful and tuneless, there were cries and embraces.
Two hundred people, solitude and self dispelled.
Liz, at the magic moment, found herself unexpectedly clutching the hot hand of Ivan Warner, which seemed wrong but ordained: she looked for Charles, and saw that the poor man had managed to find himself in the icy palm of Lady Henrietta.
Such were the random dispositions of fate.
But Alix and Brian had found one another, and so had Otto and Caroline Werner: Esther was caught between lofty Edgar and little Pete Petrie, herself the smallest of all.
Should old acquaintance be forgot, they sang, bravely, recklessly, tunelessly, and as the singing stopped, Ivan kissed Liz's hand.
‘Liz,’ he said, ‘Liz, I've always admired your style, but this was something else.’
She took it, for the moment, as a tribute, beneath the chandelier.
Beneath the chandelier.
From it fell refracted light, on balding heads and shaven heads, on Mohican plumes and gelled spikes, on neatly barbered and dressed locks, on neglected middle-aged wispy bobs, on plaits and loops and layered body waves.
The plural, the eclectic seventies.
Dark suits, pale-blue shirts, Indian kurtahs worn not exclusively by Indians, Viyella shirts, striped mother-knitted pullovers, designer-monogrammed pullovers, cheap ethnic dresses, expensive ethnic dresses, long skirts, short skirts, exclusive French dresses, hand-stitched English dresses, Oxfam thirties dresses, prim high mandarin collars, plunging  necklines, slit skirts, glimpses of suspender belts, clown pantaloons, dungarees, studded belts, limp leather belts, crackling metal belts, belts slung round waists, hips, bellies.
Disparate, disparate, a hundred opinions, a hundred cross-currents, in this blond Georgian drawing-room: ancestral echoes of ancient Victorian philanthropy of the Clapham school mingled with louche ghosts of Bloomsbury, public-school public servants held hands with hybrid tieless entrepreneurs of the television aristocracy, new modes of moneyed brutality addressed old shrinking brutality, the educated sons (well, let us not exaggerate, one educated son) of one skilled manual worker maintained an exchange with one exhausted feudal Northumbrian homosexual neurosurgeon, and the accents of North London raised themselves melodiously, classlessly, incomprehensibly, from the throats of the variously reared young, from the singing birds of the future, in their indeterminate, as yet unidentifiable plumage.
There they gathered, the employee who lacks employment, the faithless priest, the investor about to hang himself in the expectation of plenty, the physician who will not be able to heal herself, the director who lacks all direction, the historian who denies the existence of history, the Jewish scholar of early Renaissance Christian iconography, the deaf man who hears voices, the woman about to be taken in adultery.
A mingling, of a sort, in this exclusive, this eclectic room, this room full of riddles.
‘I don't believe it,’ said Sally to Alan ten minutes after midnight in the kitchen, amidst the empty bottles and the crumpled napkins.
‘How could they?
I don't believe it.’
‘Don't ask me,’ said Alan, and bravely, coolly drank a glass of water from the tap.
‘I've never known what they were up to.
And anyway, it's nothing to do with us.
Not now.’
‘No, I don't suppose it is.’
But panic filled Sally's nineteen-year-old heart, for it was, she thought, something to do with her.
Now, and always.
Aaron sat on the roof and stared at the sky.
Five floors up.
The London skyline, the Post Office Tower, the sounds of distant  merriment.
He lit a cigarette.
He had seen what he should not have seen.
He was sitting, moreover, where he had often been told not to sit.
As children, they had not been allowed on the roof.
And were not now.
Aaron brooded.
He had been in the habit of brooding, up here, as a child.
It had frightened Liz.
Understandably.
He remembered when she once had to beg him to come down.
He could see her now, in the room below, under the skylight, gazing up.
Imploring.
Sweetie, come down, she had begged ridiculously.
He had felt power in his distress.
He had backed away, had stood perilously on the parapet.
Her face had been distorted, ugly, foreshortened, all teeth and mouth.
He had been frightened of himself, of her, of the height, of the sky, of the necessity of daring.
He had brooded over his dead mother.
Jonathan and Alan never mentioned her.
He had meditated upon her, up here.
He could not remember her, of course.
The London streets stretched away.
As a small child, he had been taken to see Peter Pan.
The old-fashioned backdrop painted with its winking windows had been remarkably similar to this view, his view.
He had thought he could fly, if he willed it enough.
Sweet Hamlet, cast this nighted colour off.
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
‘Sweetie, please come down.
Come down and we'll all have supper.
It's on the table.
It's going cold.
Come down, sweetie.’
Poor Liz.
He had teased her.
The others would not: they were good, compliant.
Somebody had to tease, to sit on dangerous edges, to affect melancholia.
The dark night surrounded him.
He had seen what he should not have seen.
But would not speak.
Therefore, having played the piano for the people, he sat in the dark.
In the early hours, in the first hours of 1980, gossip spread.
Some did not want to listen.
Alix, who had no idea of what the gossip was to be about, but who could sense its ominous crackling in the distance, wanted to go home, but tiresomely Brian, the party-hater, had managed to find his old friend Otto Werner and was  deep in conversation about English social class, European intellectuals, the German education system, public schools, and the appointing of JPs and magistrates, a rich vein which they might have been able to explore for another hour at least, had Alix not been at their elbow, murmuring of departure.
In other circumstances she would have been more than willing to engage in this conversation herself, for it was one she had frequently enjoyed; she liked Otto, she had always mildly fancied that he liked her, she was amused by the offhand continental gallantries with which he interspersed, absent-mindedly, the rigour of his argument; but tonight she was tired, her eyes were closing, she had had four hours of party already, had not enjoyed the Hargreaves drama, had not enjoyed her talks with Ivan Warner and Teddy Lazenby, had been polite enough for long enough, and wanted to go home; so stood at Brian's elbow, dully, a reproachful wife, slightly annoyed that neither of them took much notice of her, as Otto invoked the name of Max Weber, a name which meant nothing to her at all, a name which excluded her, exhausted her, and provoked her into prodding, yet again, but this time successfully, Brian's arm, and murmuring of baby-sitter Sharon, who was only sixteen.
Esther also left not long after midnight.
Esther knew what she knew, had seen what she had seen, but like Aaron chose to say nothing.
She rather thought that Charles knew what she knew, and it was this suspicion that prompted what was, for her, an early departure.
She had planned to walk home, but accepted, on the front steps, an offer of a lift from Teddy Lazenby and his wife Delia, who lived in Campden Square and could easily drop her off.
Esther had not seen either of them since her days at Cambridge, and listened with a connoisseur's ear to Delia's laments about time passing, times changing, the difficulties of keeping in touch.
Esther, who had always been deeply bored with Delia and had no wish whatsoever to keep in touch with her, sat quietly in the smooth, upholstered, comfortable, large toffee-brown Volvo, which smelled of dog.
She said nothing, except to give directions.
She got home quickly, smoothly, easily, said good night politely, and went in and firmly shut the door.
In their wake, the party in Harley Street continued and rumours thickened.
Looking back, Liz would try to remember the  moment at which she had known rather than not known: she would have liked to have thought that she had known always, that there was no moment of shock, that knowledge had lain within her (the all-knowing), that she had never truly been deceived, that at the very worst she had connived at her own deceit.
Surely Ivan's first sentence of the New Year had alerted her?
(Though that would have been late, late, late.)
Surely she had taken it as an ill omen?
But no, she had taken it at its face value: from Ivan, of all people, who spread malice as his trade.
She had thought herself exempt.
Slow she had been, unbearably slow, she who could hear many strands of speech at once: trusting she had been, she who had been reared in the bosom of suspicion.
She had thought herself invulnerable.
She had been possessed by pride.
Hints, glances, sliding words, oblique smiles, incomprehensible references.
Why had she not received them earlier?
Had she been too preoccupied with butlers, with introductions, with orchestration, with champagne?
Or had the guests waited until midnight, the witching hour, before turning into swine?
Pig faced, snub-nosed, bristling broad-jowled Ivan, snouting disaster.
That ominous expression of sympathy from pebbled-glassed Jules, who took her hand and asked her meaningfully how she was?
Esther's strange allusion to a hornet's nest?
That look of frank dislike and satisfaction from Antonia Haycock?
That uncharacteristically and overly broad anecdote from Pete Petrie?
Hilda Stark's excessively theatrical departing conspiratorial embrace?
That odd, bitter, comradely crack about men from Kate Armstrong?
That glance of panic from her daughter Sally?
All these messages had been sent forth, and she had received none of them, had continued to consider herself in charge, in control, the prime mover.
Until, under the mirror, after many a circle and feint, after many a playful retreat and renewed approach, Ivan at last cornered her, and even before he opened his mouth she felt the smell of fear from herself: her pores broke open, she stood there panting slightly, her hair rising on the back of her neck in terror, her heated skin covered in icy sweat: ‘And when,’ asked Ivan pleasantly, ‘are you two going to make the announcement?
Is it to be tonight, or do we wait?’
The words meant nothing, or should have meant nothing.
She  smiled foolishly.
Her mind leaped.
It ran, it leaped, it scrambled for cover.
It turned.
‘And why not tonight?’ she said.
‘You've kept your own plans very dark,’ said Ivan.
‘Ah well, you know me,’ she said, knowing nothing.
‘I can't say I'm surprised,’ said Ivan.
‘I think you two stuck it out pretty well, in the circumstances.
How long has it been?
Twenty years?’
The utterly expected, the utterly unexpected, can they be the same thing, she wondered.
‘Your name,’ Ivan continued, ‘has been linked with Gabriel Denham's, but I don't even see him here tonight.’
She stood there: he stared at her.
She could say nothing.
A pillar of salt.
She was dependent on him.
She could not move until he released her.
‘Whereas Henrietta, I see,’ Ivan continued with a remorseless pity, ‘is very much at home here.’
‘Henrietta?’
Liz echoed.
It was the moment she was most to regret.
It betrayed ignorance.
Only a second's ignorance, but ignorance.
Had Ivan noticed?
Desperate, she found again the faculty of speech, heard her own voice, familiar, natural, even powerful: ‘Ah yes, Henrietta.
Yes, we see a good deal of Henrietta.’
She had no notion of what her words meant, but they sounded good, they fortified her, and she continued bravely, ‘But as for Gabriel, whose name has not been linked with Gabriel's?
I think you must find a more interesting candidate than Gabriel.
What about, for example—’ and she cast her eyes around her assembly, seeing reprieve, in the approaching form of Edgar Lintot, her first husband, ‘what about Edgar?
Now that would be an interesting plot, for us at least.
I see a great deal of Edgar these days, you know.
We often lunch together.
Well,’(and the plausibility of her own tone, at the moment, amazed her)‘sometimes.’
‘What's all this?’ said tall, beaky, dedicated Edgar.
‘Gossip, is it?
I've come to say good night, Lizzie.
I've got a long drive tomorrow.
Very nice party, very nice.
See you at the meeting.’
‘Yes, gossip,’ said Ivan tenaciously.
‘We were talking about Charles and Henrietta.
I wonder what New York will make of Henrietta.’
Edgar was not listening.
Ivan did not interest him, gossip did not interest him, he had given up the personal life.
He kissed Liz on the cheek.
‘I think it's on the thirtieth, isn't it?
Have a good time with the Japanese tomorrow.
Don't say I didn't warn you.’
‘Give my love to your mother,’ said Liz.
She managed to edge herself out of her corner, away from Ivan, back into the current.
She followed Edgar a few paces across the room.
Ivan, behind her, was accosted by a fellow-journalist.
He wanted to retain her, to keep her, to tease her, to worry her, to kill her, but he could not: she escaped.
Escaped to a comforting, numbing succession of thanks and farewells, for the party was beginning to break up: ‘Happy New Year,’ echoed again and again, as Liz searched vaguely for Charles but could not find him, Happy New Year, see you soon, goodbye, say goodbye to Charles for me, goodbye.
And there, in a conspicuous lull, was Lady Henrietta herself, extending her hand and cheek.
Seeing her, Liz saw it all.
The certainty inspired her.
She drew breath.
‘And when,’ she asked politely, ‘do you go to New York?’
Henrietta looked back, with a frigid calm, beneath which lay a hesitation.
‘Ah,’ she said.
‘Yes.
I thought February.’
‘Yes,’ said Liz.
‘Perhaps we could talk some time?…
May I ring you?
We could have lunch?’
‘Yes,’ said Liz.
She had won, temporarily: she had managed to give the impression that she knew.
Though what it was that she knew, she could not at that moment have said.
The two women kissed, again, and drew apart.
It was to be a long night.
The hard core of party-goers stayed on until the small hours, drinking coffee, sprawled on settees, sinking into morose abuse and gloom, surfacing occasionally to laugh, to chatter, relapsing, rising, sinking again.
Joseph O'Toole (always among the last to leave any party) sat in a corner with Anthony Keating talking of God.
Kate Armstrong came in with another tray of coffee.
The young people had gone upstairs, to bed, or not to bed: strains of music drifted from the upper regions plaintively.
Charles reappeared, after half an hour's absence, and  threw himself into an armchair, where he lay back for some time with his eyes shut.
Liz thought he looked appalling, and wondered why she hadn't noticed it before.
Blotchy, middle aged, fat.
She was frightened of him.
She had always been frightened of him.
That was why she had fallen in love with him.
He had power over her.
And now he was going to divorce her and marry Lady Henrietta Latchett.
She knew it all, now: she had divined it all.
Too late for self-respect, but not too late to exact a little vengeance.
No wonder he looked so crumpled.
He was about to embark on a new life in New York with the most boring woman in Britain.
And she, at her age, what was she to do?
A terrible, drunken tiredness filled her and she too sat back and shut her eyes.
The room turned, as it had done in the parties of her youth.
The sight of both host and hostess apparently sleeping rallied the laggards, eventually, and with apologies they began to stumble to their feet.
Liz and Charles rose too.
Little was said: it was too late.
Only one interchange could Liz later remember: ‘A very good party, a better party than ever,’ said the recently felled historian Giles, now fully recovered, to which Liz heard herself reply, ‘Well, it's as well you made the most of it, for it will be the last.’
The announcement was greeted with mute and grave acceptance by the departing guests.
Cold air drifted in through the front door.
Liz shivered.
The door shut.
She and Charles returned to the drawing-room.
They sat down.
Ceremonially, as it were: to attention, as it were .
‘I'm going to bed,’ said Charles, but did not move.
Liz stared at him.
She could see that he was frightened of her.
He looked lamentable, disadvantaged, weak.
His eyes were bloodshot.
‘You didn't dare to tell me,’ said Liz.
‘I think we should get divorced,’ said Charles.
‘Why didn't you tell me?
Did you think I'd try to stop you?
Did you think I'd plead with you to stay?’
‘No,’ said Charles, dully.
‘It wasn't that.
Not that at all.
Anyway, I thought you knew.’
‘If you thought I knew, why didn't you tell me?’
He laughed briefly.
‘This was a very expensive charade,’ she said, pursuing her advantage.
She was beginning to think she knew where she was.
He nodded agreement, muttered that he thought a grand finale would be her kind of thing, better to wrap it up in style, he said, echoing Ivan.
And then he suddenly said, in a more natural tone, in an everyday tone that she rarely heard from him these days, ‘And anyway, I thought it wouldn't matter to anyone, now the children are grown up.’
‘What?’
Patiently, he repeated, as though perhaps she had not heard: ‘I thought it wouldn't matter to anyone, now the children are grown up.’
‘What on earth has it got to do with the children?’
‘Oh well.
You know.
One wouldn't have wanted to split up the family.’
This banal observation astounded her, though she did not know why.
It seemed to come from another world of reference, an older, ordinary world, of platitude and cliché, of pattern and familiar family ties, a world that she had thought they had never entered, for many good reasons never entered: and now here was Charles himself, invoking its terms, as though it had been there always, as though they had always inhabited its domain.
‘Do you mean to say,’ she ventured, disliking the silence, ‘that in your view we've only stuck it out together all these years because of the children?
Because of the so-called children?’
Charles shrugged.
‘I don't know what I thought.
I thought that was what you thought.
I knew you'd rather have been off on your own, if it hadn't been for the children.
You've been very good with the children, I wouldn't deny that.
But I knew you were getting restless.
Wanting to be off.’
‘Whatever made you think that?’
‘You.’
‘Me?’
‘You.’
‘I made you think that?’
‘Yes, you,’ he said, patiently, irritably, still with that relentlessly everyday, normative tone, as though this whole discussion were the most ordinary event, the most expected of interchanges.
‘You're not going to start pretending you want to move to New  York, are you?
You've always made it quite clear that you were staying here and that I could fuck off to the other end of the world for all you cared.
You're too busy to speak some days.
You won't even notice I've gone.’
He spoke without embarrassment.
‘That's not quite fair,’ she said cautiously.
‘It's not as though you're not quite busy yourself.
You haven't had much time for domestic life of late, have you?
Or ever.
Come to that.’
‘We're not a domestic couple.
Though I must say, you did a good job with the boys.
Considering the problems.’
The elegiac note sounded ominously, unanswerably, offering calm and collusion: as if aware of the risks, Charles struck suddenly out, moving out into dangerous white water, tipping over the edge into a new reach.
‘And anyway,’ said Charles, ‘then there was Henrietta.’
‘Ah,’ said Liz, feeling herself begin to glitter and crackle and spark, striking out herself, away from sadness and regret, ‘yes, of course, that's a point.
There was Henrietta.
When was there Henrietta?
When ?
Tell me when ?
How long has all this been going on, behind my back?’
A new reach, but the words were banal here too: how could she be uttering them?
‘I'm not telling you,’ he said, in a manner that later she condemned as sheepish.
‘When?
This month?
This year?
Last year?
Go on, don't just sit there, tell me,’ she demanded, in a manner that later she condemned as shrewish.
He covered his eyes with his hand and moaned.
‘For God's sake, sweetie.
Let's leave it till morning, shall we?
I'm knackered.
Let's leave it till morning.’
But she heard herself saying, still in shrewish style, that on the contrary there wasn't any time in the morning, that she had to go to a psychoanalytical conference in the Metropole Hotel with a bunch of Japanese in the morning, that she wanted to talk now, that he couldn't just announce that he wanted to get divorced and then decide he was too tired to talk about it.
On and on she heard herself ranting (could it be that she heard echoes of her own past self, the speaking, ranting, resurrected ghost of that ephemeral figure Liz Lintot?) and heard his vague, evasive grunts and  answers: yes, he said, he and Henrietta would marry as soon as possible, Henrietta wanted to go to New York with him, she'd had a thin time herself lately, he needed her in New York, Henrietta hadn't been well, needed to settle…and as Liz spoke and listened she was aware of a simultaneous conviction that this was the most shocking, the most painful hour of her entire life, and also that it was profoundly dull, profoundly trivial, profoundly irrelevant, a mere routine, devoid of truth, devoid of meaning: nothing.
‘Honestly,’ Charles was saying, after more than an hour of beleaguered explanation, or semi-explanation, ‘I didn't think you'd take it like this, old thing, I thought you'd — well, I thought you'd be relieved, to tell you the truth.
Relieved to be rid of me.
You know me.
Worthless kind of chap, in my own way.
What did you expect?
Good of you to put up with me so long.
You'll have more scope on your own.’
‘You lying hypocrite,’ said Liz, exhausted, without rancour.
‘You feeble, contemptible, cowardly two-faced cheat.’
‘There, there,’ said Charles.
‘I'll never forgive you,’ she heard herself say.
‘Why not?’ said Charles, with admirable, with deadly equanimity.
‘I've always forgiven you.’
‘Ah yes,’ she heard herself cry, ‘but then I never went away , did 1? 1 stayed, I stayed with you.
I never went away !’
And suddenly, astonishingly, astonished, she began to weep, great sobs bursting out of her, tears leaping from her eyes, a kind of howling noise in her nose and throat, and Charles got up and came and sat by her and took her in his arms as she howled like a six-year-old.
‘There, there,’ he kept saying, until she lay calm against his shoulder, calm and sodden: ‘Come to bed,’he said, and pulled her to her feet, and supported her up the stairs, past the paintings and the roses, and into her bedroom, where she lay motionless as he began to take off her sandals, her tights, her dress.
He found her new white Christmas-present nightdress hanging on the back of the dressing-room door, and heaved her into it, then opened the bed, and pushed her between the sheets.
He found a sleeping pill, a glass of water, and put them on the table by her side.
Then he undressed and lay down beside her and took her in his arms.
They had not slept in the same bed for nearly two years.
‘There, there,’ he said, soothingly, ‘hold on to me, hold on.’
She held on to him, because he was there, because he had been there.
He was very solid.
She held on to twenty years of him.
Heavy, solid, smooth, adult.
Safe.
The man who had never been safe became, upon leaving her, safe to her.
So it was.
The death of danger.
No harm to come, no more harm to come.
Calm shore.
He rocked her in his arms.
They slept.
London nights.
Aaron lay awake at the top of the house.
He had overseen, foreseen, overheard.
The night was still.
The party was over.
London, West One.
He made himself levitate over the capital.
Dark street.
Would they have switched off the cold fountains in Trafalgar Square?
The owls hooted in Highgate, in Wimbledon, in Dulwich.
Drinking men lay huddled in newspaper on benches, on railways stations, beneath the arches, beneath the Festival Hall.
Aaron listened to the silence, and to the faint music of a cassette: the fifth symphony of Sibelius.
Where the swan drifts upon the darkening flood.
He communed with his mother, he implored her to drift with him.
Was she there, was it she that was with him?
Two floors below, his stepmother lay in his father's arms, for the last time.
Sweet Hamlet, cast this nighted colour off.
The party was over.
Where would he drift now?
The soft cool currents of the air lifted him above the sleeping city, swirled him gently.
The music gathered its strength.
He lay in its arms.
It was the first morning of 1980.
Meanwhile, up in Northam, that figurative Northern city, the New Year had also advanced, ignored by some, welcomed by others, bringing surprises to some, and a deadly, continuing tedium to others.
The Other Nation, less than two hundred miles away, celebrated in its own style.
In a renovated Georgian terrace house less than a quarter of a mile from the Civic Centre, actors, actresses, arts officers, leisure officers, artists-in-residence, playwright-in-residence, and a visiting jazz musician gathered together to laugh, to sing, to eat spinach salad and green bean salad and mackerel pate and wholemeal bread and curried brown rice: they played games, word games, charades, quotation games.
Northam's poet sat glumly in a corner with a plateful and a pint and watched with silent outrage, as was his way.
Next door, an old woman in her seventies read aloud to her ninety-two-year-old mother, as she had read aloud of an evening for decades; their house had not been renovated, it belonged to another age.
Solid provincial comfort, a little shabby now, but solid.
They had stuck it out, as the area stormed around them: they had stood their ground, resisting all offers of rehousing, uprooting.
They would die in their own beds.
Their high-smelling dog lay on the hairy ancient rug before the smokeless fuel fire.
Round the corner another old woman in her seventies awaited the departure of the year, huddled in bed for warmth, clad in layer upon layer of old nylon nightdress, woolly cardigan, matted flannel dressing-gown, gazing at an unsatisfactory black and white television flickering at her from a chair by the bed.
She could see nothing, could make out nothing, but it was a comfort, it was company, she heard its voices, they spoke to her.
In the flat below, a teenage couple quarrelled about whether it was safe to leave the baby and go down to the pub.
The baby cried, as babies do.
The more it cried, the more they wanted to leave it, and the less safe it seemed to leave it.
The girl began to cry, as girls do, and the teenage father went out on his own, slamming the door behind him.
The girl shouted abuse after him, then picked up her  baby for comfort, and settled down to watch telly with the remains of a bag of cheese and onion crisps.
Further out, in the fashionable village-suburb of Breasbrough, civic spirits were high at a New Year's Eve party, where left-wing councillors, left-wing teachers, left-wing journalists, left-wing social workers and a few agnostic entrepreneurs raised their glasses and looked forward to the exhilarating confrontation of the approaching steel strike: they were high on a recent freak by-election in the neighbourhood which had reversed the national trend to the Right and given, in their own view, a renewed popular blessing to their defiant, daring programme of high social expenditure.
Socialism begins at home, they told one another as they filled their glasses with Oake and Nephews' Special Christmas Offer Beaujolais.
Northam's elderly historian and honorary ideologue sat glumly in a corner with a plateful and a pint, and watched with silent outrage, as was his way.
He did not trust this new wave of optimism.
He had seen too many waves fall harmlessly upon the shore.
He did not approve of wine drinking.
He was going deaf: on purpose, he sometimes thought.
Half a mile up the hill, spirits were also high in the home of Eddie Duckworth, that plump, much-loved, avuncular manager of Pitts and Harley, newly elected President of the Chamber of Commerce, who had faith that at last a government had been elected that would put a stop to inflation, high interest rates, rocketing domestic and industrial rates, shameful capitulation to the unions, centralized bureaucratic planning, and the consequent decay of the manufacturing industries: the writing is on the wall at the Town Hall, he told his guests, as their glasses were refilled with Oake and Nephews' Beaujolais.
Eddie Duckworth smiled and sparkled and shone.
There was much laughter in both Breasbrough houses.
There were one or two guests that had been invited to both Breasbrough parties.
Northam is a small city, a parochial city.
Mrs Eddie Duckworth did not laugh, although she tried to smile.
She was not very good at smiling these days, and the unease disseminated by her unconvincing efforts led Eddie Duckworth to mutter to her in a corner, with a mixture of sharpness and sorrow, that perhaps she'd better go to bed.
He didn't know what had come over her, of late.
Shirley Harper, Liz Headleand's younger sister, was at none of  these parties, and had been invited to none.
She had been expected to invite people in.
This was now, at forty-two, her lot.
Though in the old days it had been she who had braved her mother's disapprobation and slipped out to enjoy herself, while her sister stuck grimly to her books and her duty and her long-term plans.
Shirley had been the rebel, the self-willed, the unappeasing.
She had lied and deceived, she had painted her lips with toxic red paint from a box of water colours or with the less toxic red dye of rationed Smarties, she had darkened her lashes with shoe polish and perfumed herself with sample offers of cheap perfume solicited through sycophantic correspondence with cosmetic manufacturers.
She had visited coffee bars with boys.
She had been to the cinema with boys.
She had left school against her mother's wishes, had married against her mother's wishes.
Yet while Liz, the good daughter, the dutiful daughter, was taking a deep hot bath on New Year's Eve before changing for her party, Shirley the rebel was serving up a hot meal for her mother in the old house in Abercorn Avenue before rushing back (without appearing to rush) to see what was happening in her own oven at home, where she was cooking a goose for her husband Cliff, his brother Steve and his wife Dora, her own mother- and father-in-law, and Dora's Uncle Fred.
While Liz was nibbling pistachio nuts, surveying dominions, Shirley, hot, red and angry (but not appearing to be angry) was listening yet once more to her mother-in-law's description of her digestive system and what the doctor had said about the swelling of her legs, a commentary which followed closely upon her complaints about the absence of her two older grandchildren who had (in Shirley's view very wisely) buggered off to a disco at Maid Marian's Nitespot.
‘In my day,’ she was saying, ‘New Year's Eve was a family evening, young people didn't just suit themselves.
We all used to be together on New Year's Eve, didn't we, Dad?’
Her husband, thus addressed, did not reply: he rarely did.
Since his second stroke he had found the effort of conversation hardly worth the meagre rewards.
Whatever he said was always ignored: for years, even when in health, he had been used by his wife as a ventriloquist's dummy, in support of an endless succession of mutually contradictory banalities, and whenever  he had risked an original or even a conciliatory remark he would be firmly rebuffed.
So now he sat there, his napkin tucked around his chin, smiling gently: a mild-natured, weak, weakened old man, loyal to his bully of a wife, glad to be included, glad Shirley hadn't found it all too much for her, grateful to sit there in the warmth of the nice oil-fired 1970s central heating.
It made a change.
He didn't get out much.
Steve replied for him.
‘Well, we're all together still, aren't we?’ said Cliff's brother Steve, with some asperity: he could have thought of better ways of spending the evening, given the choice.
‘Apple sauce?’ asked Shirley, who was dishing up, with her back to the table, from a hotplate on a trolley.
‘It all depends what you mean by family,’ said Dora's Uncle Fred, who tended to pedantry.
He looked round, moved his fork cautiously to a different angle on the best embroidered cloth.
‘I'm not family, strictly speaking.
Here courtesy of Dora.
And of our charming hostess, of course.’
‘Gravy?’ asked Shirley, and poured it on without waiting for an answer.
Family.
She had lacked family as a child: had missed it.
And now she'd got it with a vengeance.
The source of murder, battering, violence.
However had it happened?
‘Red cabbage?’ asked Shirley.
‘Red cabbage?
Red cabbage?
I thought it was sprouts.
We always have sprouts.’
An angry interjection from the oldest Mrs Harper.
‘It's sprouts as well,’ said Shirley.
‘I thought I'd do some red cabbage too.
As a change.’
‘He won't like it.
He won't want any.
He likes his red cabbage pickled.’
So pursued the oldest Mrs Harper.
Her husband smiled and nodded.
‘Yes,’ mused Uncle Fred, ‘families aren't what they were.
It's all this moving around the country.
Thank you, Shirley, that's grand.
By the way, Brian asked me to London again, but I thought I'd wait till the weather's better.’
‘All what moving about the country?’ asked Cliff, largely to avert further discussion of sprouts and red cabbage, which he could see was imminent from the suspicious manner in which his mother was turning over the vegetables on her heaped plate.
‘Oh, all this moving around for work.’
‘Go on,’ said Steve.
‘No one moves round here.
They stick fast, round here.
Never been south of Nottingham, half the folks round here.’
‘I think it's nice for the young folks to get out,’ said Fred.
‘I always encouraged my Brian.
I didn't want to stand in his way.’
Shirley smiled sourly to herself as she poured gravy.
Somebody was going to have to ask after Brian soon, ask what he was up to, how he was getting on, but nobody wanted to.
They resented Brian.
He had got away.
They hadn't even the satisfaction of knowing that he treated his poor old Dad badly, because all things considered, he didn't.
It was probably true that he'd asked him down to London.
‘Is that a clove?’ asked Mrs Harper, triumphant.
‘Yes,’ said Shirley.
‘The cabbage is delicious,’ said Dora, quickly.
She and Shirley exchanged glances.
‘And how's your mother, Shirley?’ asked Mrs Harper, carefully and conspicuously laying her clove on the side of her plate; taking the offensive.
‘She's much the same as ever,’ said Shirley.
‘Thanks.’
‘Pity she couldn't be with us,’ said Mrs Harper, dangerously: but Shirley hadn't the energy to fight back, she helped herself to a spoonful of sage and onion stuffing and sat down to begin her meal.
Those served earlier had nearly finished: they didn't believe in standing on ceremony, in the family.
They ate what was in front of them.
While it was hot.
‘She doesn't get out much,’ said Shirley flatly: a statement at once accurate and wonderfully, gloriously misleading: ‘she doesn't get out much ’, an acceptable phrase, a dull little coin, an everyday coin, suggesting a mild, an ordinary, a commonplace disinclination, for in Northam ‘getting out’was in many circles regarded as suspect, as improper, as leading to no good (those making merry in Breasbrough, for example, were undoubtedly up to no good)— a freak tolerated in the young, though with much grumbling, but considered dissolute, wayward, against nature in their elders.
‘She doesn't get out much ’, a phrase that Shirley had learned to use of her mother to forestall enquiry, impertinence, sympathy: a middle-aged phrase that she heard in her own voice as parody — indeed, she had noticed that when ‘the family’ gathered together all of them spoke in parodies of clichés, and some of them knew quite well that they were doing it.
Dora knew, Cliff knew, Fred knew.
And everybody there at that table knew that in the case of Shirley Harper's mother, the phrase ‘she doesn't get out much’ conveyed the distilled essence of a withdrawal so extreme that the term agoraphobia would hardly do it justice.
‘No, she doesn't get out much,’ she repeated, almost defiantly, wondering if her sister Liz would bother to ring their mother that night, and if she didn't, if it mattered.
What an extraordinary childhood they had survived.
Odd that both of them had turned out almost normal.
‘Her eyesight's not too good now,’ she continued, as though that might somehow render her mother's behaviour less odd, as though by mere words she could be converted into a harmless, ordinary, ageing old lady, just like other people's mothers.
And indeed, with old age, Rita Ablewhite was beginning to appear slightly less abnormal: behaviour strange in a healthy thirty-five-year-old was more acceptable at seventy.
‘She's even agreed to have Meals On Wheels,’ Shirley volunteered, as nobody else was saying anything.
‘That must take a bit of the burden off you,’ said Mrs Harper, lining up a peppercorn by the clove.
‘Oh yes it does,’ said Shirley.
‘It's a wonderful service, you know.’
This innocent remark, which Shirley had injudiciously thought platitudinous enough to pass without comment, stirred her brother-in-law Steve to speech: he launched into an attack upon the City Council and the high rates, an attack guaranteed to annoy Uncle Fred, upset his mild dumb father, and plunge his brother Cliff into the deepest financial anxiety.
It had been a bad year for Cliff, and it was as easy to blame the Council as anyone.
On they went, the men, talking men's talk of rates and the threatened steel strike and the Marxist lunatics at the Town Hall; of the closure of the Timperley works, of the three hundred made redundant at Brook and Partridge, of the folly of running courses of lectures at public expense in the Hartley Library on Nuclear Disarmament and Feminist Opportunities in Local Government.
‘It's disgusting,’ contributed Mrs Harper from time to time, presenting her flat, mean, worthless little counter simply because  she could not bear to remain silent, to sit back where others played, although she recognized herself temporarily outnumbered, ‘disgusting, I call it,’and Shirley, hearing this phrase for the millionth time, had a vision of households all over Britain in which censorious, ignorant old bags like her mother-in-law, who had never done anything for the public good, who had nothing positive ever to contribute to any argument, passed judgement on others while stuffing themselves with goose and roast potatoes and sprouts and apple sauce.
The backbone of the nation, the salt of the earth.
And there was poor Fred, speaking up for the reviled council block in which he, unlike any of the others, lived: ‘Nay, it's not that bad, it's a lot of it exaggeration,’ he interposed mildly, as Steve repeated the time-worn allegation that it wasn't safe to walk under the deck walkways for fear of having a television set or an old mattress chucked on your head: ‘Nay, it's not that bad at all.’
‘You'd have thought your Brian could have found you somewhere a bit more comfortable,’ interposed Mrs Harper, seeing her opportunity of introducing Brian to his disadvantage, ‘he must know a few folk, it's not only money that counts.…’
and her voice trailed away, as she simultaneously managed to imply that Brian had the Town Hall in the palm of his hand, and that he had enough money to buy his father a comfortable bungalow in a nice suburb whenever he felt like it.
Shirley watched Fred return Mrs Harper's grease-smeared, red-nosed gaze: affable, broad, patient, he stared at her, and wiped his mouth on his table napkin.
She could see his decision not to bother to try to explain that Brian hardly knew anybody in Northam Town Hall, and that Brian's salary as Head of Humanities at an Adult Education College hardly rose to paying his own mortgage, let alone to buying a house for his ageing father.
She applauded this decision.
It was not worth presenting reasoned arguments to Mrs Harper.
When they appeared before her, she shifted her ground, with an agility that occasionally suggested to Shirley that perhaps she was not after all impenetrably stupid, but on some dismal level quite intelligent.
‘Nay,’ said Fred, ‘I like it where I am, it suits me where I am, I wouldn't want to be moving at my age.
I've been in that block since it was built, it suits me fine.
There's a grand view, you know.
’ He looked at his niece Dora.
‘Your auntie  loved it.
We used to sit in the evenings and watch the lights come on.’
He looked back at Mrs Harper.
‘You ought to come and visit me one day.
You'd be surprised.’
Mrs Harper sniffed and moved her clove half an inch.
You could see she thought Fred had cheated by mentioning his dead wife: any minute now if she didn't watch her step he might drag in his dead daughter too.
The conventions prevented her from heaping any further abuse on Chay Bank, a housing project which she had frequently and loudly denounced, but near which she had never set foot: the precariousness of her own social position would forever prevent her from visiting Fred Bowen, and this yearly ritual meeting on neutral ground was as much as she would ever dare risk.
‘You'd be surprised,’ Fred insensitively urged.
‘My Brian's Alix thinks it's lovely.
She invited her Mum and Dad over from Leeds specially to have a look last time they were up here.
We had a very nice tea.’
Now that was almost cruel, thought Shirley, as she offered second helpings.
Fred had gone too far, had widened the discourse unfairly.
Alix, whom Brian had so unexpectedly married, represented a world beyond articulate resentment, too remote to attack.
Brian they could get at, but not Alix.
They didn't understand her well enough.
They didn't like her, but they didn't know why.
Celia Harper, youngest child of Shirley and Cliff, too young to be allowed to escape to the disco, sat silent throughout the meal.
She ate minimally.
Sometimes her lips would move slightly, as though she were repeating something to herself.
Nobody paid her any attention at all.
Shirley began to stack the plates.
Nobody wanted any more, which was just as well, as there wasn't much left and she couldn't face hacking at the carcase.
Cliff would never carve.
His father hadn't carved before him, so Cliff wouldn't carve.
Fatherless Shirley knew perfectly well that most British men carved, and that it was a bit of bad luck that she happened to have married into a family where the women were expected to wield the knife.
She wondered if her sister Liz carved.
Probably not.
That dreadful Charles would be brilliant at the job.
She wheeled the trolley into the kitchen, and took the  plum tart out of the oven.
The oven clock said it was only five to eight.
It felt like midnight, and they'd have to sit up till midnight.
She'd persuaded the old folk to eat far later than usual anyway and it was still only five to eight.
She wondered if there was any hope of getting them to play cards after supper instead of watching telly.
She herself would much, much rather play cards.
In the old days they all played cards.
They'd enjoyed a game of snap or whist or gin rummy.
But gradually, over the years, they had defected, as weak as the teenagers they so relentlessly criticized: they'd let the old ways lapse in order to slump like dummies in front of appalling chat shows and glimpses of the Sugar Plum Fairy and obsequious shots of the Royal Family and its corgis and babies, to goggle at old movies and new dance routines and to sit back sucking sweeties while sneering at pop stars and newscasters making fools of themselves at televised parties.
The medium had been too strong for them, they had taken to it like aborigines to the bottle.
Only her mother had resisted.
But her mother, of course, was mad.
Two hours later, as they sat watching an Irish comedian telling jokes that she herself considered quite unsuitable for family viewing, jokes that she hoped were incomprehensible to Celia and her grandparents, the telephone rang: it was her mother, to report that Liz had not telephoned.
‘Maybe she's waiting to ring later,’ Shirley said feebly, as a tide of rage with Liz, far away in distant London, washed through her: too absorbed in her own life, too selfish even to spend five minutes talking to her own mother.
‘She knows I don't stay up,’ said Rita Ablewhite.
‘She may ring later,’ repeated Shirley.
‘How was your chicken?’
A short silence ensued.
‘I said, how was your chicken?’
Shirley repeated.
She could hear the drone of the television from the sitting-room, the snores of her father-in-law, and her mother's deliberate silence at the other end of the line.
She could have murdered the lot of them, Irish comedian included.
‘Look, I've got to go now, I've got the kettle on for coffee,’ said Shirley.
‘The chicken was very nice,’ said her mother.
Half an hour later, the telephone went again.
It was for Fred, Fred's Brian.
‘Hello Brian,’ said Shirley, who was feeling marginally more cheerful, having managed to bring out the card-table in the midst of an argument about the relative demerits of the offerings on BBC and ITV.
‘Happy New Year, when it comes.’
‘And to you, Shirley,’ said Brian.
‘I'm not ringing too late, am I?
I thought you'd still be up.
Is Dad there?’
‘Yes, he is, I'll get him for you.’
She could hear a lot of background noise, the noise of life.
‘Are you having a party?’
‘No,’ said Brian, ‘we're not having a party, but I'm at one, I'm at your sister's.’
He laughed his big, round, comfortable but oddly high-pitched laugh: his inoffensive laugh, defusing the reference to Liz: the soul of tact, as ever, Brian: ‘I'm at Liz's, Alix would come.
Funny world, isn't it?
You're very good to my Dad, Shirley.’
‘Is it a good party?’
‘It's a very up-market party.
Champagne flows.’
‘How's Alix?’
‘She's fine.
And Cliff?’
‘Not so bad.
I'll get your Dad, shall I?’
‘Thanks a lot, Shirley.
I just thought I'd have a word with him.
The silly old bugger still won't have a telephone installed, you know.
Barmy, that's what he is.
That's what I tell him.’
Brian spoke with affection.
She heard its authentic note.
Brian could afford to be affectionate, from over a hundred miles away.
She went to get Fred, who was overcome with nervous confusion and pleasure.
He hated the telephone, it frightened him.
‘That you, Brian?
How are you, Brian?’ he shouted.
‘What's that?
What was that?’
Technological alarm deafened him.
‘What was that?
You spoke to Barbara?
What's that?
Did she really?
Happy New Year to you, love to Alix and Sammy.
Yes, I'll tell Dora.
What was that?
What was that?
What?’
Triumphant, he returned to the card-table.
‘That was my Brian,’ he announced, unnecessarily.
‘Fancy that.
He had a phone call from our Barbara in Australia.
Fancy that.
She told him to tell Dora she'd written to Auntie Flo to thank her for the cake.
She says why don't I go out there on a visit.
And I don't know that I won't.
You get that, Dora?
Barbara's written to Auntie Flo about the cake.’
And he picked up his hand of cards, and surveyed it with a bewildered distracted satisfaction.
‘Whose turn is it?’ he said.
‘Yours, of course,’ said Mrs Harper, grimly: so grimly that her reply seemed like wit.
‘Sorry all,’ said Fred, and threw away a club.
‘I don't fancy Australia, myself,’ said Dora.
‘My trick, I think.
They say it's very rough, Australia.’
She gathered in the cards, laid them neatly, criss-cross, upon her last gain.
‘It is a country with opportunities,’ said Steve: and off they went again, with their second-hand opinions, their echoes of overheard conversations, their phrases from advertisements and tabloid newspapers: and yet to Shirley there was perhaps something comfortable, despite all, something reassuring about the hands of cards, the button and matchstick money, the green baize of the table, the predictable, ancient jokes, the cigarette ends in the big red ashtray: there was safety here, of a sort, safety in repetition, safety in familiar faces and frustrations, and warmth of a sort, warmth and communion of a sort, society of a sort: the society she had discovered as a teenager, when she would slip surreptitiously out of the icy silence of Abercorn Avenue, where the clock ticked relentlessly on the kitchen wall, where Liz propped her textbooks against the Peek Frean biscuit tin on the kitchen table, where her mother sat in the front room listening to the radio, cutting up newspapers; she would let herself quietly out of the back door and creep down the passage, past the outside lav, through the back gate, round the corner, and then she would run for it, along Hilldrop Crescent, down The Grove, up Brindleford Drive, and across the main road at the lights to Victoria Street, where Cliff and Steve and their sister Marge lived.
Cliff and Steve and Marge were allowed to have friends in.
They even had a playroom of their own, an attic under the eaves.
A gang of them would meet there, graduating from Meccano and toy farms to risqué games of Dare, illicit cigarettes, speculation about sex.
Wildness and safety combined, Shirley had discovered there: they had made her welcome, they called her Shirl.
Spirited she was, in those days, and she played one boy off against another, teasing, bold,louche , at times wildly immodest, shocking, provoking, drooping a ciggy from her wide  wicked lip, dropping her blouse from bare shoulders, playing cards for forfeits, egging them on to experiment with Ouija, inventing naughty messages from the spirit world: how had she known these things, what models had she copied from films she had never seen, what spirit spoke through her, informing her impatient flesh?
Safety and danger, danger and safety.
‘A bad girl, that Shirley Ablewhite.’
Nobody ever said this, but she half hoped they would.
She had longed to be a bad girl in those post-war years, those austerity years.
But she couldn't quite manage it: she remained a nice girl, just this side of safety.
A nice girl.
A small, suspicious caution held her back: a small caution teased Cliff, teased Steve, teased her friends, kept them on a hook, watching, waiting, to see how far she dared go.
She was deceitful, was Shirley: downstairs, with Mr and Mrs Harper, she would be another girl, helpful, quiet, obsequious, prim, in her neat, absurdly old-fashioned blouses and skirts, her hair tied neatly back in bunches.
She liked her downstairs self too, she liked the unfamiliar familiarity, the bickerings and grievances, the small change of domestic life.
Cliff and Steve both fancied Shirley.
They watched her switch from the attic Shirley to the downstairs Shirley with appalled, enthralled admiration.
Her inventiveness astounded them.
She was the spirit of subversion.
Mr and Mrs Harper thought she was a very nice girl.
Sometimes, after acquisition of a television set in Coronation year, they would all watch television together.
Shirley had enjoyed that.
Mr and Mrs Harper had sat in their respective armchairs, Marge had sat on a red leather pouffe and she, Steve and Cliff had occupied the two-seater settee of the three-piece suite.
Cliff liked to get her in a corner but she liked to sit in the middle.
There, by small wrigglings and the exercise of will, she could encourage them both to insert their hands into different parts of her clothing, her body, sometimes simultaneously.
Steve's hand would cup her breast inside her blouse, while Cliff's would explore her suspenders, her knickers.
She learned to control these manoeuvres with great expertise.
The Harper parents never noticed, but continued to watch the programmes:What's My Line ,Down You Go ,Animal, Vegetable, Mineral?,
Twenty  Questions ,Science Review .
Shirley watched the programmes too, but was occasionally distracted by an intensity of experience that sometimes approached orgasm.
A communal event.
And her sister Liz sat at home, missing all the fun, deaf to the call of the flesh, with her Alternative Mathematics, her Chemistry and her Biology, wasting her youth, wasting her opportunities, obeying the will of their mother, programmed, docile, chaste, pale.
One autumn night, when Liz was preparing for Oxford and Cambridge entrance, Shirley had come home at ten from the Harpers', flushed from sexual excitement and from running through the cold streets under the yellowing smoke-scented suburban trees, her body on fire, and had found Liz still sitting where she had left her, two hours earlier, at the kitchen table, staring at the pale-green wall, as though in a catatonic trance.
Shirley had clattered noisily on the linoleum, had huffed and puffed and banged about, and finally had said with some passion, ‘You're barmy.’
And Liz had slowly swivelled her head round, and stared at her as though from a great way off, and had said dreamily, ‘If you really want something badly enough, do you think you get it?’
‘I haven't the faintest,’ said Shirley, taking off her outdoor shoes and putting them on the rack, putting on her indoor slippers, and guiltily, belatedly, bending down to wipe the shoe marks off the linoleum with spit and hanky.
She assumed her sister was referring to getting into Cambridge, which she herself considered a poisonous, disreputable fantasy, and one unlikely ever to be fulfilled: the number of girls who had achieved Cambridge places from Battersby Girls' Grammar in the last ten years could be counted on the fingers of one hand.
She sat back on her haunches, as the smear dried.
‘I don't know,’ she repeated, more solemnly, ‘I don't know if the amount of wanting has anything to do with the getting.’
‘It must have,’ said Liz, who sat there, burning, burning, eaten up with longing for worlds beyond her sister's guessing: a pale effigy, locked up in imaginings.
‘It must have,’ she sighed.
The imaginings were so potent that they took wing and rustled round the room, little winged souls, small bird-faced holy ghosts, emanations: the whole room was suddenly dense with the vibration of their rustling, the old-fashioned white tiles with their  rounded edges glinted with their reflections, the linoleum shimmered, the kitchen cupboards shook, the morbid whiteness and greenness of the paintwork quivered, the exposed pipes trembled and knocked.
The two girls held their breath, Liz sitting there with her mock examination papers, Shirley crouching by the shoe rack: their prison kitchen filled with presences.
These moments came, but they came rarely.
‘I think,’ Shirley said, softly, catching her sister's low, dreamy, drugged tone, ‘I think it has.
Yes, I think it has.
What we want, we do get.’
‘If we want, for example, eternity, we get it,’ said Liz.
‘Yes.
Or if we want this world, we get it.’
‘But we have to suffer for our wanting,’ said Liz.
‘Ah, that's what I can't stand, the suffering,’ said Shirley, jumping to her feet, her fifteen-year-old voice reasserting, boldly, frailly, the tones of elsewhere, of normality and new Birds Eye peas and modern kitchenettes, of television and hands fumbling inside brassières: ‘I can't stand the suffering, I won't suffer, I've had enough of suffering.’
Liz stared at her, coldly.
‘Then you won't get,’ she said.
‘You won't get.’
At this moment they heard their mother turn off the radio in the other room.
They looked at one another.
‘What if one suffers, and suffers, and suffers,’ said Shirley, deliberately, vengefully, ‘and doesn't get?
What then?’
And Liz had shaken her head in pain at the mystery in the next room.
And still that mystery in the front room continued, reflected Shirley on New Year's Eve 1979, as she examined the handsome features of the dangerous Queen of Spades, and wondered if the King had come out in the deal.
It was a little deaf, and a little blind, the mystery, and its only friend Miss Mynors was dead, but it continued.
On and on it went.
There was no mercy.
Whereas Liz, by some immense, visionary effort had invented her own mercy, under cover of obedience, had drawn up a secret map of escape, and had departed, and was now at this instant giving a party for hundreds of guests where champagne flowed.
How could these things be?
How could it be that Liz, so young, had known her way out of the maze?
Was it true that the mind  was wiser than the body?
Shirley took a risk and played her Queen, but Cliff had the King, and she lost the trick.
She must forgive Liz.
Liz was right to vanish, as the boys were right to congregate at the Maid Marian and avoid their grandmothers.
It was by her own choice that she sat here.
It was by her own choice that she had married Cliff, not Steve: it was she herself that had seduced Cliff, in a field of cow parsley on a May evening.
She had obeyed her body, she had opened her legs, had pulled him into her and said, Now, come, now.
What was, what could have been wrong about that?
She had thought to free herself, through nature, through the violence of nature.
But nature was cunning and had kept her trapped.
What did it want her for?
She had obeyed sex, she had trusted sex, she had loved sex, and it had betrayed her, had deceived her, had left her sitting here, a middle-aged housewife, mother of three, playing cards, with nothing before her but old age.
Was it so?
Could it be so?
How had it happened?
Was there maybe some other event, some other metamorphosis awaiting her?
Or was this it?
Shirley, sitting there mildly, the downstairs Shirley, thinking these thoughts, remembering the peremptory demands of the old, the attic Shirley, felt trembling in her, deep deep buried in her sitting-room centrally heated flesh, a wild improper memory, an admissible echo, the faintest thrill of a shudder of remembered desire: Shirley Ablewhite, the bad-good girl, called to her through the knot of her body, painfully, angrily, buried, buried alive, and Shirley Harper half heard her, bent her head, and acknowledged with mixed fear and relief the stirring, the tremor, the sulking, menacing, sweet and half despairing plea.
Cliff was winning.
His pile of matchsticks was considerable.
He had had a succession of good hands and won the kitty twice.
Now he was playing recklessly, sportingly, trying to let the others in, but he couldn't help winning, it seemed.
His mind wasn't on the game at all: it was on balance sheets and interest rates and VAT and cash flow and overdraft facilities.
Over-extended, that's what they were, too many orders and not enough money to buy the gear.
Borrow, said his partner Jim, borrow, but look at the price of borrowing.
Sums flitted through  his head as he won another unlikely trick with a paltry Knave.
Jim was all for going on, for expanding, for advancing rather than retreating, but Cliff was beginning to think that after all he hadn't the temperament for it, he couldn't stand the anxiety, he didn't enjoy the suspense: all he wanted was security, independence, freedom from worry, being his own man.
That was all.
Nothing too extravagant.
But it was true, what Jim said, in business you can't stand still, you go up or you go down, you can't just sit comfortably in your own 1972 executive four-bedroomed plate-glass-windowed centrally heated wall-to-wall-carpeted gadget-equipped house, with your Rover and your wife's Mini in the two-car garage, and your pot plants in your loggia, and your electric lawn mower in the shed: you can't sit still and enjoy it, you can't call it a day and call a halt when you own it all and don't owe anyone a penny, you have to go on and on, relentlessly onwards, juggling with larger and larger sums, owing more, paying out more, until finally perhaps the whole thing comes tumbling round your head like a pack of cards.
Jim was right: you had to go on.
Risks were part of the game.
He'd enjoyed them himself when he was younger.
Always ready to accept a challenge, his school reports had said.
It wasn't the hard work he minded, he liked work, he liked long hours, he didn't want to slack off: it was the anxiety he couldn't stand.
Where was it going to end?
Inflation made one run to stand still.
What if one ran and slipped backwards?
A nightmare world.
Maybe after all he'd have been better off like his Dad, quietly pushing papers round a desk in an office at the Gas Board for nine hours a day for nearly fifty years.
A living death, it had seemed to him and Jim, but maybe it hadn't been so bad.
It had been safe, at least.
They were still talking about Australia, the land of opportunity.
Fred's Barbara had gone out there with her bricklayer husband and now he had a building firm and employed ten men.
Cliff and Jim employed twenty, making screw-on wing-mirror attachments and assembling picnic sets.
‘It's coming up for midnight,’ said Shirley, with some relief, pointing at the quartz carriage clock on the mantelpiece.
They consulted watches, nodded agreement.
‘Somebody ought to go  out and come in again with a lump of coal,’ said Dora.
‘Isn't that what we usually do?’
‘We didn't last year,’ said Mrs Harper.
‘We forgot.
We were watching that Scottish comedian in Trafalgar Square on telly.’
‘A dark-haired man, it has to be,’ said Dora.
‘That's you, Steve.’
Cliff looked at Steve, ran his hands through his own hair, and said, ‘That's right, Steve.
I've got plenty left, but it's the wrong colour.
Yours is bearing up well.
Touch it up, do you?
What's that stuff called?
Grecian?’
Steve hit his brother playfully but rather hard on the shoulder.
‘Where's the coal, Shirley?’
‘We haven't got any coal.
Oil-fired, we are.’
‘What's the next best thing?’
‘Some people,’ said Shirley, ‘have those fake gas fires now, you know, they look like real coal fires, with lumps of stuff like real coal, and real ashes.
But it's all fake.
They're quite nice.
Something to look at.’
‘Go on, out you go, Steve,’ said Dora.
‘Take something black.
It's for luck.
You're to bring it in in a shovel.’
‘We never used to do this when I was a girl,’ said Mrs Harper.
‘Did they in your family, Dad?’
Her husband nodded and smiled, but whether he had heard the question or not, who could say.
‘What does it mean?’ said Shirley.
‘It's for luck,’ said Dora.
‘First footing.
It's for luck.’
‘They do it up in Newcastle,’ volunteered Fred.
‘It's a Geordie custom, I've heard say.
Go on, Steve, we could all do with a bit of luck.
Out you go.’
And Steve obediently went off, taking with him a jar of Marmite in a garden trowel as a substitute for coal in a shovel, and he stood out there on the front porch in the cold listening to the silence and looking at the stars, waiting for them to let him in on the last stroke of Big Ben on the radio: a faint, feeble echo of some once meaningful ritual, though what it had meant or now could mean nobody there knew or had ever known.
And thus, all over Northam, all over Britain, ill-remembered, confused, shadowy vestigial rites were performed, rites with origins lost in antiquity; Celtic, Pict, Roman, Norse, Anglo-Saxon, Norman, Elizabethan, Hanoverian, Judaic rites: mistletoe dangled from drawing-pins  and picture rails, golden stars shone on the Christmas Trees of Prince Albert and geese and haggis and hams lay heavy on the digestion of some, while others laughed themselves silly or sick on rum and coke at the Maid Marian New Year's Superdisco.
Steve Harper, haulage contractor, stood outside alone for a grateful crisp smokeless moment of silence, and when they opened the door to him a strange shadow of the night sidled in with him from prehistory.
Shirley Harper touched the locket at her throat, for luck, a superstition she had had since childhood.
‘Happy New Year,’ they said to one another, inadequately, shivering a little .
Something was absent, yet something was present.
The shadow filled the corners of the broad bright hallway.
A pitiful exhalation, an obscurity, a memory.
A homeless ghost.
The eight-year-old house perched precariously on the raw earth, amongst other isolated, precarious, detached houses, their lights shining on the dark hillside.
No one had lived on that hillside for nineteen centuries.
The Brigantes had held it once, against the Romans, but they had retreated to the mountains and left it to gorse and the bracken.
And so it had remained until the scoops and cranes and bulldozers of 1970s Post-Industrial Man had moved in to uproot the scrub and to build the suburb known as Greystone Edge.
A few Bronze Age artifacts were turned up in the dark soil, but they had meant nothing to those who had seen them, and they had been turned back into the earth.
Here Venutius, leader of the Brigantes, had crouched in the night by his camp fire dwelling on the treachery of his faithless queen Cartimandua, who had sold her people to the Romans.
A tragic theme.
Here the Harper clan gather, a small tribe, frail, ageing, on the threshold of 1980, in the presence of the sky: here thirteen-year-old Celia, young, aspiring, judgemental, reflects upon the past, as, long after her usual bedtime, she looks up at the stars and plots her own future.
On the threshold of Brock Bank the Harpers gather, bidding one another good night beneath the moon.
What obscure blood runs in their veins?
Who could have drawn the roots, the branches, the fibres, the tendrils that have fed them and bound them?
Ancestral voices whisper from the young dry garden hedge, as Steve starts up his Ford Cortina.
Shirley keeps her finger on her locket which rests on her throat like a warm stethoscope.
She thinks of her mother.
She  thinks of her father, whom she has never known, of whom she knows nothing, almost nothing, but whose image, it is alleged, is in that locket: an image which also hangs in an identical locket at this moment around her sister's neck.
A prized possession.
Shirley is tired, fatigue has overwhelmed anxiety and desire: she hopes her two boys will come home soon, and go to bed quietly.
She waves goodbye.
In 8, Abercorn Avenue, Rita Ablewhite lies in bed in the dark.
She is not asleep.
She is waiting for the clock downstairs to strike twelve.
When it strikes, she will shut her eyes.
When she was a girl, at midnight on New Year's Eve, she could hear the steam trains' celebratory whistle beyond the crossing down Station Road.
Now she hears nothing but the sounds of her own house.
When she was a girl, she could lie in bed and hear her mother and father talking in the next room.
When she was a young woman, she could hear distant laughter down long corridors, as she lay in her bed.
Now she hears nothing but the sounds of her own house.
And she does not hear them as well as she did once.
She lies there in the dark, with her eyes open, keeping watch.
When Liz Headleand woke on the first day of 1980 and found herself in bed with her husband, she remembered instantly the scene of the night before, and wondered how she could ever have been so upset by it.
Lying there at seven o'clock in the morning, suddenly wide awake, as was her manner, it seemed to her quite obvious that she and Charles should get divorced: it had surely long been inevitable, and if Charles really wanted to marry that woman (or had he perhaps been joking ?— no, perhaps not), well then, let him.
She had plenty to get on with meanwhile.
Why ever had she taken it so badly?
She had an embarrassed recollection of having burst into tears, of demanding to know how long the affair with Henrietta had been going on.
I must have been tired, she said to herself reasonably.
Tired and a little drunk.
All those people in the house.
That's what it was.
Charles was still heavily asleep.
Unlike her, he was not good in the mornings.
He lay solidly.
She left him there, and went to have  a bath: dressed briskly, went downstairs to inspect the damage, had a coffee, looked at her list for the day.
It was New Year's Day, Bank Holiday, but, bizarrely, for her a working day.
She had to attend a conference at the Metropole Hotel organized by a group of Japanese psychoanalysts and psychotherapists.
They did not recognize the British calendar, or, indeed, she was later to discover, their own: their first choice of conference date had been Boxing Day, but from this they had been dissuaded.
The group were admirers of the dissident English Freudian, Jay Spenser, who was unaccountably famous in Japan: they had invited Liz to give a paper on Theseus and the Minotaur: Spenser's Version of the Family Romance .
She wondered what they would make of it as she got out the vacuum cleaner and started to run it over the drawing-room carpet.
Would they understand her?
Would she understand them?
Foster children, stepchildren, institution children.
She had no idea of how these patterns were formed in Japan, nor why the Japanese should have any interest in her paper, or in Karl Auerbach's, or Gertrude Feinstein's.
Stepchildren.
What would her own stepchildren say to her divorce from their father?
The vacuum cleaner ran smoothly, efficiently over the rich dark-yellow pile, collecting cigarette ash, canapé crumbs, scattered bulb fibre; her mind sang with a faint clear high-pitched hum like a well-serviced machine.
She listened to it with an expert ear.
It sounded all right, but was there something slightly odd about the tuning, some as yet almost imperceptible new thin whine?
She tested it with the concept of Henrietta, and yes, undoubtedly it responded, changing its frequency to an angry buzz before returning to its smooth hum.
Henrietta.
Zezeee, zezeeee.
Henrietta.
Zezeeee, zezeeee.
Like stepping on an accelerator.
The buzz of jealousy.
But how could one be jealous of a stick, a statue?
The vacuum cleaner, sensing her lack of concentration, took advantage of it to munch and slaver up a long strand of rug fringe: there was a smell of burning rubber.
Shit, said Liz, she knelt down to unwind it.
She had learned bad language from her stepsons.
She struggled with the string of rug.
Would they continue to be her stepsons, if she and Charles were to divorce?
Would they become the stepsons of Henrietta?
Of course they would.
Rage possessed her and her mind zinged furiously, smelling of burning rubber.
She did not worry about  Sally and Stella: they were hers, her blood and body, for ever.
But Jonathan, but Aaron, but Alan.
Her boys, and not her boys.
What was her claim to them now?
What sudden right had Henrietta Latchett to her three boys?
Calm down, calm down, she told herself, they are all grown up, they need neither of you, this has nothing to do with them, they will not even notice.
But rage continued.
The buzz of jealousy.
So this was it.
She had seen something of it professionally, and had thought herself exempt.
For her predecessor, Naomi, she had felt none.
It had not been required.
Naomi Headleand, who had been killed so tragically, so tragically young, when driving herself quietly and soberly home from Glyndebourne one night.
Young, beautiful, innocent, rich, she had, it was claimed, been killed instantly when an oncoming overtaking car had lost control and collided, head-on, with hers.
She had died instantly, of internal, invisible injuries.
When the police arrived, ten minutes later, her car was still singing: from the radio swelled the fifth symphony of Sibelius, representing eternity.
Where could jealousy enter here?
A young, a beautiful, a fairy-story mother, dying with the greatest of grace, as immortality asserted itself and pledged its reassurance in the night air of her departure.
A potent myth, but a friendly one.
Liz had felt herself to be close to Naomi, as she nursed Naomi's children, slept with Naomi's husband, took tea or sherry with Naomi's parents, helped to form the childish letters which her stepchildren wrote to Naomi's parents thanking them for presents, for outings.
She had never met Naomi in her life, but in death she grew to love her: she had taken her into herself, had learned her likings, had read her books and tried (although not herself musical) to listen to her music, she had spoken much of her to the children, had insisted upon treating her as an ally, as a friend beyond the grave, had reinvented her and kept her close to them — oh, not without awareness of the dangers, of the necessary distortions and consolations, but then all life is danger, and Liz had embarked willingly upon its full tide with those three small boys, with that ambitious, importunate widower and that friendly ghost.
A great adventure, a fitting enterprise for one who had known herself from infancy to be set apart for some rare destiny, and one that she had thought herself to have pursued courageously, successfully, with a redeeming  love that had rescued even the anguished, complex, hostile Aaron, and had saved him from his wilder flights.
How magically her love for the boys had developed into, contrasted with, reinforced her different but equally powerful passion for her daughters: how strange but inevitable had appeared the five-pointed constellation of their heroic family.
Accomplished.
Yes, well, perhaps that was the point.
She collected glasses on a tray.
She picked a dying leaf from a branchy green-pink flecked begonia.
She answered the telephone, thanked the Martellis for thanking her for the party.
She would look for their gloves, would ring back if she found them.
She restacked the dishwasher.
The whole house was still sleeping, although it was half past nine.
She read the paper.
She was not due at the Metropole until twelve.
She would walk there.
The morning gaped, endless.
She switched on the radio and switched it off again.
She heard Charles move across the landing to his own room and run a bath.
Of course they should divorce.
She had often thought of it herself, had once or twice in low or high moments suggested it.
But was nevertheless outraged, outraged, that the suggestion should have come from Charles.
Had he meant it?
Yes, he had meant it, she had no doubt.
It was up to her, quickly, to forge herself a manner that would give her an advantage in whatever negotiations were to come: and she had done so, by the time he came down for his breakfast.
She greeted him with a pot of coffee and a brisk, slightly mocking, offhand smile.
She would treat him as a delinquent, a time-waster, a bad child, whose offences could only be petty.
She would refuse to allow that the matter was serious, or that its consequences could affect her profoundly.
A minor irritation.
Yes, that was the line.
But it did not, she found, come very naturally to her.
Breakfast was not pleasant.
They spoke of indifferent things, but her mind, resenting too tight a control, kept whining away with its own questions.
What would happen to the house?
Whose house was it, anyway?
Legally, morally?
What would the children think?
What would Edgar think?
What would the world think?
What was it like, life in the 1980s for a woman on her own?
How much would it devalue her?
Whatever could a man like Charles see in Henrietta?
What had been lacking in her that he had found in Henrietta?
What had she done wrong?
Should she feel guilt?
Should she feel shame?
What would her solicitor say?
Was it true that she had neglected Charles, as he sometimes claimed?
She had always thought he was joking.
How could one neglect a man who was never there?
Was he never there because she had neglected him?
And these questions pursued her, buzzing like mosquitoes, as she walked up Marylebone High Street with her briefcase, as she crossed the Edgware Road, as she joined the conference group for sherry in the Westminster Suite, as she discovered that Edgar had rightly warned her that conversing with Japanese was not easy, as she ate her indifferent luncheon of Maryland chicken, as she listened to Professor Yamamoto speak on Spenser's reinterpretation of Freud's interpretation of folie à deux in the classic case of Orphan Eva and her mother, as she delivered her own paper, as she attempted desperately to follow the ensuing discussion, of which she could grasp only one word in ten: all through this crazy jumble of non-language and misunderstanding, of erudition and impenetrable obscurity, of meaningless signs and uninterpretable eye contact, the mosquitoes buzzed and nipped and drew blood.
By six, at the end of the session, she was exhausted, demoralized.
She took a taxi home.
She felt herself, beneath the pricks and stings, to be growing ill.
Charles had made her ill.
She needed comfort, reassurance.
She would ring Alix.
She would tell Alix.
She knew that in speaking to Alix her voice would find its normal level, her mind would return to its normal tuning.
She could rely on Alix.
But when she got back and dialled Alix's number, Alix was out.
Liz replaced the receiver and tried to keep calm, but she could feel panic, fever, tears approaching.
Charles had gone out.
To see Henrietta, to his club?
He had left no word.
She sat in her study and stared at the telephone.
If I were my patient, she asked herself, would I prescribe myself a tranquillizer?
Is this what people feel like when they request tranquillizers?
She rang Esther.
Esther too was out.
She went back into the drawing room and poured herself a whisky and soda.
She switched on the television.
Alix Bowen was out because for her, too, New Year's Day was a working day, of sorts.
She had to go to the Garfield Centre, where  she taught one day a week, to see the inmates perform their Christmas entertainment.
She had promised to go.
They would be angry with her if she did not go.
But when she got into the car at five, ready for the fifteen-mile drive across London, it wouldn't start.
The battery felt flat.
It clicked and died on her.
No life in it at all.
It hadn't been such a cold night, what had happened?
She did not understand cars.
She sat there crossly.
There was absolutely no way of getting from Wandsworth to Wanley except by car, or none that did not involve at least four methods of public transport.
It was not easy even by car.
In fact, it was a ridiculous journey, and one that annoyed her regularly once a week.
The car had been behaving all right the night before, when Brian had driven them back from Liz's.
It always behaved for Brian.
She switched it on again.
A faint but more hopeful splutter, this time.
She switched off, quickly.
She would have to get Brian.
Brian wouldn't mind being got, but he would laugh.
Her feet were cold.
Perhaps she would put on another pair of socks.
But it was always so hot, in the Centre.
Brian did laugh.
He patted her on the shoulder, then he hugged her, and laughed.
‘You look so miserable,’ he said.
‘It's wonderful.
It's only a car.’
‘I know it's only a car,’ she said, peevishly, shifting from one foot to another on the damp pavement.
‘And it won't bloody well start.
What's the point of a car that won't start?’
It started at once, for Brian.
They listened to it.
It sounded perfectly well, for Brian.
‘There you go,’ he said, getting out, putting his arm round her.
‘I'm a fool,’ she said.
‘We're all fools,’ said Brian.
‘It's a foolish world.’
‘You're not a fool,’ said Alix.
‘You're a saint.’
‘No, you're the saint,’ he said.
‘And you look very nice in your new woolly hat.
Off you go, they'll be howling for you.’
‘Don't forget about the boiled potatoes.’
‘I've got plans for those potatoes.’
‘Fry-up plans?’
‘That sort of thing.’
‘I'll see you later.’
‘Drive carefully.’
And off she went, driving carefully, through South London, and east, and under the river, and north, and up the A113, towards the Garfield Centre, thinking of Brian frying up the cold boiled potatoes for himself and their son Sam, chopping parsley, frying eggs and bacon, delicious; Brian handled the frying pan as confidently as he handled the car, eggs never broke for Brian, he had a firm grasp of the material world, of pan handles and gear levers and of her own warm body, of garden spades and wayward boilers, of carving knives and power drills and saws and scissors and invisible screws; he treated all these things as his friends and allies, an Ideal Husband, she sometimes teased him: and yet, and yet, he spent his days and his nights teaching abstractions, he spent his time with words, words, words.
To this he had aspired.
How could it be otherwise?
From paradox to paradox we travel, onwards, from ourselves.
And what on earth was she herself playing at, crossing the urban wastes so regularly to teach a bunch of delinquent girls, a bunch of criminals, for £15.60 a night?
It hardly covered the petrol.
It probably didn't cover the petrol, if she sat down to work it out, which she didn't.
What an ill-organized, hotchpotch, casually assembled, patchwork life.
Everything seemed to have happened by accident, even the things that lasted.
Her job at Garfield, her three days a week in Whitehall, the house in Wandsworth, her furniture, Sam's school, a series of accidents.
None of it had been intended.
She could have done such things.
But she had always been, it seemed, too busy to stop and take stock, too busy to plan, too busy to rationalize.
However did people manage to discipline themselves and stick to a single line for long enough to gain control, to come out on top, to become the boss instead of the employee?
At Liz's party, last night, there had been bosses: Charles himself was an archetypal boss, and if one didn't know Liz so well one might think she was one too.
That chap Lazenby appeared, improbably, to be a boss, despite his glaring character defects.
Of course, Brian himself was a boss, if one counted being Head of Humanities in a poorly funded and now much-threatened Adult Education Institute as being a boss.
One couldn't so count it, in her view.
He employed nobody, he was employed, and precariously employed at that.
Not even his so-called students thought of him as a figure of authority.
But at least Brian had a job with a name.
Whereas I scurry aimlessly from this  to that, thought Alix, as she drove through the dark evening: they block one path, I try another, and so it goes on, thought Alix, who at times thought no such thing, and was not thinking it now with much conviction.
It was the car that had annoyed her.
But the car now proved obedient, and the north-east London suburbs received her, soothing her as they usually but not invariably did with their eloquent monotony, their repetitive regularities, street after street of semi-detached houses, their lights lit, their curtains drawn, their television sets humming, their inhabitants safe within.
An orderly life on either side of the dual carriageway, the illusion of an orderly life.
In spring there would be pink blossom at regular intervals.
Nice, quiet, safe, dull, desirable.
Desirable residences.
How the owners of these desirable residences had complained ten years ago when they found that the Garfield Centre was going to be built in their neighbourhood.
Nobody wants prisoners or lunatics on their doorstep, and there had been a well-fought campaign to demonstrate that the women of Garfield would be both prisoners and lunatics.
Even an optimist like Alix found people depressing when they revealed themselves in this manner.
She made excuses for them, but she found them depressing.
Mile after mile, ribbons of roads.
What was going on, behind those closed curtains?
Were people peacefully frying up potatoes, or were they hitting one another on the head with their frying pans?
Alix liked to let her mind wander over the map of Britain, asking herself which interiors she could visualize, which not.
She aspired to a more comprehensive vision.
She aspired to make connections.
She and Liz, over supper together, often spoke of such things.
Their own stories had strangely interlocked, and sometimes she had a sense that such interlockings were part of a vaster network, that there was a pattern, if only one could discern it, a pattern that linked these semi-detached houses of Wanley with those in Leeds and Northam, a pattern that linked Liz's vast house in Harley Street with the Garfield Centre towards which she herself now drove.
The social structure greatly interested Alix.
She had once thought of herself as unique, had been encouraged (in theory at least) by her education and by her reading to believe in the individual self, the individual soul, but as she grew older she increasingly questioned these concepts: seeing people perhaps more as flickering impermanent points of light irradiating stretches, intersections, threads, of a vast web, a vast network, which was humanity itself: a web of which much remained dark, apparently but not necessarily unpeopled: peopled by the dark, the unlit, the dim spirits, as yet unknown, the past and the future, the dead, the unborn: and herself, and Brian, and Liz, and Charles, and Esther, and Teddy Lazenby, and Otto and Caroline Werner, and all the rest of them at that bright party, and in these discreet anonymous dark curtained avenues and crescents were but chance and fitful illuminations, chance meetings, chance and unchosen representatives of the thing itself.
We are all but a part of a whole which has its own, its distinct, its other meaning: we are not ourselves, we are crossroads, meeting places, points on a curve, we cannot exist independently for we are nothing but signs, conjunctions, aggregations.
Liz and Alix sometimes talked of this vision.
Liz had a more robust notion of the self, and took another line on the individual's place in the structure.
Each suspected the other (each suspected) of personal, biographical reasons for arguing the case that each, by and large, argued: and the difference between them was in itself odd, as in the great graph of time and place their paths had oddly crossed and oddly coincided.
How strange it was, after all, that Alix out of the whole of Britain should have married Brian Bowen whose father was the uncle of Liz's sister-in-law.
Or was this perhaps not odd at all?
Alix was not sufficiently numerate to be able to calculate the odds against such an apparently odd relationship, though she could not help but feel that its component, accidental parts were startlingly combined.
Was there, could there be, a computer that could work out these things?
That could prove, perhaps, that it was yet more odd that Liz's sister's sister-in-law had not met and married, for instance, Teddy Lazenby?
She must ask Otto Werner of this one day: Otto had a new passion for computers, and loved to speculate on their possibilities.
Otto's wife Caroline, for instance, was alleged to be Edgar Lintot's cousin, though this had not emerged in the days when Liz Ablewhite had been briefly married to Edgar Lintot.
At the thought of Caroline Werner, a small shadow of anxiety crossed  over Alix's party recollections: the Werners were corning to dinner with the Bowens the following week, and what should she give them to eat?
Otto did not care, did not notice what he ate, which was rather a waste, really, as Caroline Werner was a first-class cook, and wrote cookery books.
Alix found this daunting, although Caroline took great pains not to daunt, and was on other, non-culinary matters, a perfectly acceptable non-competitive person.
But the knowledge of Caroline's expertise hung heavily, at times, on Alix: heavily, too, hung the knowledge that Caroline was such an unpretentious, agreeable woman that she would be quite happy to eat a plateful of fried-up boiled potatoes, parsley, bacon and scrambled eggs.
Liz had sidestepped the problem, last night, with caterers, and with Deirdre Kavanagh.
Alix could not have afforded this solution, and would have thought it cheating had she been able to afford it, although she thoroughly despised herself for these scruples.
Female roles, female inadequacies, parties, social life.
Liz's chandelier had glittered bravely.
Gatherings, glitterings, a faint perfume.
How had Liz managed it, this assembly?
It was against the laws of nature, unnatural.
Alix arrived at the gates, at the high wall, with its discreetly disguised barbed wire, at the porter's lodge.
There was Stanley, one-handed Stanley, hook-handed Stanley, listening in his little hut to his radio.
Stanley loves music, as he often says.
A Viennese waltz drifted into the January night.
Stanley greeted her, wished her a Happy New Year, glanced perfunctorily at her pass, admitted her.
Alix drove on to the staff car park, as Technicolor Viennese figures in ball gowns, wearing ruby pendants, flowered corsages, turned in her mind, in a scene that derived less from Vienna (where she had never been) than from Tolstoy's descriptions of balls in War and Peace .
Once long ago, Otto Werner's father had danced with Esther Breuer's mother, on New Year's Eve, in Vienna, in 1925: but neither of them remembers the incident, and therefore, perhaps, it does not exist?
What computer, what analysis, could ever retrieve it?
Alix's godmother, also named Alix, had once been to a ball in Vienna.
Alix herself had been to a May Ball or two in Cambridge, in her dancing days.
These are now over, thank God, she thinks, as she makes her way towards the discreetly locked, discreetly monitored side gate.
The temperature is high in Garfield on Tuesday, 1 January 1980.
Here it is party time, here also there is glitter.
Alix could feel the heat at once, embodied in more than the pink and green balloons, the paper chains, the tinsel.
Garfield, of all the institutions in which she had ever worked, was most responsive to mood, to atmosphere; it shifted and changed from day to day, from week to week, for it had, like the larger society of her larger imagining, its own corporate, its own embodied spirit, all the more powerful for its caging, its high barbed wire, its high walls.
On some evenings, the place was dull, impassive, stifled, solid with boredom: on some evenings it grumbled ominously, with violence, waiting for Lights Out; on some evenings it was studious, attentive, solemn; and on other evenings, like this, it sang with a high, sweet, feverish erotic intensity, a claustrophobic glamour, an emotional throb.
This was a sweet evening.
Alix found herself embraced, caressed, her hand held, her hair stroked, her new striped woolly hat with its purple bobble extravagantly admired.
These liberties were permitted.
This was a liberal regime, the only regime of its kind in the country.
Sometimes Alix shook off the liberties irritably, but tonight she submitted, responding to the petting, intimate, female warmth; she kissed and was kissed, she thanked them for their Christmas cards, she wished them a Happy New Year, she shook hands with the older women, she laughed and felt safe with her friends, she made no effort to repel their eager affection.
(It did not always go this way: sometimes they sulked and abused her, sometimes they threatened her and one another, sometimes they would not attend class.)
The wardens, Eric and Hannah Glover, welcomed her with more restraint but equal friendliness and introduced her to a man from the Home Office who had come to visit — well, to inspect, in effect, but the mood was holiday, informal, and the man from the Home Office smiled with the rest of them.
There were sandwiches and cups of coffee.
The half-hour's entertainment was due to begin at eight thirty: some relatives, waiting now patiently in the hall, had been admitted, but were not allowed backstage to mingle.
Freedom, but not too much freedom.
Some of those taking; part were already in costume: Jilly Fox was wearing what looked like an Iranian chadour, contrived from a sheet, Karen Gray was dressed up as a nurse, and Bob  Saxby who taught pottery was encased in a Michelin-man spacesuit which he claimed was an Arctic explorer's sleeping bag.
‘Imagine, man, trying to kip in this,’ he kept asking, to anyone who would listen, as he demonstrated the inconvenience of his garb.
Innocent, innocent, like schoolchildren, the thieves and murderers.
Toni Hutchinson stroked Alix's arm, possessively, affectionately, wheedling out of her the story of the party of the night before: ‘So you wore your blue dress?
And did you put your hair up?
Did it stay up?’
She liked to tease Alix about her hair, which was forever wispily descending from its large wooden slide: Toni's own curled neatly in angelic dyed blonde braids, and sometimes on request she had given Alix lessons in hair management, but Alix could not, would not learn.
The entertainment reminded Alix of the end-of-term pantomime at school, a regular feature of her own girlhood.
The same rows of uncomfortable chairs, the same improvised curtains, the same primitive lighting effects, the same take-off versions of popular songs, the same in-jokes, the same attempts at topicality, the same satirical renderings of figures of authority.
One girl produced a more than passable imitation of Hannah Glover's dress and mannerisms, in a sketch in which the pseudo-Hannah reprimanded a contrite inmate for ‘smoking in the bog’: the shapeless woolly cardigan over the wrongly buttoned blouse, the broad-seated tweed skirt, the slipping petticoat, the spectacles constantly removed and polished on the slipping petticoat and replaced, the sensible shoes, one with a trailing shoelace, the repeated exhortation to ‘help us to help you’, the earnest smiling and the short-sighted blinking, the flat Midlands accent.
Cruel, a little, but not savage: Alix could see Hannah smiling gamely, taking it in good part, and wondered if she was also taking in the rather subtle sub-text of allusions to drugs other than nicotine.
One could never tell how blind Hannah's blind eye really was.
It was Eric's turn next: his presenter appeared in jogging track suit, and false beard, and needed to do little more than puff heavily round the stage several times intoning ‘no, not on the roof, no, not on the roof, to bring the house down, rousing laughter even from those who did not know that these were the mysterious words that the Warden had uttered in a loud cry when abruptly roused from slumber during a session of group therapy.
One of  two of the visiting psychiatrists were brought forth in a psychiatric chorus, singing in psychobabble: Bob Saxby was presented giving a learned discourse on the nature of the pot, insisting reassuringly in a phrase that needed no exaggeration, so frequently was it heard from him in real life, that ‘a few irregularities add charm to a pot’.
An example of a charming pot was produced, to much mirth.
Alix herself was not mimicked, or not that she could see: she did not know whether this was a sign of affection, contempt, or indifference.
Jilly Fox did a rather well-informed feminist sketch comparing the chaplain's sexist attitudes to those of the Ayatollah: it wasn't very funny and the chaplain was not amused, although he wisely pretended to be.
Then Jilly cast off her chadour and sang, a plaintive rendering of ‘The Winter of Seventy-Nine’, and suddenly, as happens on these occasions, the knockabout mood changed, people stopped laughing, tears stood in eyes, as Jilly's harsh, grating flat voice lamented the year and deplored the future, as her white, beaky, angry face gazed fiercely at the audience, as the confined energy of months swelled up in self-pity around the room, orchestrated by Jilly's incantation:
All you kids that just sit in line,
You should have been there back in seventy-nine.
sang Jilly:
In the winter of seventy-nine,
When all the gay geezers got put inside,
The coloured kids were getting crucified,
A few fought back and a few folks died,
Yes, a few of us fought, and a few of us died,
In the winter of seventy-nine,
Back in seventy-nine,
sang, angrily, menacingly, Jilly Fox.
Jilly Fox had been educated at an expensive boarding-school.
She was doing time for several rather serious drug-related offences.
She was having an affair with Toni Hutchinson of the blonde braids, who was the daughter of a pharmacist in Hendon.
Jilly had passed her A level in English Literature the summer before, having notably failed to acquire any qualifications except  a pass in O level Divinity at her expensive school: now she was hoping to qualify for a course at the Open University.
Jilly Fox had once said bleakly to Alix Bowen on a bad evening that her release would be the death of her.
Alix feared this might be true.
Alix, driving home, thought that Hannah Glover probably had been rather hurt, despite her appearance of good humour.
She was vulnerable, still, after years of inevitable disappointments, years of failure.
She said she liked to think that the younger women looked on her as a mother, but of course they didn't: they found her faintly ridiculous, old-fashioned, gullible, naive.
She would never have been able to operate without her husband Eric, who for all his bluff and jolly manner was in practice a hard man, a no-nonsense man, who sent trouble-makers back where they came from, into the main prison system, without any heart-searchings or regrets.
Maybe, thought Alix, that mild, concerned approach of Hannah's is all a front, devised between them over the years, consciously or unconsciously, to mediate, to palliate, to distract attention?
Her own parents had played such a game, but in their case it was her father who had played the mild, the foolish role.
God, what a fool he had been, was.
Many times during the past evening he had returned to her, in ludicrous, colourful, brightly painted effigy, all his embarrassments clustered and clanging round him, all his mannerisms protruding, projected, enhanced: the sharp red nose, the usually broken bifocal spectacles, the striped woolly lunch-spattered waistcoats, the bald shining brown freckled Professor Branestawm brow, the pockets full of string, the green socks and brown sandals, the little pedantries, the favourite quotations, the antiquarian commentary, the hydrometer, the tufts of hair in his ears, the batty, potty, dotty, hurt, persistent grin.
Dotty Doddridge, Deputy Head, French teacher.
What a buffoon, what a butt, what a caricature.
How she had suffered for him, for her poor pitiable ridiculous father, how she had hated her cruel peers for their relentless mocking, how she had dreaded each Christmas pantomime, each school-leavers' farewell, each assembly that she knew her father was due to conduct, each occasion on which she heard him open his mouth in public.
The disorder, the whisperings, the giggles, the open contempt!
And her mother, in revenge, in reaction, brusque, tart, offhand, cutting, feared, fearing and avoided, uneasily detached, dismissively remote.
Large conspicuous wooden figures, Dotty and Dolly, and beneath their knees skulked little Alix Doddridge, creeping quietly, smiling obsequiously, keeping a low profile, longing to be ordinary, longing with such passion to be unnoticed, to be accepted, to be one of the crowd, not Dotty's Daughter, with all that that implied.
Ah well, her parents were old now, and retired, and nobody thought them funny any more: indeed, it was only the intensely conventional world of a Yorkshire boarding-school that had made them seem so eccentric in the first place.
They were now revealed as what they had always been, not figures of fun, not left-wing political extremists, not loony vegetarians (though they were vegetarians), but harmless, mild, Labour-voting, CND-supporting, Fabian pamphlet-reading intellectuals, of a species that Alix now knew to be far from extinct.
Odd, though, that they had once seemed so odd, so isolated, for the school at which Dotty Doddridge vainly endeavoured to teach French had been non-conformist, faintly progressive, certainly egalitarian in its religious and social complexion: it had offered a liberal, secularized, healthy coeducation, and had on its foundation in the 1860s set out to attract the children of vegetarians, Quakers, freethinkers, pacifists, Unitarians, reformers.
Its academic success had been such that it had become progressively less progressive, its original zeal swamped by the fee-paying prosperous solid Northern conservatism of parents and offspring: it had become a bastion of respectability, its one-time principles upheld by stray survivors like Doddridge, who appeared blithely not to notice that at election time the entire school, with one or two flamboyant exceptions, howled its enthusiasm for the Tory Party.
A rum evolution, Alix had often thought, though it had not seemed strange at the time: what had then seemed strange, in her girlhood, had been her parents' quaint socialist ideals, which had caused her such embarrassment, and, partly because of that embarrassment, had inspired in her such undeviating loyalty.
‘I say, does your Dad really vote Labour?’ had been one of the politer questions addressed to her at elections and other periods of heightened political interest.
My Dad's a Socialist,’ Alix would mumble in reply, aged eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, thinking that the word ‘Socialist’sounded somehow more acceptable, more intellectual, than the dreadful word ‘Labour’, with its connotations of manual toil and prison routine.
From the age of fifteen onwards she became more defiant, and would sometimes even attempt a half-baked account of some of the notions she had heard discussed at home, in the Deputy Master's Lodge.
She began to affect, in History lessons, an interest in the Soviet Union: such was the climate of opinion in this progressive boarding school in the north of England in the early 1950s, amongst the sons and daughters of tradesmen and doctors, industrialists and university lecturers, dentists and estate agents, lawyers and farmers, that her interest was regarded with awe and alarm or with frank disbelief, by those who did not dismiss it as the affectation which, in fact, at this stage it was.
Nobody, during the Cold War, was interested in the Soviet Union, not even Alix herself, not even her parents, who never mentioned the place.
It was taboo.
Indeed, her father had shocked her by breaking this silence and by advising her, when she went up to Cambridge, not to join the Communist Party; a joke's a joke, he told her, but you don't want trouble with visas if ever you want to go to America.
A surprisingly worldly comment, from so innocent a man, she had thought this.
Cambridge had been different.
There had been Communists there.
There had been the lot, or so it had seemed, at Cambridge: socialists, communists, socialites, die-hard dinner-jacketed Pitt Club Tories, Bohemians, Christians, lacrosse and rugger players, sloggers, poets, actors, Leavisites, wits, bores, eccentrics, homosexuals; to Cambridge they flocked, from ancient grammar-schools, upstart grammar-schools, progressive schools, public schools, private schools, even from private tutors in the South of France.
God's plenty.
Looking back from the eclectic seventies, the essentially post-sixties seventies, these youngsters of the fifties might well appear a deeply conventional, timid, duffle-jacketed wasp-waisted narrow-based crew, but to Alix, newly emerging from the all-too-personal matrix or patrix of The Heights, they had seemed richly various.
Her own college, at first encounter, struck her as somewhat dimly conformist, with long brown corridors and an unexpectedly high proportion of young women apparently wrapped up in the triumphs of yesteryear on  the hockey field or in the prefects' Common Room, but even there she had discovered part of what she was looking for: in the persons of Liz Ablewhite (now Headleand) and Esther Breuer (still Breuer) she had discovered it, and rediscovered it there each time she met them, which was, these days, on average once a fortnight.
She had found it in them perhaps more securely than in the friends she had made in other colleges, with whom her relationships had been complicated by sex.
She had married one of these complications, for that is what young women did in those days: educated young women married, straight out of college, as she and Liz had done.
Liz's first marriage had lasted all of ten months: Alix's had lasted slightly longer, and had been terminated not by divorce but by death.
And now she is married to Brian Bowen, towards whom she drives home through the January night.
It is a happy marriage.
They have one son, Sam.
He is eleven.
Alix also has a son by her first husband.
He is twenty-two, and his name is Nicholas.
Liz Headleand suspects that Alix Bowen is in love with Nicholas Manning, and wonders if she knows it.
Brian Bowen suspects that Alix Bowen is in love with Nicholas Manning, and wonders if she knows it.
Alix Bowen, for her part, has strong suspicions about Liz's relationship with her three stepsons, but considers her own feelings for Nicholas entirely natural.
Esther Breuer is not much interested in the distinction between the natural and the unnatural.
Both Alix and Liz are of the opinion that Esther's relationship with her niece, with whom she shares her flat, is very odd indeed, but it is not to their advantage to discuss this with one another, or with Esther herself, and they never mention it.
When Alix arrived home in Wandsworth, she found Brian and Sam sitting comfortably in front of the television on the ancient sofa with their socked and shoeless feet up watching a Len Deighton movie.
She told Sam it was time he was in bed, but without conviction.
She sat down with them.
Brian told her that Esther had phoned and wanted her to ring back.
Alix said it is too late.
She started to watch the movie.
In the morning Alix was about to apply herself to a file of Home  Office statistics when the phone rang.
It was Esther, with the news that their friend Liz had rung her the night before to tell her that she and Charles were getting divorced, and that Charles intended to marry Henrietta Latchett.
I thought something was going on, said Esther, and it appears I was right.
Good God, said Alix.
I had absolutely no idea , said Alix, however did you guess?
I saw Charles and Henrietta at a Private View in the National Portrait Gallery, said Esther.
Last month.
That's no evidence, said Alix.
Well, you know how fond Charles is of painting, said Esther.
And evidence or not, I was right, said Esther.
Good God, said Alix, what a surprise.
She tried to ring you but you weren't in, said Esther.
Well, I don't know what to say, said Alix, I thought they'd stuck it out so long they'd stay stuck, didn't you?
I mean to say, Charles is an absolute prick, but he's been a prick for twenty years, why divorce him now?
Esther pointed out that Charles was the one who wanted the divorce.
‘To marry Henrietta ?’ asked Alix, in a tone of incredulity.
‘How could he?
I mean, he may be a prick, but he's not an absolute fool.’
And they continued to discuss the personality of Lady Henrietta, or rather her apparent lack of personality, for some time, until Alix, almost as an afterthought, got round to enquiring how Liz was taking it.
‘She sounded fine to me,’ said Esther.
‘Well, of course, she would be,’ said Alix.
‘But why didn't she tell us earlier?’
‘Apparently she didn't know earlier.
He sprang it on her.’
‘Good God.
What a bastard.
I'd better give her a ring, I suppose.’
‘I asked her to supper on Friday.
Can you make it?’
‘Of course,’ said Alix.
‘I'll see you then.’
Esther, having thus fulfilled her obligations to her friends, forgot them both instantly, and returned her attention to a volume called The Vegetation of Medieval Europe and a German monograph on Sodoma; works which she was reading and annotating by her own interleaved system, a system which had evolved from her inability to concentrate fully on any one topic for more than ten  minutes.
It had thrown up some very challenging cross-references in its time, and she was at the moment pursuing a connection between the nature of quattrocento pigmentation and lichenology as a method of dating the antiquity of landscape: a gratifyingly pointless and therefore pure pursuit, which enabled her mind to wander in the direction of Italy and to hover about the abstraction of a particular shade of green-blue which she had noted in many a painted Italian scene as well as in the lichens of ancient English woodland.
A pale, delicate, hard, metallic, heavenly, shocking, suggestive green-blue.
It tinted dry artistic Italian cypress trees and the undersides of vine leaves, it lived on the damp bark of English oaks and thorns.
It expressed both distance and presence: it was both of the background and of the sharpest proximity.
An enigmatic colour, speaking of metaphysical correspondences.
Signifying nothing but the search for itself.
But an essential shade.
Italian farmers claimed that some of its modern manifestations were inspired by pesticide, but pesticide would not account for the hue of those ravishing little sprigged seaweed trees on the Tuscan hillsides in the frescoes at Monte Oliveto.
Sodoma and Signorelli.
Badgers and magpies featured also in those frescoes, and frequented the hillsides to this day.
So that vegetable blue also must then as now have had a natural home?
Esther Breuer made a note to order Oxenholme's monograph on Signorelli, and read on, waiting for some little current to leap from one open page to the other, from one lobe of the brain to the other, and to ignite a new twig of meaning, to fill a small new cell of the storehouse of her erudition.
She was content with twigs and cells, or so it seemed.
Sometimes, when accused of eccentricity or indeed perversity of vision, she would claim that all knowledge must always be omnipresent in all things, and that one could startle oneself into seeing the whole by tweaking unexpectedly at a surprised comer of the great mantle.
At other times she conceded that her interests were pointless but harmless.
I am not ambitious, I do not seek answers to large questions, she would say.
This would baffle her friends and her students who had the impression that she was engaged in some vast if imprecise enterprise.
No, I prefer precision, Esther would say.
They did not know how to take it.
Jane Austen recommended three or four families in the Country Village as the thing to work on when planning a novel.
Esther Breuer might well have been expected to approve this advice, with its implication that depth rather than breadth is of importance, and intimate knowledge of a corner more valuable than a sketchy acquaintance with the globe.
In fact, perversely, Esther Breuer disliked the only Jane Austen novel she had ever read (which was, perversely, Sense and Sensibility) and frequently boasts of her inability to tackle the others.
‘Too English for me,’ she will sometimes add, in her impeccably English middle-class intellectual's voice.
Esther, Liz and Alix, who in Jane Austen's day would never have met at all, met in Cambridge in 1952.
Just before Christmas, when they were up for interview from their respective schools.
Alix was applying to read English Literature, Liz to read Natural Sciences (with a view to medicine) and Esther to read Modern Languages.
This should have safely prevented any rapport between them, but did not.
There were, it is true, many awkwardnesses in their first communications, for none of them was much used to speaking to strangers, but this lack of practice was balanced by a strong desire on the part of all three of them to enter upon a new life in which speaking to strangers was possible.
Otherwise, each had separately recognized, the future was circumscribed.
Somehow, haltingly, over dinner in Hall (chicken, leeks and tinned spaghetti, a mixture delicious to each after years of post-war whale meat and school meals) they lurched into conversation,.
having found themselves for no good reason sitting together: Liz and Alix discovered that both came from Yorkshire, and that neither played lacrosse, nor had ever seen it being played, and Esther joined the discussion by volunteering that she had herself managed to avoid playing netball for the past three years on the grounds that she was too small.
‘I said I was unfairly handicapped, and they let me do extra Latin instead,’ she said.
The fact that both Liz and Alix seemed to accept that extra Latin might be preferable to netball indicated that further interchange might be possible, and they continued to talk, through the fruit tart and custard, of the nature of intellectual and physical  education, of matter and spirit, of Descartes (brought up by Esther), of T. S. Eliot (brought up by Alix) and of schizophrenia (brought up by Liz).
The matter was abstract, for none of them knew anything other than abstractions, and the tone lofty.
It was what they had expected of University, but had not hoped so soon to find.
Esther, at the end of the meal, expressed her satisfaction with her new companions by inviting them to go with her to visit a friend already attending the college, an Old Girl of her school.
They accepted with alacrity the prospect of a glimpse of the world inside, and all three of them went along dark portrait-hung corridors and up panelled staircases to the room of one Flora Piercy, a second-year History student of considerable sophistication, who offered them a glass of wine.
Had they known how rare such a commodity was in a woman's college at that date, they might have been even more astonished, but in a sense, looking round Flora's room, with its bright scatter cushions and Picasso prints and posters for plays at the ADC, with its invitations on the mantelpiece, with its gas fire and clutter of old shoes, with its romantic piles of what looked like lecture notes and essays, with its candle in a pewter stick and its wilting rose in a vase, they were beyond astonishment.
The glass of wine went quickly to each head, for Alix's family was teetotal, and Liz's alcohol consumption to that date comprised perhaps three glasses of brown sherry and one (celebrating her A levels with her teacher) of Liebfraumilch: Esther seemed better connected with drink as with friends, but even she became confiding under the mild influence.
They shared their dreams and aspirations, encouraged by the benevolent, admonitory, tutelary spirit of ample broad-faced Flora.
‘I would like,’ said Liz Ablewhite, after midnight, staring into the white flaming chalky cracked pitted flaring columns of the gas fire, ‘to make sense of things.
To understand.’
By things, she meant herself.
Or she thought she meant herself.
‘I would like,’ said Alix, ‘to change things.’
By things, she did not mean herself.
Or thought she did not mean herself.
‘You reach too high,’ said Esther.
‘I wish to acquire interesting information.
That is all.’
Liz, at that time, was pale and fair and thin, a colourless creature, unmade-up, drooping and slightly stooping, ill-complexioned, cardiganed, dull, yet glowing with a greenish  pallor that compelled attention.
Alix was mousy, square-faced, healthy of complexion, and, even then, extraordinarily pleasant of expression, with a pleasantness that was at times radiant, and almost always irrefutable: she was wearing, as girls who had them did for their Oxbridge interviews in those days, a two-piece middle-aged suit of an oatmeal mix, with square shoulders and a straight skirt.
Esther was small, neat, brown of skin, smooth, tidy, even (almost) elegant, yet somehow at the same time pugnacious of aspect, subversive, aggressive, commanding, Napoleonic of manner.
She was wearing a severe school uniform, olive green, from an expensive private school.
It looked ironic, satiric, suggestive on her small frame.
Flora Piercy was wearing black velvet trousers, and a large white cable-knit sweater.
Her eyelids were painted blue with a blue greasy paste called eye-shadow.
Alix bought some the next day, on her free half day in Cambridge before she took the Bletchley route to her Oxford interview (for she was a clever girl, Alix)— but she never dared to apply it, save in the privacy of her own room, until she went to Cambridge herself as a bona fide student the following autumn.
Liz, Alix and Esther all obtained places at the college of their choice, in Cambridge, and there were reunited, to gossip there and elsewhere over subsequent decades of their fortuitous friendship.
They lost touch for some time with Flora, their first presiding deity, but even she was to reappear in another context, another life.
Liz Ablewhite was offered, and graciously accepted, the Alethea Ward Scholarship in Natural Sciences (an annual college award specifically designated by Dr Ward, 1853–1935, for female students of medicine from the County of Yorkshire, her own home county), the goal towards which her mother had been directing her for the past ten years.
Great Expectations.
Is there anything more peculiar, more idiosyncratic, more circumscribed in these expectations than in those of Pip, or of Dickens himself, towards being a gentleman?
In the 1950s, one of the surest ways forward for an intellectual young woman from the provinces, for a socially disadvantaged young woman from the provinces, was through Oxford, through Cambridge.
Not through Manchester, or Leeds, or Durham, or Bristol: but through Oxford or  Cambridge.
Dr Alethea Ward had known this, and thus had left her money, some of which eventually Liz Ablewhite had inherited.
Rita Ablewhite knew this, though how she knew it remained, to Liz, a mystery which she did not think, did not care to question.
As Pip cared not to question too closely the sources of his own endowment.
Between them, the deceased Dr Alethea Ward and the surviving Rita Ablewhite directed Liz Ablewhite towards Cambridge, and Liz in her turn handed the same knowledge on to her stepsons and her daughters.
Alix was offered places at both colleges of her choice.
In fact, she was offered a better deal (let us not go into too many historic technicalities) in Oxford, but she chose Cambridge because of Flora Piercy's eye-shadow, and because of Dr Leavis.
At Cambridge she met her first husband, Sebastian Manning, who introduced her to a world in which socialism, far from being ridiculous, was natural, chic, colourful, confident, artistic: Sebastian's parents were artists of some repute, one a painter, the other a potter, and they did not think much of the austerities of Dr Leavis.
Bloomsbury and St Ives were more their style.
Now Sebastian is dead, long dead, and Alix is married to Brian Bowen, son of a saw polisher, grandson of a furnaceman, and often sits with him on an old settee in her stockinged feet.
Brian Bowen admires Dr Leavis, with some respectful reservations.
Esther was also offered places at both universities, and chose Cambridge because it offered her a scholarship, and because her brother had been at King's, and because she heard an owl hoot thrice in the college garden when she retired to her narrow bed after the glass of wine with Flora Piercy.
This last explanation for her choice is the one she most frequently proffered.
In Cambridge she quickly established herself as a cult figure of mysterious portent: she claimed to be in love with her brother, whom nobody had ever seen, and went in for gnomic utterances and baroque clutter.
Now she lives in a small flat in Ladbroke Grove, with a young woman she says is her niece.
She sits in her bed-sitting-room-study reading books.
Her walls are painted bright red.
Not Pompeian red, as she sometimes points out: it is less blue, slightly more flame, more orange coloured.
She is not sure whether it could accurately be described as Venetian red.
She is still surrounded by baroque clutter.
These three women, it will readily and perhaps with some irritation be perceived, were amongst the crème de la crème of their generation.
Illustrious educational institutions not merely offered them places, but also attempted to entice them.
Their initial meeting at dinner in Hall was not quite accidental: the nature of the placement was such that strong scholarship candidates were more likely than not to find themselves sitting together.
They did not, of course, know this at the time.
Narratives, in the past, related the adventures of the famous and the wealthy.
Kings, queens, emperors, warlords.
In The Tale of Genji , which has a claim to be considered the world's first novel, an emperor weeps for lost love in the opening pages.
(Do pages open, in a Japanese novel?
Probably not.)
In Jane Austen, to come nearer home, the protagonists are not, it is true, titled, but they are privileged.
By youth, by wit, by beauty, and sometimes by wealth.
The Princesses of their Country Villages.
Liz, Alix and Esther were not princesses.
They were not beautiful, they were not rich.
But they were young, and they had considerable wit.
Their fate should, therefore, be in some sense at least exemplary: opportunity was certainly offered to them, they had choices, at eighteen the world opened for them and displayed its riches, the brave new world of Welfare State and County Scholarships, of equality for women, they were the elite, the chosen, the garlanded of the great social dream.
Adventure and possibility lay before them, as they had not lain before Liz's sister Shirley, who married at nineteen and stayed on in Northam, or before Dora Sutcliffe who left school at fifteen and sold sweets in Woolworth's until she married Shirley's husband's brother Steve.
Brian Bowen's sister Barbara went to Australia and married a building contractor, but that is another story.
Brian himself, had he not done his National Service, would, arguably, still be working at Pitts and Harley and might have continued to work there until 1982 when this ancient, well-established firm closed, with the loss of six hundred jobs.
But that is another part of this story, and not to be pursued here, for Brian is not a woman and reflections on his prospects or lack of prospects in 1952 would at this juncture muddy the narrative tendency.
Forget I mentioned him.
Let us return to Liz, Alix and Esther.
Liz, Alix and Esther were reunited in Cambridge in the autumn of 1953.
They had spent their ‘year off’ in highly dissimilar circumstances.
Esther paid her first visit to Italy, where she spent three months at the Università per Stranieri in Perugia, learned some Italian, drank a great deal of wine, took up with a middle-aged American art historian and began to look at paintings.
Alix spent three months working as an au pair girl — working very hard, for no pay — in a suburb of Paris, bored out of her mind most of the time, but strangely, surprisingly consoled by the youngest member of the large family, a baby, which, unlike its larger siblings, seemed to like her.
Alix, then as ever, liked anybody who liked her.
She spent her rare afternoons off visiting the sights of Paris, or lying in the Luxembourg Gardens alone, reading Dostoevsky and Sartre and Camus, and sending out contradictory messages to idle young men who wondered if it would be worth trying to pick her up.
Liz stayed at home in Northam, studying.
Her mother (she knew without asking, there was never any possibility of her asking) expected her to stay at home.
Liz had a calendar and she crossed off the days in black ink.
She read Victorian novels and studied textbooks of anatomy.
She started to read Freud (The Psychopathology of Everyday Life ,Totem and Taboo ), without understanding, yet without misunderstanding.
She tried to learn the Book of Job by heart, but never got safely past the end of the second chapter; the first two chapters were on the dull side, overloaded with yoke of oxen and she-asses, with Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, Job's comforters.
Liz wanted to get on to the exciting bits, in which Job demanded why light was given to him that was in misery, and life to the bitter in soul: in which Job desired to argue with his God: in which the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind: but she knew it would be cheating to miss out the she-asses and skip to the livelier parts, so she plodded dully on with the dull narrative.
Obsessional behaviour: she determined that one day she would find an explanation for it, and, meanwhile, pursued it.
Esther sent Liz a postcard, from Perugia.
Liz put it on her bedroom mantelpiece, and touched it, every morning on rising, and every night as she went to bed.
Esther sent a card to Alix, too, but Alix's mother forwarded it accidentally-on-purpose to the  wrong address possibly because she did not care for a rather elaborate allusion to Lacrima Christi in the text, nor for the brightly coloured shiny modern Madonna which the card portrayed.
Alix's mother, broad-minded though she was, did not approve of Catholicism, and was hardly to know that Esther was Jewish.
It would be wrong to give the impression that Liz, Alix and Esther fell into one another 's arms with cries of delight when they met again that October, or to suggest that they proved thereafter inseparable.
But they were, nevertheless, pleased to rediscover one another, and sat up late on their first evening in Esther's room, which had already begun to put out hints of its later decorative eccentricities.
They talked of their summer adventures, of their hopes for the future, but mostly of their own provenance.
Liz attempted her first sketch of her mother, her first outline for the outside world of the domestic ghost with which she had lived so long: Alix spoke of her relief at escaping from the small boarding school world in which her parents and her contemporaries all knew one another far too well: Esther conjured up visions of both deprivation and splendour in her own past.
They did not know then, were not to know for many years, were never fully to understand what it was that held them together — a sense of being on the margins of English life, perhaps, a sense of being outsiders, looking in from a cold street through a lighted window into a warm lit room that later might prove to be their own?
Removed from the mainstream by a mad mother, by a deviant ideology, by refugee status and the warsickness of Middle Europe?
None of.
this would have meant anything to them, then, as they drank their Nescafé, which in those days came not in granules in jars but in powder in tins with brown, cream and white labels: tins which cost 2 s .6 d .
each.
They thought they found one another interesting.
And so they became friends.
They also made other friends, of course, both inside and outside their own college.
Liz, like a pale convent girl too long mewed up, went wild in her first year, as she discovered the world of parties she had hitherto known only by reading and by hearsay: in those days, such was the imbalance between the sexes, women were much in demand as status symbols, as  sleeping partners, as lovers, as party ballast, and Liz went out a great deal, her appearance improving dramatically as she did so.
She had little money for clothes, but that did not matter; it did not even matter, much, to her, though sometimes she wished she had more than two dresses, one pink, one grey.
She hung herself around with cheap earrings and necklaces and bangles.
Her stockings were always laddered.
She was much invited.
Men accosted her on bridges, in lectures, in bookshops.
She tried them all.
But she never disobeyed the rules by spending a night, illicitly, out of college.
Like Cinderella, she returned at midnight.
In the mornings, in the long vacations, she worked.
In her second year, she met Edgar Lintot.
He was a conspicuous high-profiled figure, in those days, a medical student and a man of the theatre, famed for his Footlights appearances and his impromptu wit.
Liz also dabbled with acting, and played several roles rather well — an inventive Helena in A Midsummer Night's Dream and a curiously haunting, poignant Bellario in Philaster , directed by Edgar.
Wounded loyalty and dignified pathos were her line on stage, although off-stage she grew increasingly self-assertive.
Her social world, in Cambridge, was largely theatrical.
After midnight, in college, she would discuss it with Alix and Esther.
Alix's social world was somewhat different.
Having been to a coeducational school, she did not find men a novelty, and in theory ought to have been able to discriminate better than Liz (who endured some fairly dreadful experimental evenings in her search for entertainment), but her natural kindness made it almost impossible for her to refuse any overture, however offensive, however louche .
A mixture of gratitude and pity held her captive through many a long, polite, sad, dull declaration of admiration, and kept her smiling through many an impolite drunken assault on her brassiere straps.
‘What will become of me?’ she would sometimes ask Liz and Esther, in mock-alarm.
What became of her was Sebastian Manning and his friends and relations.
She met Sebastian at a political rally.
Alix continued to attend such things, in unbroken allegiance to her upbringing.
Sebastian was there in allegiance to his upbringing, too.
She knew who he was, for she had observed him at lectures and had been informed of his parentage.
The names meant  nothing to her, as her own family austerity eschewed, in characteristic northern professional manner, any interest in the visual arts, but she picked up what they were meant to mean.
Of more interest to her was Sebastian's appearance, which was delightful — wide eyed, golden-red haired, sunny, surprised — and his manner, which, as they fell into chat, was even more attractive.
Never had she met anyone of such mildness, such ease, such openness of heart, such certainty of pleasing.
Sebastian liked everybody.
He said so.
He certainly liked Alix, and after the demo he took her off for lunch in a pub and then for a walk to his room in King's, where he showed her his pots and his paintings.
He also made her a piece of toast.
People dropped in and more toast was eaten.
In no time at all Alix became his intimate friend.
Sebastian appeared to believe that the world was a place full of sunshine and enjoyment.
He had been educated at a progressive, artistic school in the south, with a radical tradition very different (despite its ostensible similarities) from the one in which Alix had been reared.
She loved this new climate.
She basked in it, she took off her clothes and browned herself in it.
It was so easy to be with Sebastian.
He never called upon one to doubt one's welcome.
Nervous Alix, sycophantic Alix, diffident Alix found in his undemanding ease the simplicity of Paradise.
He had, in fact, had something of a Rousseauesque upbringing, much of it in Provence: his parents too liked the sun, and had defected from St Ives at an early stage.
Ripe tomatoes, red, green and yellow peppers, artichokes, olives, courgettes.
These vegetables were not then, in the 1950s, part of the staple British diet.
They were symbols, glowing, of plenty, of the plenty that Sebastian's uncle (a Labour MP, no less) believed and somehow expected could and should belong to all, regardless of the rigours of a northern European climate and a war-crippled economy.
They featured in still lives on Sebastian's walls.
Alix began to think that perhaps, after all, it was not wrong to be happy.
In her heart of hearts she still suspected that it was, but the charmed garden of Sebastian and his friends opened to her so easily, so seductively, that what could she do but step inside?
It was not as though there was anything wrong with Sebastian's ideas.
He was a child of nature, a romantic, not an elitist.
His happiness made others happy.
What could be wrong with that?
Esther led a slightly less straightforward social life.
Much of it was conducted from her own room, which soon acquired a shrine-like notoriety, both on account of its furnishings and its occupant.
Young men and women, not so young men and women, wended their way across Cambridge to sit for an hour with Esther Breuer, sipping coffee, tea, or, if they were favoured, vermouth or wine, as they gazed at the red-draped walls, the crowded bookshelves, the umbrella stand, the hatstand, the cabin trunk, the medley of different-patterned fabrics, the little figurines that marched along the shelves in front of the books, the carefully assembled strip of photographed Roman frieze, the little glass doves in front of the tiny mosaic fountain.
(The fountain did not play: Esther was not a magician, and college rooms did not rise to running water for people, let alone fountains.)
Outside college, Esther's life was eclectic, fragmented, secretive.
The American art historian whom she had met in Perugia reappeared as professor on a sabbatical from his East Coast university, and was to be seen dining with Esther in restaurants beyond the reach of the undergraduate purse: the Arts Theatre Restaurant, Miller's, the Garden House Hotel.
She went out with other, older, even weightier men.
But she also had alliances with people nearer her own age, notably with a wild young postgraduate architect, a hard-drinking, reckless, one-off character called Colin Lindsey, who was already provided with a wife and a baby, but who would nevertheless take his turn to sit on Esther's beaded rug.
Throughout this, Esther maintained the fiction that she was in love with her older brother Saul, and maintained it so well that not even Alix and Liz knew the truth of the matter.
The brother existed, for they saw him once: he was an unlikely object of incestuous passion, a small, dark, worried-looking lawyer, with a curiously compelling speech defect.
Esther hinted that it was the grim circumstances of their childhood that had drawn them together with a love that dared not speak its name.
Saul had been born in Vienna, in 1931: Esther in Berlin, in 1935.
They were both lucky to be alive.
They had huddled together, small exiles, refugees, in a boarding-house in Manchester, while their mother looked for work and their father hung on in Berlin trying to assemble his papers.
He assembled them: he got out just in time, he joined his wife and children: he  re-established himself as a manufacturer of optical devices: but those early years left their mark.
Or so Esther said.
It took Liz over two decades to read the signals of Esther's room, and to recognize the affinities of its decor.
Through her Cambridge years and long afterwards she simply accepted them as evidence of Esther's eccentricity and originality — and it was not, after all, difficult to be original in a period when most female undergraduates, fresh from school and far from well off, ventured little further in terms of home-making than a cushion or a chianti bottle, a photograph or a teddy bear, a gingham frill round an orange box or a postcard collage on the wall, a modernist paper mobile or an arrangement of seaside pebbles.
But, years later, Liz found herself visiting the Freud museum in Berggasse in Vienna, and there she suddenly saw it all — the red walls, the figurines, and, perhaps most distinctively, the predominance of red carpet-cushions, the characteristic mixture of Persian geometric patterns on floor and couch — a Jewish mixture, a Viennese mixture, a Freudian mixture?
Liz did not know, and doubted if Esther knew.
She had noticed earlier, of course, Esther's particular liking for red.
The walls of Freud's consulting room were red also.
Liz found this very interesting, but did not comment on it to Esther.
Esther claimed not to be interested in Freud.
And so these three densely packed, formative years passed, preparing these three highly selected young women for their respective careers.
Liz's education was to take more than three years: she had already decided to specialize in psychiatry, and knew she still had a long journey ahead of her.
This did, not prevent her from becoming engaged, in 1956, to Edgar Lintot, who was about to leave Cambridge to take up a pre-registration post at St Michael's Hospital in Lewisham.
He had decided to opt for medicine rather than the stage, and had felt virtuous, mildly sacrificial, a little self-important while making this choice.
His rejection of the overtures of a smooth-faced, smooth-tongued, camp, high-powered theatrical agent coincided with his offer of marriage to Liz.
The high-minded, the dedicated, the serious path.
They joked about this, but so it was.
He bought her a ring, with little seed pearls and a sapphire.
The world lay all before them and, from Liz's point of view most importantly, its roads did not lead back, to Northam.
She would never go home again.
(And who is to say that she was not a little piqued that her younger sister Shirley was already planning marriage?)
In the same month, in what was for her the last term of her formal education, Alix became engaged to Sebastian Manning.
It seems odd, now, but so it was: this is what young people did in those days.
Sebastian was not quite clear about his own job intentions at this stage, nor did he have to be so.
There were plenty of jobs.
His family did not take jobs seriously.
None of them had ever had one, except for his MP uncle, who had once been a journalist.
Sebastian thought he might be a journalist.
Or go into the BBC.
Or something like that.
Anybody, he knew, would be glad to have him.
For Alix, marrying Sebastian was an alternative to a job.
She did not feel entirely at ease about this, and even went to consult the Careers Adviser in Cambridge, who gave her various leaflets, told her about trainee courses at the BBC, and sent her off for a two-day inspection of the Civil Service.
Alix, I regret to say, did not take the Civil Service seriously as a prospect.
She looked at the sample examination papers with alarm and concluded that she was lamentably ignorant about the way the world worked.
Wordsworth, Blake, Chaucer, George Eliot, she knew well, but not the name of the capital of Chad or the number of trade union-sponsored MPs in the House of Commons.
She did not care for the serious young men who toured the Home Office and the Treasury with her.
In their early twenties, before taking their Finals, they were already worried about their pensions, and their wife's pension.
‘Have you got a wife?’
Alix wished to ask, of one particularly baby-faced, prematurely anxious candidate, who was contemplating the allowance that he might leave to his wife should he predecease her: but did not dare.
It would have been impolite.
Grasshoppers three a-fiddling went, Alix hummed to herself, as she ran down Whitehall for the bus, swinging her shoulder bag in the cold, bright, showery, uncertain sun of late April.
She was happy.
She would marry Sebastian, she would never have to go back to cold and sooty Leeds to drink brown soup and eat gristle stew with dark greens and mashed potatoes.
Sebastian bought  her a ring, with a little gold heart and an inscription.
‘Forever,’ it said, in Victorian script.
Esther had elected to take a higher degree, in the History of Art.
Art History as a subject was not yet available at Cambridge: she would attach herself to the Courtauld Institute.
There was plenty of money around to finance such choices.
Esther was encouraged to continue her studies.
She would return to Perugia for the summer, to learn more Italian.
Both Liz and Esther went to Alix and Sebastian's wedding, in early July, in Leeds.
It was a sunny day, and the garden party in the grounds of the school was a success, for Deborah and Stephen Manning, alerted by Sebastian and Alix, had insisted on presenting champagne (you won't get anything to drink otherwise, they had been warned) and it went quickly to the heads of those unaccustomed to drinking at all, while Sebastian's contingent had primed themselves at their hotel before arriving, in double defence.
Laughter and a smell of cut grass rose from the lawns, and in the distance children played tennis.
High seriousness mingled with amiable Bohemianism, provincial spoke to cosmopolitan, Fabian joked with hedonist, and teachers of mathematics admired the hats of potters from Cornwall.
Alix wore a white dress bought ready-made from a department store, her younger sister was a sort of bridesmaid in a flowered print, and her little brother wore a grey suit with short trousers and a pale-blue tie, on which he spilt some strawberry ice-cream.
The headmaster, who had offered for the occasion his own private stretch of garden, was unusually gracious.
The ceremony had taken place in a register office as both families were agnostic.
Photographs were taken.
Everybody said that Alix looked lovely.
Sebastian smiled at everybody, and the Doddridges thought he was wonderful.
Not a cloud, not a shiver of cold air, though Liz for one could have done with a little less heat, as she wiped the sweat from her brow and sought the shade of a chestnut tree.
Her turn next, people said to her in a slightly menacing manner, but she protested she and Edgar would wait until he had qualified.
They were the sensible couple, the forward planners: Alix and Sebastian the children of the hour.
Alix smiled and thanked people for saucepans and toast-racks and ironing boards.
She and Sebastian were off on a long  honeymoon, to spend two months in Tuscany in an old farmhouse belonging to friends of Deborah and Stephen: it was temporarily in need of a caretaker.
They did not intend to take the saucepans and toast-racks and ironing boards to Tuscany.
Esther planned to visit them there, on her way to Perugia.
The thought of a visit from Esther slightly cheered Alix, who was feeling, despite her smiles, extremely unhappy, extremely apprehensive.
In the garden in her white dress, she knew she had done the wrong thing.
She should not have married Sebastian.
She doubted Sebastian.
She had betrayed herself and Sebastian by marrying Sebastian.
Deborah Manning liked Alix very much.
She hoped she would be good for Sebastian.
Alix seemed to her to be both practical and highly intelligent.
Deborah also doubted Sebastian, although she never let it show, or hoped she did not let it show.
Alix went upstairs to her old bedroom to take off her white dress and to put on her pale-blue linen Jaeger going-away dress.
The white dress lay on the bed.
Alix was a virgin.
She had tried to disembarrass herself of her virginity, and had been certain, once she started ‘going steady’ with Sebastian, that this would be accomplished.
But Sebastian had not seemed eager to take the final step.
She had suggested to him, although of course not in words, that it would be a good idea to alter their pattern of lovemaking to something a little more adult, but he had moved away: shrunk, dwindled, and moved away.
And since that movement, that rejection, Alix had felt her own desire diminish.
So here she was, married to a man she no longer wanted, at the age of twenty-one.
She put on her pale-blue linen Jaeger dress and, believe it or not, a little hat.
Yes, a little hat.
She stared at herself.
Then she went to look for Esther to make plans, for at least there would be Esther in these appalling two months of honeymoon ahead.
When Esther visited Alix and Sebastian, they had been married for three weeks, and the marriage had been consummated.
Alix, although she did not know it, was pregnant.
They did not seem entirely happy, to Esther, but Esther put her suspicions down to jealousy.
But they made Esther very welcome, and they passed pleasant afternoons by the swimming pool and pleasant evenings on the terrace eating salami, cheese, sausage and salad.
One  did not have to cook, in Tuscany.
Back in England, in the autumn, the saucepans came into their own, as Alix, in a small basement flat in Islington, struggled to learn the rudiments of domesticity.
Sebastian got a job, as easily as he had said he would, working for an intellectual left-wing magazine.
Alix applied for jobs until she found she was pregnant, then gave up and sat at home.
She was deeply depressed, and felt guilty about her depression.
Sebastian seemed as cheerful as ever, but what she now saw as the unthinking, meaningless nature of his good nature irritated her almost beyond bearing.
She contemplated suicide.
She told herself she was suffering from hormones, that she would cheer up soon.
She did not want a baby.
She never wanted to sleep with Sebastian again.
She played house, with her saucepans.
Loyalty sealed her lips, even with Liz and Esther, whom she at this period rarely saw.
Sebastian dropped his clothes on the floor, she picked them up and washed them.
She cooked meals, they both ate them, though often the meals were not very nice.
The baby, Nicholas, was born in April.
Alix fell helplessly, hopelessly, recklessly in love with the baby.
He was all the world to her.
She no longer knew if she was happy or unhappy, cheerful or depressed, as she gazed at the infant lying in his pram, asleep in his cot, kicking on a rug before the fire.
She was obsessed, in love.
Sebastian spent more time out of the house.
Alix did not care.
They went to Tuscany to the same house again, that summer.
They invited friends to stay, to alleviate their couple-loneliness.
Liz came, briefly, with Edgar, whom she had just married: Esther for a night, alone: then a couple of Canadians, who stayed for weeks.
They were painters, perhaps, or poets, perhaps, casual acquaintances picked up by friendly Sebastian at a publisher's party in Bedford Square.
They had long hair and said they knew Jack Kerouac.
They thought that life was holy.
They also smoked dope.
Sebastian was not used to dope and one night he drowned in the swimming-pool.
Nobody was quite sure how it happened, but there he was, suddenly, dead.
Alix was asleep upstairs at the time, with Nicholas.
Everybody was very sorry for Alix.
Widowed at twenty-two, left with a small baby.
Sebastian cut off in the glory and promise of his youth, with all the world before him.
Alix, naturally, was almost (but not quite) overwhelmed with guilt, at not grieving enough, at not having been the perfect wife, at having ceased to love Sebastian.
Maybe her love would have kept him alive.
Maybe she had killed him.
The sympathy of others was hard to bear.
She felt a fraud, as the letters poured in.
She hugged Nicholas in her arms and rocked him backwards and forwards in the basket-backed rocking chair, in the damp Islington basement, night after night, morning after morning, holding on to him in his little cream Viyella nightdress and blue sleeping bag.
Her tears flowed onto him.
He was all she had.
Little mother, little widow.
Everybody had loved Sebastian.
Alix felt herself growing mean and spiteful.
Sebastian's mother, Deborah, was the only person who seemed to suspect the disarray of Alix's emotions.
She made friendly overtures, invited her to stay in their large, warm, scenic, colourful, untidy house in Sussex, told Alix to live for herself and look to the future, offered to look after the baby whenever Alix needed a break.
She would willingly have engulfed the baby.
Alix suspected this, and clung on to him the more tightly, rejecting Deborah's support, rejecting everything except a little money ‘to see her through’.
She was too fragile to form an alliance with large, strong, fully made Deborah.
She had to find her own way, in the damp, in the shadows, by the light of forty-watt bulbs, in the solitary evenings.
She would not visit her own family, except as a formality, and then as briefly as decency permitted.
Their pity, their concern, rubbed her raw.
She pushed the pram round Islington, speaking to shopkeepers and other mothers on street corners and in playgrounds.
She had tried to enter the world of light, but it was not for her.
She saw even less of Liz and Esther.
Liz was at this stage engrossed by the dramatic, blinding, smoky disaster of her own marriage, which after only six weeks managed to transform herself and Edgar into mockeries of their former selves, loud puppets mouthing insults on an unreal battlefield.
Later, she could hardly remember what the issues were that had so roused them to mutual abuse.
Her own domestic incompetence (which was indeed extreme, but what had Edgar expected from a wife with an upbringing like hers?),
Edgar's male chauvinism (though this was a phrase not yet current) and his expectation that his  work was always, would always be of greater importance, than her own — these were aspects of their mutual dissatisfaction, no doubt, although both were, decades later, to concede that Edgar at this time was paying a high psychological price for having renounced his theatrical ambitions (old Cambridge friends of his already had their names in lights in the West End, while he was a mere house officer) and that Liz was still suffering from the trauma of confronting her mother with her total, final defection.
Not a happy marriage, and not one that could take on the extra burden of a weeping widowed friend.
It could not bear the bright inspection of another's sorrow.
So Alix and Liz kept their distance.
Esther, unmarried, appeared happy.
She pursued her studies.
She planned a thesis on the works of Carlo Crivelli, so briefly mentioned in 1894 by Berenson, so little mentioned since.
She did not expect to see much of Liz and Alix, who had married and made their own lives after another pattern.
She had a flat in Camden Town.
She continued to go out to dinner with academics, to receive the hard-drinking architect.
She embarked on a new and even more enigmatic liaison with an Italian anthropologist of satanic reputation who in the fullness of time turned out to be — indeed, for some time, unrecognized by the British, had been — a structuralist.
He too was a married man.
His interest in witchcraft was said to be more than scholarly.
He instructed Esther in the interpretation of medieval Italian iconography.
Liz's marriage broke up after eight months.
Edgar, chivalrously, moved out of the flat they rented in New Cross, though he could hardly afford to do so, and into a large shabby house in Greenwich which he shared with several old Cambridge friends.
He was much happier there.
He paid her a small allowance, as she, as a married woman, was no longer eligible for the grant that had supported her at university.
Liz was humiliated by this, rather than enraged, but she knew that she had to qualify in order ever to be free and accepted the conditions.
She did not tell her mother that she and Edgar had separated.
She continued her clinical training at St Michael's and qualified in 1959.
Soon after, while she was doing six pre-registration months as house physician at St Michael's, she met Charles Headleand.
Seven  months later, after divorcing Edgar, she married Charles, a widower with three small boys.
She informed her mother after the event.
Her second marriage somewhat disrupted her postgraduate career.
It also renewed her interrupted friendship with Alix.
She sought out Alix, to tell her of her plans to remarry, and they spent a long evening, over spaghetti and Hirondelle, talking of what already seemed to them the distant past.
Alix admitted what Liz already knew, that she and Sebastian had been less than happy, that the idyll had been less golden than it looked.
Liz deplored her own appalling behaviour towards Edgar, confided his towards her.
Why ever did we marry so young , they asked one another.
And why are you doing it again , asked Alix.
Oh, this is different, said Liz.
At twenty-five, she felt mature.
She had seen people die, she had seen them give birth, she had chopped them into little pieces: more significantly, with Charles she had achieved orgasm, which she had never managed with Edgar.
She knew it was all right, this time.
So she told Alix.
I will never marry again, said Alix.
But how do you manage, said Liz.
Oh, I teach a little, I mark exam papers, I scrape by, said Alix.
Liz was embarking on a world of wealth, with Charles Headleand.
Naomi's parents, in grief and regret, had been generous to their grandchildren.
Liz, whom they liked, whom they wished to like, whom they were obliged to like, would profit, although she would work hard for her rewards.
So it was calculated, so it was arranged.
Liz had pulled herself together, on the domestic front, she told Alix, as she looked around Alix's brass-railed, shabby, cluttered, plastic-toy-littered flat, where clothes hung drying on an ancient fireguard.
Some of the things Edgar had said had struck home.
I'm going to be efficient, this time, she said.
But three babies, said Alix, it's impossible.
No, it's not, said Liz, a manic glitter in her eyes.
One is exhausting said Alix.
I shall come to you for advice, said Liz.
And so Liz Headleand was born, out of guilt, out of chance, out of sexual felicity and complicity, out of ambition, and Liz Lintot passed away, as Sebastian Manning and Naomi Headleand had passed away.
Alix Bowen was slower in the making.
She put together slowly  the bricks of her new self.
She reconsidered, slowly, the privileges and disadvantages of her childhood, of the three years of Cambridge, of the brief interlude of her marriage, of the streets of Islington where she pushed her pram.
She dismantled, she rebuilt.
In the streets of Islington, she observed poverty.
She experienced it, also.
A one-parent family, living on scraps from the educational world, too proud to seek refuge and warm her hands on the tepid thickly painted radiators of Leeds, to cast off her jerseys and socks on the radiant central heating of Sussex, to lie half-naked in that ill-starred farmhouse in Tuscany.
Fifties' pride possessed her.
She had read her Henry James.
She made no appeals.
She renounced the role of tragic widow with an austerity that irritated her would-be saviours.
She would not go out, though she occasionally made a martyr of herself by pointing out that because of the price of baby-sitting, she could not afford to go out: this was as far as she went towards self-pity.
Leeds, Sussex, Cambridge, Provence, Tuscany, Islington.
There was a lesson in it somewhere, if she had eyes to see, ears to hear.
Semi-chosen austerity: a rich cultural life in green pastures with fruit: unchosen semi-hardship.
Ugliness: beauty: ugliness.
Alix turned these things over in her mind.
Admired discomfort: cultivated ease: semi-comfortable squalor.
Alix had been told about poverty, in Leeds, at school and at home.
(In her case school and home were not easily separable.)
She had knitted woollen squares to raise money to sink wells in India (and had knitted them very badly too).
She had donated pittances of pocket money to buy tractors for India.
She had attended slide-illustrated talks on the agricultural problems of vast and distant continents.
Poverty nearer home had been less vividly presented to her, and indeed it had been less colourful, less extreme.
It was grey, shabby, and somehow infectious: to be avoided.
It was also rough and noisy and unmannerly.
It lived in back streets of terrace houses and on sprawling housing estates.
It wasted what money it had on drinking and it spoke with rough accents.
It was feckless, unthrifty, sluttish, violent, loud mouthed, and materialistic.
Its children taunted nice little middle-class children in school uniform who strayed into its terrain.
It did not need wells dug or tractors purchased.
Poverty  was an attribute of the working classes in England.
Those who worked, were poor.
Those who did not work were better off, therefore?
No, it was not quite like that.
The equation, to Alix's schoolgirl mind, had already proved confusing.
Her father worked hard, for example, but was not a worker.
Nor was he poor, in terms of the poverty portrayed in the colourful slides, where black children with hunger-distended bellies stared at the camera, where lepers crouched by begging bowls.
But he was poor when compared with the parents of many of the children who attended his school, even when compared with some of the other teachers.
Poverty, therefore, was comparative.
One measured it by a sliding scale.
One was always poor, in terms of those who were richer.