

The Rural Economy II: Non-agricultural Employment in Rural Areas
The rural economy has never been completely agricultural, for most villages used to support a number of craftsmen serving local needs.
Although industrialization has tended to eliminate traditional crafts, the non-agricultural element of the rural economy has increased in importance since at least the nineteenth century.
Apart from agriculture, what are the other important elements in the rural economy?
First, there is mining and quarrying, which in particular locations can be a major source of employment.
Most commercially exploited minerals in Britain tend to be in the older geological strata located in the more remote western and upland regions, while sand and gravel occur in coastal or valley sites or in glacial deposits, particularly in the south and east of England.
Of more widespread importance is manufacturing, especially in the smaller towns, and there is evidence of movement of manufacturing firms away from metropolitan regions into more peripheral regions of Britain including many rural areas.
Of greatest importance, however, is the tertiary sector, as the majority of employment in most rural areas is in services and transport.
The distribution of tertiary activity is uneven within rural areas, especially with the increasing centralization of public sector employment in recent years.
Tourism is also of particular importance in some regions and may dominate the local economy.
An interesting feature of the rural economy is the way in which these sectoral employment changes are interlinked.
As a result of the increased relative importance of part-time farming and farm work, many individuals seek a second job in manufacturing or services.
In addition, many farmers, particularly on family farms, have sought to diversify their enterprises, for example by catering for tourists.
This may involve using a field as a camping site, offering bed and breakfast or providing ‘farm teas’.
Other farmers have entered the retail trade, through ‘pick-your-own’ or ‘farm shop’methods of selling produce.
Another feature of the rural economy is its relationship with urban labour markets.
The extension of commuting hinterlands has increasingly brought rural areas within the daily journey-to-work range of nearby towns.
The result has been a two-way movement.
Some people have moved out of towns to live in the countryside, sometimes adopting a second part-time job in the rural area, while many inhabitants of rural areas have been able to obtain jobs in towns.
Occasionally, as with the case of part-time farms or even some full-time farms, one or more family members may work in a factory or shop in the town in order to support the family farm.
Therefore, the increased separation of home and workplace in the modern economy has acted to strengthen the interlinkages between the rural and urban segments of the economy.
Underlying these trends has been the increasing importance of the state in the management of the economy.
In addition to the macroeconomic policies of the state such as levels of taxation or public expenditure, which affect rural residents as much as urban residents, there are two specific facets of government intervention in rural areas.
The first involves the statutory local planning process; for the location of quarries, mines, factories or holiday complexes in rural areas has become a source of conflict among local social groups.
While some have welcomed the jobs provided by these developments, others have opposed them in order to preserve existing landscapes or to further their own economic interests (Newby 1979).
The means for the resolution of such conflicts is the statutory planning process.
The other specific role of government in the rural economy has been the attempt to create jobs, mainly by fostering manufacturing.
Some rural locations have been designated as ‘assisted areas’ which can benefit from regional policy, while special development boards have been established in some regions such as mid-Wales and the Highlands and Islands.
Furthermore, the Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas (COSIRA) and the Small Industries Council for the Rural Areas of Scotland (SICRAS) have also promoted small firms in rural areas.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY IN THE COUNTRYSIDE
Manufacturing accounts for a relatively small proportion of employment in rural areas, and in the more remote regions it has been estimated that this can be as low as 10–20 per cent(Gilg 1976).
Rural manufacturing tends to be polarized into two main types.
One involves craftsmen, operating on a small scale, producing custom-made or individual products such as quality pottery or fine furniture.
On a larger scale, this type of production can incorporate such enterprises as Ercol furniture or Dartington glass.
The other group of industries involves the processing of raw materials.
Some of these are footloose industries, such as the aluminium plants in Scotland utilizing cheap hydroelectric power, while others are based on the processing of agricultural products, including milk, meat and vegetables.
In these cases the locational attraction of rural areas can be considerable, and one of the most remarkable locational shifts in manufacturing in recent years has been the closure of port-based, imported cane sugar processing plants in East London in favour of sugar beet processing factories in East Anglia (Community Development Project 1977).
However, the establishment of processing plants in rural areas can have unexpected effects on agriculture.
In the eastern Scottish borders, for example, the establishment of pea processing plants led to a switch from sugar beet and potato production to peas, which require less labour than the crops they replaced, and the result was a net decrease in agricultural employment (Hodge and Whitby 1979).
LARGE SCALE MODERN INDUSTRY IN A RURAL SETTING (SOURCE: AUTHORS AND A. TEED)
In recent years, however, there has been a reversal in the relative fortunes of rural and urban areas with respect to a broad range of manufacturing activities.
Fothergill and Gudgin (1979), in a study of  manufacturing in the UK between 1959 and 1975, show that there has been rapid expansion in rural areas, while Spence et al .
(1982) confirm that decentralization of employment was prevalent throughout the British urban system during the 1960s.
Two processes contributed to this: the out-migration of firms from urban areas, and, more importantly, a growth in indigenous firms in rural areas.
Firm mobility usually accounts for only a small proportion of employment growth in any area, with most coming from existing or new indigenous firms (Cross 1981; Watts 1981).
However, there are some regional exceptions to this.
For example, 80 per cent of employment growth in the small-firm sector in Cornwall in the 1960s and 1970s was accounted for by exogenous firms (Perry 1982).
This growth of manufacturing employment can be explained partly by the quality of rural environment and partly by the changing structure of manufacturing.
One view is that rural manufacturing growth stems from the preferences of employers for rural environments.
Oakenshott (1979) found a preference for small towns among employers because of their more pleasant physical environments and easier access to the countryside, compared with the larger cities, while Spooner (1972) found that the attractiveness of the area was the most important factor influencing firms moving into the South West.
In Cornwall, which has a very attractive image, in-migration of firms seems to be in some cases linked with a form of semi-retirement by owners.
One survey indicates that their average age was over 55; they had a strong leisure orientation, and had few plans to expand their businesses (Perry 1982).
Many were also now operating smaller enterprises than before the move to Cornwall.
This group, therefore, had chosen to run their businesses less intensively in order to enjoy the benefits of living in Cornwall, possibly to prepare for retirement.
The second explanation of the shift to rural areas focuses on the changes that have occurred in the production process.
Technological change has led to a de-skilling of industrial work, so that a major requirement of many employers is now for cheap, non-unionized, semi-skilled labour (Massey 1979; Wood 1982).
The increased scale of enterprises, combined with improvements in management methods and telecommunications, has also contributed to spatial separation of functions within the firm (Goddard 1975, 1978).
Different functions require different conditions of production and therefore may have different locational requirements.
The result is that many manufacturing firms have decided to locate their physical production processes outside the metropolitan regions.
Many small towns in rural areas have been chosen as the sites of branch plants because they have ready supplies of labour which (drawing on low female activity rates) is flexible, is relatively cheap, and has little tradition of trade unionism.
In addition, even medium-sized plants can dominate the labour markets of small towns (for example , in the cases of Westland at Yeovil  and Clarks at Street), and this places them in a strong position in their dealings with the labour force (Lever 1978).
The major drawback for all immigrant firms has been the difficulty in recruiting the few highly skilled key workers essential to production.
FROM SCHOOL TO WORKSHOP: IS THIS THE APPROPRIATE SCALE FOR VILLAGE MANUFACTURING?
(SOURCE: AUTHORS AND A. TEED)
THE STATE AND RURAL MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
Although the factors outlined above have probably been the most important considerations in the growth of rural manufacturing, an additional reason can be found in the role of the state.
State intervention in rural manufacturing really dates only from the Second World War, after the report of the Scott Committee in 1942 assessed the advantages and disadvantages that would result from rural industrialization.
It was recognized that the advantages were outweighed by disadvantages, including the loss of productive agricultural land, disruption of the labour supply for farming, despoliation of the landscape, and modification of traditional village life.
Therefore the Scott Committee recommended that, within rural areas, factories should be sited on vacant land in small towns rather than in villages or the open countryside.
This has been the predominant view in planning until the present (Blacksell and Gilg 1981).
Nevertheless, in response to the persistent problems of unemployment in rural areas, the  government has increasingly become involved in attempting to stimulate industry in these areas.
Hodge and Whitby (1981) classify such state activities into three types: the improvement of locations as sites for industrial development; the reduction of relative costs, and the improvement of information flows.
Both direct and indirect methods have been used to improve rural locations as sites for manufacturing industry.
Indirect methods include attempts to improve accessibility, technical education and training; direct methods include the provision of factories and industrial estates.
Such direct measures were first undertaken in rural areas by the Development Commission, established in 1947.
Until 1976 the Commission had responsibility for England, Wales and Scotland, but thereafter its role in the latter countries has been taken over by the Welsh and Scottish Development Agencies (Carney and Hudson 1978, 1979).
The actual construction of factories has been delegated to two agencies: the Industrial Estates Corporation, responsible for rural areas that are also assisted areas in terms of regional policy (such as parts of Scotland, Wales, the North and the South West), and COSIRA, responsible for the remainder of the country.
The most important feature of the programme of advance factory building is the emphasis on concentration, particularly since the mid-1960s when the policy of ‘trigger areas’ was adopted, involving in effect a strategy of growth centres within areas of serious population loss.
Such a strategy recognizes both the negative attitudes of local planners to industrial development in the open countryside and also the advantages of concentrating investment in infrastructure in the few locations that have reasonably large labour markets.
The same strategy seems to have characterized the work of most development agencies in rural areas.
For example, the Mid-Wales Industrial Development Association was established in 1957 by the five counties of mid-Wales in order to promote industrial development as a means of alleviating unemployment, low incomes and a prolonged population loss of 25 per cent between 1871 and 1971 (Howes and Law 1973).
From the beginning, the Association limited its activities to the 21 small towns in the region and, effectively, to the main settlements within this group (Garbett-Edwards 1972).
After the report on Depopulation in mid-Wales (Ministry of Housing and Local Government 1964) this approach was formally adopted, and future factory building was concentrated in Aberystwyth, Bala, Brecon, Llandrindod Wells, Newtown, Rhayader and Welshpool.
The scheme has certainly helped to attract manufacturing firms, and it has been estimated that between 1957 and 1977 some 5,000 new jobs were created in 113 factories, many of which were engineering or clothing firms (Broady 1980).
The literature on factories in rural areas has tended to over-emphasize  the role of the Development Commission, for there are a number of other agencies that provide industrial premises.
In Cornwall, for example, Perry and Chalkley (1982) have shown that the Development Commission built only one-fifth of the small premises (less than 5,000 ft 2 ) provided between 1975 and 1981.
Substantial proportions were provided by the local authorities and the Department of Industry, and the largest share of all, one-third, was accounted for by private developers (figure 3.1).
The same variation characterizes the provision of industrial estates in Cornwall (figure 3.2).
There is a dispersed distribution of industrial estates within the county (Shaw and Williams 1982b), which were developed and managed by a number of organizations including the Industrial Estates Corporation, the county and district councils and commercial establishments.
The estates varied in size from a few units in piecemeal developments to 30 or 40 plots on well serviced, carefully planned schemes.
Some have the full range of infrastructural provision enabling them to accommodate all but the heaviest industries, while others are capable of occupation only by light industry or warehouses.
all industrial estates, however, have one common characteristic: they are all located in, or adjacent to, major    settlements, and given their labour requirements perhaps this is inevitable.
This reinforces the advantages of the more accessible rural areas.
A second form of state intervention to promote rural industrialization is the use of direct subsidies to change manufacturers' relative costs.
These include grants for buildings and equipment, tax relief and rent-free factory lets.
These incentives, together with controls on the location of industry, have formed the main body of regional policy measures developed to promote industrial growth in the assisted areas.
The policies date from the Special Areas Act 1934 (McCrone 1976), but only in the early 1950s was the first rural region (North West Scotland) designated.
Subsequently, most Scottish rural areas, mid- and North Wales, the Pennines and parts of Devon and Cornwall have at one time or another been designated as Assisted Areas (see figure 3.3a).
The changes in definitions of Assisted Areas and in the financial assistance available to firms are too numerous to recount here, but useful summaries are available in a number of texts (Manners et al .
1972; Keeble 1976; McCrone 1976; Law 1980).
As unemployment has increased and high rates have become more widespread geographically, so more rural zones (particularly upland areas) have benefited from regional policy measures.
Since 1979 there has been a reversal in regional policy.
The newly elected Conservative government decided to reduce the extent of designated areas, through a programme of phased withdrawals, over the following three years (see Townsend 1980).
Some of the most significant changes have affected rural areas, and Development Area or Intermediate Area status has been withdrawn from large parts of rural Wales, Scotland and northern England (figure 3.3b).
As this has been combined with a general relaxation of Industrial Development Certificate controls on the location of industry and reduced real spending on regional policy, it is clear that resources are being redirected from rural areas.
The corollary of this is the increasing emphasis that has been placed on urban policies, such as Inner-City Partnerships and Enterprise Zones.
However, many specific rural employment policies survived the reductions in state expenditure in the early 1980s.
The Development Board for Rural Wales and the Development Commission were little affected, and COSIRA, as a result of its commitment to small businesses, seems to have been favoured (Gilg 1980).
Whether these agencies will be able to compensate in the mid-1980s for the loss of assisted area status is doubtful.
A third form of assistance to industry is the improvement of information.
This can be either through the provision of market research data or through advice on accounting and management.
An important role in providing such information is played by COSIRA and SICRAS and by the industrial development bureaus operated by many local authorities.
Such bureaus may also adopt a promotional role, seeking to ‘sell’ the advantages of their areas to industrialists who are relocating their firms.
The small North Wales town of Wrexham is one example of an authority that has taken a particularly active role in industrial promotion, and figure 3.4 shows one of their many eye-catching advertisements placed in the national press.
Many, if not most, local authorities now have some form of industrial promotion campaign, and Burgess (1982) has shown that the more rural authorities are aware of the environmental attractions that they offer.
For example, in promotional slogans Kings Lynn is ‘a place to live, work and breathe’; the Isle of Wight is ‘a unique living and working environment’, and Shrewsbury is ‘where town and country meet’.
However, most of the campaigns are run by authorities in the more accessible countryside; there are few campaigns organized by those in the remoter or upland areas, either because they deem them undesirable or consider the likely returns insufficient.
The different approaches to industrial development have absorbed an enormous amount of resources and effort in the postwar period.
Industrialization in rural areas has increased, and has been more rapid than in metropolitan areas.
However, it is not clear whether this has been the result of state intervention or of changes in the structure of production.
Furthermore, industrialization has rarely been the panacea for rural development that had been hoped.
A number of reservations have been expressed with regard to the employment created by rural manufacturing industry, concerning both type of jobs and type of firm.
The type of employment offered by manufacturing industry in rural areas has been questioned for a number of reasons.
It has been argued that the jobs thereby created do not fit the aspirations of local residents and also perpetuate low incomes, since low wages may have been the initial attraction to employers.
On the other hand, rural industrialization is considered essential to stem the outflow of population from rural areas (Saville 1957), although this depends on a matching-up of potential employees and potential jobs.
The type of manufacturing firm that is established is also important, with a fundamental distinction being made between indigenous and  exogenous enterprises, and between parent companies and branch plants.
Several useful reviews have examined this question, including Keeble (1976) and Watts (1981).
In brief, the available evidence suggests that branch plants are likely to provide some unskilled but few managerial jobs, and are likely to be less stable employers, although the surviving firms may have greater growth potential than their indigenous counterparts.
Perry (1982) has provided a useful detailed study of the employment characteristics of small manufacturing businesses in Cornwall, classified according to whether they are new starts or movers, and exogenous or indigenous firms.
Figure 3.5 illustrates that new starts are less stable than established firms, and that exogenous firms are less likely than indigenous firms to create male and skilled employment.
Another important difference between exogenous and indigenous firms concerns their linkages with the local economy.
The available evidence suggests that, in terms of both the purchase of services and material inputs, indigenous firms are likely to have the higher level of local linkages (Lever 1974; Marshall 1979; Watts 1981).
This is supported by the few studies specifically of rural areas; Moseley and Townroe (1973) found that immigrant firms in East Anglia retained most of their original linkages   outside the region, and Hodge and Whitby (1979), in a study of the eastern Scottish Borders, found that few in-migrant firms had important local linkages.
Therefore, the impact of manufacturing employment in rural areas will depend on the precise nature of the firms that have been established.
SERVICES AND TOURISM
Services provide more than 60 per cent of employment in most rural areas, and are the mainstay of job opportunities and incomes in these localities.
This is an economic sector that has a number of social features, usually with distinctive geographical dimensions.
The ratio of service to manufacturing jobs in most rural areas is of the order of 2: 1, but in the remoter rural areas this rises to 4: 1 (Gilg 1976); service employment however also tends to include more part-time work and self-employed workers.
For example, Marquand (1979) has shown that in 1976 23 per cent of female workers in manufacturing were employed part-time, compared with 51 per cent in the distributive trades, 57 per cent in miscellaneous services and 47 per cent in professional and scientific services.
The self-employed form a larger proportion of the workforce in services (8.2 per cent in 1975) compared with manufacturing (1.6 per cent).
Both these features of service employment have specific social implications; for example, part-time workers are often lower paid and need to work quite near home, while the self-employed usually must have their own transport and also have less security at times of sickness or slack employment.
There is a lack of readily usable statistics on service employment in rural areas, but some idea of its form and extent can be obtained from considering the national trends in service employment (table 3.1).
The most rapid rates of growth have been in the professional and scientific services, in insurance and other financial services, in miscellaneous services and in public administration and defence, while employment in distribution and transport has stagnated or declined.
Up to 1973 nearly all the fast growing services were of the type used by other industries.
Employment in education and health, the two largest non-market publicly provided services, also increased.
Consumer services, including most branches of retailing, did not expand, although this was accounted for by technological and organizational changes (for example, the growth of supermarkets) rather than by decline in demand.
In very general terms, these developments represent a shift in employment from the more ubiquitous services to those that are footloose (Marquand 1979).
In regional terms, there is evidence of a strong concentration of most footloose service industries in the South East, especially London.
Furthermore, the   available evidence suggests that the two strongest growth sectors — professional and scientific, and insurance and other financial services — have become more spatially concentrated during the postwar period (Daniels 1978).
Only public administration and defence have become less concentrated, the result of growth in local authority functions and government policy to disperse the civil service.
In order to understand how these trends have affected rural areas, it is necessary to consider separately the main types of service employment.
Office employment was one of the major growth sectors of the economy in the 1950s and 1960s, and by the early 1970s it was estimated that one-quarter of total employment was in offices (Goddard 1978).
All forms of office employment reveal a marked concentration in the South East, which has nearly half of the total.
However, there has been some decentralization of office employment since the mid-1960s, with a  redistribution away from London to the outer-metropolitan areas.
This change, and the more modest gains in the South West and East Anglia, has meant that many smaller towns have experienced increases in office employment (Marquand 1979).
The reasons for this decentralization are lower rates and rents outside London, the desire for an attractive environment, and the availability of cheap female labour.
Furthermore, many office jobs are routine clerical operations which could be located almost anywhere, while telecommunications are reducing the locational requirements of higher-order professional and managerial jobs (Goddard 1975).
Regional policies have also sought to decentralize office jobs from London and the South East.
The dispersal of office activities may have resulted in an increase in employment in some of the smaller towns in more rural regions within the South of England.
However, the bulk of tertiary employment in rural areas is in consumer services, both public and private, and in retailing.
These activities are closely linked to the populations that they serve, and therefore there are only limited possibilities of interregional redistribution.
However, changes have occurred at the local level, for there has been a strong centralization trend evident in both.
Retailing, in particular, has been affected by economies of scale and by enhanced mobility offered by increased car ownership rates (for some social groups).
As a result, village shops have tended to be replaced by supermarkets or shopping centres in nearby towns (Harman 1978).
In some remoter villages mobile shops play an important role, but these rarely create jobs in these villages themselves.
There has also been centralization in the public services.
This will be discussed more fully in chapter 8, but essentially, the reorganization of schools, health and social services has led to a closure of many local service outlets.
This trend has been reinforced by reorganization of the public sector bodies such as the National Health Service, local government, gas, electricity and water authorities.
Larger administrative units are usually associated with a greater concentration of service outlets.
The selected settlement strategies proposed by local planners, discussed below in chapter 7, have also reinforced the concentration of resources and new development in a small number of key settlements.
Therefore, although the service sector may be the mainstay of rural employment, it has a very uneven spatial distribution at the local level.
An uneven geographical distribution is also characteristic of tourism, one of the few industries that does tend to be found in the remoter rural areas (see chapter 9 below).
The state has actively sought to develop tourism, both to attract foreign visitors and to act as a counter-magnet to holidays abroad for Britons.
The most important policy instrument has been the Development of Tourism Act 1969, which allowed grants and  loans to be made by the tourist boards for tourist projects in Development Areas.
There was an upper limit of £50,000 on the amount of aid, and only about 500 projects were approved between 1971 and 1977 (Marquand 1979).
In May 1977 the policy was amended, when it was decided to concentrate on a few tourist growth points in areas of rural depopulation where there was unrealized tourist potential.
This led to a number of interrelated projects being financed in three limited areas; the High Pennines, the area around Scarborough, and between Bude and Wadebridge in the South West.
In addition, COSIRA and the Countryside Commission can also help to finance some smaller tourist developments.
Tourism does bring economic benefits to rural areas, but it is usually considered to be a mixed blessing, even by those who depend on it for their living.
The advantages are fairly clear and straightforward; both directly and indirectly, it brings about an increase in employment and incomes in rural areas.
Income from tourism can account for a sizeable proportion of an area's total income; it has been estimated that, in Cornwall in the 1960s, this was equal to the income generated by manufacturing in the county (Cornwall County Council 1966).
This can be particularly important to farmers, and Denman (1978) has shown that in Scotland approximately 6,100 private landholders, many of whom were smallholders or crofters, were involved in some form of tourist or recreational provision.
Against this, a number of disadvantages have to be noted.
Tourist receipts are volatile, for holidays are usually one of the first casualties of reduced family expenditure during a recession.
Furthermore, tourism tends to provide unskilled and low paid jobs, which are highly seasonal, many lasting only three or four months during the summer.
It can also contribute to congestion on the roads, various forms of pollution, and rising house prices if there is a demand for second or holiday homes.
For all these reasons, it is probably not as beneficial or stabilizing to the local economy as an increase in other retailing or service jobs, or in office employment, would be.
RURAL DEVELOPMENT BOARDS
In addition to the economic policies already discussed, development boards have been established in some rural areas where particularly acute social and economic problems exist.
To date, there have been three boards: the short-lived Northern Pennines Rural Development Board (1969–71), concerned mainly with agriculture; the more recent Development Board for Rural Wales, established in 1976; and the longer established Highlands and Islands Development Board, initiated in 1965.
Discussion here will be limited to the last-named agency since it has had more extensive impact.
There are acute development problems in the Highlands and Islands, because of a sparse population living in dispersed settlements, and the relative isolation of the region.
The economy has a weak base, and only 7 per cent of the land is cultivated, most being under rough grazing (Turnock 1974).
Some 15,000 crofts, small family farm units that offer marginal incomes and mainly part-time employment, have survived.
Incomes in the area have therefore been lower than in the UK as a whole, and out-migration has reduced the region's share of Scotland's total population from about 20 per cent in the mid-eighteenth century to about 5 per cent today.
There have been a number of attempts by central government to intervene in the region to stem the loss of population, dating from the 1886 Crofters Act (Turnock 1969).
None was really successful, however, and as a policy departure the Highlands and Islands Development Board was established in 1965, covering some 3.6 million ha (one-sixth of Britain's area) with a population of only 340,000 (Grieve 1973).
The aims of the Board have been to improve economic and social conditions as well as to increase the contribution of the region to the national economy.
The Board prepares specific proposals for the region and submits these to the Secretary of State who, after consultation with the local authorities, has the power to approve them.
Thereafter the Board has considerable means at its disposal to implement these schemes, and is empowered to acquire land and buildings to promote activities and enterprises (including the provision of grants and loans for these ventures) and to offer advice and training.
However, although its brief is exceedingly broad and its powers substantial, the activities of the Board have been fairly selective, both sectorally and spatially.
In view of its relatively small budget and the size of the region, this is probably inevitable.
The main sectors to be supported are tourism, fishing and manufacturing; between 1965 and 1974, each of these was allocated about £5–6 million, while by contrast, only about £2 million was spent on agricultural projects (Gilg 1976).
This pattern has continued, with the three main activities absorbing 66 per cent of all loans and grants between 1971 and 1980 (Shucksmith and Lloyd 1982).
A broad spectrum of projects has been supported, including repair yards for fishing boats, bulb growing, hotels, craft industries and an aluminium smelter.
The Board's activities have been concentrated into three growth areas — around Fort William, Inverness and Caithness, where almost one-half of the labour force of the region live — and the aim is to strengthen them further as both industrial and service centres.
Plans include the provision of new housing, advance factories and industrial estates.
This growth area strategy has been complemented by the designation of an additional 27  rural development points considered to be capable of further economic growth, whether in industry, as in Kirkwall, or services, as in east Sutherland.
However, this leaves uncovered the larger part of the region in which 10 per cent of its population live.
The Board has achieved a measure of success although this has been boosted by the development of North Sea Oil.
Population decline has been halted in many areas since the mid-1960s to its present level of 346,000, with employment in manufacturing trebling in this period and total employment growing by one-half (Shucksmith and Lloyd 1982).
Incomes had also increased to 90 per cent of the national level by 1973 (compared with only 65 per cent in 1960).
However, the Board has been criticized for over-concentration on economic development at the expense of social development (Carter 1974).
The economic strategy has also been criticized for having placed too much emphasis on manufacturing, especially on large-scale, capital-intensive schemes such as the paper mill at Fort William.
Instead, it can be argued that more attention should have been given to services and small-scale manufacturing.
The recent closures of the paper mill and the aluminium smelter at Invergordon lend weight to this argument.
However, there are no easy solutions to the problems of an area such as the Highlands within the constraints of the existing national economic structure, and there is no certainty that small-scale industries would have provided a better base for employment growth.
Some of the features of deprivation that may be associated with life in such regions are discussed in chapter 10.
COMMUTING FOR WORK
The discussion so far has shown that the structural changes in the rural economy have had important spatial implication.
Agriculture is an extensive activity with dispersed employment, but this sector has seen the largest decline.
By contrast, in the growth sectors of manufacturing and services within the non-metropolitan regions there have been strong tendencies of concentration in the main settlements.
This has led to an increasing separation of place of work and place of residence for many rural residents, a trend that has been reinforced by the decentralization of population from towns (chapter 4).
As a result, an increasing proportion of the rural population no longer work in their home parish or village but instead commute for their living.
It is difficult to establish an accurate picture of commuting in rural areas, but some insight into its extent is provided by the work of Spence et al .
(1982) on the urban system.
This is a large-scale analysis which used  local authority units in order to define metropolitan economic labour areas (MELAs), of which 126 were identified in Britain.
Each MELA was divided into three zones — cores, with minimum employment sizes and densities; metropolitan rings, with 15 per cent or more of their labour force commuting to work in the cores; and outer rings, with up to 15 per cent of their economically active labour force employed in a core.
The areas outside the MELAs were treated as ‘unclassified’ but, although there is only the crudest correspondence between these zones and the rural areas of Britain, the results of the analysis do give some indication of the extent of commuter hinterlands.
The MELAs clearly dominate the UK space economy.
Even in 1951, less than 5 per cent of the population lived in unclassified areas (table 3.2).
By 1971 there had been a further reduction in this proportion, so that only 4.3 per cent of the population lived beyond what may be considered practical limits for commuting to metropolitan labour market centres.
There were also changes within the labour markets, with strong evidence of decentralization from the cores to the metropolitan rings and outer rings.
At the same time, depending on personal mobility (chapter 6), more and more people have the possibility of commuting to major urban centres.
The available evidence suggests that this has become less of a choice and more of a necessity for many people.
Another feature of the MELAs is their geographical extent (figure 3.6); they cover almost all of England, particularly the South East, East Anglia, the Midlands, Lancashire and Yorkshire.
The major regions excluded are those that may be identified as the more remote rural areas — the extreme South West, the Lake District, the northern Pennines, mid- and North Wales and Scotland.
Even within these areas, there is smaller-scale, shorter-distance commuting for the few jobs in the larger villages and the smaller towns.
Only the most remote of rural localities now lie beyond the influence of town-based labour markets.
One major reservation must be added regarding commuting.
Although we have emphasized the outer limits of commuting, this is realistic only where suitable public or private transport is available to link home and workplace.
Given the decline of rural rail and bus routes (chapter 6), it is private transport that is most likely to be important, and access to cars and motorbikes is highly selective in terms of age, sex, income and social class.
INCOME, ASPIRATIONS — AND UNEMPLOYMENT
Income
The employment problems of the rural population concern not simply jobs, but also the rate of pay received.
Thomas and Winyard (1979) have shown that, of the ten counties with the lowest average net incomes in the 1970s, seven were very rural: Gwynedd, Cornwall, Isle of Wight, Powys, Devon, Norfolk and Clwyd.
Although these low average incomes may be affected by the large numbers of pensioners' households, there does seem to be a clear difference between urban and rural areas.
Gwynedd is the county with the lowest average net income in England and Wales, and its position actually seems to have deteriorated in recent years.
In the mid-1960s its average income was 90 to 94 per cent of the national average, but by the mid-1970s it had fallen to 85 per cent.
Variations can also be expected to exist between the more and the less accessible rural areas, but few published data exist that allow this to be illustrated.
A study of Cornwall in the early 1970s revealed that average earnings in the more rural employment office areas (in the west or the north-east of the county) were as much as 6 per cent below the county average, while earnings in the more urban areas (for example, near Plymouth or Camborne — Redruth) were 6 to 7 per cent above the county average (Cornwall County Council 1979).
The lower incomes may be due to the types of jobs available in country locations or to lower wages being paid in rural areas compared to urban areas for the same jobs.
There seems to be evidence to support both of these arguments.
Rural areas have relatively larger proportions employed in low-paying industries such as agriculture, distributive trades and tourism.
However, lower wages are also paid in many other industries in rural areas; for example, in 16 of the 19 industries examined in the South West, earnings were as much as 13 per cent below national levels.
These problems are further compounded by the extent of part-time and seasonal employment in rural areas (Thomas and Winyard 1979).
Two questions seem particularly relevant: why are agricultural earnings relatively low, and why are earnings less in rural areas than in urban areas  for comparable work?
There has been considerable research into the question of low pay in agriculture.
The wages of farm workers are set by the Agricultural Wages Board (for England and Wales).
The Board fixes minimum rates, although farmers and farm workers locally may agree higher rates and in practice this is fairly widespread — in 1976, 94 per cent of full-time male farm workers were paid more than the minimum.
However, only 43 per cent were paid more than £5 per week above the minimum, and full-time male farm workers in 1977 still earned only 77 per cent of the average earnings of all male manual workers.
The position of women is even worse: 8 per cent were paid below the legal minimum while over one-half were paid barely above it (Winyard 1978).
It is true that there are some fringe benefits available to farm workers (as there are for many occupational groups), but their value amounted to only an estimated £1 per week for free food and a net £2 per week for low-rent tied cottages (Brown and Winyard 1975).
Although only a small proportion receive free food, about half of all farm workers in Britain live in tied accommodation.
However, the agricultural tied cottage is a doubtful privilege, because of its insecurity of tenure and the poor quality of accommodation (chapter 5).
The result is that many farm workers are caught in the poverty trap between exemption from taxation and receipt of means-tested benefit (Winyard 1978).
The consistently low wages paid to farm workers have been explained by five main considerations.
First, there does seem to be genuine preference by agricultural workers for the ‘non-economic’ conditions of their jobs compared with non-agricultural work.
For example, Newby (1972a, p. 20) writes that, ‘compared with most manual work in industry, agriculture offers greater non-economic rewards in terms of job interest, judgement, discretion, challenge, responsibility and control.
On most farms the division of labour has not reached anything like the level of most factories and there is a wider variety of jobs to perform and more job rotation.’
A second reason is that many smaller farms simply cannot afford to pay higher wages because of the low price elasticity for farm products (Bellerby 1956; Metcalf 1969).
However, this does not generally apply to larger farms, and it is paradoxical that some of the lowest earnings are in East Anglia, where the largest and probably most profitable farms are located.
More important may be the third reason — the poor trade union structure for agricultural workers.
The geographical dispersion of agricultural work among predominantly small units makes it very difficult to organize union activities effectively (Newby 1972b).
It is perhaps significant that the last strike organized by the National Union of Agricultural and Allied Workers was in 1923 and nearly bankrupted the Union; although, having amalgamated with the Transport and General Workers' Union in 1982, farm workers may now find themselves in a better  bargaining position.
The fourth consideration concerns the informal but paternalistic social relations that exist between employer and employees on farms which make it difficult for farm workers even to consider industrial action.
Finally, it may be argued that farm workers have to accept low wages because they are relatively immobile.
A lack of capital, the tied cottage system, and the workers' age and lack of formal qualifications make it impossible for many to move to better jobs elsewhere (Newby 1972a).
As to the question of lower earnings paid in rural than in urban areas for the same industries, four reasons can be suggested for this, although there is some overlap with the earlier discussion of low agricultural wages.
First, the types of manufacturing activities attracted to rural regions have included many enterprises that specialize in the routine semi-skilled and unskilled parts of production, often employing females.
There is, therefore, a preponderance of lower paid posts, and a lack of professional and managerial posts.
Second, although many of the enterprises in rural areas are relatively small, some may dominate limited local labour markets (Lever 1978).
As a result there may be lower rates of unionization, fewer strikes (Bean and Peel 1976) and more informal work relations resulting in lower wage rates.
Third, al of these problems are compounded by the part-time and seasonal nature of much rural employment.
Finally, the fundamental problem of a lack of suitable alternative jobs in rural areas, compounded by the effects of economic recession in the early 1980s, serve to keep local wages low.
Aspirations
Most of the recent research in this field has concentrated on school-leavers' job aspirations.
Drudy and Drudy (1979), in a study of north Norfolk, found that 31 per cent of their survey group aspired to professional and intermediate non-manual jobs and that a further 31 per cent aspired to other non-manual jobs, so that little more than one-third aspired to manual work.
Toyne (1977), in a study in Devon, found that only 16 per cent of school leavers' first-choice employment was manufacturing, while 59 per cent preferred jobs in offices, retailing or the public sector.
Manufacturing industry had a very unattractive image to school-leavers, especially because of the nature of the work, the working hours and the wages.
The most detailed research, however, has been undertaken by S. Dench in mid-Devon.
Again it has been shown that jobs in services, clerical work, agriculture and construction are attractive, but factory work is only the fifth choice, preferred by only 11 per cent(see figure 3.7).
The most interesting feature of this study, however, is the way in which it compared the preferred jobs of school-leavers with those   obtained, revealing the gap between aspirations and reality.
The reality is a lack of suitable clerical and service jobs, leading many to take what are viewed as less satisfactory alternatives in agriculture or factories.
Those living in rural areas are likely to meet barriers to the fulfilment of their aspirations.
Faced with this fact, there are three possible options: accepting less desirable jobs, being unemployed, or migrating from the area.
There is strong evidence that many will choose the last-named option.
Toyne's study showed that one-third of his survey group expected to leave the region within the next 10 years, and the main motive for this was better career prospects.
Drudy and Drudy also found that 22 per cent of    their survey group wished to leave the area, although they did not seek to establish the motives, while Dench found a willingness to leave mid-Devon if career prospects were frustrated.
Unemployment
Unemployment rates arguably provide the most sensitive indicators of local employment opportunities.
Apart from the traditional urban-industrial Assisted Areas, the higher rates of unemployment may be seen in the South West, West and North Wales, Cumbria, and the Scottish Highlands and Islands (figure 3.8).
The more accessible countryside throughout southern and eastern England and Scotland has relatively lower rates of unemployment.
But there is a second, more local, level at which substantial differences exist in unemployment rates.
This can be illustrated by an analysis of 1977 unemployment rates in Norfolk.
The average male unemployment rate was 7.3 per cent in urban areas compared with 10.5. per cent in the rural areas.
The two extremes were represented by ‘urban’ Thetford, with only a 5.4 per cent unemployment rate, compared with 14.6 per cent in rural Cromer (Packman 1979).
These spatial variations, both at the regional and the local scale, are directly related to the structure of the rural economy.
Unemployment also affects social groups unevenly and four groups are especially susceptible: the young, the old, females and the unskilled (Packman 1979).
Rising unemployment among school-leavers is sadly a national trend, and in particular there has been a lack of training opportunities and apprenticeships (see chapter 8).
Females are more prominent among the unemployed for two main reasons: they are disproportionately employed in seasonal work and, as there are now more economically active women than ever before, they are as likely as men to lose their jobs because of recession.
As a consequence, the proportion of women among the unemployed in Norfolk increased from 12 per cent in 1971 to 22 per cent in 1978 (Packman 1979).
The outcome of low incomes, frustrated job aspirations, restricted career structures and unemployment can be a poor quality of life.
These conditions can also lead to selective out-migration, which has been an important feature shaping the social geography of certain rural areas.
As this has been a recurring theme in the literature, it warrants further attention when the more general question of rural population change is discussed in the following chapter.
POPULATION AND SOCIAL CHANGE
The British countryside has long been regarded as a source of out-migration and a pool of reserve labour for urban areas.
Lawton (1973), in his analysis of Britain's nineteenth-century population, observed that between 1801 and 1911, while the total population increased four-fold, that of rural areas was stagnant, and in fact decreased after 1861 (figure 4. 1).
The rural population, as defined in the census, fell from a peak of 9.1 million in 1861 to a low of 7.3 million just before the Second World War.
As a proportion of total population, this represents a decrease from 65.2 per cent in 1801 to just under one-half in 1851 and to 17.6 per cent in 1939.
Britain had become the most urbanized nation in the world by the late nineteenth century, and has probably remained so ever since.
Lawton (1977) gives a most useful summary of the nature of those population changes and of the balance between natural change (the differ   difference between births and deaths) and migration.
Between 1831 and 1861 the increase in the rural population was slackening as out-migration (especially to London) strengthened, although most moves were over short distances.
After 1881 birth rates fell; this, combined with continuing out-migration, ensured the decline of rural population.
Out-migration, however, had become more interregional, a trend that became even stronger during the interwar depression years.
This period saw a levelling-out of both the absolute fail in rural population and the decline in the proportion of total population living in rural areas.
By 1951 rural population was on the increase, a trend that has continued throughout the postwar period.
Although a surge in the birth rate until the 1960s contributed to this, there is also evidence that the balance of net migration has turned in favour of rural areas.
This reversal provides the framework for an analysis of demographic change, but the trend has been uneven both spatially and socially.
The spatial differences are mainly between the more remote areas and the accessible countryside; while some of the latter areas experienced population growth from the 1920s, many of the more remote rural areas experienced population losses of more than 15 per cent even between 1951 and 1971 (Countryside Review Committee 1977a).
The 1970s saw a further shift in population trends.
The regions with the most rapid growth rates were two of the more rural, East Anglia and the South West.
A county-level analysis also reveals that there are two different types of rural growth areas; those such as Shropshire or Sussex, which are accessible to the major conurbations, and those such as Cornwall or Powys, which are considered to be remote (Gilg 1983a).
Therefore many traditional notions about rural decline have to be modified to take account of the remarkable turn-around in demographic trends.
The precise reasons for these changes are hard to establish without further analysis of census material, but it should be noted that some of the population increases in rural areas (sometimes of more than 10 per cent) are from very low population bases and therefore are not great numerically.
The two-fold classification into more remote and accessible countryside areas is somewhat simplistic, but it does provide a useful guide to understanding spatial differences in rural population change.
These changes have also been socially differentiated, because in-migrants and out-migrants have been selective in terms of age, sex and socio-economic characteristics.
As a result, there has been a demographic and social differentiation of rural areas that reflects their economic and social functions.
These spatial and social variations provide the framework for interpreting the themes of accessibility, service provision, recreation and deprivation that are examine later in this book.
ACCESSIBLE, GENTRIFIED LOWLAND ENGLAND.
THE RURAL VILLAGE OF POPULAR IMAGES (SOURCE: THE AUTHORS)
THE DRIFT FROM THE LAND
The phrase ‘the drift from the land’ as a description of rural depopulation is something of a misnomer, for both natural change and out-migration contribute to this process.
It is possible, for example, to distinguish between two types of population decline in an area such as mid-Wales.
In the first there is natural decrease and out-migration:
these are the areas which are reaching the final stages of the demographic cycle in which, as a result of migration of the child-bearing age-groups, the residual population is unable to maintain, let alone increase, its own level by means of natural growth.
There is no ‘in-migration’ of younger people, and the whole process becomes one, therefore, of cumulative decline.
[In the second type there is]…a natural increase which is offset by outwards migration so that the overall result is one of population decline….
[Thomas 1972, p. 72].
Although it is important to note these differences, it is nevertheless possible to agree with Lowenthal and Comitas (1962) that out-migration is still the prime factor in rural depopulation.
Rural population changes can be observed at the regional level, where the pattern is one of population loss from the upland areas — the more remote and agriculturally poorer parts of the country.
The main regions involved are mid-Wales, the Lake District and the remoter areas of the Pennines, the Scottish Highlands and some parts of the South West peninsula, although many lowland areas also lost population until comparatively recently.
In the more remote regions population losses have been as high as 10 per cent in many of the intercensal periods during the twentieth century (Dunn 1976).
Mid-Wales provides one example of a region where population has fallen during every decade, from 217,277 in 1901 to only 174, 604 in 1971 (Dunn et al .
1981).
These broad regional variations conceal substantial differences at the sub-regional level, although, again, these can be classified in terms of the more accessible and the less accessible areas.
Jackson (1968), in a study of the north Cotswolds, observed that the main zone of depopulation was the area of hill farming, while the fringes of the Cotswolds, which are accessible to the West Midlands urban areas, had received large numbers of in-migrants.
In Herefordshire, between 1951 and 1971 Hereford Rural District grew by 10 per cent as a result of expansion in the nearby city, and the remainder of the rural districts lost population at rates ranging between 3.8 and 20 per cent(Dunn 1976).
This is not a very remote county, but some districts still lost up to one-fifth of their population in only 20 years, roughly equivalent to the 17.6 per cent decrease that occurred in the population of the Scottish Islands during the same period (Dunn et al .
1981).
Analysis at the local level provides a more detailed insight into the nature of population change.
This is amply demonstrated by House's (1965) research on the rural areas of north-east England.
In overall terms, there was a net gain of 9 per cent in the population of rural districts between 1951 and 1961, mainly owing to overspill from towns like Darlington and some growth in market towns such as Barnard Castle.
But  the remaining rural areas actually experienced a net loss of 2 per cent, while one rural district — Norham and Islandshires — had a 12.5 per cent loss.
A more recent example of population loss is to be seen in the Wells area of north Norfolk (Drudy and Wallace 1971).
Between 1951 and 1966, three parishes had population gains of between 5 and 22 per cent, but ten parishes had population losses, the largest of which (52 per cent ) was in Warham.
The importance of studying these demographic changes is underlined by Neate (1981, p. 9) who stressed that the depopulation of an area ‘is the ultimate protest and arguably one of the most potent indicators of relative disadvantage or deprivation’.
INACCESSIBLE AND ISOLATED WELSH FARM (SOURCE: THE AUTHORS)
Causes
In explaining rural out-migration, emphasis is usually given to economic factors, especially the problems of employment outlined in chapters 2 and 3, although factors such as planning policies, housing markets and the decline of services are also important.
Nevertheless, it is the economic change in rural areas, and especially the decline in agricultural employment, that are often stressed as root causes of depopulation (Drudy and Wallace 1971).
The decline in the agricultural labour force, continuous  since the nineteenth century, can be observed in all regions, not only in the more remote ones.
Drudy (1978) saw changes in agriculture as contributing significantly to population loss even in relatively prosperous rural areas such as north Norfolk.
Furthermore, even if agricultural jobs are available, they may not be attractive to those who live locally; Cowie and Giles (1957) found that 40 per cent of a sample of out-migrants gave low pay and long hours of farm work as reasons for deciding to leave their home areas.
The lack of alternative employment is also a cause of rural out-migration.
This was discussed in chapter 3, but an example will illustrate the often dramatic reduction in manufacturing jobs in rural areas.
Of the thousands of chair makers living in the scattered villages of the Chilterns in 1880, 30 years later there were only a handful, working in factories concentrated in High Wycombe (Saville 1957).
Cairncross (1949) has argued that, as rural-urban migration in the nineteenth century was greater in the more prosperous farming areas surrounding towns, the attraction, or ‘pull’, of alternative jobs and higher wages must have been more important than the ‘push’ from the decline of farm jobs and the low wages in farming.
This view is substantiated in recent studies such as that by Drudy and Wallace (1971), which compare young people's aspirations with the types of jobs available in rural areas.
Two-thirds of their sample thought they could obtain their preferred type of job within 24 miles of home, but only 18 per cent were willing to travel this distance daily.
The expectation at an early age that career aspirations cannot be met locally contributes to a lack of commitment to the home area and to the acceptance of out-migration as the inevitable solution.
Economic factors may be fundamental to rural out-migration but they are not the sole explanations.
This is illustrated by the results of two surveys of the motivations of out-migrants (table 4. 1).
Direct comparison of the results of the two surveys is not possible because of the different methods of classification that have been used.
But it can be seen that, while occupational and income motives are dominant in the Welsh borderland, employment reasons are less important in the Herefordshire survey.
The other motives that seem to be important are social, community, housing and family reasons.
Perhaps the underlying feature of the social motivation is the decline in services in rural areas.
This is linked to population decline in what is usually portrayed as a vicious circle of cause and effect: as services decline people react by out-migrating, which leads to further fall in demand and a consequent further reduction in service provision (Bracey 1970).
This view is substantiated by a study of population loss in Somerset between 1931 and 1951 (Bracey 1958).
Areas losing population were generally less well provided with public utilities (such as piped water and sewerage) than   expanding villages.
In practice, it seems that it is not decline itself, but a fail in population to below critical threshold levels that is important in affecting service provision (Winter 1971).
A study of the rural North East showed that critical thresholds may be as low as 120 persons, below which there is a precipitous fall-off in all services (Edwards 1964).
Elsewhere, it has been shown that the closure of village schools can often trigger a rapid decline in rural services (Lee 1960).
The concept of the ‘vicious circle’ theory is, of course, underlain by people's expectations of what constitutes acceptable levels of service provision.
With general improvements in standards of living, expectations have risen, so that young people are no longer prepared to do without the basic utilities or to accept a limited range of shops and services (Thomas 1972).
Although some uneven distribution of utilities and services can be attributed to market forces, others result from decisions taken by public agencies, such as health authorities, or by local planning authorities (see chapters 5 and 8).
Changing housing requirements also affect rural migration and the family life-cycle is an important factor in residential mobility (Rossi 1955; Morgan 1976).
Studies of rural migration have largely neglected these factors although Dunn (1979) has shown that a substantial amount of short-distance movement in rural areas can be attributed to changing housing needs.
Movements between tenures, whether from tied cottages to council houses or from council houses to owner-occupation, is a particularly important reason for movements between villages (Dunn et al .
1981).
There are however differences between short-distance and long-distance migration, because in the latter economic motives are more likely to be important (House and Knight 1965).
Finally, a number of other social and community reasons may contribute to out-migration.
The sheer isolation of some rural areas, for example the Scottish Islands, may be important (Dunn 1976); there may also be more complex factors associated with the nature of the rural community.
Mitchell's (1950) study of villages in the South West is particularly relevant because the considerable variations in population change rates that he noted did not appear to conform with any simple indices of accessibility.
Instead, it seemed that the nature of social organization in the villages was critical.
Villages that experienced population losses tended to be those that had ‘closed, disintegrating societies’, that is, those that had disharmonies in institutional life and where newcomers were regarded as ‘foreigners’.
By contrast, a sense of ‘community’ seemed to be absolutely essential if village populations were to be maintained at viable levels.
Who goes and who stays?
Out-migrants from rural areas are predominantly the younger members of the adult population.
There is evidence that this trend existed in the nineteenth century (Hill 1925) as well as more recently.
Saville (1957) observed that the bulk of rural out-migrants were aged 20 — 29, while Jones (1965) found in a study of mid-Wales that 38 per cent of all migrants were aged less than 25.
Migration is certainly related to the family life-cycle: House (1965) discovered in the North East that migration peaked in the late twenties (when family commitments are fewest); there was then a lull for about 15 years, and migration again became more important when family ties had been reduced as children grew up.
There were also distinctive sex differences between migrants and non-migrants.
The traditional view is that females are more likely to predominate among rural out-migrants for two main reasons: employment opportunities for women are even more restricted than those for men in rural areas, and women are more likely to move after marriage than are men (Hannan 1970).
However, not all the evidence supports this view; both Hill and Saville found that, while women were more numerous among the youngest groups of migrants, men were more likely to be in the majority in the older groups.
Even more interesting is the finding by Drudy and Drudy (1979) that there were no differences between male and female school-leavers regarding their expectation of migrating.
Expectations may be frustrated, however, since constraints operate differently for men and women at various points in the family cycle and career structure.
Out-migration is also socially selective in terms of education and employment aspirations, which in turn reflect social class.
The most useful evidence on this again comes from Drudy and Drudy's study of school-leavers in north Norfolk.
Fewer than half of them wanted further education, while 29 per cent wanted training for skilled work, 9 per cent wanted vocational training and 15 per cent aspired to higher education.
Aspirants to further or higher education may well have to migrate and, once the initial break with the home area has been made, there is always the possibility that young people will not return to their villages.
Employment aspirations also differentiated the school-leavers; those who aspired to manual jobs were more likely to obtain them locally than were those who aspired to non-manual work, especially professional and managerial posts.
It is therefore the more academically able who will have the education and occupational aspirations likely to lead to out-migration.
This, in turn, may reduce community leadership and innovative capacity in the village.
Migration, however, is not a one-way process, and the stream of young out-migrants may cross a very different counter-stream of in-migrants to rural areas.
COUNTER-URBANIZATION
Flows of people from metropolitan to non-metropolitan areas have been observed in a number of developed countries in recent years, and the term ‘counter-urbanization’ has been applied to this process (Berry 1976; Bryant et al .
1982).
Counter-urbanization in Britain has been measured in two major studies, by Hall et al .
(1973) and Spence et al .
(1982).
The latter study, analysing population changes between 1951 and 1974, found that there was substantial and widespread decentralization throughout urban Britain.
The conurbations had been losing population relative to the smaller ‘free-standing’ cities, and almost al the ‘cores’of the metropolitan areas had experienced absolute or relative population shifts to their metropolitan rings.
This is summarized in table 4.2 (see pp. 65–6 above for definitions).
In the 1950s there was relative decentralization as population grew more rapidly in the rings than the cores, but by the 1960s there was absolute decentralization as a net loss of population was registered in the cores.
This pattern became further exaggerated in the early 1970s when the cores lost population even more rapidly.
There is nothing new about the decentralization of population.
Lawton (1977) has shown that many rural districts around London and the other major cities have had persistent population increases since 1921.
This was   largely the result of the extension of commuting zones, a trend that has continued through the interwar and postwar periods.
At first much of the increase in population was accounted for by suburbanization, that is, by contiguous physical expansion of the cities into the surrounding countryside.
However, over a period of time, and partly encouraged by urban planning policies, commuter villages have grown up at greater distances from the cities.
It is mainly as a result of these changes that there has been a decisive reversal in rural demographic patterns (see figure 4. 1).
Between 1939 and 1971 the population living in rural areas has increased from 7.3 to 10.6 million; in proportional terms, a rise from 17.6 to 21.8 per cent.
Suburbanization, therefore, has become ‘rurbanization’, and physical urbanization has been replaced by functional urbanization of the countryside (Hall et al .
1973).
This has been augmented by retirement migration, a topic that will be elaborated in the following section.
Rural population growth has had a distinctive regional pattern, which is, of course, the inverse of that observed for rural depopulation.
The rural areas that gained population up to about 1970 were those in the South and East in the lowland areas of Britain.
In particular, growth was most impressive in the accessible countryside, especially in rural south-east England (including most of Kent, Surrey, Hampshire, Berkshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire and Essex), although there were also important outliers in the South West, in Wiltshire and Dorset.
However, as with the drift from the land, there are important sub-regional and local variations within this general pattern.
For example, some of the larger key settlements in Devon and Warwickshire have experienced substantial growth while other smaller settlements have lost population (Cloke 1979).
The existence of this counter-urbanization trend, and its extension into the accessible countryside, has long been recognized, but many commentators were surprised by the population changes of the 1970s.
There have    been substantial population losses in the more industrialized and urbanized regions, including the South East, North and North West, while the largest gains have been in the South West, East Anglia and the East Midlands.
A district-level analysis reveals that population change is still greatest, and is even accelerating, in the conurbations (figure 4.2).
During this period the population of inner London fell by 18 per cent, that of Glasgow by 22 per cent and of Manchester by 17 per cent .
What is unexpected is the extent to which decline has extended beyond the conurbations into those adjacent districts that had previously grown so rapidly (Spence et al .
1982).
However, the really surprising feature of these population changes is the way in which growth now seems to have occurred in the more remote countryside.
Large areas of western Scotland, mid- and North Wales and the upland zones of the North and South West of England have exhibited population gains, in some cases for the first time in over a century.
Some of these gains have been quite spectacular; in Cornwall, for example, there was an increase of 50,000 on a base population of 380,000 (Robert and Randolph 1983).
By contrast, almost the only areas of decline in Britain have been the conurbations and some of the older established industrial areas in South Wales, Scotland and the North of England.
The list of the 13 largest relative population gains between 1971 and 1981 is dominated by new towns, but rural areas, some very remote, feature prominently (see table 4.3).
If such population gains are repeated in the next few decades, the traditional demographic map of rural areas will be completely transformed.
Already, it has been stated that ‘the last vestiges of rural depopulation seem now to be rapidly disappearing’(Robert and Randolph 1983, p. 90).
A note of caution is necessary, however, for despite the apparent evidence of the 1970s, counter-urbanization is not an all-pervasive trend.
Many parishes and villages have continued to lose population and will probably do so in the foreseeable future.
Counter-urbanization, like out-migration, is a highly selective process.
Characteristics of rural in-migrants
There are at least four types of rural in-migrants, classified according to their reasons for movement: those using the countryside for recreation, for retirement, for employment, and for commuting.
First, there is a small, but in some areas important, group who see the countryside as a locale for recreation and therefore may sometimes purchase rural second homes.
This group will be discussed further in chapter 5; here it is sufficient to note that they tend to be older people and those with higher incomes.
A second group are those who retire to rural areas.
There has been, over the course of this century, an increase in the number of elderly people, in the levels of pension available from private funds and the state, and in the number of people leaving work, voluntarily or through redundancy, before the accepted retirement age (which itself has been failing).
Therefore there are now larger proportions of non-economically active persons in Britain than at any previous period in the twentieth century.
Allon-Smith (1982) estimates that the proportion above pensionable age has increased from 7.8 to 16.0 per cent during this century.
Some of the more wealthy groups, or those with better pensions, have greater means than ever before to choose where to live during their retirement (Warnes 1982).
Although elderly persons, on the whole, are less geographically mobile than other age groups, the spatially selective nature of their migration gives them an important impact (Law and Warnes 1982).
On the other hand, many elderly persons are ‘trapped’ locationally by their low earnings and position in the housing market, especially if they are not owner-occupiers.
There is also evidence that many who have the financial means to be mobile are actually committing themselves to post-retirement migration.
Among the reasons are greater mobility before retirement, which enables them to acquaint themselves with alternative residential locations, and the financial advantages of moving from larger to smaller houses, perhaps in less expensive areas (Law and Warnes 1976).
Apart from financial advantages, environmental preferences and the increasing amount of time available for leisure may also attract elderly migrants to non-metropolitan areas (Law and Warnes 1973).
It is to be expected, therefore, that the major flows of elderly migrants will be either local (adjusting to changing housing needs) or from urban to rural areas, perhaps at an interregional scale.
For longer-distance migration the destinations are likely to be places that are better known to tourists or are considered to be scenically more attractive.
A major study of England and Wales using 1966 census data has shown that the pattern of out-migration is largely as expected (figure 4.3): the principal destinations are the South West, East Anglia, Wales and the outer South East, with the metropolitan London area being the source of most moves (Law and Warnes 1976).
As a result the numbers of elderly persons living in these regions has increased substantially, especially in coastal locations.
There has been a retirement migration to small inland towns in these regions for, as the authors of the study stress ‘ail of these are rural areas with attractive scenery which have been largely by-passed by industrial development of any scale’(Law and Warnes 1976, p. 470).
These migratory movements, adding to the numbers of ageing local residents, have led to quite phenomenal growth in the number of elderly persons living in specific areas (Allon-Smith 1982).
At a regional level it has been demonstrated that, in 1971, over 30 per cent of the population in North Wales and Sussex was aged over 60, compared with the national mean of only 19 per cent(Law and Warnes 1975).
However the most dramatic growth is observed at the local scale; in 1971, 159 of the 1,400 administrative divisions in England and Wales had a proportion of the elderly greater than one standard deviation above the national mean (Allon-Smith 1982).
Most of these areas were urban centres on the coast or their immediate rural hinterlands, and the remainder were small inland towns.
Size was one of their common characteristics: most were relatively small, and 81 had populations of fewer than 10,000.
The top ranked places, all of which had more than 40 per cent retired in their populations, were Grange-over-Sands (Lancashire), Sidmouth, Budleigh Salterton and Seaton (Devon), Bexhill (Sussex), Southwold (Suffolk) and Frinton and Walton (Essex).
The main concentrations of the elderly are therefore outside the metropolitan regions, and are more likely to be located in small towns than in villages or the open countryside — which tends to lack the   public transport and range of local services that are important to elderly persons.
A third group of rural in-migrants comprises those who have moved from metropolitan areas for employment reasons.
These may include the managers or key workers who have moved with a decentralizing firm, although in some areas, notably Cornwall (Perry 1979), migration may  occur before employment is obtained.
While some elements of this group are simply following the decentralization of jobs that has already occurred, others are moving for non-economic reasons, attracted by the quality of life in non-metropolitan zones.
This group is likely to be fairly heterogeneous, both socially and demographically.
In the fourth group, in-migrants have moved out of cities in order to live in rural or semi-rural areas, but commute to urban jobs.
There are a number of reasons to explain this, including the location of new housing beyond the existing built-up areas (Ambrose 1974), the desire for larger houses and gardens, improved mobility, and a preference for rural life.
The advantages of village life are supposed to be friendliness and better surroundings (Clout 1972), although reality does not always match perceptions.
Whatever the motives for rural residence, this group has profoundly transformed the social composition of many villages in the accessible countryside.
In social terms it is a rather heterogeneous group, although it almost certainly excludes the lowest income groups, who may be caught in the housing and job ‘traps’ in inner-city areas (Department of the Environment 1977a).
In addition, Pahl (1975) and others have shown that commuting may be a constraint rather then a preference, and that many higher income manual workers are ‘reluctant commuters’, who are only able to afford homes outside metropolitan areas.
The discussion in this chapter should not suggest that the entire rural populace is in constant flux.
Most attention has been directed at the in-migrants and out-migrants to the exclusion of a core of more or less stable groups.
Johnston (1967), in a study of Nidderdale, found that 51 per cent of the adult population had lived in the area at least 11 years.
Others may come or go, but the entire life-cycle of many is lived within the confines of quite small areas.
SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE COUNTRYSIDE
Economic changes, the growth of commuting, and migration movements have all helped to modify the social structure of rural areas.
In the same way that these changes have varied spatially — both regionally and at a local scale — so too have the modifications to social organizations themselves varied.
There is no simple pattern or model of social change that can be applied to all villages, and there is no single continuum on which all rural communities can be placed (see chapter 1 above).
In addition, attempts to interpret rural social change are hampered by the myths surrounding rural life, especially those that portray all rural communities as settings in which mutual aid and harmony of interests abound.
Nevertheless, in spite of these difficulties it is possible to identify a number of central themes concerning rural social change.
The first of these is a fairly widespread concurrence about the demise of the traditional village community.
Newby (1979) argues that in the mid-nineteenth century the majority of people living in villages relied on agriculture for a living, either directly or indirectly, so that each village comprised an ‘occupational community’.
Perhaps the main characteristics of this community were the senses of certainty and order in social life:
Inevitably, the boundaries of what was and was not considered permissible in village life were much clearer in the nineteenth century, as they were in Victorian society generally.
This conferred a sense of order on village life, a sense of ‘place’, in both a geographical and a social sense, which could be recognized and accepted as an immutable fact of life.
For those villagers who accepted their ‘place’ this created a sense of psychological certainty and with it a not altogether unwelcome sense of security.
[Newby 1979, p. 157]
Economic and social changes have combined to eliminate this occupational community, at least in lowland England, in all but a few very remote areas.
The changes observed in the Sussex village of Ringmer between 1871 and 1971 are not atypical (Ambrose 1974).
In 1871, 74 per cent of the village men were manual workers and most were engaged in agriculture, while the few women who worked outside the home were almost entirely ‘in service’.
By 1971 only one-third of the men worked manually and there was only one agricultural worker (in a survey of 150 households), while a large proportion of married and single women had jobs.
As Ambrose emphasizes, the agricultural village had become the office workers' village.
Apart from the greater occupational variety, the greatest change in the village community has been the introduction of large numbers of new residents.
This has sometimes led to social divisions between newcomers and locals, as mentioned in chapter 1, although the more remote rural areas are less affected by this influx than the accessible countryside.
Much academic attention has been focused on the classification of the social groups comprising the new types of communities in rural areas.
Four of the most frequently-used typologies are by Stamp, Pahl, Thorns and Ambrose.
1
Stamp (1949)
(i)
Primary rural population
(ii)
Secondary rural population
(iii)
Adventitious population 
2
Pahl (1966)
(i)
Large property owners
(ii)
Salaried immigrants with some capital
(iii)
Spiralists
(iv)
Those with limited income and little capital
(v)
Retired
(vi)
Council house tenants
(vii)
Tied cottagers and other tenants
(viii)
Local tradesmen and owners of small businesses
3 Thorns
(1968)
(i)
Professional and managerial
(ii)
Other white-collar workers
(iii)
Skilled and semi-skilled manual workers
(iv)
Farm workers and unskilled workers
4
Ambrose (1974)
(i)
Possess capital, can afford ‘character’ house and run two cars
(ii)
Can afford four-bedroom house and run a car
(iii)
Can afford two- or three-bedroom semi-detached house and run a car
(iv)
Can afford a two- or three-bedroom semi-detached house but not a car
(v)
Rent a council house and can run a car
(vi)
Rent a council house but cannot run a car
(vii)
Live in private rented accommodation
The earliest of these classifications is by Stamp, who divided the rural population into three groups.
The primary population is directly dependent for its living on the land and includes farmers, farm workers and foresters; the secondary population exists to serve the primary population and includes the village shopkeeper, the smith and the doctor; by contrast, the adventitious population lives in the countryside by choice and includes newcomers such as elderly migrants and commuters.
Saville (1957) considers that this is a useful analytical device, if rather imprecise.
For example, it ignores the fact that a large proportion of the secondary population actually live in nearby towns rather than in the village.
More importantly, the definition of the adventitious population stresses an element of choice in rural residence.
This may have been true at one time, when the vast majority of commuters were middle-class, but it does not apply in the postwar period when large numbers of commuters have been ‘reluctant’ villagers, constrained by the availability of cheap housing to living in the countryside (Pahl 1965b).
Pahl (1966) instead suggested that eight distinctive social groups could be identified particularly with respect to housing, although these can have broader applications.
The classification is further considered in the context of housing in chapter 5 but, essentially, Pahl proposed a two-dimensional model of stratification, with the two axes being income-housing tenure and newcomers-locals.
This was made more complex by differentiation of those who intended to spend an appreciable period of time in the village (such as the retired and salaried immigrants), and those, such as career-oriented spiralists, who were merely passing through.
The inclusion of the retired as a separate group added a socio-demographic element to the typology and, although the classification was two-dimensional, the two axes were not considered to be independent.
Furthermore, Pahl has made it clear elsewhere (Pahl 1965b) that one of the axes is dominant; that class rather than commuting is more important in social change in the village.
Ambrose's (1974) typology has some similarities to Pahl's model because it also was specifically designed to analyse rural housing.
Four m. come-capital groups were defined, each with access to different forms of housing, either in terms of tenure or in terms of the number of bedrooms available.
These groups were then further sub-divided according to car ownership, important both in the access it allowed to jobs and services and in the flexibility it offered to migrants in the initial residential search process.
This seems to be a particularly valuable approach to analysing the wider concept of access to resources in rural areas.
Some families choose particular village locations because multiple-car ownership eases their problems of accessibility; others make the choice or are constrained to a particular area for economic reasons even though the ownership of just one car may cause difficulties for some members of the family; yet other households may be constrained even to particular houses in particular locations.
Thorn's (1968) classification is in many ways the most interesting for social geographers.
This model was developed from a study of 11 villages in Nottinghamshire, where immigration had created a division between newcomers and locals.
Thorns considered that the main social divisions were along class lines, and hence the four categories outlined are similar to those frequently identified in sociological studies (Worsley 1970).
However, although there was a close association of life styles and values between the local and newcomer middle classes, there was a significant difference between the working-class farm workers and the other working-class groups.
The farm workers were far more village orientated, were more likely to have been born and bred locally, and had lower incomes and poorer access to housing.
Thorns also elaborated a socio-temporal model of village communities, suggesting that there were three types of villages: those that have established structure (long-standing and with an accepted pattern of authority); those that are transitional, in which the higher-status group has lost its authority; and those that have been re-established, in which new leaders, mainly in-migrants, have filled the roles of authority.
These types of villages can be located on the two axes of temporal and social change (figure 4.4).
Following Mitchell's (1951) work, the villages may further be classified as being open or closed, and as being integrated or disintegrated (see previous section).
Established villages are likely to be of type A, that is, closed and integrated; transitional villages will probably be of types C or D, that is , closed or open but disintegrated, while the re-established village is likely to be of type B, which is open and integrated.
This offers an interesting insight into the nature of change in rural communities, and it is unfortunate that it has not been further researched.
Consequences of social change in the village
The fundamental change is, arguably, social polarization (Harris 1973).
Although polarization may include an element of newcomers-versus-locals, it is based essentially on social class, with the division occurring between the working class and the middle class.
The former group is largely made up of locals while the latter mainly comprises newcomers, but the class dimension is paramount.
These groups have different accessibility levels and are therefore subject to different life-style constraints (Pahl 1975).
Since the working class is most affected by these constraints, it is more likely that a characteristically rural working class will develop than a distinctly rural middle class.
The latter will be more likely to develop activity patterns typical of the middle class nationally (Thorns 1968).
The new social divisions in the rural community tend to cut across the old class divides of the former occupational community.
The local working class may now a an ‘encapsulated community’, ‘a village within the village, suspicious of and resistant to any intimate social contact with the commuters and the second home owners’(Newby 1979, p. 161).
Because of the way in which new housing has been developed in commuter villages, social polarization is likely to be reinforced by spatial segregation.
Both new private housing estates and council estates are often peripherally located with respect to the existing village (Pahl 1965b; Blacksell and Gilg 1981).
Sometimes working-class residents will live on peripheral council housing estates while older ‘period’ dwellings are taken over by the middle class.
This is clearly the case in East Horsley, Surrey, where Connell (1974) has shown that spatial segregation was most clearly defined in the council estates, which were often morphologically distinct and separated by a considerable distance from the remainder of the village.
By contrast, in the Devon village of Broadclyst, it is the middle-class estate of four-bedroomed detached dwellings that has been grafted on to an older core of smaller, less attractive houses.
One of the implications of spatial segregation seems to be that differences in housing quality will be reinforced further by the quality of the neighbourhood environment and facilities in each area (Ambrose 1974).
In short, one group will be constrained to five in inferior housing with poorer immediate surroundings and will increasingly have fewer contacts with the other, wealthier, group in the village.
Of course, no village has such a simple two-fold spatial organization, but the element of segregation is clearly evident in many rural areas.
The lack of social contact between the predominantly local working class and the predominantly newcomer middle class can be particularly marked.
One of the most obvious symbols of this is in the public houses; if  there is more than one pub, each tends to be patronized by different social classes, while a single pub will usually have socially segregated ‘lounge’ and ‘public’bars (Newby 1979).
This division extends across a whole range of social activities.
In East Horsley, for example, the middle classes have organized several theatrical and musical groups, while the working class belong to the sports clubs, the Seniors' Club and the British Legion (Connell 1974).
There are also differences in the schools that the children attend, in who recognizes whom as a neighbour, and in the use of village shops and other facilities.
Some of these differences are outlined in the community studies reviewed by Frankenberg (1966).
The effect of middle-class newcomers on the level of services in a village is particularly important.
On the one hand, their arrival may add to the demand for retailing and educational facilities, which may help to sustain the village shop or school; on the other, their children may attend other more distant schools and the newcomers may shop in the adjacent towns so that, if they have ‘replaced’ locals, there may be a downturn in demand, which could even precipitate the closure of these facilities.
This is likely to enhance further any mistrust that exists between the two groups.
This is not to state that the middle class wants to exclude all the working class from the village.
On the contrary, they may like to see farm workers around the village to mark it as being ‘truly rural’.
Newby (1979, p. 170) suggests that, in fact, ‘what are demanded are pet farm workers who cause no trouble but who form part of the landscape along with the fields and the trees’.
This probably excludes both the working-class commuters and the inhabitants of the council estates.
The two groups may also have very different sets of values, and this is well illustrated by Forsythe's (1980) study of the Orkney community of Stormay (a pseudonym).
The values of the middle-class incomers are urban, and few migrants take active part in the traditional island activities.
Even where migrants do join in, they tend to alter completely the nature of the events.
For example, one migrant volunteered to organize the meal served at the annual Harvest Home, but he replaced the traditional supper of Orkney dishes with a meal that could have been served in any restaurant in the south of Scotland.
The disparity in values also extends to social control and child-rearing.
Orcadians, for example, apply informal means of familial control to under-age drinking, whereas newcomers wished to inform the police.
Although the case of the Orkney community may be rather extreme, studies of villages in the more accessible countryside have also identified significant differences in the values of newcomers and locals, and the working and middle classes (Pahl 1965b; Thorns 1968).
Upon such differences, the integration of all groups into the village community can sometimes founder (Dunn et al .
1981).
Different values can also lead these social groups into conflict.
The two  ‘communities’ are in competition for scarce resources in a number of instances, especially regarding housing, environment and land.
Working-class residents may want a factory to be located in the village to provide local jobs, but the middle class, who wish only to consume (and not produce) in the area, may oppose this on conservationist grounds.
Again, low-income local families may need council houses but the in-migrant middle class may oppose all new developments, having obtained their own foothold in the village.
This conflict is clearly to be seen at the level of organized local politics (chapter 1), although the particular interests of the farming and landowning community add complexity to this.
It is potentially an unequal conflict, as rural councils are dominated by various combinations of local and newcomer middle classes (Newby et al .
1978; Rose et al .
1978; Saunders et al .
1978; Rose et al .
1979).
These groups operate sometimes in concert and at other times in opposition, but almost inevitably they seem to further their own interests at the expense of the rural working class.
These conflicts over resources rarely come into the open; instead, rural political structures are characterized as being ‘the non-politics of the status quo’, a situation in which the effective control of local politics by farmers and landowners is matched by the acquiescence of the working class.
The transformation of rural communities, therefore, has led to new social divisions.
In the most extreme cases this has meant that previously small, socially closely knit occupational communities, dominated by a squirearchy, have totally disappeared, or else survive only partly as encapsulated communities.
In almost all villages however there has been some element of change, and usually there has been a set of related changes in which social polarization is accompanied by segregation and a shift of political power to a new ruling group, dominated by in-migrants.
HOUSING
Houses, particularly in Western society, confer upon their occupants much more than merely the roofs over their heads; they involve status and an expression of place in society.
Housing requirements may alter as families move through life, and different types of financial commitments may be undertaken at different points in the life-cycle.
In the countryside the type and quality of a family's housing is also affected by the accessibility of its location and by the social and financial circumstances of the family.
A COMPETITION FOR RURAL HOUSING?
The search for houses in both urban and rural areas can be regarded as an unequal competition between groups of people and between people within groups.
This suggests that certain groups and individuals will be ‘stronger’ and better placed to obtain the housing they want, although this is something of an oversimplification since it implies that all are competing for the same types of house.
The idea can be better focused by identifying the groups that are in potential competition in the countryside.
We may think of them as competing for various tenures.
Most such classifications should be treated with some caution, however, even if they help to identify the groups seeking accommodation within the rural housing market.
Numerous authors have attempted classifications, often not specifically with regard to housing but as part of a more general examination of social groupings in the countryside.
Dunn et al .
(1981) point out that a basic distinction can be made between those who can own (having the income and potential to be able to buy a house) and those who must rent.
The theory of housing classes is based largely on subdivisions within these two main groups.
Rex and Moore (1967) have provided the classic statement on this theme, suggesting seven categories:
1
the outright owners of large houses in desirable areas;
2
mortgage payers who ‘own’ their houses but on a mortgage;
3
council tenants in purpose-built council flats and houses;
4
council tenants in slums awaiting demolition;
5
tenants of private landlords;
6
resident landlords who take in lodgers to meet repayments;
7
lodgers in rooms.
It is, however, unrealistic to expect all of these to be visible in all locations, especially in rural areas where the balance of tenures differs considerably from the national picture.
Rex and Moore's classification was based upon research in the Sparkbrook area of Birmingham, and it is more or less time-specific to the mid-1960s and applicable to medium-to large-sized cities.
Also, it does not easily take into consideration key interests in housing such as absentee landlords letting as a business.
The idea of housing classes does give a rudimentary sense of groupings of potential housing competitors, however, even if the categories may differ somewhat or be less clearly defined in rural areas.
HOUSING CONVERSION FROM A METHODIST CHAPEL: A HOUSING GAIN BUT A LOSS TOT HE RURAL COMMUNITY (SOURCE: AUTHORS AND A. TEED)
Fundamentally, many regard the ‘conflict’ over housing as an extension of the major divisions in society and argue that the allocation of housing is determined largely by the power that each group has come to possess in a society with a long history of class conflict (Haddon 1970; Duncan 1976; Mellor 1977).
Rural social geographers take this view very seriously, as it stems directly from the political economy background outlined in chapter 1.
Some classifications of rural social groupings introduced in chapter 4 (pp. 90–1), particularly those by Pahl (1966) and Ambrose (1974), have a more direct relevance to rural housing.
Pahl recognized that large-scale property owners, although few in number, can still exercise disproportionate political and managerial power in the rural environment, sometimes in a paternalistic manner (Newby et al .
1978).
Pahl's ‘salaried immigrants’ frequently ally themselves with this group on housing matters.
His ‘spiralists’ tend to own mainly modern village housing.
They contrast with the ‘reluctant commuters’ of more limited means, forced to live in villages for the sake of buying at the cheaper end of the housing market.
Another important group, the retired, can place significant demands on local facilities and services, but in housing terms they form a heterogeneous group since some have capital from the sale of housing in more expensive locations while others are in competition for cheaper housing, and especially for rural local authority houses and sheltered accommodation (Law and Warnes 1976; Phillips and Williams 1982a).
Council tenants, perhaps the ‘fortunate few’ in villages that do not have many local authority houses, are usually the more poorly paid rural workers and can include the homeless and ex-tied-cottagers rehoused under statutory obligations of councils.
Tied cottagers (farm workers) and ‘other tenants’, such as those living in winter-lets or caravans, are another important rural group discussed by Pahl.
These tenants can frequently be living in the least desirable and least secure of all housing in rural locations.
Pahl's final group comprises local traders and small business owners.
This is another mixed group including both owner-occupiers and those who rent their homes with their business.
They may be better placed financially than many tenants, but their security of tenure can end with retirement.
This classification is a useful starting point for the study of rural housing.
In addition, Ambrose's (1974) classification is interesting because of its emphasis on transport availability and tenure which distinguishes his seven groups outlined in chapter 4.
Dunn et al .
suggest that the transport element tends to dominate the classification, and in terms of opportunities available to the residents in any given location, their quality of life can be very much influenced by whether or not they can afford private transport.
Access to housing
A theme discussed in chapter 1 was the influence of managerialism and national policies at the local level which can have clear and direct influences on the housing market.
A few examples illustrate this contention.
If central government, as a matter of policy, curtails the building of new local authority houses then, within a very short time, there will be few council houses available locally for allocation.
In a less obvious but equally influential manner, if a credit squeeze is applied as a macroeconomic policy, the resulting high interest rates will reduce the number of people able to take out mortgages.
This will result in fewer sales of new houses in the owner-occupied sector and construction firms will then build fewer new houses.
At a more general level, cut-backs in improvement grants and subsidies will retard any upgrading of local and national housing stocks.
HOUSING CONVERSION FROM A RAILWAY STATION: ONE CONSEQUENCE OF THE BEECHING AND OTHER CUTS (SOURCE: AUTHORS AND A. TEED)
Many centrally determined policies are implemented via the managers of housing; therefore it has become more accepted in recent years to adopt a managerialist stance in analysing access to housing.
The majority of studies have been in urban areas and have focused on the activities of building societies and finance institutions in the private sector (Ford 1975; Boddy 1976; P. R. Williams 1976, 1978; Short 1978), and on the activities of housing managers in the public sector (Gray 1976a, 1976b; Paris and Lambert 1979).
Chapter 1 dealt in some detail with the more general aspects of managerialism.
Here, it is necessary not only to highlight the diversity of ‘managers’ influencing housing but also the fact that key ‘gatekeepers’tend to represent institutions or public bodies.
Models of housing opportunity stressing choice on the part of the individual are essentially unrealistic, for constraints imposed by bank managers or building society officers may be much more important.
The chances of mobility for a tenant in the local authority sector are often very slim, particularly if the managers in his authority do not operate a very efficient internal transfer scheme.
For new applicants, different councils' rules and regulations on allocations may be more or less strictly enforced by local officials.
Most research has focused on the role of local authority managers (Gray 1976a; Phillips and Williams 1982a) and building society activities (P. R. Williams 1976, 1978; Boddy 1976, 1980).
The latter can be very influential, since in 1981 they accounted for about four-fifths of home loans outstanding and made some two-thirds of net advances for house purchases (table 5. 1).
Therefore, if a building society prefers lending to white-collar workers wishing to buy modern houses, the chances of an agricultural worker being able to purchase an old terraced house or stone cottage could be slim.
In addition, owing to the restrictions to fixed multiples of income for mortgages, the lower paid worker will be at a disadvantage.
Individual societies may favour advances to people in salaried jobs, so hourly-paid workers can be discriminated against.
Blanket embargoes such as the ‘red-lining’ of areas in which loans will not be advanced are   probably rare in rural districts, but restrictions are sometimes placed on older cob, stone and thatched buildings so that many cheaper properties may not be mortgageable.
Finally, the rules of ‘new’ providers of housing can also operate to exclude or favour certain areas or individuals.
The Housing Corporation or their related housing associations may or may not favour schemes in rural areas (to date, they generally have not), and therefore their attitudes, rules and regulations can all influence the chances of a rural resident of obtaining adequate housing in the correct location.
In view of these constraints, it may be necessary to consider housing acquisition from the perspective of deprivation rather than choice.
Shaw (1979b) has suggested one such model of housing deprivation in rural areas; he argues that poor housing, inappropriate housing or inaccessible housing is mainly a consequence of other types of deprivation which can act cumulatively, including opportunity deprivation (in terms of jobs, education, recreation and health) and mobility deprivation (in terms of poor transport and inaccessibility, which ‘ration’ opportunities).
This is a useful concept although as Dunn et al .
(1981) suggest, it does not emphasise sufficiently that poor rural housing is as much a symptom of deprivation as a consequence.
Housing tenure, quality and location can be at least partly responsible for other handicaps, such as poor access to jobs, education and services, from which households may suffer.
They suggest therefore that greater emphasis be given to housing tenure in evaluating relative deprivation.
Their model (figure 5. 1) sees family income as a key explanatory variable, as this will influence accessibility and mobility, and largely govern the tenure that can be entered.
It is a useful model since it recognizes internal household characteristics and the requirements of other models such as life-cycle or space needs.
It also indicates the links between accessibility and quality of life, and between housing tenure and housing conditions, and their eventual effects on the lives of occupants.
In addition, the model can incorporate those rural families who are far from deprived and have high levels of mobility, high incomes and access to housing of a good standard.
HOUSING CONDITIONS IN RURAL AREAS
Two main aspects of housing condition are important: the overall quality of the rural housing stock; and the variations in quality within the tenure groups, a matter that is discussed in subsequent sections.
In terms of housing standards and occupancy rates, conditions have improved considerably during the course of this century.
Commentators such as Brockway (1932) found appalling rural housing conditions in many areas of England between the wars: dwellings were in physically poor condition and insanitary, lacking water, electricity, ventilation or light.
Since then the condition of housing in rural areas seems on average to have reached a higher standard than that in many urban areas, even where renovation or renewal policies have been conducted.
Nevertheless the 1976 English House Condition Survey found that over 5 per cent of the rural housing stock was still unfit, and by 1981 this had risen to 6.7 per cent(Department of the Environment 1978, 1982).
The main safeguards in this area are the Housing Acts, supported by public health legislation, which is intended to ensure that no person should be allowed to live in a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation.
The current definition of unfitness (under the Housing Act 1957) lists nine items in which a dwelling must be found to be ‘reasonably suitable for occupation…’.
These include general aspects such as state of repair, stability of foundations and freedom from dampness, and also quite  specific matters of ventilation, natural lighting, waste disposal, sanitation and cooking facilities (Hadden 1979).
In spite of statutory definitions, however, the designation of an ‘unfit house’ can still be a rather subjective matter, and standards in the past have been found to vary from one district to another.
In addition, although not technically unfit, a house can still be very unsuitable for the needs of its occupants in terms of accommodation and access to jobs and services, aspects that are not generally the subject of legislation.
The Housing Act 1974 adds to the above criteria of ‘unfitness’ a list of certain ‘standard amenities’, the absence of which does not render a dwelling unfit but may make it eligible for improvement grants.
These include quite basic facilities such as bath or shower, sink, WC, and hot and cold water supply.
This indicates that, although technically ‘fit’, many dwellings may in reality have less than adequate amenities, such as outside toilets.
In 1971 some 13.8 per cent of households in English rural districts lacked one or more basic amenity, and in certain rural districts (including some in Cornwall, Devon, Norfolk, Shropshire, Derbyshire and Durham), this was as high as 30 per cent.
It seems clear that the poorest-quality rural housing persists where the traditional rural economy is still strongest and where urbanization levels are low (Dunn et al .
1981; Rogers 1983).
As noted below, rural districts also tend to have far higher proportions of non-permanent mobile homes than do urban areas, and, while many of these are of high quality, some are in very poor condition.
During the 1960s considerable improvements were made in the condition of the housing stock both nationally and in rural areas.
The early 1970s saw additional impetus being given to housing improvements by the designation, under the 1969 Housing Act, of General Improvement Areas (GIAs).
This Act widened the scope of improvement grants, first introduced in 1949, and gave local authorities the power to declare general improvement areas within which grants covered up to 60 per cent of eligible expenses compared with 50 per cent elsewhere.
However, with their emphasis on rehabilitation of stock and on area-wide environmental improvements, GIAs had a relatively limited impact, and only about 5 per cent of grants since 1969 have been issued within these areas.
In some areas they have actually added to housing stress by contributing to gentrification, while areas with great social need or high levels of rented accommodation have sometimes been excluded (Lansley 1979).
As a result, the 1974 Housing Act introduced Housing Action Areas (HAAs), designed to give priority to the improvement of areas for which GIAs are not relevant, where poor physical condition of housing is combined with social stress and deprivation.
New powers to purchase and to  enforce improvements were given and grants of up to 75 per cent(90 per cent in hardship cases) became available.
The policy was designed to improve communities both in social and housing terms during the five-year life of an HAA, and an overall aim was to remove heavy reliance on individual improvement and to enhance the environmental and physical quality of the areas.
The designation of HAAs and GIAs is essentially area-based however.
As such, they may be more appropriate for urban areas, where most of the housing in any area tends to be of a similar age and type and the blanket effect of the area-based policy will at least have some logical basis (although even in inner cities problems do not necessarily come in a spatially concentrated form — see Smith 1979a).
Rural areas do not display the same concentrations of poor housing and poor social conditions, and as a result very few HAAs or GIAs have been declared in them (Kirby 1977,; Dunn et al .
1981).
Therefore, grant-aided benefits and enforced improvements have not been as readily available to rural householders.
The 1976 English House Condition Survey found that some 28 per cent of all unfit dwellings in England but only 23 per cent of total stock were in rural areas, defined to include settlements of up to 1,000 dwellings.
This provided something of a contrast to previous surveys, in which rural areas have shown up as having generally better housing than urban areas (Dunn et al .
1981).
The 1981 English House Condition Survey (Department of the Environment 1982) supports the general urban-rural differences found in 1976, although slight changes in surveyors' classifications of   district as rural, urban or conurbations make precise comparisons difficult.
Instead, table 5.2 illustrates the proportions of dwellings affected (for example, unfit) in each area and relates this to the average for the given year for stock over all areas.
This ratio shows that measures of housing condition have remained quite stable between 1976 and 1981, with the rate of improvement perhaps being slowed down by reduced grant availability in the late 1970s, but that there are distinct differences between different types of location in the incidence of poor housing.
In general, dwellings in rural areas and conurbations are about 25 per cent more likely to be in poor condition than dwellings in provincial towns.
The proportion of dwellings lacking one or more of the basic amenities is highest in conurbations, but unfitness and disrepair (indicated by high repair costs) are more common in rural areas.
Average over-occupancy and under-occupancy rates suggest an additional rural problem: that in many locations the housing stock is not being as ‘efficiently’ utilized as it could be.
Only 4 per cent of housing stock in English rural districts compared with 6 per cent of the total English housing stock exceeded the official overcrowding index in 1971, but almost 38 per cent of housing in rural districts was defined as ‘under-occupied’.
Under-occupation of large dwellings, particularly by the elderly, can be most undesirable, especially when rates, maintenance and heating bills become too high for those on low incomes.
However, because of the low levels of provision of rural council houses and small owner-occupied bungalows, especially purpose-built accommodation for the elderly, people who want to move out of accommodation that is too large may have nowhere to go locally.
In addition, the relatively small number of alternative dwellings available to families who have to live in specific rural locations may mean that they have to take and retain whatever dwelling is available, whether or not it is appropriate to their needs.
Poor housing can therefore assume many forms.
Unfitness, substandard amenities and under- or over-occupancy can all indicate ‘bad’ housing, but in social terms location and accessibility are paramount.
Accessibility as a concept is discussed in chapter 6; here it is sufficient to mention its implications for personal mobility.
It is true that ‘bad’ housing is not solely a rural problem, just as it is not exclusively urban.
But is has been identified as a cause for social concern by a number of recent researchers on rural conditions (Larkin 1978a, 1978b, 1979; Dunn et al .
1981; Phillips and Williams 1982a).
In order to understand the nature of the rural housing question, it is perhaps best to examine some of the features that are specific to each tenure, although it is always necessary to be aware of the many interlinkages among all tenures in the housing market, which can in some ways render this an artificial exercise.
OWNER-OCCUPATION
The tenure of rural housing is of considerable interest to social geographers, since access to specific sectors is restricted for many persons and the variation in security of tenure has social implications relating to quality of life, welfare, accessibility and expenditure on housing.
The significant features of rural tenure that differ from the national picture are: high proportions of owner-occupied housing, high levels of private rental, and generally low levels of council housing (table 5.3).
National trends such as the predominance of private housing since the 1950s (figure 5.2) and the decline in private rental have of course affected rural areas also.
The growth of home ownership even among the less well off in Britain has been said to have created a ‘corps of working-class capitalists, a new type of property-owning bourgeoisie….’
(Dennis and Clout 1980, p. 153), even if there remains a strong private rental sector in rural areas and many owner-occupiers are already ‘well-to-do’.
Owner-occupation has grown steadily, both nationally and in rural areas, since the 1950s.
Over one-half of the houses in rural districts of England are owned by their occupiers, whether outright or on a mortgage.
All of the major political parties since the Second World War have, to a greater or lesser degree, been in favour of extending home ownership.
However, the national financial and economic climate prevailing at any given time has influenced the supply and demand for such housing, and    prices have altered at different rates (almost always increasing) during this period.
An important feature of owner-occupancy in rural areas is that the stock of housing is relatively limited in any given location and hence choice is restricted.
This has come about partly because of low rates of building in the past (owing to a relatively small effective demand) and partly because of stringent planning controls, which have restricted the rate of growth of new housing particularly in national parks and other scenically attractive areas (see chapter 7).
The net result is that prices are often higher for houses in attractive and accessible villages, and much of the new housing built tends to be of a more expensive kind which maintains this feature.
Various authors have suggested reasons for the building of expensive new homes.
First, planners are often blamed, because they may frequently specify the styles and building materials with which new houses should be built, ‘in keeping’ with existing structures (Blacksell and Gilg 1981).
Clark (1982a, 1982b) cites the example of the Lake District, where planning board regulations concerning slate roofs can add £2,000 to the price of a house.
Second, although land is cheaper in rural than in urban locations, planning policies may have helped to increase its price considerably by limiting the amounts of building land available.
However, planning should not always be indicted as a cause of problems, since the planning process has fostered generally higher standards in all housing, particularly in technical matters and, perhaps, site layout.
Even if all rural houses are not prohibitively priced, they can be expensive relative to the income levels of local inhabitants, and this can be the key factor that determines whether an individual family can afford to purchase a home.
As discussed in chapters 2 and 3, many rural  occupations have low incomes.
Furthermore, in many more isolated and smaller settlements a wife may be unable to work regularly owing to a lack of jobs or transport; therefore the total mortgage that a would-be home buyer can obtain will be based on a multiple of the husband's income alone.
Finally, the nature of rural employment can also militate against successful mortgage applications because of building societies' lending preferences for ‘white-collar’ occupations.
Owner-occupancy has probably been subject to less direct legislative activity than have the two other main tenures.
However, some legislation has influenced this sector since the 1960s, such as the GIA and HAA grants discussed previously, and legislation ostensibly directed at other tenures has often had repercussions for this sector.
For example, the encouragement of council house sales by Conservative governments under the terms of the Housing (Finance) Act 1972 and subsequently by the Housing Act 1980 has boosted owner-occupation.
The Housing (Finance) Act shifted the balance further in favour of house purchase rather than rental when it imposed ‘fair’(usually higher) rents on most council tenants.
As Duclaud-Williams (1978) suggests, the operation of rent rebates and other principles embodied in the Act tended at that time to swing the balance further in favour of home buyers and away from the two rented sectors.
The Labour Government's 1977 Green Paper,Housing Policy: a Consultative Document , had a slightly different emphasis.
Although it welcomed the extension of home ownership, it also recognized the problems of families who could not or would not take on the responsibility of home purchase (Department of the Environment 1977b).
As a result, it saw the need to continue strong support for local authority housing provision.
This view did not receive much support from the Conservative government that entered office in 1979.
Its policy was to restrict public expenditure in fields such as housing and to extend home ownership for council house tenants with their Right-to-Buy legislation in the Housing Act 1980.
In addition, during the early 1980s funds for housing improvement were very much subjected to central government control and were issued in a rather unpredictable fashion, which made the planning of local grants very difficult and variable.
It is clear that housing remains very much, as Berry (1974) described it, a political football', with different political parties favouring varying policies to each tenure.
The overall result can often be disillusionment for the householder and frustration for housing professionals.
Second homes
The phenomenon of second homes in rural areas has been quite widely  researched, although there is debate as to their definition (Dower 1977; Davies and O'Farrell 1981) and little agreement as to whether they constitute a ‘curse or a blessing’(Coppock 1977).
In parts of Britain, particularly in parts of Wales, second home ownership has been fiercely contested by some locals, but it is hard to judge whether such opposition is justified.
Opponents of second homes argue that outsiders, being wealthier, can outbid locals for any specific property, thereby stimulating out-migration.
In addition, social disruption and discontent are said to be fostered by temporary visitors, and ghost communities may be created out-of-season.
Protagonists of second homes suggest that outsiders are actually saving homes for which there is no local demand, preventing dereliction, paying rates that would otherwise go unpaid and supporting local shops, services and craftsmen (albeit seasonally).
These arguments doubtless have different real weight in different locations, depending on whether there is pressure on the local housing stock.
The emotional contribution is difficult to evaluate in any circumstances.
The number of second homes in existence is surprisingly uncertain, partly because of problems of definition and partly owing to a reticence on the part of owners to advertise themselves in view of the possible local opposition.
In Britain, the proportion of second homes per capita is still very low compared with North America and some European countries: Bielckus et al .
(1972) estimated some 350,000 in England and Wales in the early 1970s, of which 180,000 were caravans.
Sarre (1981) points to the quite marked fluctuations in numbers throughout the 1970s (although he recognizes the data limitations) which reached a peak in 1972 and a low in 1975, climbing back to about 155,000 in 1979 (table 5.4).
Steady but slow growth in numbers is predicted for the 1980s.
It seems, therefore, that second homes comprise, on average, no more than 1 per cent of British housing stock.
Naturally, there tend to be strong regional and local concentrations; in some parts of North Wales second homes can comprise up to 50 per cent of housing stock in small areas (Bollom 1978).
In a recent Lake District survey, only 48 per cent of house purchasers were local, with more than half the purchases being for holiday accommodation, second homes or retirement (Shucksmith 1981).
In the Lake District too, Clark (1982a, 1982b) cites an estimate of 11 per cent of stock being in use as second homes in the mid-1970s, with figures of over 30 per cent in some parishes.
Within the South West of England a wide distribution of second homes was found; 10 per cent of the total building stock in the extreme north-west of Cornwall were used for this purpose but the figure was between 1 and 5 per cent in most districts (South West Economic Planning Council 1975).
The tendency of second homes to be clustered in specific pleasant rural locations is probably the characteristic that exaggerates their significance.
There is no general evidence as yet to link second home ownership with house price increases (de Vane 1975), but in local instances this has undoubtedly happened on a property-for-property basis, and it is easy to be convinced that dire housing consequences can come about for the ‘traditional’ rural population.
Occasionally, housing policies in local areas have attempted to restrict the sale of houses to local inhabitants.
This is usually effective only with new houses or with council houses resold by their tenants.
In the Lake District National Park, an experiment was conducted after 1974 to attempt to restrict second homes purchases of new houses (Clark 1982a, 1982b).
The estimate of 11 per cent of stock in use as second or holiday homes was felt to be an underestimate, and it was suspected that the real figure was nearer 26 per cent by 1980.
The policy was to restrict planning permissions for new house building to about 70 dwellings per annum.
Permission for building would be given only if the occupier of a new house would live in it for at least six months per year and was a person employed or to be employed locally.
This was a form of positive discrimination in favour of locals.
The resale of the houses was also to be only to them.
The powers involved were under Section 52 of the 1971 Town and Country Planning Act: however, subsequent intervention in late 1981 by the Secretary of State for the Environment appears to have prevented planners from being able to specify the nature of occupiers of new housing.
Although this policy may have been viewed as a ‘reasonable’ intervention in the free market for private housing, there might in any case have been problems of enforcement of restrictions on resale.
LOCAL AUTHORITY HOUSING
In Britain local authority (council) housing has become the second largest sector of the housing market, holding considerable social significance in local areas.
This is because a major aim of public sector housing policy has been to provide a good standard of accommodation usually for the less well-to-do who cannot or do not wish to buy their own homes.
It can also be a tool of social and economic policies to help the aged, the homeless, single-parent families and the handicapped to obtain housing, as well as to provide flexibility in the attraction of key workers.
In some urban areas it can comprise as much as 40 per cent of the stock and up to 100 per cent of houses over considerable tracts.
As it is publicly owned, this sector is subject to direct government influence and, frequently, political direction.
For practical purposes, it is the local authorities that finance, build and administer these houses, but central government directives, legislation and grants have had direct influence on building rates, rents, finance and sales.
From time to time there have been limits to the amount that councils can spend per house (the ‘cost yardstick’) and minimum standards have been established since the 1967 recommendations of the Parker Morris Committee.
The cost yardstick system related the total approved cost of a development to the number of people it was intended to house.
In the past, ‘yardstick-plus’ costs have been permitted, mainly in expensive urban locations but also in some rural locations in recognition of their higher building costs.
In general Parker Morris standards and yardstick limits made the development of small numbers of houses in rural locations very uneconomical, and, in response to this and other criticisms, their discontinuation was announced in January 1980; instead, cost estimates and project details were to be submitted directly for Department of the Environment approval.
This has had the effect of making local authority housing even more subject to central scrutiny, and the current system of central government constraints has severely limited new council house provision in rural areas since 1980, particularly as the new proposals may see more expensive building in rural areas as inappropriate.
Numbers of council houses have, in any case, always been lower in rural than in urban areas.
They comprise some 21 per cent of rural housing stock on average, and Shucksmith (1981) indicates that, during 1968–73 in England and Wales there were usually more than double the number of local authority houses being built per 1,000 population in urban than in rural districts.
At a local scale, table 5.5 shows differences in tenure within Devon, an example of a predominantly rural county.
The urban districts   of Exeter and Plymouth and the partly urbanized Tiverton District have far higher proportions of council-rented accommodation than the rural districts.
Only Torbay, with its high proportion of elderly and retired persons in owner-occupied accommodation, is more poorly provided.
The very rural West Devon, Torridge, Teignbridge and South Hams Districts have percentages at least ten points below the national level of council house provision.
In particular, the continued growth of owner-occupancy is emphasized here with the comparison of the 1971 and 1981 figures.
Why has the rate of council house provision been so much lower in rural areas?
Reasons are not clear-cut, but various aspects of rural social life have been suggested.
Attitudes appear to be somewhat unfavourable to ‘welfare state’ provision; Newby (1979) suggests that influential local interests (farmers and landowners) have been keen to minimize local council house building in order to keep down rates — and through key positions on councils have been able to realize this objective.
In addition, farmers can maintain a greater degree of social control over agricultural workers living in tied accommodation.
A declining agricultural workforce may also have helped to convince local interests there was no real demand for rural council housing.
Although care must be taken in generalizing too  much from Newby's research in East Anglia, these contentions might well hold true for other rural areas of Britain.
Financial reasons could be of more general importance.
Housing subsidies in the past have sometimes favoured rural areas, but Shucksmith believes that the higher building costs have not been matched, and that ‘it is clear that central government policies have played a major role in frustrating council housing in rural areas, both through the overall financial allocation to rural areas, and through the constraints imposed on individual developments….’
(Shucksmith 1981, p. 37).
Can a case be made for the continued provision of such housing?
A number of authors maintain that a definite need does exist.
Larkin (1978b) cites evidence to show that poor people in rural areas are frequently less well housed than their urban counterparts.
Waiting lists also tend to be longer, and these are not complete indices of need since council allocation rules often exclude certain persons from them.
In addition, tied accommodation, winter-lets and caravans are all sources of potential demand for council housing in rural areas.
Shucksmith (1981) found waiting lists of over 1,200 and a housing stock of only 2,169 in the Lake District National Park, while Phillips and Williams (1982a) found a waiting list of about 1,000 and a stock of some 4,500 dwellings in South Hams, Devon.
Many of these applicants are living in very poor existing accommodation.
Niner (1975) estimated from census data that some 250 applicants to Copeland Borough Council would be without a fixed bath or shower.
Phillips and Williams (1982b) found that over 10 per cent of the 1,000 applicants in South Devon were living in bedsitters or caravans, while about one in five were sharing a kitchen, bathroom or WC; 5 per cent were living in accommodation that lacked at least one of these facilities, and some even lacked mains electricity or water.
All these data indicate a considerable need for rural council houses, and authors such as Shucksmith, Newby and Larkin argue that need and demand for council housing outstrip the supply and any foreseeable increase in supply.
Figure 5.3 indicates the characteristics of council housing and its management which must be considered when analysing any given rural area.
The first main factor concerns the distribution of the housing stock.
It is sad but true that existing houses are often poorly located with respect to current jobs and services.
Even if there are relatively good overall stocks of rural council houses, they may be concentrated mainly into a few larger settlements, and persons who need to work in the more remote or smaller settlements can be severely disadvantaged.
Shucksmith (1981) highlights the fact that the pressure in district councils has been to build (if at all) in larger settlements rather than in isolated locations.
Planning policies of concentration have fostered this, sometimes to facilitate the provision of   amenities and services to housing.
Government subsidies were also, in effect, greater for higher-density development (subject to Parker Morris minimum standards), and all these factors have combined to militate against the building of few dwellings and small estates in isolated locations.
Evidence to support this general contention has been found in Warwickshire and Devon, where it appears that new building has been concentrated mainly in the major settlements of the hierarchy.
In Devon, in particular, both private and public sector new housing has been predominantly in the larger settlements, especially those within commuting distance of the main urban centres (Cloke 1979).
At the district scale in South Devon, 531 of the 734 completions of local authority dwellings between 1976 and 1979 were in the three main towns of Kingsbridge, Totnes and Ivybridge and only 51 completions were in parishes outside the seven main settlements (Phillips and Williams 1982a).
All this evidence tends to support the contention that there will be relatively few new council houses available for allocation in the more remote areas where housing need and accessibility problems may be most acute.
Management of council housing in rural areas
Distributional factors tend to make more difficult the task of housing  management, the second main aspect displayed in figure 5.3.
The management of housing stock can have wide-ranging social implications, and, in their interpretation and execution of national and local housing policies, local authority housing officers may become key figures in social policy in one of the key areas of people's lives.
It is the managers of local authority stock who determine who is allocated to which houses and where; who can enter the waiting list and how long they have to wait and, crucially, who can transfer within this sector.
Therefore an examination of housing management must consider the following: pointing schemes or other forms of assessment of applicants; allocation and transfer policies; building policies and sales policies (Phillips and Williams 1982a, 1982c).
Allocation of housing is frequently carried out by quasi-objective schemes to allocate ‘points’ to each applicant.
Some rural districts, however, still lack separate housing departments staffed by professionally trained housing managers, and in extreme instances allocations have been carried out on a more or less ad hoc basis by local councillors.
Where points schemes do exist, they are usually based on criteria such as family size and existing housing space, lack of a separate home or facilities, medical need, separation of families, length of local residence, and a number of discretionary points.
Only in a very few cases are points awarded explicitly to recognize the need to reside in specific rural locations, which is a sad reflection on the past role of allocation policy.
Some authorities now, such as South Hams, have awarded extra points for persons who live in, or need to live in, certain rural parishes which have small local authority housing stocks.
These can give people who have to live in certain remote locations a slightly better chance of obtaining appropriate accommodation.
Many local authorities in addition to‘pointing’ applicants, place them in queues for accommodation, based on type of dwelling required and location.
The different relative lengths of queues can be very important in determining the time spent on the waiting list.
Again, taking South Hams as an example, applicants are placed in queues for one of five housing sub-districts and also in one of five groups according to family size, marital status and number of children.
Although some of the groups would clearly not be competing with others for the same kind of housing (for example, families with two or more children versus single applicants), there are potentially 25 different queues.
Applicants do not necessarily know the relative lengths of queues or their chances of obtaining housing in one sub-district rather than another.
Queues vary, being shortest, for instance, for three-bedroom houses and much longer for ‘specialist’ accommodation for the elderly (a common rural problem).
Applicants clearly have a better chance of obtaining accommodation quickly if willing to accept a dwelling  in one of the main settlements, and this in turn may be detrimental and cause long journeys to work.
Important management decisions relate to the levels of priority accorded to different groups for accommodation.
There are statutory duties to house certain categories of homeless persons and some tied cottagers (these will be discussed later).
In many small rural districts these obligations can effectively pre-empt almost all ‘voids’(vacancies) occurring during the year and leave very few opportunities for housing applicants from the general waiting list.
In addition, applicants with high numbers of points awarded for medical reasons may be favourably treated.
When an applicant comes into a priority category or reaches the head of a queue and is offered housing, he or she then has to decide whether to accept the offer if it does not accord with the original preference.
Usually a limited number of offers can be rejected but there is no guarantee that a subsequent offer will be an improvement, so in many rural districts applicants may have to make the best of either inappropriate housing or housing not ideally located with regard to their workplaces or existing patterns of use of facilities.
Once within the council sector, tenants may find their circumstances changing: families may increase or decrease and places of work or school attendance may change, so that many tenants apply to transfer accommodation.
There was a transfer waiting list of over 500 applicants in early 1980 in South Hams, and many of these, if moved, would release houses for families, especially if they were elderly persons waiting to go into purpose-built flats.
The small stock in rural areas frequently makes it very difficult for councils to meet transfer requests, even though these may lead to more efficient utilization of their resources.
Phillips and Williams (1982d) suggest a ‘positive’ approach to transfer management in the rural sector in which housing visitors ‘scout’tenants and try to suggest ways in which a small (and diminishing) stock can be better used both in terms of persons per dwelling and of the tenants' patterns of spatial behaviour.
The Scottish Development Department (1980) also suggest that all allocation schemes should be sensitive to transfer requests, especially where these will release housing that is in considerable demand by other groups.
This is one way in which rural housing departments can attempt to overcome certain of their problems, and it seems that at least some councils are adopting such procedures of ‘positive’ transfer management.
Council house sales
A final aspect of housing management is the sale of houses to tenants  (figure 5.3).
This has caused much debate and emotion.
Opponents of sales see them as reducing a vital social resource built up at the ratepayers' expense, while proponents see sales to long-standing tenants as almost a recourse to ‘natural justice’, although there are also the political overtones of the desire of Conservative politicians to build up a property-owning base to their vote.
In rural areas, with the small stocks identified earlier, the issue of sales can be particularly emotive.
District councils at present will rarely be able to afford to replace such houses, and, if all or most of the houses in a small village are sold, then the council's ability to meet housing need locally is effectively negated.
The additional fear has been that properties sold in attractive rural settings may eventually become ‘second homes’ for rich urban dwellers.
The sale of council houses to tenants is not, however, new.
It has been occurring for many years and has been embodied in legislation such as the Housing Acts of 1935 and 1957, although numbers of sales have fluctuated considerably according to the political complexions of the government of the day.
In the year 1972 alone, for example, 60,000 dwellings were sold with the encouragement of the Conservative administration (Hughes 1981).
Even Labour Party policy has been to permit sales, provided they do not disadvantage the community or impair housing authorities' abilities to meet their obligations, which can be difficult to prove in practice.
The Housing Act 1980 introduced a new aspect to sales (Hughes 1981,; Smith 1981).
Whereas ministerial consent was previously required, now certain ‘secure tenants’ have the right to buy their houses (flats, initially excluded from purchase but available for long lease, were later included).
Local authorities will now be unable to prevent the exercise of the ‘Right-to-Buy’.
Not even all Conservative politicians were happy with the implications of the notion of compulsory sales, particularly as they might affect rural areas, and certain safeguards have had to be incorporated.
Basically, however, secure tenants of three years' standing can buy their houses at discounts ranging from 33 per cent of market price to a maximum of 50 per cent.
Section 19 of the Act did protect rural areas from the immediate profiteering resale of houses in attractive areas, for example in small rural estates or in lone rural settings.
In national parks or Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONBs), or in areas designated by the Secretary of State as ‘rural’, the sale contains a covenant limiting the freedom of the purchasing tenant and his successors to resell the dwelling; houses can be resold only to ‘locals’ who fulfil certain criteria, such as living or working in the designated rural area for the previous three years; or, for ten years after the original purchase, the tenant has first to offer to resell to the council (Liell 1981).
In addition to the national parks, AONBs and certain areas in rural Wales, a number of rural authorities have applied for designation as ‘rural’ to benefit from such protection.
Not all have been successful (and some have been only partly designated), but the list has grown since 1980 (figure 5.4).
A major problem is that, even in very rural districts, much of the council's stock will frequently be in the largest settlements, which in many cases have not been included under the rural designation.
These settlements can still be attractive, and the larger part of authorities' stock can therefore remain unprotected.
In South Hams, for example, the towns of Totnes, Kingsbridge, Ivybridge and Dartmouth have not been designated ‘rural’, and they contain more than half the council's stock, with many houses located not on large estates but in pleasant settings.
The same may be said of a number of other rural districts designated under Section 19 of the Housing Act 1980, ostensibly protected but in reality having quite large proportions of their stocks vulnerable.
The major implications of these sales of rural council houses will be an eventual reduction in the ability of authorities to meet even their statutory obligations, let alone to use housing as a tool of social policy (Phillips and Williams 1981).
However, at present it must not be assumed that sales always produce immediate problems.
Many of the tenants buying would have remained in the same houses, so there would not have been ‘voids’ for allocation in any case.
It is in the long term that the ability of councils to transfer tenants and to optimize the use of stock will be lost.
PRIVATELY RENTED HOUSING
Accommodation rented from private landlords has always represented the most heterogeneous sector of the housing market in terms of quality and type of dwelling.
In rural areas it assumes a greater significance, comprising, in 1971, 24 per cent of the total housing stock compared with 21 per cent nationally, although this proportion is falling quite rapidly everywhere.
A full range of types of rented accommodation is also found: in addition to houses, bungalows, flats and bedsitters of all ages, there are some types of dwelling not as commonly seen in urban areas — caravans and mobile homes, winter-lets and tied accommodation.
The privately rented sector has traditionally been enumerated according to whether it is let furnished or unfurnished, with the latter usually providing somewhat greater security of tenure.
However, owing to the very mixed nature of rented housing, we shall concentrate on the more distinctively rural aspects, namely winter-lets, caravans/mobile homes and tied accommodation.
Winter-lets
The term is self-explanatory and covers mainly those second homes that have been called ‘holiday investment properties’(Davies and O'Farrell 1981).
Countryside cottages, seaside flats or even terraced houses in villages are the usual type of properties involved.
The short-term lets often suit people such as students when the off-season coincides with their term, but for families the disruption of having to move out for the summer is frustrating.
For many, the only alternative rural accommodation may be m. a caravan, seasonally almost as expensive as a holiday investment home.
The Housing (Homeless Persons) Act 1977 can sometimes assist these families.
However, local authorities have adopted varying interpretations of the law.
A number of classes of homeless persons has been created by a rather cumbersome section 4 of the Act, and local authorities, differing in their interpretation of the Act, have accordingly treated residents of winter-lets differently.
West Dorset District Council, for instance, was refusing to house people evicted from winter-lets unless they qualified for housing prior to entering such accommodation, even though in this case they would presumably have sought council accommodation in the first place (Larkin 1979).
Persons with ‘priority need’, which includes having children who are also homeless, actual or threatened homelessness through emergency such as fire or flood, old age, illness, physical or mental handicap or pregnancy, can expect to have accommodation provided, at least while enquiries proceed.
If not in priority need, particularly if considered for the purposes of the Act to have become ‘intentionally homeless’, persons may receive only advice and ‘appropriate assistance’, leaving much to an authority's discretion.
There is little detailed work on homelessness in rural areas, largely because of the diffuse nature of the problem.
Most homeless persons and families have the common feature of poverty although a variety of personal and other reasons may underlie their homelessness.
Winter-lets can be one possible cause of homelessness, although the reasons for occupants being in seasonal accommodation in the first place are very difficult to evaluate, and only now is the law being clarified in the courts.
Hughes (1981) cites recent cases, some of which are in rural areas such as the West Country, in which the homeless tenants from winter-lets have not always been rehoused.
The 1977 Act adds another housing responsibility to local authorities, and the government unfortunately refused to allocate any new resources to implement it, in spite of repeated requests for aid.
Greater resources are needed to meet these obligations but they have not been forthcoming.
In rural Devon, for instance, South Hams District Council's lettings to homeless persons increased from 16.2 per cent of all lettings in 1976–77 to  29.7 per cent in 1979–80.
This probably represents a combination of the requirements of the Housing (Homeless Persons) Act 1977 and the Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976, which added some agricultural workers to the authority's responsibilities.
In many districts it is impossible to distinguish exactly the contribution of winter-lets to homelessness, but they must add a considerable degree of uncertainty to housing demand in any given rural location, particularly in attractive holiday areas.
Indeed, Larkin (1979) cites cases of families in Dorset who have followed the pattern of moving out of winter-lets into summer caravans for over ten years without local authorities taking responsibility for their permanent rehousing.
Winter-lets are not intrinsically bad, but they are ‘symptoms rather than causes of insecure housing, chiefly because many authorities ignore the needs of people who have to resort to them for want of a better choice….’
(Larkin 1979, p. 76).
Caravans
As noted earlier, estimates of the number of second homes in the United Kingdom indicate that about one-half of them are caravans or mobile homes.
In many areas, these comprise both second home dwellers and those households least well established in the housing market.
A popular view is to regard the latter mainly as young families outbid for rural property, perhaps by the second home buyers.
In size and quality, caravans range considerably from lightweight mobile vans on holiday sites to those in sometimes quite plush mobile home establishments in which prices can often be from £10,000 to £20,000 (as much as many built-homes in the locality).
The range of quality from very good to squalid is of significance, because at one end of the range many authorities view mobile homes as being more or less equivalent to permanent dwellings, while some of the poorer, less well serviced, caravans cannot be regarded as permanent homes.
In addition, although many residents own their mobile homes or caravans, sites are usually only rented, and local authorities and site owners remain as landlords and sometimes as notoriously poor ones.
Caravans can serve the function of temporary housing for homeless persons, but too often regulations on their seasonal use are ignored even by local authorities to avoid the creation of homeless families who would have to be rehoused (Larkin 1979).
They can function as first homes for some young families, and Dunn et al .
(1981) emphasize the role of caravans as transitional on the way to more permanent accommodation.
Sadly, however, they can become the ‘true ghettoes of the rural poor…’
(Larkin 1979, p. 75) since they can be subject to little planning control and  have easier access than other rural housing tenures.
They can become long-stay expedients both for families and for housing authorities wishing to dump tenants, particularly problem families hard to house elsewhere.
Rural England has significantly higher proportions of ‘non-permanent buildings’ than does urban England: 1.3 per cent of the stock in rural districts compared with 0.5 per cent in urban districts.
Their spatial distribution in some rural districts has been noted by Dunn et al .
(1981) and by the Department of the Environment (1977c) in their review of mobile homes.
Berkshire and Lancashire have rural concentrations, while Larkin (1979) notes that south Oxfordshire has more than 10 per cent of all its ‘permanent’ dwellings in the form of caravans.
They are also to be found near to towns and some holiday resorts in South East England where many of the perhaps 70,000 residential caravans are located.
All in all, in 1975 it was estimated that some 145,000 persons lived in a mobile home of some type.
Although they may be regarded as suitable accommodation by some people, especially retired couples able to afford good-quality mobile homes, relatively poor facilities and frequently isolated locations make them less than ideal for the majority of inhabitants.
Tied accommodation
Although there are many forms of accommodation ‘tied’ to employment, the agricultural tied cottage is of prime interest (Shelter 1974; Schifferes 1980).
Its quality, in terms of amenities and physical condition, has been found to be generally poorer than that of other rural rented accommodation, which itself is often poor (Fletcher 1969), and it can be very variable, depending as it does on the individual farmer's upkeep.
Agricultural tied cottages formed the largest category of this type of housing in 1974, when there were an estimated 100,000 dwellings (Shelter 1974).
The proportion of farm workers who live in tied accommodation also requires comment; estimates range from just over one-half to 70 per cent(Shelter 1974; Irving and Hilgendorf 1975); Gasson (1975) suggested the existence of 73,000 tied agricultural cottages in England and Wales.
According to the parliamentary debates on the Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976 (discussed below), of the 223,000 men employed in agriculture, presumably full-time and part-time, 70,000 were housed in tied cottages in England and Wales, with a further 20,000 cottages occupied by retired farm workers.
Some interesting research has been conducted on the regional distribution of these cottages.
Irving and Hilgendorf's (1975) data (table 5.6) broadly support Gasson, who found, using a rather finer regionalization, that the parts of England with the highest proportions of full-time agricultural workers in tied accommodation were the South West and the   South East.
In most surveys, Scotland is also shown as having a very high proportion of workers living in tied accommodation — over 80 per cent in a number of counties.
Only in Wales, Yorkshire and Lancashire do tied cottages house fewer than one-third of agricultural workers.
The regional distribution is important, but at a local scale it is the location of tied cottages that is crucial.
Key farm workers such as foremen and stockmen need to be close at hand to the farm and in these locations there are often very few other dwellings available.
It is true that, without the farming job, the need to live on or near to the farm would be removed, but tied cottages can reinforce ties of dependency and can create considerable problems for employees wishing to change or to leave jobs (Newby 1979).
Legislation in the 1970s attempted to improve matters, but the only way realistically to overcome the problem is to provide more local authority dwellings near farms since owner-occupancy is beyond the means of virtually all agricultural employees.
As Shelter (1974) point out, one way of abolishing much tied accommodation would be to eradicate the need for it, which is based on housing shortage.
As long as the housing shortage exists, tied housing will continue to be offered and accepted.
The Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976 made some attempts to introduce greater security of tenure for tied cottagers.
It was explicitly ‘an act to afford security of tenure for agricultural workers housed by their employers, and their successors;…to impose duties on housing authorities as respects agricultural workers and their successors….’
(Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976, introduction).
There was, however, scope for considerable flexibility of interpretation of many aspects of this Act, as with the Housing (Homeless Persons) Act 1977, and minor points required clarification under the Rent (Agriculture) Amendment Act 1977.
Nevertheless, the main provision of the Act did improve the legal protection of tied cottagers, since previously protection had varied for different categories of tenants.
In most earlier cases, the occupant of tied accommodation had not enjoyed full protection against eviction under the Rent Acts since no money was paid, the accommodation usually being provided rent-free as part of remuneration.
Tied cottagers received protection under the Rent Act 1957 only in so far as they were ‘tenants’ who were entitled to four weeks' notice to quit and could not be evicted without prior warning.
The Protection from Eviction Act 1977 gave some additional protection since the courts could delay eviction.
However, the term ‘security of tenure’ is in fact a legal misnomer when applied to the majority of tied cottagers (Clements 1978).
To receive protection under the 1976 Act, an agricultural employee has to achieve the legal status of ‘qualifying worker’, which requires that the person has worked at least 91 out of the preceding 104 weeks whole-time in agriculture.
Previously, if dismissed a qualifying worker would normally have lost his home, but the Act now provides security of tenure that extends to a surviving spouse and, under certain circumstances, to some other family members.
The tied cottager can then become a ‘statutory tenant’, obliged to pay a weekly rent and paying for services and rates.
Farmers however are entitled to obtain vacant possession of a house occupied by a former employee in order to provide accommodation for a present or prospective agricultural employee.
The local authority should then provide suitable accommodation for the present occupier ‘in the interests of efficient agriculture’.
To prevent collusion between employer and employee, the local authority is not obliged to do this when the tied cottager is still employed by the farmer (who could otherwise obtain a council house for the tenant by threatening to terminate his employment).
The Act gives protection, if sometimes uncertain protection, to most full-time workers living in agricultural tied cottages.
But hardships can still be experienced by non-qualifying workers such as part-timers.
In addition, in the case of dismissed workers, some local housing departments will try to assess the merits of the dismissal before rehousing, and  the clause ‘in the interests of efficient agriculture’ is far from clear.
Clements (1978) goes so far as to suggest that this Act may precipitate the demise of agricultural tied cottages.
While the Act was being debated there was apparently a thinning of numbers, and subsequently some employers may have offered only limited-period or part-time employment to prevent employees from achieving the crucial ‘qualifying worker’ status.
Rather than let their cottages become occupied by potential sitting tenants, some farmers may prefer to let them to anyone but their own employees.
Legislation may therefore have done relatively little to help tied cottagers or to improve low cost agricultural housing.
ALTERNATIVE TENURES
In rural areas, as in urban areas, some alternatives have been developing to the three main tenure groups.
Although as yet they have made relatively little contribution to the overall rural housing scene, their existence and growth seems assured.
Probably the most important ‘alternative’ tenure — that provided by housing associations — is really a supplement to the existing owner-occupied and public rented sectors.
Their development was stimulated since 1964 with the establishment of the Housing Corporation which provides overall regulation of their affairs.
To some, they represent the ‘third arm’ of housing policy, although in their first 20 years their activity was mainly in urban areas.
They represent a potentially very important method of providing good rented or cheap owner-occupier housing in rural areas since they are an established medium for obtaining finance and for managing schemes.
They have also been associated with a variety of approaches such as self-build schemes, renovations and housing trusts.
Housing associations attempt to provide housing at fair rents either for community needs or for special groups such as retired rural workers, the elderly or the handicapped, both through building and through acquisition of existing properties (Clark 1981).
Most exist under the scrutiny of the Housing Corporation, which is a source of funding, although they are often able to obtain local authority finance, sometimes for joint ventures.
As a result, they frequently delegate to local authorities the right to nominate perhaps 50 to 70 per cent of their tenants if the authorities have provided finance.
In addition, they will be registered as charities or as ‘societies’ under the Industrial and Provident Societies Act.
Housing associations received a major boost from the Housing Act 1974 when a new once-and-for-all capital grant became payable at the outset of each scheme (Baker 1976; Lansley 1979).
A few of these associations have been providing homes in rural locations, and although individually their impact has not been great, collectively it is growing.
Clark cites the example of the Newcastle-based North Eastern Housing Association, which has built some 3,000 homes in rural areas within that region.
Local councils set the rents and nominate the tenants in this case and the Association has been willing to build relatively small-scale developments (sometimes fewer than ten houses) suitable for village settings.
The National Agricultural Centre Housing Association is an example of an organization that more specifically intends to provide rural housing.
However, financial uncertainty, a low priority attached until recently to rural schemes by the Housing Corporation and problems associated with its national-scale administration, coupled with some rural planning restrictions, have meant that only a very small number of the schemes of this and other organizations have come to fruition.
Nevertheless, a few moderately successful rural schemes have appeared.
Particularly hopeful was the sanction in 1978 by the Housing Corporation of up to 200 units per annum in the Special Investment Areas, where the Development Commission (the parent body of COSIRA) is involved in providing advance factories for job creation.
As a result, a housing association presence has been achieved in a number of relatively small villages.
However, as the majority of schemes proposed was to have been in small towns where there was already a relatively good provision of council houses, they have often not been implemented.
Recent reports indicate that only 100 houses rather than the projected 200 per annum have been provided which suggests a rather slow take-off (Gilg 1981, p. 110).
To date, many housing associations' rural ventures have not met with marked success.
Uncertainties of planning, finance and building, along with flagging enthusiasm, have often proved too much for local initiatives.
Certainly there is evidence that their distribution is very patchy and not always related to known housing need (figure 5.5).
Partly to overcome this, the Housing Corporation now favours local groups linking to existing national or regional associations rather than starting their own associations.
However, larger-scale organizations tend to be less sensitive to local requirements and to have greater inertia and administrative encumbrances (Richmond 1983).
National associations also tend to sponsor larger schemes in the more important settlements rather than in areas of isolated housing need.
However, a hopeful sign is a recent indication from the Housing Corporation that it would be interested in funding well conceived schemes in country areas where numbers of people may be small but needs acute.
In particular, they feel they may be able to develop new forms of equity-sharing in rural areas to provide, say, sheltered housing for the elderly owner-occupier (Clark 1981).
Other alternative schemes in rural areas include conjoint ventures    between local authorities and private developers, and self-build schemes.
The joint venture approach involves a transfer of land direct to new owners from the council, with private developers building the houses and the land profiteering element eliminated.
‘Starter schemes’ or ‘shell-housing’, ready plastered-out but not finished, have often been built on this basis, for example in Ribble Valley District, some Devon districts and in Suffolk Coastal District.
A number of the schemes have attempted to control speculative resale by using Section 19 of the Housing Act 1980 to restrict resale in rural areas.
By and large, it appears that building societies and other financial ‘gatekeepers’ are willing to advance money on houses built to NHBC standards, although this may exclude ‘shell’homes.
Under a self-build scheme , a group of seven or more persons can form a housing association to use their own labour to build homes for separate owner-occupation.
Since the members provide their labour free, houses can be built cheaply and the members can register as a friendly society with the National Federation of Housing Associations (rather than the Housing Corporation).
Such schemes depend on local enthusiasm, skills and initiative, although some work may be performed by contractors.
Finance can be available from the Housing Corporation, building societies and local authorities, from whom land can also sometimes be acquired at a reasonable price if councils want to dispose of some building land unwanted because of reductions in their own building programmes — perhaps at prices below market value if restrictions on resale are accepted.
Examples of self-build schemes in rural areas exist in West and East Sussex, Bordon (Hampshire), East Cornwall, Chesterton (North Oxfordshire) and Somerfield (Gloucestershire).
They can be particularly appropriate to smaller villages since they can be small-scale and use small plots of land, and as a result they are more likely to receive planning permission.
However, self-build schemes are really possible only where a number of energetic persons, usually young, coincide.
Strains are imposed on the self-builders' families and main jobs, and as a result these schemes are not suitable for all persons and rarely for the elderly.
Therefore it is fitting to remember that such houses are no substitute for fair rent housing from local authorities or housing associations (Clark 1981).
Issues raised in this chapter touch upon many related questions discussed elsewhere.
Housing can be a tool of social policy; in fact it can be argued that it must be, since it is a crucial element in people's lives and fair access to housing is essential to achieving social justice (Burke 1981).
Housing and statutory planning should be closely related in terms of both general strategic planning and physical planning within settlements.
Unfortunately, they have not always been mutually supportive.
To some extent this has been exacerbated by trends in rural transport, and these form the subject matter of the following chapter.
TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY
ACCESSIBILITY AND MOBILITY
Transport availability and costs assume a greater importance in rural areas than in urban areas.
Travel times and distances are usually greater and services and facilities less conveniently situated.
Rural areas are often considered ‘inaccessible’ not only because of locational factors but also because of poor transport provision.
However, this generalization hides the fact that many areas of the countryside are actually traversed by good main roads, even though some areas do lie well away from major transport networks.
There are also important differences in levels of mobility between rural residents.
This chapter intends to highlight three important themes: accessibility in the countryside, transport costs and availability, and the ways in which various sub-groups are affected by them.
Accessibility has long been recognized as a ‘slippery notion’.
In crude terms, an ‘accessible’ thing or place is one that is ‘get-at-able’(Gould 1969; Moseley 1979a).
However, there are great differences between physical, social and economic accessibility.
‘A well-paid job, a pretty girl or a desirable residence may each be located only five minutes away and yet be effectively inaccessible because one's inadequate skills, social talents or incomes effectively place them out of bounds….’
(Moseley 1979a, p. 56).
These social dimensions of accessibility may be very important to the quality of life, but rural residents usually face problems of accessibility because of spatial separation; theirs is a problem of physical accessibility , which requires that an individual must be able to command the transport facilities needed to reach the requisite supply points at appropriate times.
The two concepts of social and physical accessibility are related, as social benefits often accrue from physical accessibility.
This will be seen in chapter 8, particularly in relation to accessibility to cultural, educational, information and social services, the improvement of which can enhance the quality of life for rural residents.
Moseley cites two definitions of physical accessibility which have strong common themes; ‘the ease with which people can reach distant but necessary services…’
(Daly 1975, p. 75) and ‘the ability of people to reach destinations at which they carry out a given activity…’
(Mitchell and Town 1976, p. 3).
These provide links with the concept of mobility , which itself has at least two important facets.
The most basic of these relates to personal physical mobility, which can be impaired by physical handicap or old age.
But mobility can also be achieved through having access to transport in order to get from place to place.
Personal mobility has been defined as ‘the capacity that a person possesses for getting around…’
(Hillman et al .
1973, p. 2), and this clearly incorporates both facets of the term.
Mobility therefore relates to people's ability to move and to reach desired goals.
It depends on matters such as physical attributes and abilities of individuals, their monetary resources, the availability of mechanized means of transport and the appropriate infrastructure; but it does not depend on the opportunities that may or may not present themselves as a result of moving: accessibility alone incorporates this feature (Moseley 1979a).
Here, therefore, it is assumed for simplicity's sake that mobility is equated with transport availability (in terms of provision, costs and time).
Accessibility to other services and facilities forms the subject of chapter 8.
Any attempt by geographers to define ‘accessible’ or ‘inaccessible’places is an approximation.
To say that a certain village enjoys a certain level of accessibility is to summarize much too crudely the position of the middle-class person in a two-car household and the elderly person without a car because, as Moseley (1979a) so correctly points out, these neighbours are effectively living in different worlds in terms of mobility.
Therefore the spatial dimensions of accessibility and mobility have complex but very important social overtones.
Travel involves a number of costs to the individual, including financial expenditure, time and effort spent.
Therefore, the availability, speed and pricing structure of various modes of transport must be taken into account when travel and mobility are analysed.
The time that an individual has (literally, his time budget) is a valuable commodity, and travel by a faster mode of transport can allow more time and leisure to enjoy services once reached.
It is the conjunction of travel time, costs and opening hours (availability) of services that combine to render rural residents more or less isolated or inaccessible, and this question of poor spatial and temporal synchronization of services and public transport (in particular) will be developed in chapter 8.
To begin with, however, it is necessary to review the different modes of transport available in rural Britain.
PRIVATE TRANSPORT
For the majority of people living in rural areas, the private motor car has come to be the main, or vastly preferred, mode of transport.
It enables individuals to overcome some of the accessibility/mobility problems outlined above; they can come and go largely as they please, use the services they wish and enjoy a wide range of social, business and leisure contacts, conditioned only by the time that is available for driving from place to place and the running costs of the vehicle.
Because of the decline of public transport, it is often no longer possible for those who do not have access to personal transport (their own or shared) to commute daily to and from rural settlements; these people and places may effectively be isolated.
Therefore, the main factor identifying rural people who are disadvantaged in terms of access or transport is the lack of a car (Moseley 1979a).
This is exacerbated by the fact that, where car ownership levels are highest, demand for, and therefore provision of, public transport, will usually be the lowest (Whitby and Willis 1978).
This has serious implications for people in rural areas who cannot afford to run a car or are physically unable to do so.
Whitby and Willis further suggest that the demand for private transport will continue to grow in spite of oil price increases, and that losses arising from over-pricing of oil are disproportionately borne by rural residents.
Equally important are the increasing closures of small independent petrol stations, many of which are in rural areas, which can mean higher petrol prices and less petrol availability.
Car ownership rates are higher in rural areas than the national average.
The General Household Survey indicates that, nationally, about 58 per cent of households had at least one car in 1980 (Central Statistical Office 1982) but that around 70 per cent of rural households have at least one car.
In rural Lincolnshire, Clark and Unwin (1981) found that 77 per cent of respondents in a survey had regular access to private transport.
It is therefore not very surprising that rural public transport provision is lower than in many urban areas, where demand will be higher because of lower rates of car ownership.
Two of the main determinants of car ownership rates are undoubtedly income and age of household, and these have important implications in different rural areas.
Moseley cites a University of East Anglia Survey in rural Norfolk which indicated that, in 1975, only 8 per cent of households with an income of more than £2,000 per annum had no car, although even families with much lower incomes attempted to run cars in rural areas (Moseley et al .
1977; Moseley 1979a).
This would suggest that many poorer households must make enormous sacrifices in other areas of  spending in order to maintain a car, perhaps to the extent of going without adequate food and buying clothes at jumble sales (Brown and Winyard 1975; Winyard 1978).
But if they wish to visit shops, get their children to schools and use other services they have little choice — even if the price of petrol means that journeys have to be kept to the minimum.
With regard to age, in rural Lincolnshire 13 per cent of those aged over 60 were found to have no access to any kind of private transport compared with only 5 per cent in the population as a whole (Clark and Unwin 1981).
This would seem to indicate that car availability can be directly related to age.
PRIVATE TRANSPORT IS ESSENTIAL FOR BULK BUYING AT RURAL SUPERMARKETS (SOURCE: AUTHORS AND A. TEED)
However, absolute levels of car ownership do not necessarily indicate true levels of mobility, since this is governed by car availability .
In the past car ownership has been assumed to give equal ‘mobility’ to all members of a household.
This is not strictly so, however, since if the husband takes the car for work, the remainder of the family (which could include one or more members attempting to reach work or services themselves) are effectively marooned until he returns (Moseley 1979a; Phillips 1981).
While 73 per cent of economically active heads of households in the General Household Survey of 1980 had one or more cars, the fact remains that three in five adults even in car-owning households do not drive, and  many more do not have a car available for use during the daytime (Hillman and Whalley 1977).
The spatial behaviour of those rural residents without the use of cars in car-owning households may more accurately be compared with that of behaviour in non-car-owning households.
Their work, patterns of social contacts and service use will all tend to be governed by the distance they can walk or the availability of convenient public transport.
Age, employment and social status all influence the possession of driving licences.
Those under 17 years of age will not be eligible; also very few women over the age of 65 (possibly only 4 per cent) and only 7 per cent of women in skilled and unskilled manual occupations have their own cars.
Hillman et al .
(1973) also found, in a rural parish in Oxfordshire, that pensioners and women were far less likely to have driving licences.
The social implications of differing levels of car availability are very important.
As governments increasingly demand cost-effective public transport, poorly used routes are likely to have their services curtailed.
Infrequent services will be used even less, and, as levels of car ownership grow in rural areas, so demand will continue to fail until the services may eventually be withdrawn.
This vicious circle tends to leave a ‘rump’ of inhabitants who are unable to run a car, many of whom could be defined as the ‘transport poor’(this term will be discussed below).
Numerous figures can be cited to support the view that specific types and ages of households tend to be thus affected, but perhaps the most telling is that 90 per cent of single-person households over the age of 60 years do not have a car (table 6.1).
The majority of writers and researchers agree that this has serious personal, community, planning and service implications (Age Concern 1973; Pulling and Speakman 1974; Munton and Clout 1975; Wibberley 1978; Moseley 1979a; Hillman and Whalley 1980).
PUBLIC TRANSPORT
A major question is how far public transport can substitute for, or fill the vacuum left by, the absence of private transport.
It will rarely be as convenient, and rarely as cheap (see table 6.2), as private transport.
The relative costs of bus, coach and rail fares since 1975 have all increased more rapidly than the costs of running a private car or motorcycle.
With a base of 100 in 1975, the relative costs in 1980 of bus and coach stage fares were 237 while the costs of motoring had reached only 193, roughly the same level as the Retail Prices Index.
In relative terms, people forced to rely on public transport pay more than car users for their mobility.
Can  public transport, therefore, even if available, fill the gap, in view of the low incomes of many of the elderly and rural poor?
In addition, public transport is much more subject to direct government policy and to the influence of political decisions.
Although private transport is also subject to government policy, it will be affected more slowly.
For instance, road fund licence charges and petrol prices tend to creep up gradually, whereas decisions in the sphere of public transport can effect substantial changes almost immediately.
Routes may be closed, reducing accessibility, or subsidies may be removed, increasing fares for users at a stroke.
Public transport has been subject to numerous policy changes, especially since the 1960s (Banister 1983).
Monetary inflation, falling demand and rising fuel and running costs have all made public transport much more expensive to provide in rural areas.
The revenue required to support bus services in Gwynedd, for example, rose by almost three times between 1974/75 and 1978/79, yet the £700,000 subsidy in the last year was worth considerably less to operators at that time than earlier subsidies had been.
Rural counties such as Gwynedd suffer particularly since they often have very low density settlements, rugged terrain and relatively poor roads.
Sparsity of population in some rural counties of Britain can create considerable problems for bus operators.
For example, routes will frequently be made economical only if adults are taken on the school transport services.
However, school children pay only about two-thirds of the adult fare and for only 200 days of the year, and for the remainder of the time adult passengers may not be numerous enough to cover operating costs.
Apart from these ‘peak’ hours, there is often a considerable surplus capacity, with buses and drivers perhaps being inefficiently used.
Public opinion sometimes erroneously accuses the partly empty, off-peak buses of being run inefficiently.
However, since drivers' wages are already being paid for full shifts, Dobbs (1979) argues that the extra costs of providing more off-peak buses on low demand routes is not very great.
Buses that would otherwise sit unproductively in garages could be turned out to provide services for doctors' surgeries, shopping and social trips.
Nevertheless, it is apparently particularly difficult to convince councillors of the justification and effectiveness of these services, which could be life-lines to a minority of rural inhabitants.
Therefore public transport policy for rural areas requires very careful evaluation, not only in terms of economic viability but also in terms of the social impact of reducing services.
Generalizations about public transport decline almost certainly obscure the complexity of the picture in any local area, and there is very little precise, comparative information on local or even regional variations in the rates of increase, decrease or changing fortunes of different modes or routes at different dates.
Also generally unknown is the extent to which decline is due to the abandonment of routes or to the reduction of frequencies.
Therefore warnings should be sounded about the uncritical interpretation of data indicating supposed ‘decline’.
Bus services
PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN DECLINE, BUT THIS FERRY STILL PROVIDES AN ESSENTIAL LINK TO THE ISLE OF ISLAY IN THE SCOTTISH HIGHLANDS (SOURCE: D. G. LOCKHART)
The ‘stage carriage bus service’, or public omnibus, is the service usually referred to when rural transport is under discussion.
Such services are flexible, in that they can be routed wherever roads are suitable, and with a frequency to suit demand.
In addition, a range of bus sizes is available from the mini-bus to the large double-decker.
Furthermore, the considerable infrastructural investment of railways is not needed, or, at least, such  fixed costs are not all charged directly to bus companies.
At the same time, where demand is low, services can be withdrawn easily, and this has been the most characteristic trend in recent years.
Moseley (1979a) shows that in many counties, including Norfolk, Oxford, Leicestershire, Warwickshire and Northamptonshire, between 20 and 35 per cent of the parishes had fewer than six buses per week in 1976.
The picture is very variable but, as might be expected, larger settlements tend to have better services.
Much of rural Britain has a non-existent or very rudimentary bus service, and about one-quarter of all the rural parishes of lowland England have fewer than one bus daily.
Clearly it is not possible to rely on this form of public transport for commuting to work or for visits to local towns for access to a range of services.
Clark and Unwin (1981), in a study of 50 contiguous and rather remote parishes in rural Lincolnshire, found that 16 had no bus service at all and many others had a service that would not permit visits to towns of long enough duration to attend a variety of services.
National-scale data, which should be treated with caution, illustrate that the number of passenger-kilometres travelled by private vehicles increased from 60,000 million to 380,000 million per annum between 1951 and 1977, while the number of passenger-kilometres travelled by public service road vehicles declined from 80,000 million to 50,000 million.
This trend has been even more marked for rural areas; figure 6.1 shows a decline of some 29 per cent in passenger journeys by rural buses between 1965 and 1975.
During this period the vehicle fleet size remained almost constant, although it was less intensively used, with a decline of 9 per cent in vehicle miles (Association of County Councils 1979).
At the regional scale a much more varied picture of bus services emerges.
In rural Wales, for example, taking 1938–39 as the year of the ‘peak’ network, considerable decline may be seen in route mileage in the first decade up to 1949, although this did not occur at a constant rate and varied considerably in the north and south of Wales, and according to the specific operating companies considered.
The net loss of route mileage by one mainly rural operator (Gosville's, of mid- and North Wales) was 24 per cent between 1938 and 1979, but this was mitigated by re-adoption of some routes by other operators, leaving a net loss of 13 per cent to the public transport system.
The interchange of routes between operators complicates analysis, but operators in South Wales also appear to have made a net loss of some 12 per cent of mileage since 1939.
Nutley (1982), analysing these data, suggests that decline may have proceeded mainly by frequency reductions which have not gone as far as complete closures.
A number of very different trends were to be seen in a sample of frequencies on bus routes, ranging from consistent decline over the period since 1939   to slight increase in recent years on a few routes.
However, for the Gosville Company the general picture was of increase from 1939 to 1949, then a period of stability, followed by decline in service frequency of just over 15 per cent during the 1970s.
The company's mid-Wales network, the most rural area it served, showed the greatest decline in the 1970s — 35 per cent— which supports the contention discussed later that these are the types of areas that now typically have the poorest effective public transport provision.
Some authors suggest that the decline in bus transport is not so extreme.
However, even if bus networks have not declined as markedly as has, say, the rail network, frequency of services has usually declined and fares have increased.
Route mileage alone is not a very useful index of service quality since a reduction in frequency in one area can constitute a more serious deterioration in service than a complete closure of a very lightly used route elsewhere (Moseley et al .
1977).
Bus use rates do seem to vary.
In particular, fare increases appear to lead to high losses of passengers, particularly at off-peak periods.
Although the levels of ‘resistance’ vary, such passenger losses on rural routes can be very damaging (Holding 1979).
Relatively few rural residents appear to rely solely on public transport, perhaps because it is not regarded nowadays as a worthwhile alternative — Moseley et al .
(1977) found that only one-third of respondents in a large survey of transport availability in Norfolk had used a bus or train in the preceding month.
The Department of the Environment (1971a, 1971b) also found low rural rates of regular use (about 6 per cent using public transport on most days).
It is these few people who are probably very dependent on public transport, and, if it becomes too expensive or infrequent, they may find themselves unable to live in the rural community.
The young and the old are obviously vulnerable in this respect (Hail 1975).
Frequency is one important aspect of bus services, while costs, convenience, reliability and network pattern are others.
Surveys have generally found that what consumers want are more frequent services with lower fares and more convenient routes (Hislop 1975; Moseley 1979a).
It appears that many bus services were considered to be relatively marginal in cost terms even during years of peak usage in the 1930s and early 1950s.
The 1968 Transport Act (which established the National Bus Company) recognized this, and brought the county councils into the provision of bus services to enable subsidies to be made for socially necessary but loss-making services (Moseley 1979a).
There is, of course, considerable debate as to the degree to which profitable routes should subsidize (in conjunction with the rates) the non-profitable routes.
One area of reasonably firm public support remains the school bus.
The guaranteed customers (even if at cut-price) twice daily during term-time can assist the financial success of many rural bus routes, which can sometimes also be used by adults to travel to nearby centres.
A slight staggering of schools' starting and finishing times sometimes leads to a more efficient use of buses (although the service may then be less convenient to other users).
However, when children's fares are below the full adult fare this can cause difficulties for operators (Dobbs 1979), and the economic and social costs of getting children from more remote rural settlements to school remains an outstanding problem in many localities.
The questions of access and transport to schools for rural children are discussed further in chapter 8.
The Transport Act 1980 has attempted to encourage private operators to enter passenger transport under the philosophy that more competition will lead to better services.
This Act was important in that it eased restrictions in the field of public service transport, but critics felt that it would weaken the protection necessary for essentially unprofitable bus routes, mainly those in rural areas.
Advocates of the Act claimed that it would update the restrictive licensing system which had its basis in the 1930 Road Traffic Act, which itself discouraged newcomers from entering the industry for reasons of safety and standards.
In the event, in a number of rural areas small-scale operators have managed to provide services at  cheaper costs than have been managed by larger national firms, mainly because of lower overheads.
Some small subsidies are still paid on non-profit-making routes, and companies such as Red Rover Buses of Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, now operate a limited number of routes in local areas to meet local needs.
The Aylesbury firm runs about a dozen routes in rural areas, and similar firms sometimes use a variety of sizes of buses and vehicles.
There are still critics, however, who believe that only the more profitable routes will be retained in this system; that it places too great a reliance upon operators identifying socially important routes, and seeking and obtaining subsidies to maintain them; and that a piecemeal system will result.
The Conservative Government believed, however, that what they thought to be excessive subsidization would be stemmed and resources would be better employed.
These views are not mutually exclusive, though the dangers to low-use but socially important rural routes could still exist.
At the local level, there has been a considerable range of approaches to public transport provision.
In 1976 the government argued that, although it would set the ‘broad lines of transport policies’, local communities would make their own decisions within the context of the national policy.
The range of attitudes is illustrated by strategies that state, at one extreme, that ‘all people should be provided with access to public transport services for three return trips a day to the nearest market town, providing for a journey to work in the morning, a mid-day shopping journey and a journey home in the evening…’, and suggest, at the other extreme, that all ‘deep’ rural areas should have a public transport service to a local centre on at least two days a week or that all sizeable villages should be served by public transport on one day a week (Adams et al .
1977, p. 3).
Clearly, the life chances of many rural residents would be considerably influenced by the policy adopted.
Train services
Railways are not really flexible enough to be able to serve isolated communities in rural areas.
Many lines were laid only where a considerable volume of traffic (passenger and goods) was assured.
However, some rural communities did become quite reliant on rail for outside contacts, in particular the rural mining settlements in Wales and the North of England, commuter villages in the South East and some more isolated estuarine settlements in the South West.
In addition, many rural areas were traversed by the rail network, which gave them an additional lifeline and a link with main centres.
As Thomas (1963) wrote, people were affected by trains to some extent even in the most remote parts of England  during the latter half of the nineteenth and early years of the twentieth centuries.
By the time of the First World War, an enormous number of quite small villages and hamlets had their own wayside station or halt, and at its peak Britain's railway system was (to Thomas)‘almost absurdly dense’.
The major reason given for the closure of railway lines and stations was that the 1950s modernization plan for the railways had had little effect on stemming an ever-rising deficit in running costs.
The Transport Act 1962 broke up the British Transport Commission established under the Transport Act 1947.
Instead of attempting to integrate and co-ordinate internal transport services as a whole, individual boards, such as the British Railways Board, the London Transport Board and the British Docks Board, were to have as much individual responsibility as possible, especially in commercial terms.
This reorganization in 1962 was largely a result of the pressing need of the railways for financial readjustment.
Dr Richard Beeching had been brought in in 1961 with the prime mandate of improving commercial viability.
The result of major surveys during late 1961 and most of 1962 appeared as ‘The Reshaping of British Railways ’, known as the Beeching Report (British Railways Board 1963).
This Report was, of course, the subject of much debate, particularly concerning the validity of some data used to support its contentions.
Nevertheless, perhaps the most startling statistic contained in it was that some one-third of the rail route mileage carried only about 1 per cent of the freight and passenger traffic, while one-half of the route mileage accounted for only 4 to 5 per cent of total traffic.
From a commercial viewpoint, this was clearly intolerable, although socially these may have been lines in very remote areas where rail was an important link.
The most unprofitable services were singled out as ‘stopping trains’, which made enormous losses and cost almost twice as much to run as revenue received from them.
The majority were in rural areas and the traffic densities were so low that there was no prospect of making them pay.
Therefore, the Beeching proposals were quite drastic, although arguably there was no commercial alternative to closing numerous uneconomic lines.
It was suggested that 400 passenger services be withdrawn or modified and 2,000 stations and 5,000 route miles closed to passenger traffic.
It was recognized that this would inevitably deprive many parts of Britain, especially Wales and Scotland, of passenger services altogether (Aldcroft 1968).
The Beeching proposals have been criticized for the lack of serious consideration given to the possibility of retaining many unprofitable passenger services, and the case for closure was presented in a way that prejudged the final decision.
Some of the Report's data were criticized, and it was argued that the specific social effects of closures were not fully appreciated even if some of the wider social and economic repercussions  had been noted.
In the end, many of the Report's recommendations were implemented quite speedily.
By 1966 the route mileage had been reduced by 4,500 miles and over 2,000 stations closed, a reduction of 44 per cent on the 1962 figure.
On the positive side, steam traction became almost a thing of the past; by the end of 1966, 96 per cent of total coaching train miles were operated by diesel or electric trains.
Also, standards of service on many main line routes were improved considerably, particularly the inter-urban routes.
The irony was that the economic returns expected from the reforms were hardly gained at all, and the railways were really no nearer paying their way by the end of 1966 than they had been in 1962.
The Labour Government outlined its ‘New Deal’ for transport in 1966; its 1967 development plans aimed to retain some 11,000 route miles of the 13,500 left in existence against Beeching's original plan for an eventual reduction to some 8,000 miles.
Emphasis was to be placed on retaining commuter and rural services and routes deemed to be of value in spite of costs.
These policy recommendations formed the basis of the 1967 Transport Bill.
The Beeching proposals for the railways (figure 6.2) can be compared with the 1982–83 rail network (figure 6.3) although, as with bus services, the network itself may not be as crucial as the frequency and cost of train journeys.
What is evident is that, in spite of variations in the rate of reduction of rural services and the different attitudes of various governments to the public subsidy of railways, the pattern of rural services is now very much as Dr Beeching seems to have wanted.
The cuts in services appear to have been most severe in Wales, the South West and parts of the Midlands.
Services in Scotland, Lancashire and Yorkshire, while not unscathed, seem to have survived more successfully.
Numerous examples of rail closures in specific rural areas can be identified.
Norfolk, for example, lost 70 per cent of its rail network during the 1960s, but some closures had come about even before the 1963 Beeching Report, having been underway ever since postwar nationalization of the railways (Moseley 1979a).
Many lines in North Wales have been closed since the late 1940s, although the 1960s were also years of decline: figure 6.4 illustrates the railways closed to passengers in that region between 1948 and 1976 (Halsall 1979).
The tragedy is that, although many small settlements never had a railway station, the inter-small-town rail network has been destroyed nationally and the service is now effectively inter-city, so that‘the rural branch line is a thing of the past…’
(Moseley 1979a, p. 23).
Some of the options for the future of British Rail outlined in the 1983 Serpell Report would, if adopted, leave the network effectively only inter-main-cities, and would make the decline of rural railways almost complete.
One solution to the problems caused by the withdrawal of rail transport in rural areas has been to replace these services with buses.
Improved bus services with co-ordinated timetables were widely suggested in the 1976 Green Paper on Transport Policy and in the response of British Railways' Board to this,Opportunity for Change .
It was felt that this would enable more rail services to be withdrawn in rural areas without ‘undue hardship’(an ill-defined term) being caused to the communities currently served by rail.
However, there is now a wider awareness of the need for greater attention to be paid to changing public attitudes and to the financially unquantifiable effects and social costs of closures to residents (Hillman and Whalley 1980).
Some of these are discussed in the conclusions to this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Telecommunication links provide a type of ‘mobility’ that is becoming more and more important in terms of business and leisure contacts as telephone ownership and possession of home television computer links grow.
To some extent, the deficiencies in private and public transport can be offset by the use of a phone.
Trips that are solely for information or for social contact can be replaced by verbal contact via the telephone and the  outcome can be satisfactory for the rural resident, although not as rewarding in terms of personal contact.
However, unequal access is again a feature.
Moseley (1979a) found that only about one-half of Norfolk's rural households had a telephone and the figure was lower for more inaccessible places.
In addition, the lower-income households are far less likely to have a telephone — and at the same time are less likely to have a car.
These households, already disadvantaged in terms of personal mobility, can thus be further disadvantaged.
They will suffer still more communication deprivation if ‘uneconomical’ public telephones are withdrawn from villages; yet, sadly, in the early 1980s many rural public telephone boxes are being removed by British Telecommunications, in spite of campaigns to retain them, because they are not felt to be economically viable.
The increasing range of new and improved telecommunications services can have potentially profound effects on future travel and home-based employment opportunities, because certain types of jobs do not need face-to-face contact and may be carried out from home by the linking of the telephone to home computers or the use of other teleconferencing, text-handling or information-retrieval systems.
Much regular ordering by retailers or other rural service points can be done by telephone or other systems based on remote computer linkages and improved ‘information technology’.
However, evidence suggests that non-business travel is also important and can cover 67 per cent of all movement (Clark and Unwin 1981); if this were to be substantially reduced by remote linkages by telephone or other means, the consequences for continued viability of still more rural public transport routes could be serious, especially where comparatively minor variations in demand can be critical.
The telephone can reduce the need for personal contacts both at a local and a non-local scale.
Some 24 per cent of daily contacts in rural Lincolnshire were by phone, a proportion that rose to 28 per cent for non-local contacts for information.
It is such non-local visits that raise the most serious problems of accessibility and are of the greatest importance to rural transport policy-makers (Clark and Unwin 1981).
The elderly, the semi-skilled and unskilled, emphasizing their relative isolation, make relatively fewer non-local visits compared with those who have access to private transport or who have phones.
However, journeys for information and for social contacts form a substantial part of daily activity for all people, and the telephone could become a substitute for at least some journeys and reduce the need for direct personal contact.
On the other hand, it is possible that, instead of substituting for transport interactions, telecommunications will broaden people's activities and actually stimulate further activities and trips (Tyler 1979; Clark and Unwin 1981).
As a result the telephone might, ironically, accentuate and  compound the rural accessibility problem.
Those who have regular access to private transport may find their social activities increasing, while the relatively immobile may experience an increase in their wishes to make social visits which cannot readily be satisfied.
Therefore modern communications can increase some people's awareness of their isolation and spatial immobility (and, presumably, their frustrated opportunities).
ALTERNATIVES IN RURAL TRANSPORT
In addition to the means of transport already discussed (private car, rail and bus), some additional or innovative methods of ‘getting about’ have been introduced in rural areas of Britain.
They will not suit all areas, and it should be stressed that, from a social viewpoint, an adequate travel network and frequent service is the most desirable solution, given that not everyone can be ‘personally mobile’.
Alternatives to this usually provide only a palliative for the rural transport problem.
Moseley (1979b) suggests a few alternatives: these should be borne in mind when access to services is discussed in chapter 8, because there are also innovations in service type and provision aimed at improving accessibility.
Many of the alternatives depend on the use of buses in, for example, off-peak excursion services (say, twice monthly), which can be run quite cheaply to large towns in view of marginal pricing and maximizing use of vehicles.
Mini-bus services have been experimented with in a number of areas, although the savings over larger buses are not always felt to be great and, frequently, mini-buses will be too small to cope with maximum demand over part of the route (Dobbs 1979).
In the Snowdon National Park a local Sherpa bus service was started experimentally in 1976 as a means of getting visitors into and out of the Park and reducing the volume of private cars (Mulligan 1979).
The use of postal transport to act concurrently as post-buses has been hailed as an important and efficient way of reaching small settlements.
However, the Post Office requirement that the mail delivery and collection must take priority has inevitably meant that circuitous routes and awkward timings have developed, rendering the post-bus unattractive to many potential customers (Moseley 1979b).
Dobbs (1979) cites a proposed service in Anglesey that would take 70 minutes by post-bus compared with 27 minutes by conventional bus.
Clearly, even with cheaper fares this would be unattractive for all but the most impecunious rural resident.
School buses have sometimes been used by adults, although not frequently — again, sometimes owing to routes and timing.
Car-sharing has received a recent boost since the petrol price increases; owners are able to share petrol costs without endangering their insurance policies as long as sharing is on a non-profit basis.
However, it is unfortunately true that many unconventional forms of service can be relatively inconvenient for users and tend to have a romantic, if empirically unsound, appeal.
They generally present ways of extending rather than replacing conventional public transport (Dobbs 1979).
Some more drastic solutions than those discussed above have been proposed, although, as Moseley (1979b) argues, they are based on a number of myths about rural mobility.
The first is that rising car ownership will eventually solve the transport problem.
This is true to an extent, but many individuals either cannot run a car or will not always be able to run one.
The second myth concerns the attitude that, if rural residents do not like their locations, they can move.
In fact, many people are effectively tied to rural areas because of their own or their spouse's occupation, and residential choice is not free as envisaged in the theoretical residential decision-making models.
Third, the myth persists that private enterprise, unfettered by legal constraints, could fill the void in transport provision, but the risk is that only profitable routes will be maintained.
This links with the final ‘myth’, that rural bus services are very little used.
As discussed earlier, the emphasis must be on the residual rural population, even if in a minority, who are, and will always be, dependent on public transport.
These myths, suggests Moseley, have underlain the widely found reluctance in rural Britain to promote the provision of a co-ordinated, efficient system of public transport.
Perhaps changing levels of transport provision can be regarded as part and parcel of rural change as a whole, as discussed in chapter 1.
SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES: ISOLATED PLACES AND ISOLATED PERSONS
This chapter has provided evidence of the increasing isolation of some rural communities, particularly in terms of public transport provision.
However, the extent of the loss or deprivation of public transport should not be exaggerated.
For example, Nutley (1979), when using transport coverage as a basic and simple indicator of accessibility, found that only 15 out of 365 sample settlements in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland were totally deprived of public transport in 1977.
In the national context this is a good record, and shows no significant decline from the 1960s.
Rural Wales (excluding the urbanized south and north-east) provides a contrast with the Scottish Highlands, as here a large number of parishes were without any public transport at all.
Although their population was only about 5 per cent of the total of rural Wales, some districts fared relatively worse than others, particularly in Powys (Brecknock, Montgomery and Radnor) and parts of West Wales (Preseli and south Pembrokeshire).
In Radnor and Montgomery, about 13 per cent of the scattered population was totally without public transport in the late 1970s (Nutley 1980).
As mentioned earlier, and as will be referred to again in later chapters, it is important to recognize that the mere presence of a public transport service is not a good index of its usefulness.
The option of using public transport for travel to work or to use services may be very limited.
The presence or absence of public transport that can get people to work, that may be thought of as a service available between 8 and 9 am and 5 and 6 pm from Mondays to Fridays, is a much more realistic indicator of accessibility.
Nutley (1980) formed an overwhelming impression of vast areas of rural Wales with no public transport suitable for journeys to work (figure 6.5).
The whole of Radnor, most of Brecknock and much of Montgomery lacked this facility, and it was estimated that 14.5 per cent of the population of rural Wales was without effective public transport to work.
This, of course, illustrates powerfully the lack of choice facing rural dwellers, imposing the need to work within walking distance (if there is any) and enforcing car ownership, lift-sharing or migration.
It is hardly surprising that journey-to-work surveys in rural Wales have found that the very high proportions of between 48 and 84 per cent of trips are made by car (Nutley 1980).
Ultimately, however, there is still the problem of the individuals who rely on a poor frequency of public transport and this can be the most significant feature of isolation.
Individuals may not have access to private transport to substitute for inadequate public provision; they may not be able to obtain a lift when necessary and they may not possess a telephone or the resources to obtain a car or phone.
These people will often be very isolated and their social and spatial contacts will be very much determined by what is available in the local community.
The ‘transport poor’?
Several groups now constitute what can evocatively be called the ‘transport poor’(Wibberley 1978).
These are pensioners, others on low incomes, the unemployed, children, housewives and disabled persons.
Transport deprivation is a real form of poverty and often exists with other forms of poverty (see chapter 10).
Evidence is not hard to find to support these assertions.
In a large survey of almost 800 respondents in the Cotswolds, 38 per cent of elderly persons were found to have total dependence on public transport and a further 21 per cent had at least partial dependence.
Similar proportions were seen among social classes 4 and 5   with 34 per cent totally dependent and 26 per cent at least partly dependent on public transport (Smith and Gant 1981).
It is misleading to assert that only areas are isolated, since the ‘transport poor’ are individuals who will be isolated in relative terms no matter how rural or urban their location may be (Coles 1978).
Instead, it is sometimes useful to envisage a three-fold classification of constraints on transport availability for households.
First, there are capability constraints, such as age, health, income, possession of a driving licence, and car ownership.
Second, there are ‘coupling constraints’, which reflect individuals' commitments to engage in specific activities at specific times (work, school, or appointments) which may be at odds with the timing of public transport services.
Finally, there are ‘authority constraints’; for example, free school transport may not be available to children living within a certain distance of school; or opening hours may be mis-matched with the timings of public transport, rendering the services effectively inaccessible to users dependent on public transport.
Mobility deprivation is therefore real and can afflict many persons and groups in more or less rural areas.
Community isolation undoubtedly results, and a commonly perceived feeling in rural areas bereft of public transport is one of being ‘cut-off’ from the services and facilities outlined in chapter 8.
Geographical and transport remoteness make areas less accessible to friends, relatives, some tourists and businessmen.
This can induce a feeling of insularity and reduce opportunities for residents (Hillman and Whalley 1980).
The loss of opportunities can be particularly damaging to the young or to the needy and can exacerbate the rural population changes identified in chapter 4.
The effects on communities of mobility deprivation can therefore be either visible or intangible: rarely are they negligible.
PLANNING WITHIN THE COUNTRYSIDE
THE GROWTH OF STATUTORY PLANNING
The concept of planning encompasses a wide range of activities that affect the living conditions of those in particular areas.
We have already mentioned some of the agencies that ‘plan’ the countryside: these include the EEC, whose prices affect the types of crops grown (chapter 2), the Development Commission, which locates factories in rural areas (chapter 3), and local authority housing departments, which develop and manage village stocks of council houses (chapter 5).
The full range of such agencies is considerable, as Gilg's (1978) survey of countryside planning illustrates.
In different ways, all the planning bodies affect land use and social activities in rural areas.
Many of these activities have been discussed elsewhere in this book, so the scope of this chapter is limited mainly to analysing the role of local authorities, which exercise specific statutory planing powers within the countryside.
As there are several excellent histories of the development of town and country planning legislation (Ashworth 1954; Cherry 1974a, 1974b; Sheail 1981), we shall give only a brief review here.
Individual property owners in cities have long had to conform to legal controls, but planning as a more widespread activity dates only from the mid-twentieth century (Hall 1982).
An outstanding feature of the interwar period was the sprawl of suburbia into the surrounding countryside, especially in the South East.
Except for measures such as the Ribbon Development Act 1935 and the Green Belt Act 1938, introduced too late to be effective, little was done to control this urban sprawl.
During the Second World War, three influential reports were published which were to shape the evolution of statutory planing: the Barlow Report, in 1940, which advocated controlled industrial decentralization from the conurbations; the Scott Report, in 1942, which argued for a system of planning controls to protect the agricultural use of the countryside; and the Uthwatt Report, also in 1942, which recommended nationalization of undeveloped land to secure for the community the value added to land by the planning system.
These were complemented by the Dower and Hobhouse Reports of 1945 and 1947, recommending the creation of national parks.
The two most important outcomes of these official inquiries and reports were the Distribution of Industry Act 1945, which introduced controls over new and expanded factories, and the Town and Country Planning Act 1947, which introduced a system of development plans and development controls for land use in England and Wales.
Local authorities were to prepare detailed land use plans for their areas against which individual planning applications for new or extended dwellings or for changes in land use were to be evaluated.
In time, the system came to be criticized for being too narrowly focused on land use (to the exclusion of social planning), as well as for being slow and inflexible.
Following the Planning Advisory Group's Report in 1965, a new two-tier system of planning was adopted under the Town and Country Planning Act 1968.
In England and Wales, counties were to prepare structure plans to establish general social and economic development plans with ‘key diagrams’ and ‘written statements’.
The structure plans then provided a framework for local plans, which were to be more detailed strategies prepared at district level.
The local plans could take one of three forms: district plans as overall plans; action area plans for smaller areas undergoing more intensive change; and subject plans for particular issues such as conservation.
The format for statutory planning has also changed, so that there is now greater public participation in the identification and evaluation of key issues, more formal examination in public and the presentation of several alternative planning options rather than a single final plan.
In practice, there has been considerable disappointment with the new system of planning, partly because of the lack of guidelines provided by central government and partly because of the slowness and cumbersomeness of the new procedures (Barrass 1979; Shaw and Williams 1982a).
Although there have been considerable changes in the machinery of statutory planning and in the scope of the development/structure plans, the powers available to planners have altered little.
These powers are enshrined as development control procedures which enable local authorities to reject, approve, or approve with conditions, applications for planning permission for new buildings, extensions to existing buildings and changes in land use.
There have been some adjustments to the extent of these powers; in particular, the Local Government Planning and Land Act 1980 relaxed the controls and shifted more responsibility from the counties to the district (Catchpole 1982).
These development controls do give the planners an influential role in local development, even though the  powers are mainly negative, comprising the ability to refuse rather than to initiate development.
Occasionally they can be used in a more positive manner, and both the addition of ‘conditions’ to planning permissions and informal discussions between planners and developers allow the former to exercise a more decisive influence on new developments (Blacksell and Gilg 1981).
There is still, however, a gap between social and physical planning; structure plans may set broad social and economic objectives, but the powers available to the planners relate largely to land use control over specific development proposals.
Statutory planning has influenced the evolving social geography of postwar Britain in two main ways.
The first concerns the general control exercised over development and especially the resolution of land use conflicts in the countryside.
This includes control over new housing and industry, or arbitration between urban expansion and rural conservation.
The second major influence of statutory planning in rural areas has involved settlement policy, and is clearly related to general land use control.
In rural areas of both growth and decline, selected or key settlement policies have been adopted as the planning ‘solution’ to a number of social and economic problems (Cloke 1979).
The importance of such policies is the way in which they redistribute resources and accessibility within the countryside.
CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT IN RURAL AREAS
The first real planning act, the Housing Town Planning [etc.]
Act 1909, was followed by two other important measures during the interwar years; the Housing Town Planning [etc.]
Act 1919, which encouraged adjacent districts to co-ordinate their plans, and the Town and Country Planning Act 1932, which sought to encourage local action to regulate activities in both the town and county (Sheail 1981).
These powers were permissive, and in most of Britain urban sprawl and ribbon development continued more or less unabated.
It was in response to this that the Scott Committee on Land Utilization in Rural Areas urged that agricultural use should have priority in any conflicts over rural land use.
This influenced the spirit and the formulation of the Town and Country Planning Act 1947, so that the main tasks of country planning were viewed as being the exclusion of urban sprawl from rural areas.
The countryside was also viewed as having a ‘natural’ beauty which was self-perpetuating and under threat only from urban growth (Robinson 1976).
These aims were to be advanced through the twin application of development plans and development control powers.
The essence of these planning powers lay in development control , because  no persons, industries or non-statutory organizations could undertake development without planning permission.
However, there was a number of exceptions that were particularly significant in rural areas.
The most important concern agriculture, government departments, including the large areas owned by the Ministry of Defence, and Crown lands.
In particular, vast tracts of agricultural land and agricultural buildings are excluded from the obligation to obtain planning permission (Gilg 1978).
Apart from these exemptions, planning controls operate in rural areas in the same way as in urban areas.
Therefore, although farmers and foresters can change land use and erect new non-residential buildings, private individuals have to apply for planning permission for industrial or residential developments.
In practice, development plans have zoned most of the open countryside for agriculture, so that spatial restraints have been applied to development.
In addition, some areas are considered to have special value, either for amenity, for beauty or for scientific interest, and are protected by further restrictions on development.
This also applies to rural areas that are under immediate pressure from urban expansion.
There are now a number of types of specially protected areas including national parks, Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONBs), nature reserves, Heritage Coasts, green belts, Areas of Great Landscape Value, country parks, forest parks, and Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
It has been estimated that more than one-third of the land area of the United Kingdom is covered by these additional restraints.
Figure 7.1 shows the distribution of such zones in England and Wales.
It can be seen that both more remote areas and parts of the more accessible countryside are included.
In these areas development is not normally permitted and will be approved only if there are exceptional circumstances, although in practice these guidelines are not always adhered to (Davidson and Wibberley 1977).
Green belts and national parks
The most intense physical pressures on rural areas have, of course, been in the urban fringes.
The expansion of towns and cities has increased the demand for development land for housing, industry, retailing and other activities.
Land in the urban fringe is also at a premium for recreation, whether for rambling or for sports and recreation grounds.
In some areas urban pressure on the periphery creates additional problems because expansion may be into areas of considerable landscape value.
This is true, for example, of some of the towns located near the Downs in Sussex or the Pennines in northern England.
Urban growth in the interwar period was characterized above all else by the suburban expansion of towns and cities, frequently at unprecedentedly low densities.
These changes placed    enormous pressure on agriculture in some areas, especially because of land speculation (Low 1973; Rettig 1976).
As a result of the growing competition and conflict between different land uses, and because of the spirit of ‘anti-urbanism’ in debates over the countryside, special attention has been directed to planning in these urban fringe areas.
Green belts have been the major instrument of planning in fringe areas, having long been advocated by leading planning theorists such as Unwin and Howard.
The latter viewed the ‘green belts’ around towns as an integral part of urban life, to be conserved for recreation and for meeting local demands for food.
The first such green belt was introduced in 1938, when an Act of Parliament allowed a zone to be established around London.
However, the influential Greater London Plan of 1944, proposed by Abercrombie, advocated an enlarged green belt for London, mainly as a ‘sanitary zone’ around the city, to prevent further urban encroachment.
This was the spirit that influenced the Ministry of Housing and Local Government in 1955 to urge a more widespread adoption of green belts.
Three reasons were given for this policy: to check further growth of large built-up areas; to prevent neighbouring towns from physically coalescing, and to preserve the special character of some historic towns (Elson 1981).
More recently, it has been shown that the aim of preservation has been somewhat relaxed, and some attention has been given to non-agricultural uses of green belts, particularly for recreation (Hebbert and Gault 1978).
In terms of the aims set out in 1955, it can be said that green belt policies have been fairly successful.
They have physically contained the growth of some cities, prevented coalescence of others, and have helped to retain the character of some historic centres, such as Cambridge and York (Davidson and Wibberley 1977).
However, it has also to be pointed out that many intrusive land uses have occurred in green belts.
Furthermore, as many of these zones already contained substantial built-up areas prior to designation, green belts frequently contain a mixture of land uses and rarely form zones of attractive or continuous open landscape (Thomas 1970, 1974).
It has also been argued that green belts have been used as instruments of preservation rather than conservation, and that insufficient attention has been devoted to positive planning, and to provision for recreational use.
In response to such criticisms, many feel that a more flexible approach to green belts is required.
Policies should aim to create and improve accessible landscapes, and not just to preserve all land around cities, irrespective of quality.
At the same time, the Secretary of State has revealed his attitude to developments in his response to structure plan policies; in many cases, while approving the general outline of the structure plans, he has also given more emphasis to permitting further development in rural areas and has substantially reduced the proposed limits for some green belts (Elson 1981).
Therefore, both the extent and the  functions of green belts may be expected to change in the near future, and this change may also have social implications.
The other major type of area with special development constraints is national parks .
Following the Dower and Hobhouse Reports, the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 was passed and the National Parks Commission set up to designate suitable extensive areas of land of national scenic importance as ‘national parks’.
Twelve areas were identified and ten were designated as national parks in England and Wales between 1950 and 1955 (Bell 1975).
The majority are in the upland regions of the North and West (figure 7.1).
They comprise some 13,600 km 2 approximately 9 per cent of the land surface of England and Wales (there are no national parks, as such, in Scotland).
Unlike national parks in some other countries, these are not supposed to be wilderness or isolated areas.
Instead, they are inhabited and the economic and social activities of the rural communities are expected to continue more or less normally.
Indeed, it is the ‘cultural environment’ of farms, farm landscapes and villages that is often the most attractive feature of these areas (Whitby and Willis 1978).
The 1949 Act established four goals for the national parks:(1) the characteristic landscape beauty was to be strictly preserved;(2) there was to be access and facilities for public open-air enjoyment;(3) wildlife and buildings and places of architectural and historic interest were to be suitably protected; and (4) established farming use was to be effectively maintained.
While it was generally agreed that these broad aims were appropriate, there were considerable difficulties in their detailed implementation, often arising from conflicts over land use.
The Countryside Commission, which replaced the National Parks Commission in 1968, established the National Parks Policies Review Committee to examine the policies in operation, and their 1977 Sandford Report stated the aims of national park policies as being the preservation and enhancement of natural beauty, and the provision of access and facilities for enjoyment by the public.
Where the two aims were in conflict, the former was to take precedence.
Implementation of these broad guidelines is left to the national parks boards or committees.
These are dominated by the local authority within whose boundaries the park lies; for example, Devon administers the Dartmoor National Park.
Where the park straddles a county boundary, two joint-planning boards were established, and these have operated successfully in both the Peak and Lake District regions.
Since 1974 each park authority has been required to prepare a five-year management plan for its area (see, for example, Dartmoor National Park Authority 1977 and Peak Park Joint Planning Board 1978).
These plans have tended to emphasize multiple land use management so that recreation, conservation and the needs of the local community can be met (Hookway 1978).
However, the  powers of the authorities are not very extensive, for although they have the right to buy land within the parks they largely lack the means to do so, and ownership, therefore, is predominantly in private hands.
As a result, policy aims have to be secured by and large through the normal development control procedures (Whitby and Willis 1978).
The structure plans have also had an input into national park planning.
In most cases they provide general guidelines; the Peak District and Lake District National Parks are unusual in having structure plans covering solely or mainly their areas.
In retrospect, it is clear that three main problems have faced the national parks, to which suitable solutions are still being sought.
First, there has been an enormous increase in the pressure on the parks.
This has stemmed partly from the growth in the demand for recreation and the fact that they are accessible to the metropolitan areas, especially given the improvements in road transport and the increase in car ownership (chapters 6 and 9).
However, there have also been economic pressures to allow developments within the national parks, including mineral workings in the Yorkshire region and oil refining in Pembrokeshire.
Furthermore, many of these developments have actually been proposed by government departments or statutory bodies; examples include the Fylingdales Moor Defence Station on the North Yorkshire Moors and nuclear power stations in Snowdonia.
In practice, therefore, a number of substantial developments have been allowed in the parks, often against the wishes of their management boards or committees.
Secondly, a continuing and, in some ways, irresolvable problem is how to balance the twin aims of conservation and recreation since, despite the Sandford recommendations, it has not always been clear where the emphasis should be (Cripps 1980).
It is interesting that a number of individuals on the Sandford Review Committee felt that there was a need to establish a new type of national park zone; these were to be ‘inner’ National Heritage Areas, where the claims of conservation were to have clear priority.
This recommendation was not accepted, however, and the authorities still have to balance the need to provide access to the parks with the need to preserve them from the increased pressure that results.
Another strategy involves the creation of country parks which have the main function of recreation.
These should have the capacity for absorbing large numbers of people from nearby towns.
The emphasis is on accessibility and the provision of facilities.
It is intended that the country parks should reduce pressure on the more remote areas and reduce damage to the countryside caused by recreation.
By 1981, there were 167 country parks in England and Wales, of which 28 were managed by private owners such as the National Trust (Countryside Commission 1982).
Third, as the powers of the national park authorities are limited to the normal development control procedures, agriculture is excluded, although it contributes so much to the valued cultural landscapes of the parks.
One approach to this problem has been to establish management agreements in which landowners voluntarily agree to manage their lands in specified ways receiving in return some financial compensation (Blacksell and Gilg 1981).
More recently, Exmoor National Park has decided on a more active policy of land purchase as the only sure way of conserving existing agricultural landscapes.
It is rather peculiar that no national parks exist in Scotland.
Although the Ramsay Committee had suggested them in 1945, they were never established.
Therefore there was a lack of clear guidance on land use in Scotland until the Countryside Commission for Scotland was established under the Countryside (Scotland) Act 1967.
The most significant achievement of this body was to identify 40 national scenic areas in Scotland having outstanding landscape value.
These covered more than 12 per cent of the land area.
Extra development control powers applied to these areas, and all substantial developments now have to be referred to the Countryside Commission for Scotland.
However, there have not yet been any plans for positive management of these areas (Blacksell and Gilg 1981).
Other protective designations
Although national parks and green belts are probably the most important elements in the ‘special protection’ of the countryside, there are a number of other instruments.
Foremost among these are the Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONBs) which, along with the parks, had been proposed by both the Dower and the Hobhouse Reports.
These were to be more densely populated and smaller areas than the national parks, but areas still requiring special protection.
By the late 1970s the Countryside Commission had designated 33 AONBs in England and Wales, occupying more than 9 per cent of the total land surface.
As can be seen from figure 7.1, these cover a number of coastal zones as well as upland areas that lie outside the parks, such as the Quantocks, Cotswolds, Chilterns and Sussex Downs.
 AONBs have been designated since 1956, the most recent in 1983.
This is in contrast to the national parks, since none have been added to the original ten.
They are the direct administrative responsibility of the local authorities, and are covered only by normal development control.
There are exchequer grants available to finance improvement schemes, but these are limited in extent, and little effective work seems to have been accomplished.
The British coastline, which has been under greater developmental  pressure than almost any other part of the country, has been the subject of particular interest for conservationists.
Large stretches of coastline are inside AONBs and national parks, but since 1973 other stretches of high-quality undeveloped coastline have been designated as Heritage Coasts .
These are usually agreed jointly by the Countryside Commission and local authorities, and it is intended that strict development control should be applied within them.
By the late 1970s over 30 stretches, extending over 1,100 km, had been designated, including large parts of the coastline of north Northumberland, north Anglesey and Cornwall (Countryside Commission 1982).
By contrast, and usually in inland locations, the  Forestry Commission has since the 1930s designated forest parks , which are open for recreation.
However, these are limited in number and apply to only a small proportion of all Forestry Commission lands (Hall 1974).
Another agency with responsibilities for ‘protecting’ the countryside is the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC), established in 1949 and covering Scotland as well as England and Wales.
One of its roles is the designation of national nature reserves , areas of land that are managed in order to preserve their flora and fauna.
The NCC has the power either to acquire land or to enter into agreements with its owners which may involve some financial assistance from the Council.
Over 150 reserves have been established.
Although most are quite small, they cover over 120,000 ha.
In addition to these national nature reserves, local planning authorities, in consultation with the Council, may also establish local nature reserves .
Finally the NCC is also entitled to designate Sites of Special Scientific Interest , where they deem that this is necessary in view of the flora, fauna, geology or physiography of the area.
By the late-1970s, over 4,000 such sites had been designated.
There is only limited additional protection for these areas, but all development proposals have to go to the NCC for comment.
If an important site is threatened the only real recourse open to the Council is to step in and purchase the land, as in the widely publicized case of the Ribble Estuary Marshes where drainage plans had been proposed.
However, the funds for this came from a special central government grant and the NCC normally lacks the finance for such intervention.
It can be seen that there is a wide range of statutory and semi-public bodies exercising a variety of controls over development in particular areas of the countryside.
However, their powers are essentially limited to development control procedures, which are often usurped when ‘national interests’ are at stake; furthermore, most agricultural activities are excluded (Shoard 1980; Green 1981).
The fundamental weakness of these bodies is that they do not usually own the land they are trying to control, so that the most effective preservation of landscapes may well stem from  private landowning bodies that have an interest in conservation.
The outstanding example of such a body is the National Trust, which owns more than 200,000 ha of land in England and Wales (there is also a National Trust for Scotland).
However, even they may have to submit to ‘national interests’ on occasion, as was evident in the case of Bradenham.
Many Trust members object to the lease of inalienable Trust land in this area to the Ministry of Defence, but the National Executive Committee argued that the lease had to be granted as the case would probably have been lost on appeal.
Evaluation of control powers
Ultimately, control over development depends on the statutory powers of the local authority.
The important question is whether town and country planning has successfully constrained development in rural areas.
A broad answer to this is provided by Best's research using agricultural returns (Best and Champion 1970; Best 1976, 1977).
Best argues that in the early 1920s there was a conversion of land from rural to urban uses at a rate of 9,100 ha per annum, but that this increased to a level of around 21,000 ha during the 1930s.
Since 1945 conversion rates have fallen to a lower level, of about 15,000 — 17,000 ha, and this is considered to be the direct result of stricter planning controls.
This conclusion is supported by an investigation into the effectiveness of urban containment policies in England and Wales (Hall et al .
1973).
However, both the research projects mentioned were dependent on aggregate published statistics, and although they provide useful overviews, they measure the impact of planning only indirectly.
The above-mentioned studies are complemented by others that actually consider the planning process itself.
The first and landmark study was undertaken by Gregory (1970) in Seisdon District, located within the West Midlands Green Belt.
Gregory analysed all the planning applications in the area between 1957 and 1966, and showed that development permission had been refused for 83 per cent of the 3,000 ha for which applications had been made.
Here, at least, the policies of special restraint seem to have been effective.
Blacksell and Gilg (1981), however, in a more comprehensive evaluation of development control in Devon, are rather less sanguine in their conclusions.
They observe that application rates were greatest in an area such as east Devon, which is also mostly protected.
In such a zone the refusal rate was a high as 40 per cent compared with only 20 per cent in mid-Devon, which has little protection.
Nevertheless, in absolute terms, large numbers of applications are being approved even in protected rural   areas The difference between the Devon national parks is also interesting.
IN eastern Dartmoor, which is under strong developmental pressure, the refusal rate was 55 per cent, while in western Exmoor, an area of population decline, the refusal rate was only 42 per cent (table 7.1).
These figures on their own do not really provide a full assessment of the effectiveness of planning.
The simple existence of development control powers, and the likelihood of having applications refused in an area such as Dartmoor, has probably reduced the number of applications for planning permission.
Therefore, the designation of specially protected areas is perhaps quite effective as a deterrent.
However, it should be noted that Blacksell and Gilg (1981, p. 143) consider that ‘in many respects, whether or not an application is granted or refused is less important than the safeguards that are attached to any permission.’
In the Devon case studies, it appears that only 9 per cent of all the applications were granted without conditions, and in the two national park study areas the figures were 6 and 3 per cent.
As an example of the conditions applied to one new scheme within the Dartmoor area, there were strict guidelines on using approved natural slate for the roofing, for the position of the gable on an outbuilding and even for the lining materials to be used for proposed trout-breeding pools.
It is interesting to ponder how the values of planners are formulated with respect to determining aesthetic criteria for decision-making.
This can have considerable impact on the built environment but, with some minor exceptions, it is still an under-researched area (Harrison 1972).
SELECTED SETTLEMENT POLICIES
Development plans and development control have been concerned predominantly with restricting development in particular parts of the countryside.
Settlement policies have a complementary role, in that they affect the distribution of employment, services and housing within rural areas.
At the simplest level, it can be argued that the concentration of growth in a small number of settlements will ease pressure on, and help to preserve, the remainder of the countryside.
However, settlement policy is broader in scope than this, for it can also incorporate elements of positive social and economic planning.
Selected or key settlements may be service centres; they may also be associated with public investment in facilities such as schools and council housing, and designated for residential expansion or for industrial growth (Woodruffe 1976).
They may also be used in pressurized rural areas as a strategy for concentrating growth in order to relieve congestion in other villages, while in more remote regions they may be used to ‘intercept’ or reduce out-migration.
Cloke (1977b, p. 19) provides probably the most useful definition: ‘the key settlement itself is planned for comprehensive growth in terms of housing, services and often employment…’, while ‘the key settlement policy incorporated an overview of the settlement pattern as a whole and lays special emphasis on the relationship between the key settlement and other settlements served by it…’.
This may be rather a purist definition, but it does direct attention to the role of key settlements within the wider settlement system.
A number of arguments is usually advanced in favour of a selected or key settlement policy for rural areas rather than a strategy of dispersed growth.
One argument is environmental, stressing the protection of valued landscapes through a policy of spatially limited growth.
Another stresses the fact that minimum population thresholds are necessary to maintain particular services and that, therefore, the most effective way of reducing or halting rural service decline is to concentrate growth and development in a limited number of locations (Green 1971).
However, as discussed in Chapter 8, it can be difficult to establish the precise levels of these thresholds in practice.
Cost, or more precisely the economies of scale in service and housing provision, is another major argument proposed in favour of a selected settlement policy.
Thorburn (1971) considered that important economies of scale could be achieved in the provision of public utilities, transport, education and retailing.
Research in Norfolk revealed that the costs of providing electricity, water supply, telecommunications and education were up to 50 per cent higher in dispersed than in concentrated developments (Shaw 1976; Moseley 1978).
Some have questioned whether small  villages can be afforded, and most economic evidence in the 1970s suggested a negative answer.
Furthermore, the real difficulty is not only that costs seem to be higher in areas of sparse population, but they are also likely to increase as depopulation occurs.
Another argument used to advocate key settlement policies is that they favour employment growth.
Concentration of employment in a few locations will reduce infrastructural costs and may increase the external economies of scale available to firms and provide support for growth centre strategies for economic development, although it is by no means clear at what scale these advantages become significant (Moseley 1974).
There is also uncertainty about whether the economic benefits of industrial growth centres will spread to the surrounding areas or will be restricted to the centre.
In practice, it seems that ‘spread’ effects are limited to the journey-to-work catchment areas (Moseley 1973), and the ‘key’in rural areas therefore is the availability of private and public transport.
For a number of reasons, therefore, planners may recommend that growth should be channelled into selected settlements.
Such designations may be comprehensive in that the key villages are usually designated as the loci for growth in employment, services and housing.
The actual definition of key settlements, the hierarchies of settlement types and the nomenclature adopted for these vary enormously among counties.
Two examples will illustrate the policies that have been adopted by different authorities.
Probably the best-known, and perhaps the most notorious, selected settlement policy is that adopted in County Durham, where there were special difficulties in planning for the dispersed villages that had grown up in the coalfield (Barr 1969; Blowers 1972).
All the villages in Durham were classified into one of four categories, as follows:
A
Substantial investment is envisaged as population is expected to increase.
B
Population is expected to remain constant and investment should be sufficient to cater for the present population.
C
Population is expected to fall, and investment should be reduced in recognition of this.
D
Considerable loss of population is expected and there should be no further investment.
In effect, the policy proposed that D category villages should be allowed to wither away; as houses became uninhabitable they would not be replaced.
As might be expected, such a policy aroused enormous controversy and opposition, and was later modified.
Not all selected settlement policies propose such a stark categorization of villages.
Angus District in the Tayside Region is an area of general  population loss especially in the glens and the highlands, but some pressure for commuter housing exists in the south near Dundee.
All rural settlements in the areas were classified according to their size, existing facilities and the scope for further development.
On this basis each village was placed in one of five categories (see figure 7.2):
Key centres Outside the catchment area of a burgh; basic services available; some growth potential; some encouragement to industry.
Dormitory centres Within the catchment area of a burgh; basic services available; some growth potential and encouragement to industry.
Intermediate centres Limited basic services, suitable for in-fill housing development only.
Remote centres Located in highland glens; unsuited to large-scale growth; limited development related to recreation, agriculture or forestry.
Other rural communities Unsuitable for development except for agricultural or forestry workers' housing.
This policy was formulated in 1976, and the range of locational, growth and service features that it incorporates illustrates the increased sophistication that now characterizes selected settlement policies (Lockhart 1982).
When it comes to implementing key settlement policies, local authorities have considerable resources at their disposal.
Development control provides the negative instrument with which growth in non-key settlements can be prevented.
However, there are also some positive powers available, because the county and district councils control the provision of educational facilities, social services, libraries, council housing and road improvements, all of which can be directed to the key settlements.
In addition, infrastructure such as water, drains and electricity are controlled by public bodies, as is some of the provision for industrial developments and transport.
Therefore, powers do exist to enable a controlled reshaping of the settlement geography of rural areas.
There is a number of general commentaries on key settlements, but few detailed analyses of how effectively these policies have been implemented.
Cloke's (1979) work on ‘pressurized’ Warwickshire and ‘remote’Devon is the most comprehensive study so far completed.
Although such a classification is rather crude, especially in the case of Devon, the contrast between the two study areas is interesting.
Cloke assessed population change, housing development and service provision in the key and non-key settlements within these two counties.
In Warwickshire the policy had not been able to limit growth to the selected villages in the more   pressurized parts of the county.
Public sector housing development had followed the guidelines more closely than the private sector, but even so there had been substantial investment in some non-key villages.
Devon, too, had succeeded only partially in terms of the policy aims.
Population and housing growth in the more pressurized areas had been channelled into the key settlements, but the selected villages in the more remote areas were simply too small to function as foci for growth.
That the policies have been more successful in the pressurized areas should not be surprising; the most powerful planning instrument available is still development control and this, of course, can be effective only in areas of growth.
These general conclusions have been further qualified by Blacksell and Gilg's (1981) detailed analysis of planning applications in parts of Devon, where there were large numbers of applications and approvals for  residential developments outside the selected settlements.
In a Dartmoor study area, key settlements attracted only 22 per cent of outline planning permission compared with 34 per cent in non-key villages.
In mid-Devon results were even more surprising: the key settlements attracted 8 per cent of permissions, the non-key villages had 51 per cent, and the remaining 41 per cent were in the ‘open’ countryside.
These mostly involved piecemeal or rounding-off development in existing settlements or small groups of houses, but it nevertheless indicates a surprising flexibility in the application of policy even in those areas where one would expect the policy to be strongly applied.
Notwithstanding these observations on the effectiveness of policy implementation, the entire approach to selected settlements has been heavily criticized in recent years.
The first criticism is that, although key settlement policies are theoretically sound, they have been poorly implemented in practice.
Cloke (1980a, p. 98) suggests that this may be because the concept of ‘key settlements has been a cosmetic justification for a policy created merely out of economic expediency and administrative pragmatism’.
In other words, the title ‘key settlement policy’ has often been lent to programmes devised only on very narrow cost or administrative criteria.
Furthermore, many key settlement policies have not been properly implemented because there has been a lack of co-ordination among the relevant planning agencies (Cloke 1980b).
Education and housing departments, water and electricity boards have often failed to follow policy guidelines or to co-ordinate their work.
A clear example of this is provided by Glyn-Jones (1979) in a study of Hatherleigh in Devon.
In spite of the fact that the village was designated as a key settlement, there has been a sharp fall in new housing because of a failure to provide the necessary improvement to the sewerage system.
It is possible to sympathize with these arguments, but there are more fundamental criticisms of key settlement policies.
One problem is that key settlements have been seen as panacea for all rural problems, irrespective of social and regional context.
For example, Thorburn (1971) considers that settlement policies have been applied in ‘blanket fashion’ to villages, ignoring their individual characters.
Dunn (1976) underlines this point and argues that, in some rural areas in Britain, the largest settlements would not qualify as service centres according to some threshold criteria.
This seems to have been a particular problem in the more remote areas, whether in Devon or in the Scottish Highlands (Varwell 1973; Cloke 1979).
Even the argument that key settlements offer economies of scale has not remained unscathed.
The most devastating attack comes from Gilder (1979), who has provided empirical evidence on the costs of educational, sewerage, public transport and health facilities in rural areas.
In terms of internal economies of scale, these were significant only for sewerage and primary education.
More interestingly, he found that ‘economies of scale are insignificant in villages having a population of up to 2,000 and that the unit costs in these villages are not significantly higher than in a town of 29,000…’
(Gilder 1979, p. 252).
These findings are confirmed by more impressionable evidence from the Scottish Highlands (Greaves 1979).
Many commentators would now agree that the marginal costs of making fuller use of existing facilities outweigh the economies of scale to be obtained from their concentration.
Indeed, economies of scale are likely to vary so much between different services that they cannot all be served by a single settlement policy.
Therefore perhaps support should be given to the idea of ‘functional interdependence’, in which different facilities are located in different villages within a cluster of settlements (McLaughlin 1976).
Key settlements have also been criticized on social grounds, a point that will be elaborated in the next section.
The criticisms outlined above have not been completely ignored by the planners, since, although the new structure plans still exhibit a keen adherence to key settlement policies (National Council of Social Service 1979; Shaw and Williams 1981), alternative settlement policies have also been considered.
For example, the idea of functional dispersal among a group of villages has been adopted in the structure plans for North Yorkshire, Gloucestershire and Cumbria, and a more flexible approach to allowing housing development outside key settlements has also been adopted by many counties (Derounian 1980; J. M. Shaw 1982).
There does seem to be a greater sensitivity to community needs and to the dangers of ‘blanket’ application of general policy.
SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF STATUTORY PLANNING
Although the total amount of resources devoted to the needs of the rural population is arguably the prime factor affecting standards of living, statutory planning has played an important role in influencing the distribution of resources and employment within the countryside; including the availability of shops, houses and services.
There has been a greater social and economic input in structure plans than in development plans, but there is little agreement as to the scope of social planning (R. Williams 1976).
The most important powers available to planners are development controls, which operate predominantly at the level of the built environment.
Although planning has a number of wider social implications for rural areas, many of these have been unintentional side-effects of physical planning policies.
The policy of constraint, whether in AONBs, national  parks or other areas of valued landscapes, is a case in point.
These areas were designated to conserve valued landscapes and to make them more accessible to the general public (or at least to those who own cars).
The restrictions that have been placed on development in these areas have partly secured these conservationist goals.
At the same time, they can conflict with the needs of the local community; although houses, factories, swimming pools and supermarkets may appear ugly or aberrant land-uses to the outsider, to the local community they may be essential ingredients in improving the quality of life.
The Sandford Report on the national parks explicitly recognized these conflicts and called upon central government to alleviate some of the special problems of such local communities.
The argument was advanced that a form of welfare payment should perhaps be made available to those who happen to have been born in national parks (as opposed to those who chose to move there) if job and housing opportunities have been restricted by conservationist planning policies.
In practice, of course, it would be very difficult to implement a policy of this nature.
The example of the national parks illustrates some of the consequences of negative development control planning, but positive planning may also have serious implications for local communities.
The key settlement policies are a case in point.
These were designed partly to ensure the survival of a minimum level of service provision in rural areas, and, in the face of the continued decline of rural services, such a policy may have been necessary m some locations.
However, this strategy appears to have contributed to a more rapid decline in services (and sometimes to population losses) in more remote areas outside the selected settlements (Hancock 1976; McLaughlin 1976; Cloke 1979).
Overall service provision may be stabilized, but a more uneven distribution may result.
In theory, people living in the non-key settlements should be able to utilize the provision in selected centres.
However, the decline of public transport and the far-from-universal availability of private transport militates  against this in practice.
The real losers are the ‘transport poor’(chapter 6), and the reason for this is that official estimates of the costs of key settlement policies do not generally include the time and money costs of individuals.
This is why commentators such as Shaw (1978) have argued in favour of a broader ‘social cost accounting’ approach to settlement policy.
It may be impossible to quantify precisely the social costs to individuals of thwarted employment aspirations and extra-long journeys to shop, but a social cost accounting method would at least increase an awareness of these social consequences.
Apart from employment, the most serious implications of the policies of  constraint are for housing.
Restrictions on new building, both in general and to specific locations (usually key settlements), has two direct consequences.
First, there will be an absolute lack of new housing available, especially in particular villages; second, prices of the available houses will consequently be greater.
Together, these can give a ‘further twist to the inflationary spiral’ in rural house prices (Blacksell and Gilg 1981).
Costs are, in fact, forced upwards both by the limitations on the supply of land and the restrictions on the densities of housing that may be constructed per hectare (Hall et al .
1973).
There is now considerable evidence to show that prices are higher in areas of special restriction, such as AONBs and national parks, than in the surrounding region (Penfold 1974; Bennett 1976; Standing Conference of Rural Community Councils 1979; Shucksmith 1981).
Hall et al .
(1973) have also shown that urban containment policies have resulted in higher house prices as a result of the higher price of land, so that there has been a fall in the quality of new first-home, owner-occupier dwellings in town and country.
The consequences of these developments in rural housing are socially selective, and were discussed in chapter 5.
As locals and lower income groups can be forced to move to other areas or to nearby key settlements where housing is available, the social composition of the community may change.
In time, the future and viability of rural communities may be threatened (Standing Conference of Rural Community Councils 1978).
These trends pose a dilemma for the planners.
If they permit the expansion of a village, it may be ‘invaded’ by newcomers who will change the social character of the community.
On the other hand, if they restrict development, this may force up house prices and exclude lower-income local inhabitants anyway.
Some councils have tried to tackle this difficulty through a policy of permitting only those new developments that will serve local needs.
This strategy has been recommended in a number of structure plans for areas ranging from accessible Hertfordshire and Surrey to remote Cumbria and the Peak Park, although the Secretary of State has later modified some of these policies (D. Clark 1981; G. Clark 1982a).
Ultimately, the role of planning is limited by the restricted powers available and by a lack of co-ordination with other public and quasi-public agencies.
Planning can prevent some poor features of development, but without controlling all the consequences, while other positive aspects of developments may be beyond their influence.
As Shaw and Stockford (1979, p. 122) state, ‘it is the problems of implementing ‘socially-based’ policies for rural areas through the medium of the statutory planning system which accounts for much of the gap between society's expectations of planning, and the results in practice'.
VILLAGE PLANNING
Although most research in settlement geography has been directed at  settlement systems , or the distribution of villages, it is also important to consider village development or planning at the micro-scale of design or general layout.
The  initiative usually comes from the developer proposing an addition to an existing village, or from the local authority housing department wishing to construct a new council housing estate.
The developer (public or private) or the architect takes the lead in suggesting densities, house styles, building materials, estate size and layout; planners play a fairly passive role, approving or refusing the planning application.
In practice, developers will probably consult planners in advance in order to ascertain the type of development that is likely to be approved, but there is no obligation to do this.
Planners can also give approval with conditions appended to the details of the scheme.
Therefore successful schemes will reflect a combination of the ‘good’ design perceptions of both planners and architects, within the financial constraints imposed by the developer.
The constraints are particularly important in the case of council housing, as changes in government financial yardsticks have led to considerable variations in the quality of housing built over time (Byrne 1976).
Green (1971) has summarized criticisms of village designs, suggesting that the new development tends to be dull and monotonous, that many layouts lack open spaces, and there is a lack of footpaths and loop roads to link new housing to schools, shops and buses.
While all these points are important, the last-named is crucial as it influences the way in which new development is linked to the existing village core.
Woodruffe (1976) suggests that new developments may be divided into four categories:
1
extensions of old village cores by consolidation with new perimeter developments;
2
in-fill sites; that is, consolidation of the existing close-knit character of villages;
3
establishment of definite edges to villages;
4
formation or retention of village greens together with the encouragement of social amenities.
The main debate within planning has focused on the first of these types of development.
Sensitive infill or retention of village greens generally raises few criticisms, but the addition of perimeter development has often been highly contentious.
The main criticism is that the development of peripheral estates (public or private) can create a dual village, in which the new housing is sometimes physically and socially isolated from the existing village core.
An example of this type of development has been analysed by Ambrose (1974) in Ringmer, Sussex.
The village has a ‘two-cell’.
Structure, comprising the old core and a number of peripheral estates, which has   been socially and spatially divisive.
The people living on the estates, especially the elderly, tended to be isolated, and a number of new residents felt lonely and insecure.
These criticisms are echoed in a number of other studies.
Martin (1976, p. 72) writes that village extensions in Hampshire and Cumbria were like ‘a series of linked housing estates with the layouts encouraging a separate identity on each estate and going no way towards promoting a sense of ‘community’ between the newcomers and the established residents…’
Another example is the village of Clyst St Mary in Devon (figure 7.3) where prior to 1914 there were only 50 houses, a number that hardly changed in the interwar years.
However, since the 1950s some 226 new dwellings have been built.
This new appendage is ‘out of all proportion to the initial development and separated from its services, including a primary school, by a busy main road’(Blacksell and Gilg 1981, p. 186).
The tragedy of these kinds of development is that the opportunity may be lost of creating an integrated community, and of benefiting from the social advantages that can accrue from good design (Masser and Stroud 1965).
It is not the designs that are important but their social impact; and it is not the physical distance between new and old that is of concern, but the social distance.