

Introduction: Siberia's role in Russian History
Alan Wood
The breathtaking pace of political upheaval in Eastern Europe, the Baltic region and Transcaucasia in the last few weeks of the 1980s has naturally focused international attention on those parts of the Soviet empire lying to the west of the Ural mountains, including those countries which were allotted to Joseph Stalin's ‘sphere of influence’ at the end of the Second World War.
The momentous events themselves and the amount of journalistic coverage and academic analysis they have received have understandably reinforced the tendency in most western historical literature specializing in Russia and the Soviet Union to devote the greater share of its attention to political, social and economic developments in the central, ‘European’ heartland of Russia and on its western and south-western rim.
Uneven demographic distribution, diplomatic and military considerations, the location of major industries, commercial relations, cultural influences and the centralization of political and administrative power in either St Petersburg or Moscow (ancient and modern) have all helped to ensure that cis-Uralian Russia has enjoyed a near-monopoly of European and North American scholarship in this field.
(A glance at the index of just about any reputable general text-book of modern Russian history will confirm this.)
One of the direct results of this westwards orientation (or, more precisely, ‘occidentation’) has been the relative neglect by historians of the huge, seemingly limitless tracts of territory stretching eastwards beyond the Urals towards the Pacific coast, and encompassing on its north-south axis the frozen wastes of the Polar North and the deserts and mountains on the edges of Central Asia, Mongolia and China.
This enormous continent, covering no less than one-twelfth of the planet's entire land surface, and including the modern administrative region of the Soviet ‘far East’, is traditionally known as Siberia .
It is, of course, both a name and a concept which readily stimulates knee jerk responses, stereotyped visions and hackneyed images in most people's minds — images which will almost invariably feature great frozen wildernesses, blinding  blizzards, steel-shattering frosts, and, of course , legions of fur-wrapped, fettered convicts and political prisoners —‘exiled to Siberia’, in the chilling cliché — by the autocratic Russian state.
In fact, such images do to a large extent reflect both the climatic and the historical reality of Siberia.
The winters there are long, hard and cruel; two-thirds of the entire territory are grounded on ‘permafrost’— permanently frozen earth, in many areas over one kilometre deep; eastern Siberia contains the northern hemisphere's ‘pole of cold’, at Oimyakon, several degrees south of the Arctic Circle where temperatures in this inhabited settlement sometimes sink to — 70°C; major rivers, seas and ports are frozen solid for most of the year, and growing conditions are so disadvantageous as to create one of the most fragile ecological systems in the world.
Countless similar facts and statistics could be adduced to substantiate Siberia's fearsome reputation for extremes of ice, cold and snow.
But Siberia also encompasses the ‘little Switzerland’ of the Gornyi Altai, a region of spectacular alpinesque beauty; it contains the verdant grasslands around Lake Baikal where for centuries nomadic  pastoralists have grazed their flocks and herds; Lake Baikal itself, the deepest in the world and ‘the pearl of Siberia’, is magnificent at any season and supports a micro-ecology with its own unique flora and fauna; from the Kamchatka peninsula towers Mount Klyuchevskii, the highest volcano in Eurasia, and there, too, is a hotbed of active, boiling springs and geysers; in the Vladivostok region on the Pacific coast grapevines are cultivated, and the jungles of the Amur and the Ussuri lowlands are still the stalking grounds of the great Siberian tiger.
It is, in short, a land of astonishing geographical and climatic diversity, as befits its size, which to some extent belies the rigid, frigid snowscapes of the popular imagination.
As regards its notoriety as a ‘land of damnation and chains’, a domain of perpetual punishment and pain — this, too, is grimly rooted in the very real sufferings of generations of convicts, rebels, revolutionaries, common criminals and multitudes of often innocent men, women and children, who for nearly four centuries have dragged themselves along the ‘road of chains’(kandalnaya doroga ) leading beyond the Urals.
At first starting on an ad hoc and  ad hominem  basis before the birth of the Romanov dynasty, the system of transporting the unwanted criminal detritus and the antisocial, nonconformist and subversive members of the Russian social and political order — both tsarist and Soviet — steadily generated a huge sprawling diaspora comprising millions of wretched human beings who were banished to the living purgatory of Siberian exile.
Amid the unspeakable sufferings, however, there are epic tales of courage and heroism; of those who voluntarily followed their banished loved ones into the unknown; of enlightened, cultivated exiles who chose to remain after their sentences were complete  and devote themselves to the scientific, artistic and educational development of the region.
At the same time it should be remembered that over the centuries, exiles and deportees have only accounted for a tiny fraction of the total population of Siberia, the vast majority of which was there as a result of voluntary emigration, fortune seeking or the process of natural procreation.
As well as the horror stories of the tsarist penal system and the Stalinist GULag , there are also examples of those exiles who managed to lead a relatively comfortable, if spartan, existence, taking regular exercise, hunting for sport, reading, writing and corresponding fairly freely with fellow exiles, enjoying connubial pleasures and composing theoretical treatises — one thinks particularly of Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov/Lenin who spent three reasonably fruitful and unexacting years, most of the time with his wife, Nadezhda Krupskaya, living as a political exile in the home of a rich peasant in the village of Shushenskoe in southern Siberia (1897–1900).
But for the majority, conditions were so atrocious as to justify Dostoevskii's description of the Siberian penal system as ‘The House of the Dead’.
There is, however, obviously a great deal more to the history of Siberia than a catalogue of criminality and cold.
from the reign of Ivan the Terrible (1547–84) to the present day, Russia's northern empire east of the Urals has played an often crucial — sometimes direct, sometimes indirect — though frequently unacknowledged, role in the development of the Russian state and society.
It was, after all, the conquest and settlement of Siberia in the late sixteenth and the seventeenth centuries which more than anything else — at least in terms of territorial aggrandizement — originally transformed the land-locked mediaeval Tsardom of Muscovy into the mighty Russian Empire, giving the government in Moscow and then St Petersburg virtually unchallenged, absolute sway over the whole of northern Eurasia and its polyglot peoples.
During the period of Tatar domination from the thirteenth to the end of the fifteenth centuries, Russia under the Golden Horde had been the most westerly province of the great Mongol Empire founded by Genghis Khan; but from 1582 onwards the tide was turned and the European Slavs rapidly found themselves rulers of a vast colonial domain stretching across Asia to the northern Pacific.
The Leningrad historian, R.G. Skrynnikov, has suggested, though not without challenge, that it was in 1582 rather than 1581, that the first foray or ‘expedition’ of cossack conquistadors under the leadership of ataman Yermak Timofeevich scored an unspectacular military victory over the tiny Tatar princedom of Sibir, then ruled by Khan Kuchum, thus laying the foundations for what was to be the irresistible Russian Drang nach Osten .
Over the next hundred years a motley collection of military servicemen (voennosluzhilie lyudi , fur-hunters, merchants, government officials, Orthodox clergymen, fugitive serfs, entrepreneurs and tradesmen (promyshlenniki ), convicts, religious dissidents, foreign prisoners-of-war (generically known as Litva , ‘Lithuanians’), cossacks, artisans, adventurers and vagrants (gulyashchie lyudi ) steadily overwhelmed the indigenous Siberian native population and established a strongly defended network of wooden fortresses, outposts and stockaded population points, several of which swiftly grew from small military and administrative settlements into substantial, bustling frontier towns, a process described in more detail by David Collins in Chapter 2 of this book.
The nature of Russia's ‘conquest’, ‘subjugation’, ‘annexation’ or ‘assimilation’of Siberia has been the subject of a good deal of historical debate, and is indeed discussed briefly in some of the following chapters, particularly those by Basil Dmytryshyn, David Collins and James Forsyth — the last concentrating on the ambiguous impact of the incoming Slavs on the aboriginal Siberian peoples — but what is important to underline in this introductory essay is that Muscovy's expansion from the Urals to the Pacific in the seventeenth century was in a sense the territorial and colonial complement to the institutional consolidation of the political power of the Russian autocratic state.
Although in the middle of the seventeenth century Muscovy was racked by a series of civil rebellions, peasant wars, religious turmoil and military mutiny, it was also during this period that the foundations for the political, social and economic structures of the tsarist imperial system were laid down.
The salient features of this historical process were: the dynastic consolidation of regal authority in the Romanov family; the entrenchment of autocratic absolutism; the social ascendancy of the land-owning nobility (dvoryanstvo ); the promulgation of a comprehensive legal Code (the Sobomoe Ulozhenie of 1649); the burgeoning of a civil bureaucracy; the confirmation of the caesaro-papist principle (by crushing the popular Raskol (Schism) and curbing the authority of the patriarchate); the dependence on military prowess; and, above all, the final enserfment of the Russian peasantry.
It was precisely at the same time as these processes, policies and institutions were being consolidated that the embryonic imperial regime found territorial expression for its increasing power in the colonial administration and economic exploitation of Siberia.
Indeed, one might even go so far as to say that, were it not for the ‘discovery’ of Siberia's seemingly inexhaustible resources of ‘soft gold’, that is, an abundance of fur-bearing mammals — in particular the highly-prized sable — the Muscovite government would have been without the economic foundation for the growth of its political power.
Among western historians, Raymond fisher has established the centrality of fur in the seventeenth-century Russian economy and, more recently, Janet Martin  has demonstrated that control of the fur trade (the ‘Treasure of the Land of Darkness’) was an essential ingredient in the political domination of a succession of mediaeval states, culminating in that of the Muscovite Tsardom.
There is, of course, nothing novel in the idea that commercial and political power go hand in hand, but the sheer volume and importance of fur as the preponderating commodity on the mediaeval international market suggests that a monopoly in its procurement, sale and supply was, if not exactly a sine qua non , then at the least a decisive factor in the political hegemony of Muscovy.
No doubt the proposition: ‘Had there been no Siberian sable, there would have been no Muscovite empire’, is somewhat fanciful, but there is no gainsaying metropolitan Russia's early economic dependence on the resources of her Siberian possessions.
There was, of course, as Basil Dmytryshyn points out in Chapter 1, no grand design or masterplan for the original Russian conquest of Siberia.
It was the result of a complex intermixture of state enterprise, private initiative, ‘geopolitical’ imperatives, the urge to find ‘natural’frontiers, serendipity and sheer adventurism.
However, during the reign of Peter the Great (1682–1725), tremendous changes were introduced into every sphere of Russian life which, as far as Siberia was concerned, meant a greater element of state intervention, of dirigisme , particularly in the exploration and scientific investigation of Siberia's natural and economic resources.
The motive force behind all of Peter's reforms was the greater glory of the Russian state, and to this end he sought to harness the entire human and material reserves of his extensive kingdom.
How much more practically, efficiently and profitably those reserves could be utilized and exploited if the raw materials and the areas in which they were located or lay buried were systematically explored, charted, surveyed, investigated and catalogued.
Therefore, driven by a mixture of curiosity, practicality and raisons d'état , and encouraged by the councils of such western advisers as the Dutchman, Nicolaas Witsen, and the German philosopher, Gottfried Leibnitz, Peter ordered the kitting-out and dispatch at state expense of various expeditions for the scientific exploration and study of his Siberian treasure house.
Of these, commencing its odyssey some time after Peter's death, and with the participation of the Academy of Sciences, the most famous was the Second Kamchatka, or ‘Great Northern’ expedition, led by the Danish seaman, Vitus Bering, who was to lend his name to the narrow straits separating Siberia from the American continent at the northern extremity of the Pacific Ocean.
It is to this grandiose undertaking that J.L. Black's chapter in the present volume is devoted.
Although this was the grandest, Bering's voyage of discovery was only one of many scientific expeditions in the eighteenth century, and through the efforts of government-sponsored  explorers and private entrepreneurs — the latter seeking not so much scientific information as further killing grounds in the pursuit of the lucrative sea otter — Russia's political and commercial power began to reach out beyond the Siberian landmass across the northern Pacific, taking in the Aleutian and Kuril Islands, Russian America (the present Alaska), as well as establishing trading settlements down the western coast of America, and even making a short-lived foray into the Hawaiian archipelago.
However, as James Gibson's chapter in the present collection makes clear, Russia's overseas colonial experience in the Americas was not a happy or successful one.
The expense, the incompetence of the personnel, the distances involved, the lack of an agricultural base, the foreign competition, a reorientation of imperial policies in the far East — these and a number of other factors analysed by Gibson eventually led to the sale of Russian America to the United States in 1867 ‘at two cents an acre’.
Meanwhile, the colonization, settlement and economic exploitation of the Siberian mainland continued throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, binding the territory ever more closely to metropolitan Russia and reflecting, contributing to or suffering from every stage of the nation's overall historical development.
One aspect of Peter the Great's reforming energy in the early eighteenth century, which had an indirect effect on the population dynamics of Siberia, was his massive use of convict and forced labour on his gigantic construction projects in European Russia, in particular the building of St Petersburg, the digging of canals and the fortification of new ports and harbours, like Rogervik, on the Baltic.
As mentioned above, although the exiled inhabitants of Siberia never amounted to a large proportion of the total population, nevertheless they did make a significant quantitative and qualitative contribution during the seventeenth century to the region's manpower resources — accounting for around 11 per cent of the total, and engaged in a variety of administrative, military, clerical and agricultural occupations essential to the proper management of the newly-conquered territories.
But Peter's preoccupations in the west, and his insatiable demand for recruits for both his military and civilian enterprises, meant that the flow of compulsory exiles into Siberia from European Russia was temporarily curtailed.
On the other hand, Peter was responsible for the introduction of a punitive practice which was to remain at the centre of the tsarist criminal code and of the Siberian penal system until well into the twentieth century.
This was the institution of katorga , or forced labour.
One of the tsar-reformer's great achievements was the foundation of the Russian navy, much of it consisting of wooden galleys propelled by the collective muscle-power of conscript or convict oarsmen.
The mediaeval  Greek word for galley is katergon , and it was in this nautical sense that the word first entered the Russian vocabulary.
It soon lost its exclusively maritime connotation and, from denoting simply work as a galley slave, came to be applied to other forms of penal servitude with hard labour.
As such, and particularly after Empress Elizabeth's de facto abolition of the death penalty for criminal offences in 1753, exile to katorga, followed by perpetual exile in Siberia (ssylka na katorgu v Sibir ), was to be retained as the harshest form of punishment in the tsarist penal code until the revolutions of 1917 — though of course it survived far beyond that date under a different dispensation.
During the period of ‘Palace Revolutions’ following Peter's death, Siberia gained in notoriety as a place of exile and confinement as a result of the increasingly frequent banishment there of the victims of a sequence of palace conspiracies and coups.
Between 1725 and 1762, scores of once-powerful imperial favourites, courtiers, viziers, royal lovers, politicians, patricians and plotters fell foul of this or that faction or clique in St Petersburg and found themselves temporarily or permanently imprisoned or exiled beyond the Urals, still alive but incapable of joining in the political intrigues of the capital.
Paradoxically, however, as well as becoming the classical place of banishment, Siberia was also fast developing into a haven and a land of freedom and opportunity for the steadily increasing numbers of refugees fleeing from the oppressive social, economic and political policies of St Petersburg.
If the flow of compulsory exiles to Siberia decreased during the reign of Peter the Great, so did the rate of voluntary fugitives from central European Russia increase by leaps and bounds.
And there seems little reason to doubt the conclusions of a number of pre-revolutionary and Soviet historians that the enhanced rate of peasant flight to Siberia in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries was the direct result of the increasing burdens of the serf-owning economy and of Peter's oppressive fiscal policies, military recruitment, foreign wars and religious persecution.
Between 1678 and 1710, for instance, the peasant population of Siberia, counted in number of households (dvory ), increased by almost 50 per cent , while that of Moscow province alone declined by 27 per cent .
This trend continued in succeeding years so that during the three-quarters of a century between the first (1719) and the fifth (1795) official censuses, the Russian population of Siberia increased by almost two and a half times, from 169,000 adult males to 412,000, at a time when the population of the empire as a whole less than doubled.
The faster rate of population growth in Siberia than in the rest of the country demonstrates the rapid and determined process of  Siberia's colonization, settlement and russification, and is explained by a number of factors.
First was the continuing, and expanding, rate of peasant flight from European Russia, which peaked during years of harvest failure, and was a constant manifestation of discontent with the abuses of serfdom.
Second, the discovery of mineral resources and the consequent development of metallurgical industries in Transbaikal and the Altai demanded more manpower than could be met from the local populations, and hence acted as a loadstone for the attraction of the necessary personnel to work them, in the form of both voluntary and forced labour.
Third, the large number of commercial expeditions joining in the hunt for the maritime fur resources of the far East and the North Pacific drew more and more merchants,promyshlenniki and ordinary peasants into those far-flung regions.
fourth, the regularization of commercial relations with China by the treaties of Nerchinsk (1689) and Kyakhta (1727), and also the building of fortified ‘lines’(linii ) in the relatively fertile southern borderlands, created stable conditions there for trade, agriculture and settlement, as did the annexation of the rich Gornyi Altai district to the empire in 1758. fifth, after the comparative lull during the reign of Peter the Great, the St Petersburg authorities resorted with increasing frequency to the practice of exiling malefactors and malcontents to Siberia, with the twin aims of punishment and colonization.
The reasons for this phenomenon are varied: the tightening bonds of serfdom and the greater degree of social regimentation introduced by Peter the Great meant that a number of previously innocent practices (tree-felling, salt-gathering, trespass, begging, vagrancy, and so on) were criminalized and punished with hard labour and exile; popular protest against the proliferating powers of the state in the form of minor revolts, mass insurgencies (for example , Bulavin, Pugachev), large-scale banditry and escalating rates of petty crime were similarly dealt with; the abolition of capital punishment for criminal offences in 1753 led to its replacement with ‘civil execution’(public flogging and mutilation followed by perpetual katorga); and laws passed in 1766 and 1769 changed the usual place of penal servitude from Rogervik and other locations in European Russia to the silver mines and factories around Nerchinsk.
But the steepest rise in the number of Siberian exiles was caused by the notorious legislation of 1760 which granted serf-owners the right to hand over disobedient, idle or refractory peasants to the state authorities for exile to Siberia, in return for a military recruit quittance.
Incomplete figures reveal that between the third (1762) and fourth (1782) censuses, the number of exiled serfs almost quadrupled from around 2,500 to over 10,000 in the Tobolsk, Kolyvan and Irkutsk provinces alone, that is, not counting those condemned to hard labour in the mines at Nerchinsk.
All of these different circumstances, with the  added natural factor of increased birth-rates in a non-serf-owning environment, resulted in Siberia being inhabited at the end of the eighteenth century by an overwhelmingly Russian peasant population.
The fact that central government was now beginning to regard Siberia as an integral part of Russia as a whole, rather than merely as a colonial appendage, was marked by the abolition in 1763 of the Siberian Department (Sibirskii prikaz ), the central state bureau which had, with a brief interruption under Peter the Great, been directly responsible for the governance and administration of the territory since 1637.
By the beginning of the nineteenth century Siberia was divided up into the three governorships (gubemii ) of Tobolsk, Tomsk and Irkutsk, each of them further subdivided, like any other guberniya in the empire, into a number of regions (oblasti ) and districts (uezdy ).
However, despite the formal integration of the territory into the regular administrative structure of the empire, a combination of human and material circumstances peculiar to Siberia served to preserve the particularity of the region in a number of ways, which led later’ regionalist' historians and thinkers to consider Siberia to be a quite distinct entity, in other senses than the merely geographical, from European Russia, with its own unique characteristics, needs and requirements.
One particular characteristic which had blighted the administration of Siberia throughout the period of Russian domination was the legendary rapaciousness, venality, corruption and brutality of many of even the region's most senior officials.
Since the early seventeenth century, despite the central government's efforts to attenuate, curb or eliminate the worst abuses (to the extent of publicly hanging the first Governor of Siberia, M.P.
Gagarin, in 1721), the tsar's ‘Siberian satraps’ enjoyed almost plenipotentiary powers in what they regarded as their own freedom, which they exercised with all the arbitrary and unbridled ruthlessness of a military dictatorship and the methods of a police state.
Particularly notorious in the early nineteenth century, during the supposedly ‘liberal’ reign of Alexander I (1801–25), was the draconian regime of the Siberian Governor-General, I.B. Pestel (father of the executed Decembrist leader), and his assistant, the Civil Governor of Irkutsk, N.I.
Treskin.
Not only the Siberian natives, who had long suffered from the systematic cruelty and exploitation of the invading white men (see James Forsyth's account in Chapter 4), but also the ‘old inhabitants’(starozhily ), Russian peasants, citizens and merchants fell victim of their virtual reign of terror.
Although, as Marc Raeff has pointed out, it was their methods rather than their aims which were at fault, it was nevertheless the inefficient, inhumane and corrupt administration of Siberia under Pestel and Treskin, last of a long line of government-appointed  regional tyrants, that was to be tackled with such determination by Alexander's brilliant bureaucrat and disgraced official, Mikhail Speranskii (1722–1839).
Speranskii's own brief governorship of Siberia (from 1819 to 1821) was a minor turning point in the history of the territory.
Indeed, one of Nicholas I's ministers, Count Uvarov, was later to remark that the history of Siberia could be divided into two periods — before and after Speranskii.
While Uvarov's periodization is obviously too clear cut, it is nevertheless true that Speranskii's reform of the territory's administration — including the operation of the exile system and the regularization of relations with the Siberian natives — created, in theory, if not always in practice, a more rational and equitable framework for the government and management of the Siberian lands which remained more or less in situ until the upheavals of 1917.
When the ostracized Speranskii learned of his appointment to the Governor-Generalship of Siberia, his own mental image of the place was similar to the popular stereotype described above — that of a vast, remote and inhospitable ice-bound prison.
However, his on-the-spot tours of inspection, and his characteristically thorough investigations of the region's peoples, problems and resources, quickly convinced him of Siberia's enormous potential as a land of civilization and plenty, if only it could be provided with the necessary administrative, legal and political framework within which to develop its promise.
Speranskii's consequent package of reforms is too complex to be analysed in detail at this point, and has in any case been thoroughly investigated by Marc Raeff.
Suffice it to say that, in the absence of a sufficiently ‘mature’, well-educated civil society in Siberia, Speranskii sought to design a structure of bureaucratic agencies and offices in which power was vested in institutions rather than personalities, which took full cognizance of individual regions' peculiar human and material needs and circumstances (both Russian and native), and which laid down proper codes of administrative procedures, legal practices and economic policies.
In other words, he endeavoured to introduce into Siberia something which was after all only a rudimentary concept at that time in metropolitan Russia, that is, the ‘rule of law’.
Conscious of his pioneering role in this respect, and in thereby ‘opening up’ Siberia to the prospect of a more orderly and civically developed future, Speranskii compared himself, rather immodestly, with the traditional ‘discoverer’of Siberia, Yermak.
Despite his good intentions, and despite the more rational management principles and institutions introduced by Speranskii, the actual administration of Siberia, the manner of its economic exploitation, the low levels of popular enlightenment, the permanently suppurating sore of the exile system, the treatment of the native population — which still ranged from the  paternalistic to the spasmodically genocidal — and the survival of traditional ‘imperialist’ attitudes in St Petersburg, meant that in practice the old core-periphery, metropolis-frontier relationships still remained in force, and Siberia continued to be treated and governed in a manner which reflected its original quasi-colonial status.
An attempt has been made by the present writer to convey something of the lawless nature and the rough, tough frontierland conditions of post-Speranskii Siberia in his later chapter comparing Siberia to the American ‘Wild West’ and analysing the relationship between exile, vagrancy and crime in the region.
The reforming governor's efforts to place the hated exile system ‘on a more orderly and business-like foundation’ foundered on the twin reefs of under provision of infrastructural resources, and the over-supply of vastly more compulsory settlers and convict labourers than the restructured system was designed or intended to cope with.
From an average of 2,000–3,000 exiles a year during Alexander I's reign, by the middle of the century as many as 17, 18, or even 19,000 exiles were being annually transported to settle in Siberia — not even counting those sentenced to katorga.
Apart from the thousands of common criminals who proved to be such a bane for Siberian society, the nineteenth century also witnessed a steady increase in the number of people who, either by judicial or administrative process, were banished to Siberia for political crimes — committed or suspected — against the state.
The first large contingent of political exiles in the modern period were over a hundred participants in the abortive military rebellion against autocracy in 1825 — the Decembrists.
Even before their enforced sojourn in the tsar's eastern provinces, several of the Decembrist conspirators already had some experience of, or indirect connection with, Siberia.
The leader of the Southern Society, Pavel Pestel — executed, not exiled — was the son of the notorious Governor-General mentioned earlier; G. S. Batenkov, himself of Siberian origin, acted as a close personal aide to Speranskii during the latter's governorship; Baron V.I.
Shteingel was born in Perm on the western edge of Siberia, was raised in Kamchatka and served between 1802 and 1810 in Okhotsk and Irkutsk; D.I.
Zavalishin was well travelled in both Siberia and Russian America; and, as James Gibson notes in his own chapter, several of the Decembrists (including the poet, Ryleev, who was hanged alongside Pestel) had connections of one sort or another with the Russian American Company.
There is an enormous literature in Russian on the Decembrists' Siberian exile which accurately reflects the powerful impact which these ‘first enlighteners of the Siberian people’ had on the scientific investigation and cultural development of the region with which so many  of them came to identify themselves, and where not a few chose to remain after they were eventually amnestied by Alexander H. Just as their initial, ill-fated rebellion marked the beginning of the nineteenth-century Russian revolutionary movement, so did their exile beyond the Urals open a new phase in the history of political exile in Siberia and of the on-going battle between the radical intelligentsia and the autocratic Russian state.
The Decembrists were followed in 1849 by members of the Fourierist circle of M.V. Petrashevskii, including the young writer, Fedor Dostoevskii; by tens of thousands of Polish insurgents after the national uprisings of 1830 and 1863; by radical pamphleteers and adherents of the fledgling post-emancipation revolutionary groups; by the most famous of the exiled ‘men of the sixties’ and acknowledged figurehead of his intellectual generation, Nikolai Chernyshevskii, confined in soul-destroying conditions at the remote outpost of Vilyuisk in northern Yakutia; by propagandists and terrorists of the Populist revolutionary movement of the 1870s; and by the victims of the new catch-all legislation on police powers of surveillance introduced after the assassination of Alexander H in 1881.
All these, as well as many of their innocent relatives and acquaintances, were to find themselves condemned to the mercies of a capricious and often brutal exile administration which many were neither physically nor spiritually able to withstand.
The majority of these state criminals or politically ‘untrustworthies’(neblagonadezhnye ), sprung from Russia's educated classes and her critically-thinking elite, that is, the intelligentsia.
They thus represented a specific stage in the history of the revolutionary movement as a whole — that of the largely non-gentry,déclassé radicals, or raznochintsy , of which Chernyshevskii was the archetypal figure.
Around the turn of the century, however, the social composition of Siberia's community of political exiles became more diversified, more’ plebeian', as thousands of striking workers, members of Marxist-inspired proletarian organizations, rebellious peasants, participants in national liberation movements in the non-Russian borderlands, anarchists, rank-and-file Mensheviks, Bolsheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries became involved in the empire-wide tidal wave of social and political protest during the dying years of the imperial regime.
While the government was to some extent successful in thereby isolating its opponents from their comrades in European Russia and elsewhere, the ‘democratrization’ of the political exile operation only served to disseminate the seeds and agents of revolutionary change in greater numbers and into the remotest corners of the empire.
Through the government's own policies, therefore, Siberia was well supplied with an experienced and committed cohort of exiled revolutionary activists when  revolution itself, followed by civil war, swept across the country during and after 1917.
But before that stage was reached, the far-reaching social and economic changes brought about by the post-emancipation process of modernization, industrialization and the growth of capitalist relationships in Russia also found their idiosyncratic expression in Siberia, newly enlarged by the territory of the Amur and Ussuri regions which were incorporated into the empire at China's expense by the visionary efforts of the Governor-General of Eastern Siberia, N.N. Muravev-Amurskii (treaties of Aigun, 1858, and Pekin, 1860).
Despite the obstacles to personal and geographical mobility posed by the communal organization of the liberated peasants, the abolition of serfdom in 1861 nevertheless created conditions in which an even greater number than ever before of voluntary emigrants and settlers from the land-hungry provinces of central European Russia flocked towards the fertile steppe and forest-steppe lands of west and south-west Siberia, thus massively augmenting the influx of peasant settlers already observed in the previous century.
In his contribution to the present volume, the distinguished Soviet historian, Leonid Goryushkin, has added fresh insights to the body of literature on nineteenth and early twentieth-century peasant migration patterns by demonstrating how these reflected the fluctuating social, economic and political policies of the late tsarist regime and by analysing their impact on the agrarian economy and village industries of Siberia in the decades before the first World War.
Such factors as the government's initial anxiety to guarantee an adequate labour force to the ex-serf-owning nobility; the building of the Trans-Siberian Railway — centrepiece of Russia's late industrial revolution; the uncertainties caused by the 1905 revolutionary situation; Stolypin's political gamble on agrarian reform: all these circumstances influenced the rate of Siberian settlement in what was one of the largest population shifts in European history.
Goryushkin's conclusion is that in the process of peasant immigration and colonization, not only did the incoming millions bring about innovations in agricultural methods, animal husbandry, cottage industry and the social customs of the Siberian peasantry, but they themselves were also deeply influenced by the traditional local practices of the old Siberians.
The result was a two-way process which created a ‘new amalgam of peasant traditions and cultures’ and ‘a close unity in the material and spiritual culture of European Russia and Siberia.’
Be that as it may, there were still those in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries who still continued to look on Siberia as an exploited  colony whose population and resources were recklessly plundered and despoiled by the central government, whose merchantry continued to suffer under the ‘economic yoke of Moscow’ and the commercial interests of the centre, whose native peoples were many of them doomed to extinction, where such civil and political rights and modern judicial institutions as existed in tsarist Russia were largely denied to the population of Siberia, where the cultural and educational infrastructure was inadequate for the region's needs, and which was still used as a distant dumping ground for the criminal sweepings of the rest of the empire.
In the second half of the nineteenth century such sentiments had fostered the growth of a small but vigorous school of Siberian regionalist writers and political activists (oblastniki ), some of whom had even gone so far as to envisage the complete political separation of Siberia from Russia and the establishment of a new, independent Siberian republic.
The proponents of such outrageous plans were easily muzzled and isolated by the police and military authorities, but localized, ‘patriotic’ sympathies for some kind of regional autonomy continued to be cherished by a few individuals and groupings until the collapse of tsarist authority and the ensuing chaos of revolution and civil war created conditions in which the adherents of Siberian independence could now openly press their case and join in the bitter, fratricidal struggle of contending political and nationalist forces which raged across the country's huge expanses between 1917 and 1922.
The final chapter of this book, written by John Channon, comprises both a brief survey of the course of the Revolution and Civil War in Siberia, and, drawing on the work of a number of Soviet historians and also western experts such as Evan Mawdsley, Norman Pereira and Jon Smele, an analysis of the horrendously complex, bloody and confused antagonisms with which the entire territory was racked.
During this agonizing period, Siberia was perhaps the most bitterly fought-over, and certainly the largest, theatre of military operations and political hostilities in the entire conflict.
As it was the revolt of the Czech Legion on the Trans-Siberian Railway in May 1918 which in a sense signalled the start of the Civil War, so was it the taking of Vladivostok by the Red Army in 1922, the withdrawal of American and Japanese interventionist forces from the Siberian mainland, and the incorporation of the short-lived far Eastern Republic into the Soviet Union which finally marked its end.
In this way, as so often in the past, even in the throes of revolution and civil war Siberia once more demonstrated the intimate and inextricable connection between its own internal fortunes, the sufferings and achievements of its people and the historical development of Russia as a whole.
It is hoped that the following chapters, contributed by an international team of acknowledged experts in their own field of scholarship, will help to counter the peripheralization from which Siberian historiography has partly suffered in the west, will illuminate and underline both the importance and the fascination of Siberia's role in Russian history, and also act as a stimulus to further research and publication in this relatively neglected area.
Subjugation and settlement in seventeenth and eighteenth-century Siberia
David N. Collins
First of all the native people had to be made to pay tribute, and this was achieved by the use of military expeditions…
If the natives were ‘disobedient’, they were subjected to force of arms…
The tents of the ‘disobedient’ were burnt down, their wives and daughters were taken into captivity, their fur stores were ransacked.
Terrified by such an onslaught, the natives hastened to ‘kow-tow’(bit chelom ) by paying tribute in fur (yasak )…
The second stage was the construction of a fort (ostrog ) in the centre of the newly discovered territory.
This construction usually evoked great alarm among the surrounding natives and led to attempts to destroy the fort which had been built on their land…
There followed severe repression with the aim of terrifying the recalcitrant, and mutinous princelings usually paid for their revolt by death on a gibbet…
[But]extermination of the natives was not in Moscow's interests.
She needed not empty lands but fur, and the natives were the best suppliers of this fur.
Therefore, having forced them to pay yasak, she strove to put an end to war.
The native tribal organizations were even retained, since they could be used tor yasak collection.
(S.V. Bakhrushin 1929)
Bakhrushin's rather harsh summary of Russian colonial policy in Siberia is characteristic of a certain strain of Soviet historiography.
Even when the author credits the Muscovite government with moderate policies towards the Siberian natives, the motivation for its instructions that they be treated tenderly (laskovo ) is held to be solely mercenary.
Other Soviet writers have reacted against the stress on the military nature of the colonial process evoked by terms such as pokorenie (subjugation) or zavoevanie (conquest), and instead have placed emphasis on the peaceful and progressive nature of the Russian presence, using more neutral vocabulary such as prisoedinenie (annexation) or osvoenie (assimilation) of the new territory.
The reasons for this have been discussed elsewhere.
The purpose of the present chapter is to investigate in more detail the nature of Muscovite colonial policies in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, drawing largely on the researches of a range of Soviet scholars, but particularly those of N.I.
Nikitin and A.P.
Umanskii, whose works form the basis of the following study.
During their progress across the Siberian landmass, the Russians came into contact with many indigenous peoples.
Though it is impossible to estimate their numbers with accuracy, the generally accepted total for all the peoples together is only between 200,000 and 220,000 in the late sixteenth century.
Settlement was very sparse in the far north and north-east on the tundra, whose inhabitants relied on hunting migratory reindeer or sea mammals.
Populations were slightly higher in the wooded taiga zone further south, where the abundance of game, fowl and fish supplied enough food for denser settlement.
The largest indigenous groupings occurred further south still, in the wooded steppe and the immense grasslands, where it was possible to herd large numbers of domestic animals, as well as engaging in hunting and primitive forms of agriculture.
All the peoples traded in the products of their particular region, exchanging goods by means of barter.
It has become clear that the process of Russian penetration into these far-flung regions was more complex than some writers have suggested.
There were several intertwining strands which were mutually interactive and dependent upon one another.
There was a close relationship between state and private initiative.
Sometimes an expedition under orders from the Sibirskii prikaz (Siberian Department) in Moscow would be the first to penetrate into a region; at other times hunters and traders would investigate a new river system on their own, later reporting their success to the local military governor (voevoda ), who would then penetrate the region asserting government control over the inhabitants.
On occasion groups of private traders would collect fur tribute in the name of the tsar, though this was rather irregular.
Subsequently a small fort would be constructed, a garrison would be placed there to collect yasak and to protect the private traders.
Around the fort would grow a tiny settlement which gradually, if the fort were well situated on what was to become a primary trading route, evolved into a complex settlement including military servicemen and their families, traders, artisans and peasants.
Once this base had been consolidated, forays would be made deeper into the wilderness, this time, perhaps, with a cossack military unit establishing a blockhouse (zimove) to contain the furs collected from the next tribe to be located.
Some blockhouses were small and short-lived, but others proved to have been placed advantageously and after several years would be reconstructed on a larger scale to form a frontier town.
Such was Irkutsk.
founded in 1652 as a cossack zimove to collect yasak from the Buryats and Tungus (Evenkis), in 1661 it was rebuilt into an ostrog.
Originally this had four towers and a wooden palisade to protect the inhabitants.
By 1684 it had developed into a key centre with its own voevoda, a full range of administrative buildings, warehouses, baths, a merchants' hall, cottages for the garrison and civilian inhabitants, a guard house and a church in the centre.
Raised in status to a gorod (that is, a town, a higher administrative level than an ostrog) in 1686, it was substantially rebuilt in 1693 with stout fortifications.
There was an inner bailey containing the buildings of greatest importance.
Outside this was a citadel, fortified like the inner bailey, but containing a greater number of buildings.
Beyond this was a third fortified settlement, irregular in shape in contrast to the other two.
The outer settlement was for artisans, peasants and other civilian personnel.
By 1699 there were 1,000 inhabitants.
Situated at a crossroads for the colonization, trade and post routes, with good arable, pasture and fishing facilities, Irkutsk became a major centre in which the various strands of Russia's colonization came together.
Apart from the military and administrative functions of the town, which included offices for collecting taxes from native and Russian alike, there was the beginning of a perish structure established by Orthodox clergy who had accompanied or soon followed the first government forces.
There were craft workshops, shops and counting houses for the commercial and artisan community.
There was a market for the sale of products of the forest (meat, fish, nuts and honey) and agricultural goods (grain, sheepskins and vegetables).
The Russians could not hope to settle or control the whole Burasian continent at this period.
Instead they penetrated along river routes, fortifying strategic points such as confluences and portages from one river system to another.
Muscovite settlements were, in fact, little islands in a vast ocean of forest, tundra and steppe, linked by fragile transport routes.
All the participants in the process of control and settlement were mutually dependent.
Two other significant strands of Russia's colonial expansion into Siberia deserve mention.
The first consisted of religious groups; the second comprised peasant colonists.
There were two different types of religious groups.
Approved by the government were members of the Orthodox clergy who began to establish a parish and diocesan network in Siberia early in the seventeenth century.
As well as catering for the spiritual needs of the Russian settlers, monks, sometimes with lay assistants, participated in the colonial process by establishing small monastic communities which soon attracted peasants and became the focus of new communities.
Attempts by the Orthodox clergy to convert the indigenous peoples, mainly shamanists, to Christianity were in some case approved of by the authorities, but generally in the period under study there was a reluctance to permit the baptism of natives, since they then ceased to pay yasak.
Relations between church and state in Siberia were mixed.
Whilst in general each supported the other, there were clashes from time to time, both sides accusing the other of reprehensible acts.
There is still no satisfactory study of the church's role in Siberia, though in recent years some work on it has begun both in the Soviet Union and in the West.
The other religious groups were Old Believers (that is, Schismatics) trying to escape from persecution in Russia.
Their communities were generally established in remote locations far from possible government interference, so on the whole they were to one side of the main process of ingesting Siberia into the Russian state.
Yet they added their own particular flavour to the developing Siberian community, retaining seventeenth-century ways even until 1917 and beyond.
Peasants arrived in Siberia by various means.
Some were forcibly settled there by government directives, imported to help provide food resources for the remote garrison settlements.
On other occasions they came independently, fleeing from oppression to the fabled free lands beyond the Urals.
Legends such as the tale of the Land of White Water (belovodie ) drove them onwards away from Europe into the dense forests where serfdom was but a memory until a voevoda's troops stumbled upon them, making them pay taxes by growing grain for the troops or by carting goods — one of the harshest occupations in this severe land.
Some Soviet writers have overstressed the importance of free peasant settlers in the early years, regarding their spontaneous settlement among the native inhabitants as evidence of a happy intermingling of the peoples of the Russian Empire, a sort of prelude to Lenin's nationality policy.
Such colonization occurred on a large scale mainly in western Siberia, in areas nearest to the peasants' departure point, and in regions largely pacified by the troops by the mid seventeenth century.
Peasants tended to move onwards in short stages, so their progression across Siberia was not sudden.
It was more a trickle than a flood, for peaceful homesteads could be successfully built only where there was relative security, and where there were known to be agriculturally suitable regions.
Peasants were dependent on the government for protection, and the garrisons could not survive without foodstuffs produced by the peasants.
Short of reliable military forces the government obtained its troops from many sources: some regular dragoon regiments were sent as garrisons, particularly during the eighteenth century.
Prisoners-of-war, wandering free men, peasants and natives were mobilized from time to time into detachments of foreign servicemen (Litva ) or cossacks, and there were service gentry from European Russia stationed in the region for periods of several years.
During emergencies, when indigenous tribes attacked, every available person, male or female, would be brought into the common fight for survival.
It thus becomes clear that an intricate web of mutual dependency existed between the state and private individuals, between the military, the hunters, the peasants, the craftsmen and the merchants.
Even hardy explorers needed strongpoints to which they could return after exhausting expeditions into unknown regions.
Sometimes there was harmony between the different groups, sometimes clashes occurred.
The state supported private activities for its own ends, and vice versa.
One might almost speak of a complex symbiosis of different elements in society.
It is indeed difficult on occasion to know how to untangle the strands.
for instance, as Nikitin points out, it is impossible to categorize those garrison troops who undertook private trading against their superiors' orders, or those private individuals who voluntarily joined armed detachments going out on campaign under orders from Moscow.
One thing which it is difficult to deny is that military strength was vital for Muscovite survival in this massive frontier land.
The first campaigns in Siberia against Kuchum and his khanate were quite blatantly military, as were many actions further east.
Yet there is a strong emphasis among some historians on the voluntary submission of native peoples.
There are indeed cases of leaders of aboriginal groups offering to pay yasak.
Yet it would be anachronistic to assume that they had surrendered their rights in anticipation of Marxist theories about the superiority of the all-Russian market, or that they felt a particular brotherly love towards the Great Russian folk.
It is quite clear from studies of aboriginal peoples elsewhere that they could be astute traders and politicians, using the European newcomers for their own ends as much as they were being used.
Quite often submission to the Russians was a calculated act based on one or more of several considerations.
for instance, seeing how firearms had decimated their neighbours, they might decide to bow to the inevitable and offer tribute before it was demanded with menaces.
They might well have had experience at second hand of Russian trade goods, and thus have resolved to pay tribute to obtain these benefits.
And on occasion some groups would choose to submit themselves to the Russians as the lesser of two evils when called upon to supply tribute to a third party with whom they were not on good terms.
In the shifting pattern of dominance and submission which characterized tribal life, with warfare being carried out now against one, now against another group, it was natural that on occasion peoples should ally themselves with the Russians.
A Buryat tale relates how one of their groups decided to link itself with the Russians because their own khan chopped off heads  for crimes which merited mere birching in Muscovite territory.
We hear of other cases where the decision was based on Russian tribute being lighter than that of other overlords.
Of course, this might have been no more than a diplomatic ruse by the Russians to initiate a dependence which would permit a later imposition of heavier tribute payments without negative results.
Russian concepts of suzerainty and subjection were not always the same as those of the peoples they were hoping to subdue.
for the Russians the payment of the yasak made the natives permanent vassals.
The very word for citizenship in Russian,pod-danstvo , implies being under tribute payment.
When first a new people group was contacted, the leaders were asked to pay tribute, and then they were often persuaded to make a solemn pact or covenant (shen or prisyaga ) The customs of the locals were investigated to elicit information about what sort of oath would be regarded as the most binding.
Naturally these varied depending on the beliefs of the people in question.
In general there was the invocation of one or more deities to bear witness that a binding contract was being undertaken.
The subjects vowed eternal fealty to the ‘White Tsar’, to be loyal and to pay dues on time.
In return the monarch undertook to protect those who had come under his ‘high hand’.
Ostyaks (Khantys) swore in front of a bearskin on which were laid an axe, a knife and some bread.
If they broke the vow a curse would ensue according to which they would be savaged by a bear, split apart by an axe, knifed to death or even choked by food.
Some Yakuts split a dog in half and walked between the pieces with a lump of earth in their mouths, saying that if they did not observe the vow they would be split in two and buried in the earth.
Altaian tribes ‘drank gold’, drinking from a vessel into which a gold object had been placed.
The voevody took the words of the vows literally, as ‘an obligation made before the tsar to be eternally faithful and devoted to him and to give yasak to the Treasury’.
However, the natives, who had known yasak, or alman , before the Russians arrived on the scene, and regarded it as a payment by a vanquished people to its conqueror, in the time-honoured manner would pay only as long as it suited them.
It appears that the blood-curdling nature of the vows made little impression on them.
This part of the ceremony was regarded as nothing more than formal ritual.
Such misunderstandings between the colonizers and the colonized naturally led to problems.
Russians would regard as treason any switch of alliance against them, whilst in the steppe lands, particularly, switches occurred regularly.
Reneging on the terms of the agreement was not only done by the natives.
The Russians undertook to protect their new vassals, but were often not disposed to or were too poorly endowed with manpower to help when asked to do so.
This, of course, demonstrated to tribespeople  that the Russians understood their ways, and that either side could break the agreement if it were expedient to do so.
Other causes for disagreements between natives and Russians abounded.
In order to secure the payment of tribute, servicemen would often resort to taking hostages (amanaty ).
Usually members of the more prominent families would be taken.
They would be kept under house arrest within a fort until the yasak payment season came round.
They would then be exposed before the kinsmen, complete with presents such as metal dishes, tools and beads given by their captors, to demonstrate that they were still in one piece, and even being treated well.
After a couple of years they would be exchanged for someone else of sufficiently high position.
On occasion, not surprisingly, raids were mounted to regain hostages.
This would lead to Russian reprisals, and sometimes to an escalation of conflict with which the sorely pressed garrisons in the wilderness were ill equipped to deal.
There was also trouble with yasyri , that is slaves seized, not for formal reasons like the amanaty, but for the personal use of men far from home and family.
Peasant settlers were short of womenfolk, as were the soldiers and hunters.
Young women would be seized from their home tents and taken to Russian fortresses where they would often be sold, to end up as common law wives or concubines.
Cases of this traffic in women are legion in seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century Siberia.
On occasion girls were sold by their parents.
Where such a transaction had taken place there were no problems, but naturally any forced seizures caused bitterness and could well lead to bloodshed.
The progeny of mixed marriages contributed to a ‘metisization’ of the Russian population, the greater part of which occurred in the regions most remote from Europe.
Clashes also occurred because of the rapacious actions of some Russians, because of the infringement of native hunting territories, and the settlement of peasants on pastures essential to the yearly migrations of pastoralists' herds.
Russian peasants were bound to come into conflict with the indigenous inhabitants.
Apart from extending agriculture into lands which were not free, as they seemed, but part of an ancient patrimony, they hunted fur-bearing animals as well as birds and fish and in other ways competed with the existing population for scarce resources.
When the natives had to pay yasak in furs and Russians were killing the dwindling stocks, or when, as in Chukotka, both sides were very short of provisions and the Russians, desperate for food, stole reindeer in large numbers, hostilities were more or less inevitable.
It was all very well for the government in Moscow to lay down severe penalties for its servants who maltreated the natives.
The conditions of service, the harshness of the environment, the atrocious difficulties  associated with travel and food supplies, the ravages of scurvy, and the son of men who went out in search of new lands for the tsar, all contributed to the tense atmosphere which sometimes erupted into bloody conflict.
Not that the natives were always hostile in intent or capability.
Nor were the Russians always spoiling for a fight.
They were used to rubbing shoulders with Tatars in regions west of the Urals, and seem to have had few trances of the sense of racial superiority which other European colonists took with them.
In general they got along with their new neighbours.
Most of Siberia was conquered and held without the serious levels of bloodshed experienced in the American West.
The exceptions were in four main areas: in the west during the first onslaughts when the khanate of Kuchum was being eliminated; in the far north-east against the Chukchis and Karnchatkan Itelmens (here Russian losses may not have been very severe, but the effects on the aboriginal population were catastrophic); in the south-east in the struggle with the Manchus for domination of the Amur, where the Russians were beaten; and finally in the south-west against the nomadic horsemen of the steppes who were a thorn in the Russians' flesh for over a century.
(for further discussion of the Russians' impact on the natives, see Chapter 4.)
The Russians, small in numbers, relied on their firearms for victory.
Whenever powder became damp or ran out, whenever shot was lost in a river or was used up, fear stalked the camp.
It was essential to prevent the enemy obtaining harquebuses or cannon.
Government orders forbade anyone to show the natives how to use such weapons, yet inevitably they did on occasion obtain them and use them to deadly effect, though their culture might be basically Stone Age.
Even without them, some groups were particularly effective fighters.
Marksmen with the bow and arrow, slings or spears, they inflicted grave wounds and death upon many Russians.
They often stormed and burned ostrogi, soon realizing that the ‘thunder and lightning’ weapons were slow.
Indeed, the primitive matchlocks could only be discharged a maximum of sixteen times during a whole day of battle.
In the cavalry skirmishes against Kalmyk, Kirgiz or Mongol horsemen, who almost lived in the saddle and were ‘a numerous, highly manoeuvrable and well armed foe, a serious and dangerous enemy’, Russian firepower proved of very little advantage.
It was most useful in defensive positions.
A specifically military form of life was characteristic for  practically all areas of southern Siberia.
Inhabitants of the uezdy (districts) there had to be ready at any moment to leave their homes and fields to get under cover of the walls of the fortresses.
All field-workers took weapons with them, and would venture forth to collect firewood only in large parties.
Blockhouses were built in the fields, and  sometimes the cattle were kept in fortified compounds to protect them from raiders.
In the seventeenth century none of the Russian peasants in any of the regions of mass settlement lived without fear.
In a sideswipe at some earlier Soviet historiography, Umanskii writes that ‘history does not need embellishments’, and goes on to state that
a great share of the blame for military clashes lies with the tsarist voevody who organized campaigns deep into [native]lands to set up strong points, to search out new ‘lands’ and to return ‘traitors and unruly elements’to subjection.
He continues:
In our view, we ought not to shut our eyes to these facts, or mask the dark sides of tsarist activities, or look for a justification for them in the need to protect Russian settlements from nomad onslaughts, and in the voevody's disobedience to the tsar, etc.
For, in essence, the Russians were simply invaders and had to face the consequences of that fact.
Probably the most costly problems facing the Russian government, which was always eager to run its fur empire on a shoestring, were posed by the nomadic tribes of south-west Siberia referred to above.
Whereas in sparsely populated regions of the north and east individual ostrogi may have been sufficient to take and hold territory, tribes and transport lines, the situation in the south was far more complex.
As Russians penetrated southwards from the forested zone (taiga) to the wooded steppe, and then the open grasslands, they built new fortresses.
For instance, Tomsk, founded in 1604 on the orders of Tsar Boris Godunov, around 60 kilometres from the confluence of the Ob and Tom rivers, ‘served as a defensive post for protection against attacks by the local population and for subjecting them to the payment of yasak’.
In 1607 detachments were sent out towards the Kondoma and Mrass rivers to collect fur tribute.
With time it became clear that the new region was too distant from Tornsk to be controlled with ease.
Consequently, in 1618 a new ostrog was established where the Kondoma joined the Tom.
It was called Kuznetsk (’ Smithtown') because the local inhabitants practised iron-working.
The only reasons for the establishment of Kuznetsk were to collect and trade in furs and control the natives.
Kuznetsk is interesting in that, unlike Irkutsk, it was not near any main communication arteries and did not develop a secure economic base before the October 1917 Revolution.
By 1700 it had an outer polygonal timber palisade one sazhen high (a sazhen is 2.13  metres) and 1,500 sazhens in length, with five towers set into it.
The inner bailey had a circumference of ninety-four sazhens and three towers.
There was slow development in the seventeenth century, and by the early eighteenth century decay was evident, despite the designation of the town as a centre of an administrative district (uezd) of Tobolsk Province.
There were still only two churches, three large warehouses and a cluster of cottages to house the 674 households, with a total of 5,000 inhabitants.
All the buildings were wooden.
By the third census in 1763 the number of households had reduced to 500, and the inhabitants to roughly 3,000.
In military terms the settlement had declined, so that in 1744 there were only 160 men in the fort.
Yet circumstances were changing.
Kuznetsk itself may not have developed, but in the Altai mountains to the south-east of the town, metallic ores including copper, silver-lead and gold had been found.
Initially worked by a private company owned by Akinfii Demidov, whose main interests were in the Ural mountains, at his death the Altai mines and smelting works passed into the personal possession of the imperial family.
Eager to enrich the treasury the Crown began a rapid development of these resources, settling the area with peasants who worked as a serf proletariat and maintained farms to feed themselves.
The rise to prominence of the Dzhungar state in what is now Chinese territory, and the submission to it of tribes in the Altai and further west in present day Kazakhstan, were causing problems (see below for more detail on the Teleuts).
Raids were becoming so costly by the mid-eighteenth century that the imperial government began to undertake substantial fortification work along the southern marches which resulted in the erection of a series of connecting fortified lines (lini ) which stretched from the southern Urals to Kuznetsk.
In doing this the government was employing techniques perfected from the sixteenth century onwards in the expansion of the Muscovite state towards the Black Sea and the Volga basin.
Peter the Great's expansion was not limited to the west and south.
His government claimed that the whole course of all rivers flowing into the Arctic Ocean was by right Russian territory.
This had been so ‘from ancient times’(izdrevle ), and the peoples living within this vast area were said to be undertaking their seasonal migrations with Russian permission.
Yet this did not mean that the natives were aware that Russia had ‘owned’ the region from ancient times, or that they would be prepared to agree to this state of affairs.
The Dzhungar state, the last in a long line of typical steppe nomad conglomerates descended from Genghis Khan's empire, also claimed the more southerly zone where lay the headwaters of the Ob-Irtysh river system.
The Kirgiz-Kaisaks (Kazakhs), roaming in areas claimed by both sides, were  in an uncomfortable position and from time to time paid fealty to both, meantime raiding on their own behalf and fighting amongst themselves.
Owing to the immense distances involved it was impossible to construct a continuous fortification like Hadrian's Wall in Roman Britain.
Yet constant raids were causing great losses and hardship.
In the 1730s settlements in the Tobol region to the south-east of the Urals were being attacked.
Villages were raided and burned, cattle were driven off, growing crops were trampled, hay stocks were fired and people were taken captive.
Three raids alone in 1736 led to the loss of 1,026 head of cattle.
In the summer of 1741 nomads penetrated the strategically important gap between the Ishim and Irtysh rivers devastating the hamlets of Zudilovo and Chausskaya.
A traveller passing through the area afterwards reported scenes of utter devastation.
In 1743 an attack on Bezrukovo near the Ishim led to the deaths of two people, the imprisonment of twenty-six more and the loss of eighty horses.
Extra artillery and troops were drafted in, and an attempt was made to plug the gaps with extra forts, yet by the 1740s the defence lines were crooked and poorly organized.
Every 100 kilometres had approximately two defensive positions, 200 soldiers and five or six cannon.
The raids continued.
In 1742 the head of the Orenburg Expedition, Neplyuev, was sent to investigate the situation.
In 1743, in consultation with the governor, he decided that an attempt should be made not to fortify the watersheds of all rivers leading to the Arctic — a mammoth task indeed — but to defend all the lands necessary and useful for the Province of Siberia, provided that care was taken not to include territories so important to the natives that a pretext would be given for an uprising.
After two or more years' investigation and the resolution of differences about which locations should or should not be included, a plan was submitted to the Governing Senate in St Petersburg in 1746.
It was approved only in 1752, during which year construction work began.
The latest military technology was to be used in the construction of forts (kreposti ) which were to be surrounded by massive earthworks, and to be of stone construction, unlike the seventeenth century ostrogi.
Omsk alone required the excavation of 130,000 cubic metres of earth.
In 1769 1,375 people were at work on it, many of them prisoners at forced labour.
The construction works led to the severe exploitation of exiles, soldiers, cossacks, peasants and horses.
Periods on guard duty alternated with heavy navvying.
Not surprisingly, the work was plagued by desertions.
Owing to the insanitary conditions and malarial swamps in some parts there was also a heavy incidence of disease.
Kuznetsk recovered from its period in the doldrums; in fact it was the only one of the old Siberian forts apart from Tobolsk to be rebuilt in stone, since it formed the terminus of the most easterly section of the fortifications.
Its stone fort  with impressive barracks, powder stores, administration buildings and walls was substantially completed by 1813.
The garrison consisted of a company of 200 soldiers and a detachment of up to ninety invalids.
Yet with the destruction of the Dzhungar state by the Chinese towards the end of the eighteenth century, the military significance of the town declined once more.
Since the fur trade was also well past its zenith, the town snoozed in a rural backwater.
The fort became a prison and was blown up by partisans during the Civil War following the Bolshevik Revolution.
Apart from the fortresses, the lines consisted of smaller forts (forposty ), redoubts (reduty ) and signal towers or beacons (mayaki ).
The forty were sixty versts apart (a versta equals roughly one kilometre) and were a smaller version of the ostrog of wooden construction.
The reduty were also wooden.
They interspersed the forposty at twenty-verst intervals.
Their dimensions varied, some being ten sazhens square with half-bastions at the corners, whereas elsewhere they were double the size, with full bastions.
They held small detachments of troops on guard.
The signal towers were tall observation posts eleven sazhens square.
On the top was a pole wrapped in straw which could be ignited by the cossack sentry in case of enemy incursion.
They were situated in positions which made them visible from the pests on each side.
The overall length of the Siberian lines was 2,100 versts, and mounted cossack patrols constantly made the rounds to ensure that all was peaceful.
The most easterly section of the Siberian Line was the Kolyvano-Kuznetsk fortified Line.
When the Demidovs had first built mines and smelting works in the hills, they had been fortified and special permission was obtained from the government for the industrialists to hire a private army for protection.
It is doubtful whether they would have been able to afford the elaborate system which replaced this piecemeal amateur effort, and in any case they were spared the necessity of any expenditure since the Empress Elizabeth seized their assets in 1747, just as plans were in hand to construct the new line.
The eastern terminus was Kuznetsk.
In the centre was Biisk, an ostrog on the Biya river, built in 1718 and later enlarged into a fortress, while at the opposite end lay Ust-Kamenogorsk, established in 1720.
The first section to be built was the southern half.
By 1757 this included Biisk, fifteen forposty, two small forts on the Anui and Katun rivers and three fortified factories.
In that year hostile natives attacked the village of Praporshchikovo on the Irtysh river between the last forpost, Ubinsk, and Ust-Kamenogorsk.
This led to the line being extended thither, the total length then being 380 versts.
It was extended in the 1760s as the Russians had advanced slightly, to become 457 versts long.
The northern section was built from the late 1760s to 1795.
Between Biisk, which was relocated and strengthened, and Kuznetsk were three forposty and eleven beacons.
Difficulties were experienced in the provision of construction workers since labour was scarce in Siberia, and the mine administration was competing for it as well.
Gradually a mixed bag of cossacks, exiles and peasants settled the area, and as the natives became pacified so the military flavour declined.
In 1816 a Special Commission resolved that Biisk was obsolescent, and by 1825 it was no longer on the list of active fortresses.
The northern section was abandoned in 1848, though the southern maintained a shadowy existence until the 1890s.
The cossacks were given allotments of land and farmed there as the wooden fortifications gradually rotted away.
Today tourist trails follow the route of the old cossack patrols, and schoolchildren participate in archaeological investigations to discover the location of remnants of lost signal towers.
A case study of Russian colonial relations with one Siberian native group, the Teleuts (otherwise known as the Telenguty or Belye Kalmyki) has been undertaken by Umanskii.
He has investigated the subject with tenacity and in great depth, enabling us to understand a good deal about Russian and Teleut attitudes and activities.
The Teleuts were herdsmen, hunters, fishers, gatherers of natural produce, and superlative horsemen living in the upper reaches of the Ob river system.
They were illiterate, mainly shamanist in religion and dominant over a number of other tribes in south-west Siberia.
Their numbers seem to have grown from around 5,000 in the early seventeenth century to about 20,000 a century later.
Since their traditional migration routes lay in areas which came under Russian influence fairly early (Tornsk, Kuznetsk and Tara districts), they established economic, political and cultural contacts with them in the seventeenth century.
The Dzhungar khanate, established in 1635, also influenced them a great deal.
They seem to have been in some sort of vassal relationship with the Dzhungars until they broke away in the 1650s and 1660s.
Early in the eighteenth century they became more firmly subjected to Dzhungaria.
A group of Teleuts, in tsarist documents known as the vyezzhye belye Kalmyki , moved into Russian-held territory and settled there out of reach of the Teleut princes.
The Teleuts made an agreement (shert) with Muscovite voevody, but never consented to pay yasak during the whole seventeenth century, even when offered the inducement of paying a nominal tenth of the usual quantity.
They did give presents (pominki ), but these were voluntary.
It seems that this was their means of asserting their continuing independence of Moscow.
It was normal diplomatic protocol to exchange presents when delegations met, and Umanskii detects a distinct difference between these gifts and those which yasak-paying tribes gave originally voluntarily, but later on under  coercion.
Nor did the Teleuts hand over hostages to the Russians, despite pressure being placed on them to do so.
In fact their leaders were regarded as slippery customers by the Russians.
One of them, Machik, ‘manifested great inventiveness, cunning and insidiousness in his struggle against the Russian authorities, and the voevody could not take him at his word’.
Umanskii concludes that their subjection to the Russians was nominal.
Yet on the other hand an agreement had been reached for mutual military aid as early as 1609.
There might appear to be elements of a feudal vassal status for the Teleuts here.
In feudal Russia the petty princes had sworn allegiance to the crown and had to engage in military service, whilst retaining autonomy in their internal affairs, as the Teleuts did.
But Umanskii sees a significant difference: feudal subjects of the seigneur are usually from the same nation as him.
The Teleuts, however, had been sovereign in their own domains for a long period before the Russians arrived on the scene.
Rather than being a case of feudal vassaldom, this has more of the characteristics of a military alliance between two states, an unstable one, it is true, and between partners of very unequal power.
Relations between the Teleuts and the Russians were not smooth.
Periods of peace alternated with conflicts, some of them minor border skirmishes, others quite major clashes.
The peaceful periods demonstrated that both sides had common interests.
first, they had enemies in the Dzhungars, the Khalkha Mongols and the Yenisei Kirgiz.
A common front could be made here.
Second, they had mutual economic interests.
The Teleuts needed Russian trade and agricultural products and the Russians were in desperate need of leather goods, cattle, horses and women.
The Teleuts began to become dependent on Russian metalware but the Russians were unable to use this as a bargaining tool, since the Teleuts knew that the troops could not exist without their trade goods.
If anything a mutual dependence was growing.
There were also sources of friction between them.
The leaders of both sides wished to take yasak from the smaller Altaian groups, whose position became anything but enviable.
The Kumandintsy are a good example of this.
They were a collection of kinship groups (seoki ) living around the river Biya.
They were hunters, metal-workers, cattle raisers and also engaged in primitive agriculture and the gathering of roots and nuts.
Throughout the seventeenth century they paid tribute to the Teleuts.
from the 1620s the Russians started demanding payment too.
Some of them also gave tribute to the Yenisei Kirgiz from the Minusinsk Depression.
As the Teleuts became subject to the Dzhungars in the early eighteenth century, tribute had to go to them as well.
The end of the Dzhungar state lightened their load, but the Russian yoke was never removed from their necks.
Not  only did they have to pay yasak, but Russians came and settled on their best lands.
Russian-Teleut clashes also occurred over trapping rights as well as over yasak payment from subject peoples.
As fur resources dwindled and as Russian settlers moved ever onward, the pressures on Teleut traditional hunting grounds grew.
There were, too, political conflicts.
All Russian attempts to penetrate the Teleuts' territories were opposed, since they regarded themselves as overlords in the northern Altai.
The Tomsk voevody wanted firm control over the region and were not satisfied to have the Teleuts as allies; they wished them to become permanent subjects.
Russian forays deep into Teleut territory were regarded as provocations, and as an abrogation of earlier agreements between the two sides.
Strains developed over the migration of the ‘vyezzhye belye Kalmyki’ to Russian territory, since the prince of the Teleuts regarded them as traitorous subjects and demanded their return.
Russian failure to comply was regarded as unwarranted intrusion into their internal affairs.
Also the Russians failed to help their Teleut allies in time of need.
By the 1660s the alliance was breaking down.
Years of sporadic warfare followed, with both sides at one time aggressors, at another the victims.
Peace came about in the 1680s through Teleut exhaustion.
Their economy and population were both suffering, but also they were becoming wary of the Dzhungars' increasing strength.
Russia wished to use the Teleuts as a buffer against the Dzhungars, but in the end they were overwhelmed by a superior power and began raiding Russian lands again around 1700 at the behest of their new masters, as did the Kazakhs further west.
A Russian-Dzhungar struggle ensued over the Ob-Irtysh area which was only ended when the Chinese Empire crushed the Dzhungars.
Pacification of the Teleuts, now really weakened, followed, and in the end many became completely russified.
Russian colonial policies in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were aimed at maximizing the income of the state by the subjection of aboriginal peoples to fur tribute.
It was fashionable at one time to see this process crudely in terms of mere military subjugation.
Then the pendulum swung too far in the other direction, towards an assertion that the Russians avoided the unpleasant aspects of colonialism as exemplified in Spanish, Portuguese or British experience.
Neither position, however, contains more than part of the truth.
fortunately we are now able to see the complexity of the processes more clearly through the painstaking researches of Soviet scholars.
Russian servicemen were sometimes, but not always, brutal exploiters; they often felt frightened, vulnerable and far from home.
Native peoples were  not simply savages unable to pit their wits against a superior enemy, nor were they the Russians' dupes.
Weakened by warfare, imported diseases and the excessive demands of their overlords, they were obliged in the end to submit.
Those who foresaw the inevitability of this could take one of three ways out: commit suicide like the Itelmens; resist and fight like the Chukchis; or learn to get along with the newcomers.
Only those who chose the last option survived.
The Siberian native peoples before and after the Russian conquest
James Forsyth
The recorded history of Siberia begins (apart from some references in early Chinese works) with its invasion by the Russians in the late sixteenth century.
By then the ethnic composition of its native population was multifarious and complex, being the result of a long period of prehistoric development.
Attempts to reconstruct the ethnogenesis of the peoples of Siberia have preoccupied many Russian scholars.
In ethno-linguistic terms the ‘oldest’ peoples of Siberia are those speaking the ‘Palaeoasiatic, languages, which cannot be related to any known families of languages outside Siberia.
These are the Chukchis, Koryaks and Itelmens of the extreme north-east and the Kamchatka Peninsula, the Yukagirs who in the seventeenth century inhabited a very large territory between Chukotka and the lower Lena, the Ainu of southern Kamchatka and the Kuril Islands, the Nivkhs of the lower Amur and Sakhalin, and the Kets of the Yenisei.
The Eskimos are also often included among the old Siberian peoples.
Movements of peoples in the historical period originated in the southerly latitudes of Inner Asia.
It was presumably from present-day Manchuria that the Tungus tribes gradually spread northwards to pervade the taiga as far as the Arctic zone, from the Sea of Okhotsk in the east to the Yenisei in the west.
A much more compact intrusion from Inner Asia was achieved, between the twelfth and fourteenth centuries AD, by the Yakuts with their Turkic language, whose culturally isolated community, based upon cattle and horse-breeding, was established among the Tungus on the middle Lena.
At about the same period the Mongol-speaking Buryats moved into the steppes and forests around the southern end of Lake Baikal, where they subjugated the previous inhabitants.
One of the most widespread language families in Siberia was that now known as Samoed, the speakers of which at one time occupied a large part of southern Siberia from the Irtysh to the Yenisei, including the Altal-Sayan mountain region.
These tribes, along with the Yenisei peoples whose last surviving linguistic descendants are the Kets, were profoundly affected by  the northward expansion of Turkic peoples from Inner Asia and of the Tungus from the east.
As a result, they were either pushed farther north or absorbed by the incomers.
In western Siberia, while Turkic tribes from the steppes moved into the southern fringe of the forest and pressed upon the Samoeds, the Ugrian (Khanty and Mansi) peoples moving eastward from the Ural mountains into the Ob-Irtysh basin also mixed with the Samoeds, who by then occupied the northern forest and tundra from the White Sea in the west almost to the Lena in the east.
Among the sometimes rather speculative theories about these movements of peoples one thing is certain: contrary to the facile generalizations of many historians whose interest is almost entirely focused on the Russian element in Siberia, this vast area of northern Asia was not an ‘empty’ land in the sixteenth century.
from the mountainous south to the treeless tundra, human communities had established themselves over several millennia, with a way of life which was nomadic or semi-nomadic.
Except in the case of the Yakuts and the Turks and Mongols of the southern steppes, their economy was largely based upon the use of reindeer — in the first place by hunting wild herds during their seasonal migrations, and later by domesticating them to a greater or lesser extent.
The Russian conquest of northern Eurasia, which developed from the north-eastward territorial expansion of Novgorod and then Moscow, reached beyond the Urals into Asia only some sixty years after the Spanish conquest of Mexico, and twenty years before the first french and English colonies were founded in North America.
The land into which the Russians advanced was similar in many ways to Canada in terms of terrain, climate and natural vegetation.
Culturally, the native population encountered by the Russians was more varied than that found by the first Europeans in northern North America, but the general linguistic situation in the two regions was similar.
This fact is generally obscured by the appearance of simplicity and tidiness imposed by the classification of the existing languages of the USSR, since, out of its approximately 105 recognized native languages, only about twenty-nine, belonging to eleven families, are indigenous to Siberia.
This appears to offer a contrast with the 200 native languages (in fifty-seven families) in present-day North America, of which about sixty-eight occur north of the 45th parallel (the zone comparable with Siberia).
In fact the situation in sixteenth-century Siberia was rather different from what it is today, since a considerable number of languages, such as Kott, Yug, Arin, Assan, Pumpokol, Kamas and Mator, have died out completely.
Moreover, the modern status of officially recognized ‘languages’, as opposed to‘dialects’— always a controversial question — obscures the fact that, for instance , Khanty has as many as five ‘dialects’ which are by no means mutually comprehensible; the far-flung Evenki Tungus have at least three groups of  dialects, and their cousins the Evens as many as thirteen; and the Nenets Samoeds of the forest have three rather different ‘dialects’, although those of the tundra have a single common language.
It is believed that the Yukagir people had many languages and dialects at the time of the Russian conquest, although only a small remnant of this nationality survives today.
Of the larger nationalities, the Buryat Mongols have four dialects, the recently ‘consolidated’ Altaians about six, the Khakass about five, and the Tuvans four, while even such a small community as the Enets Samoeds has two quite widely differing ‘dialects’.
If these facts are taken into account, it seems probable that the number of indigenous languages spoken in Siberia when the Russian occupation began was over 120.
The precise situation will never be known, since the Russian invaders, being interested only in extracting tribute in the form of sable and other furs, paid little attention to the linguistic complexity of Siberia.
Like any other European colonialists, they were content to rely upon the services of interpreters from among the local people as they advanced farther into unknown territory.
The linguistic complexity of Siberia reflected its ethnic variety.
The accompanying map (5.1) of seventeenth-century Siberia shows about twenty nationalities, but this too is a simplification.
The reality of the ethnic situation is suggested by the folding map accompanying B.O. Dolgikh's study, based upon official contemporary records of tribute-exaction, of the clan and tribal composition of the peoples of Siberia in the seventeenth century.
This shows at least 520 territorial groups recognized as administrative districts (volosti ), which in some cases corresponded to true consanguineous clans, but in many other cases were merely ‘clans’ of convenience, rather arbitrarily designated by the Russian authorities.
The population figures estimated by Dolgikh on the basis of this survey have become widely accepted in the Soviet Union.
They show tribute ‘constituencies’ ranging from as few as fifteen persons to several hundreds or even thousands in the case of some of the bigger nationalities — in particular the Kangalas, Baturus, Borogon and Megin tribes of Yakutia, and the Bulagat and Tabunut tribes of Buryat Mongols.
Aggregating Dolgikh's figures, we can arrive at the approximate numbers for the peoples of Siberia in the seventeenth century (including some 69,000 people of the Altai-Sayan and the far East who were not at this time Russian subjects) as shown in Table 5.1.
Map 5.1 The native peoples of Siberia in the seventeenth century
In view of the vast size of Siberia, the relatively small numbers of Russians operating there in the seventeenth century, and the difficulty of carrying out a census of a mobile population, it seems likely that these figures somewhat underestimate the number of indigenous Siberians before the Russian conquest.
In any case, by the beginning of the eighteenth century the native peoples were competing with a rapidly growing contingent of Russians in their midst: about 100,000 in 1701, increasing to some 700,000 in 1720.
By that time the native peoples constituted a minority of only 30 per cent of the total population of Siberia, and they remained at that level until the end of the eighteenth century, although their own numbers increased from 288,000 in 1719 to 732,000 in 1795.
Most Russian historians have presented the Russian occupation of Siberia as a culturally progressive phenomenon, and have shown the way of life of the native peoples in a negative light.
for instance, much emphasis is placed upon fighting between tribes, which supposedly occurred with great frequency until such conflicts were stopped by the Russians.
This is a highly tendentious view.
Of course native Siberians sometimes fought among themselves, just as the various national and religious communities of Europe were often at each other's throats.
However, the scale of slaughter, cruelty and destruction involved in European wars of the seventeenth and subsequent centuries was immeasurably greater than that of the tribal conflicts of the ‘savages’.
The latter involved smaller numbers of people and were less indiscriminate and embittered, frequently being, like those of the North American Indians, somewhat ritualized and even limited to stand-up single combat between champions.
They can scarcely be taken as a serious reason for the ‘backwardness’ of the Siberian peoples, nor as a justification for their subjugation by the Russians.
So far as material culture is concerned, the Siberian peoples fell into two main categories.
One consisted of the peoples of the forest and tundra, who chiefly relied upon reindeer skins for their clothing and shelter, and obtained their food by hunting game with spears, and bows and arrows, by fishing and by gathering nuts, berries and roots.
Such were, for instance, the Khantys and Mansis, the Tungus (Evenki and Even), the Sarnoeds (Nenets, Enets and Nganasans), and the Yukagirs.
The other group consisted of horse and cattle-herding peoples of the steppes and mountain pastures of the southern margin of Siberia who, while wearing animal-skin garments in winter, were also well acquainted with textiles.
These included the Buryat Mongols, the Turkic peoples of the Altai-Sayan mountains, and the west Siberian Tatars.
This division reflects one of several points of contrast between the Siberian natives and those of northern North America.
Before the advent of the Europeans the latter lacked any contact with more ‘advanced’ cultures (except in so far as the influence of the Aztecs and other peoples of Central America may have percolated northward), whereas Siberia, as part of the ‘Old World’cultural complex, was subject to many influences (however remote) from the great civilizations of Eurasia.
Above all this meant China, but also included Persia, since the nomadic pastoralists of the steppes (who had their own, sophisticated equestrian culture) carried elements of these cultures to the northern forest peoples.
As a result, metal-working (which was hardly developed at all in North American native cultures) was widespread in Siberia from the second millennium BC, and long before the seventeenth century AD all its indigenous peoples either worked iron themselves or used artefacts made of the precious metal when these could be obtained by trade.
Nevertheless, for many Siberian communities wood, stone and bone remained the principal materials for making tools and weapons.
There were few exceptions to the rule that the peoples of Siberia were illiterate before the Russians came.
Only the west Siberian Tatars, as Muslims in touch with Bukhara and other Islamic centres of Central Asia, were familiar with Koranic Arabic, while the Buryat Mongols east of Lake Baikal used classical Mongolian, written since the thirteenth century in a vertical script, and later, as a result of conversion to Buddhism in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, received its scriptures in Tibetan.
Lack of writing, however, did not mean the absence of creative composition in words: in every native community recitation was prized, and oral traditions, often partly historical, were highly developed, as, for example, in the Yakut epics known as olonkho .
So far as observation and knowledge of the world is concerned, the beliefs of the northern peoples have been dismissed equally by the Russian Orthodox Church and by the Communists as benighted superstition which imprisoned them mentally in a fear of evil spirits.
Nevertheless, even if their cosmology, like that of all religions, was expressed in fantastic terms, the Siberian  natives, like the ‘primitive’ peoples of any land, had a rational enough view of the world which surrounded them, in addition to a wealth of practical knowledge about the forest and its fauna, and about crafts and hunting techniques.
Nor did they lack ethical principles — contrary to much biased misunderstanding on the part of Russians with their Christian European prejudices, especially in the field of sexual mores.
One of the most striking social norms of all the hunting peoples was sharing of the spoils of the hunt among all members of the community, even if they had played no part in the hunt — a practice to which the Evenki term nimat is often applied.
Even Russian Communists, who dismiss most of the traditional aspects of mutual assistance within the clan as concealed exploitation of the poor by the rich, can find little to condemn in this indubitable manifestation of ‘primitive communism’.
It is generally accepted that most of the Siberian peoples were organized in clans, each of which traced descent from a common ancestor, and that marriage within this kinship group was forbidden.
Thus the system of exogamy prevailed, according to which a bride had to be obtained from another clan, ‘bride-price’ and dowry being given according to an agreement between the parents.
Awareness of belonging to one's clan — involving such obligations as mutual assistance and blood vengeance — was an important fact of life for all Siberian native peoples, except those of the extreme north-east — the Koryaks, Chukchis and Eskimos.
The Chukchis in particular had no social unit greater than the extended family, and social coherence was achieved by neighbour association and (as also among the Nivkhs of the Amur) by ‘group marriage’, in which friends shared each other 's wives.
In the far north-east and Karnchatka a common marriage practice was the residence of the husband in the family of his bride for a certain period of time, in order to pay for her by performing work for the family.
Throughout Siberia (and indeed the European north as well), with the partial exception of the Muslim Tatar fringe in the west, the religion of shamanism was universal.
Much has been written about the ritual practices, accoutrements, and spiritual calling of the shaman , who functioned as priest, soothsayer and healer.
The most conspicuous aspect of the shaman's ministry was his performance or dance (known in Russian as kamlanie , from the Turkic word kam ‘shaman’— the word shaman itself being the Tungus term).
During this, the shaman wore a special coat, often elaborately embellished with symbolic designs, trailing thongs, bells and iron pendants in the form of birds or chain ‘snakes’.
On his head was a special headdress of deerskin and feathers, and sometimes a metal crown bearing antlers or a bird effigy.
Beating a similarly ornamented one-sided drum with a fur-covered stick, the shaman chanted and danced with increasing frenzy until  he fell down in a trance.
In this state his spirit was said to fly to the other world of spirits and there discover the cause of and cure for a person's illness, the identity of a malefactor, or the nature of events destined to occur.
Shamans also used kamlanie to invoke the good will of spirits for such communal activities as hunting or warfare.
For long the shaman was treated in Marxist-Leninist writings as a mere charlatan who exploited the ignorance of his fellows in order to extort high fees for his services.
In recent years, however, a less simplified and more generous interpretation has emerged, as noted, for instance, by Syroechkovskii: ‘It is now clear beyond doubt that shamans were usually quite poor individuals, who stood out by reason of their intelligence or personality, and their authority was normally based upon this’.
The shaman's journey to the land of the spirits is one manifestation of the animist religion of the Siberian native peoples.
Their general reverence for nature spirits as the ‘masters’ of forest, rivers, mountains, and so on, took a very characteristic form in the cult of the supreme animal — for most Siberian peoples the brown bear.
Although respect for the bear did not preclude killing it, due apology had to be made, and strict rules governed the disposal of its carcass.
Consequently the bear-feast — ubiquitous in Siberia — was on the one hand a communal enjoyment of the cooked flesh of the animal, but on the other hand a sacred ritual intended to placate the bear-spirit and ensure that, while the dead animal would live again, its spirit would not seek vengeance on those who had killed it.
In general, blood sacrifice was the principal religious rite of all Siberian peoples, the animal sacrificed being that which played the most important part in daily life.
Thus most forest and tundra peoples sacrificed reindeer, but it was a dog which was killed (and eaten) by those peoples (Nanai, Ulcha, Nivkh and Koryak) who used dog-teams for transport, while the sacrificial animal of the Buryats, Yakuts and other Turkic peoples was the horse.
While idealization of, or sentimentality about, the way of life of primitive peoples must be avoided, there seems to be no doubt that among the Siberian peoples in their original state a certain harmony with nature existed, if only as a reflection of the unavoidable conditions in which they lived.
These conditions embraced the realities of survival in an often hostile environment, and the mysteries of birth and death.
Living meant constant activity to obtain food, shelter and clothing, and the way of life was an integrated one in which work was not distinguished from leisure, and every activity contributed towards the survival of the individual and the community.
On this basis the Siberian peoples achieved a certain balance with nature.
While they were at the mercy of erratic weather or changes in the migration routes of reindeer, so that they might suffer famine from time to time, they were generally well fed, more or less comfortably adapted to their environment, and enjoyed a surplus of resources sufficient to allow expenditure of time on the decoration of clothing and utensils on story-telling and dancing.
Their weapons were simple but not crude, and their clothing was meticulously.
formed and finished.
As C. S. Coon has pointed out in regard to the world's hunting peoples in general compared with urbanized people:
Hunters live and work mostly out of doors.
Their senses are acute and, like their bodies, well exercised.
Their schedules and routines are seldom monotonous, but often adventurous.
Their craftsmanship has to be accurate, for their success is at stake.
In contrast with ‘overspecialized, overmechanized urban society, where the world of adults is sharply divided from that of children, those in hunting communities share in all adult activities and learn skills by example.
Even if their way of life was uncomfortable by modern standards of luxury, the peoples of northern Asia in their original state, like other hunting peoples, ‘had the energy, hardihood, and ingenuity to live and live well’.
Their lives, in short, were not spent in misery before the Russians came among them.
This basic fact should be borne in mind when reading ideologically biased accounts of the benefits following upon Russian occupation for, in the words of the same writer on the hunting peoples, ‘In every well-documented instance, cases of hardship may be traced to the intervention of modern intruders.’
The Russians came among the Siberian peoples in the late sixteenth century from two directions, which subsequently became established as the main regular routes.
The northern (and earlier) approach was by passes across the Ural mountains to the lower reaches of the river Obn and thence down the Ob Gulf by boat to the mouth of the Tazn which was ascended as far as a portage to the lower Yenisei; from there they followed an eastward course up the Lower Tunguska river, crossing a portage to the Vilyui and so to the Lena.
The more southerly route lay across a gap in the Urals to the Irtysh and thence, after the Tatar khanate had been defeated, up the middle Ob and its tributaries, such as the Ket, to where a portage led to the middle reaches of the Yenisei; from here they ascended the Upper (or ‘Stony’) Tunguska as far as the Ilim, and so either by portage to the Lena or up the Angara towards Lake Baikal.
In many ways a parallel can be drawn between this river-borne Russian penetration and conquest of Siberian with its combination of raiding and trading, and the invasion of the original land of the Slavs by the Varangians eight centuries before.
Unlike the Scandinavian seafarers, however, the sixteenth-century Russians enjoyed an enormous military advantage over  the indigenous people they encountered by having guns, and in addition they had behind them the organized power of the centralized state of Muscovy.
In terms of military conquest, a considerable difference existed between the conditions encountered in the north and the south of Siberia.
In the latter — the steppe and woodlands inhabited by Tatars, Altaians, Kirgiz, Buryats and Mongols — the Russians had to wage war against formidable enemies who were not only capable of putting up resistance to incursions into their territories, but also able to obtain support from the larger communities of Turkic-Mongol peoples to whom they were related.
The steppe frontier from the Urals to the Altai was thus by no means‘open’ to the Russians.
The west Siberian Tatars of the Khanate of Sibir were subjugated or dispersed among the steppe nomads, but the presence of the latter (particularly the Kazakhs and Oirats) obliged the Russians to maintain fortified ‘lines’ in the south for over two hundred years (see Chapter 3).
farther east, Russian campaigns against the Buryats around the southern end of Lake Baikal went on from the 1630s to the 1680s, causing great turmoil as some Buryat and Mongol tribes withdrew to Mongolia, or were buffeted back and forward between the two aggressive empires.
of Russia and China.
At the farthest end of Russia's Inner Asian frontier, the Chinese, under the Ching (Manchu) dynasty, confronted the Russians on the Amur and put an end to their episodic marauding and colonizing activities around the fort of Albazin.
The Russians were pushed back northwards to the Stanovoi mountains, where the frontier fixed in 1689 by the Treaty of Nerchinsk was recognized until the nineteenth century.
The smaller peoples of Siberian living as they did in more or less dispersed clan communities or nomadic bands, also resisted the Russian conquerors wherever they could.
Nevertheless, they were forced into submission, in the first place by a demonstration of the killing power of firearms.
Thereafter they were obliged to register as payers of fur-tribute (for which the Russians used the Tatar term yasak ).
One of the means used to enforce this was the imposition of an oath (shen ) by which the shamanist natives invoked the wrath of the spirits upon themselves if they broke their undertaking to the Russians.
The other, more effective means, was the taking of hostages: chiefs or other tribesmen and their wives or children were seized and imprisoned in Russian forts as a guarantee of submission and tribute-payment on the part of their compatriots.
The most ruthless campaigns against northern peoples who refused to submit appear to have taken place in the east — perhaps because there the proximity of the Okhotsk coast, and the mountainous terrain, left fewer possibilities open for escape from the Russian soldiers.
The ‘Lamuts’(Even Tungus) of the Okhotsk region fought hard to preserve their freedom, while in Kamchatka the Itelmens, whose conquest did not begin until the early  eighteenth century, were subjected to genocidal slaughter by troops using the up-to-date weapons of Peter the Great's military machine: muskets and hand grenades.
The most determined resistance of all was put up by the Koryaks and Chukchis of the north-east, who faced a fierce and explicitly genocidal Russian campaign up to the 1750s.
Eventually this policy was abandoned because it was unprofitable for the Russian state treasury, and from then until the early twentieth century the Chukchis had the distinction of being recognized as ‘not completely subdued’, and were left largely to their own devices.
While the main west-to-east movement in the occupation of Siberia was accomplished by the first half of the eighteenth century, the frontiers of the Russian Empire continued to be pushed forward in various directions, thus bringing more peoples under its control.
One important direction of expansion was southward into the Altai-Sayan mountain region on the border of Mongolia, where the Russian town of Kuznetsk was for long an outpost threatened from west, south and east by the ‘White Kalmyksn (Teleuts and other Altaian tribes), the Oirats or western Mongols, and the Chinese.
Intermittent warfare from the 1620s to the 1750s ended with the incorporation into the Russian Empire of many tribes speaking Turkic languages.
These included the Kachan Kyzyl, Sagai, Koibal, Beltir and Shor tribes of the upper Yenisei basin (the ‘Minusinsk Tatars’) and the Altai Kizhin Telengit, Teleut, Tölös, Kurnandan Tuba, and Chelkan, living between the Irtysh and the Yenisei, who are nowadays grouped together under the common name ‘Altaians’.
Russian expansion in the far East during the nineteenth century also involved the annexation of territory belonging to China, which lay in the Amur basin and the ‘Maritime’ region between the Ussuri river and the Sea of Japan.
In addition to nomadic Tungus clans and the semi-nomadic Nanai, Ulcha, Udeghe, Nivkh and other small ethnic communities, this brought under the Russian flag considerable numbers of Han Chinese and Koreans who had migrated into these regions as seasonal labourers and agricultural settlers.
During the nineteenth century the absolute number of indigenous Siberians remained approximately the same as at the end of the eighteenth century, but their proportion in the total population of some five million fell to about 14 per cent.
While the native people were fairly evenly distributed across Siberia from west to east (but with a greater concentration in the south than in the north), the distribution of the incomer population from west of the Urals was always very uneven.
In the nineteenth century about 70 per cent of all Siberia's ‘Russians’ lived in the three most westerly provinces (Tobolsk, Tomsk and Yeniseisk), while only 30 per cent lived in the eastern half of Siberia.
There was an even greater variation  in the various regions between the number of natives and of incomers.
By the beginning of the twentieth century the latter made up about 90 per cent of the population of the three western provinces, and between 60 and 85 per cent of Irkutsk, Transbaikal and Amur provinces, but in the enormous Yakutsk province and the far north-east it was still the non-Russian indigenous population which predominated, in a proportion of 13:1.
One of the major preoccupations of Soviet Russian ethnic historians, obliged to work within the framework of Marxist-Leninist dogma, is to define the level of social-political evolution which the peoples of Siberia had reached by the sixteenth century in terms of Marx's five universal stages.
Not surprisingly, it was among the southern, pastoral peoples that social stratification had developed by that time, so that the label ‘feudal’ is attached, for instance, to the Buryat Mongols and the Tatars.
The precise stage reached by the Yakuts remains more controversial, but Soviet historians generally agree that their tribal society was already decaying, so that the Russians found a community with marked class differences.
Among the smaller northern peoples there was no tribal aristocracy, chiefs only being chosen temporarily for specific purposes such as war.
They are considered to have been ‘primitive-communal’ societies based on the clan (rod .)
In some cases, however, such as the Khanty and Mansin the accepted view is that even before their subjection to the Russians their clan system was in decline and ‘feudal’ relations were developing, with the emergence of princes and social inequality.
Whatever stage of development any of the peoples of Siberia had reached, the occupation of their land by the Russians had a profound effect, either setting off entirely new social developments or accelerating trends which were already present.
One of the principal ways in which the Russian state undermined native culture was by purchasing the collaboration of chiefs, where they existed, or could be arbitrarily designated.
This led to the development of personal privilege and wealth as these native collaborators colluded in the exploitation of their compatriots.
The indigenous way of life was greatly undermined by the burden of yasak, which diverted men from the essential hunting pursuits that provided food, clothing and other necessities, to the trivial occupation of hunting and trapping sable, arctic fox, squirrels and other fur-bearing animals.
These were demanded relentlessly by the Russian government and by traders because of their commercial value, but they contributed nothing to the natural economy of the natives.
Eventually this perversion of the natives, way of life led to their dependence upon Russian provisions — grain, bread, sugar, tea, and tobacco.
Another key element in Russian culture was alcohol, the  unscrupulous introduction of which to the unsophisticated natives by traders led in many cases to addiction, loss of the means of livelihood and eventual pauperization.
Colonies have always given scope to adventurers from the metropolis who have enjoyed irresponsible power over the natives, whether as administrators, police officials, soldiers, traders, or settlers (even if these were of the peasant class).
Along with this power went a contemptuous attitude towards the natives as a ‘lower race’.
Such attitudes were familiar, for instance, in British imperial possessions in African India and American and there is no evidence that the Russian colonialists differed to any degree.
In fact, the supposed readiness of Russians to ‘accept’ baptized or otherwise assimilated natives as Russians is in itself a manifestation of the national arrogance of the Russians, which eventually engendered a sense of inferiority among many of the indigenous peoples.
Meanwhile the latter were looked upon by most Russian settlers as fair game to be preyed upon in a variety of ways.
Before the Russians came there was no landownership in Siberian although rights to the use of hunting-grounds, fishing-grounds and pastures were respected by tradition or asserted by force.
Under Russian rule many native communities were deprived of such rights by sheer seizure of land (zakhvat ) or by forfeiting territory as a result of pernicious debtor-contracts into which they had been duped by unscrupulous settlers.
Another direct result of conquest by force of arms was the development of slavery, which was widespread up to the beginning of the nineteenth century.
The native slaves owned by Russians of all social classes were in the first place either prisoners-of-war or women and children captured after the men of a native community had been killed.
Inevitably soldiers, officials and traders operating far from their home base needed women, so that the taking of native ‘wives’, either voluntarily or by force, was common, and prostitution, which had been unknown in traditional culture, also appeared.
The general effect of widespread miscegenation was, as in North American the creation of large number of métis , many of whom became assimilated into the ‘Russian’ population of Siberia.
An involuntary, but major, effect of Russian intrusion among the Siberian peoples was the introduction of diseases which were endemic in European Russia but, apparently, were unknown in northern Asia.
The most virulent of these were smallpox and measles, epidemics of which are noted in Russian colonial records from the 1630s onwards.
Up to the middle of the seventeenth century they overran only western Siberia where, for instance, the number of Kets is said to have been reduced by half.
Similar outbreaks spread east of the Yenisei in the 1650s, carrying away up to 80 per cent of the northern Tungus and Yakuts, while a widespread epidemic in the  1690s reduced the Yukagirs by 44 per cent.
The Buryats are known to have suffered several epidemics in the middle of the eighteenth century, and later it was the Itelmens of Kamchatka who were reduced by almost two-thirds.
In the nineteenth century these diseases ravaged the most remote populations: the Nganasans and Dolgans of Taimyr from the 1830s, the Chukchis and Koryaks of the far north-east in the 1880s.
A more problematic infection which has been attributed to the Russians was the spread of syphilis, especially among the Nenets Samoeds.
These drastic reductions in population through disease must have been restored quickly; otherwise they are difficult to reconcile with the overall growth in numbers of indigenous people mentioned above.
Through the ideological prism of Marxist historicism some Soviet Russian historians see ample justification for the Russians, intrusion into the lives of the Siberian natives in the benefits of civilization which the latter are deemed to have received.
These include their being brought out of geographical and cultural isolation into the sphere of a ‘higher’(that is, Russian-European) culture.
No doubt the material culture of the Russians was more highly developed than that of most Siberian peoples, in so far as they built log houses with wooden floors, windows and stoves; wore clothing made of textiles woven from linen, hemp or wool; used steam-baths; were able to shoot game (and people) more efficiently with bullets than with arrows; used vessels made of ceramics or metal; provided themselves with grain and vegetables where natural conditions permitted, and so on.
On the spiritual side it was at one time also considered self-evident that the Russians, adherence to the Christian religion put them automatically on a higher plane than the heathen, raw-flesh-eating ‘savages’.
In reality, however, the Russians'’ higher, culture was represented in the seventeenth and eighteenth century by soldiers (men of service) and colonial administrators out for personal gain, and by peasants, whose building-tools were of the simplest — the axe, gouge and spokeshave (although they could do wonders with these).
The settlers' attempts at agriculture were frustrated, except on the southern steppe frontier, by frozen subsoil and the sub-arctic climate, and as they were carried out by the primitive ‘slash-and-burn’ method, were highly destructive of the forest environment.
Even with regard to the Russians, superiority in weaponry, the high cost of firearms, powder and lead, not to mention the unreliability of early firearms, restricted their use.
Even in the European North many peasants used old flintlocks right up to the first decades of the twentieth century, and in Siberia the use of bows and spears by Russians was not unknown at least as late as the 1830s.
The high cost of transporting goods from European Russia made the Russians of Siberian like the Mongolian and Turkic peoples of its southern regions, largely dependent upon textiles imported from that other centre of high culture — China.
If the economic and social backwardness of the Russian metropolis itself is often invoked to justify the reforms of Peter the Great or the 1917 Revolution, the state of affairs in its vast eastern colony was inevitably much worse in many respects.
So far as ethical standards are concerned, the history of armed conquest, yasak extortion, and unscrupulous exploitation by the Russians, speaks for itself, while the conversion of the natives to Orthodox Christianity was mainly a superficial phenomenon induced by threats or material bribes.
In any case the ignorance and superstition of the Russians themselves was notorious.
Even in regions much closer to the centre of Orthodoxy in Moscow, belief in the powers of wizards was still strong in the early twentieth century, let alone the seventeenth.
In the remoteness of Siberia the doctrines of Christianity became very attenuate and distorted, and Russian settlers quite often resorted to the services of shamans — or indeed ‘went native’ altogether.
Thus, if on the one hand the ‘civilizing’ role of the Russians in Siberia should not be belittled, neither should too much credence be given to nationalistic claims put forward in Russian accounts of the subject, whether before or after the 1917 Revolution.
The many types of indigenous culture which existed in Siberia fall into approximately nine groups.
The classic type of pastoral nomadism was practised by the peoples of the south-central region between the river Irtysh and the Xingan mountains of Manchurian namely, the Turkic tribes of the Altai, Minusinsk and Sayan steppe-lands, including some Kazakhs, and the Buryats and other Mongols south of Lake Baikal.
Migrating from pasture to pasture with their herds of horses, cattle and other animals, they lived in a type of portable home (ger ) consisting of a circular framework covered with felt (which the Russians incorrectly called yuna ).
Their costume reflected Mongolian and Chinese affinities, with coats always wrapped over to the right, having a band of decoration down the right edge, and soft leathern thick-soled boots.
West of the Irtysh in the woodlands along the northern edge of the Kazkh steppe lived the west Siberian Tatars and their neighbours in the Ural foothills, the Bashkirs.
These had originally also been nomadic pastoralists, but even by the time of the Russian conquest were partly settled and engaged in agriculture around the Tatar towns such as Tara and Tyumen.
Here they abandoned the ger in favour of fixed houses ranging from wattle-and-daub huts in the Baraba steppe to log cabins heated by their own type of open stoven the chuval .
At the other extremity of southern Siberia, a number of peoples on the lower reaches of the Amur river, such as the Nanais, Ulchas, Udeghes and Nivkhs, as well as the Itelmens and the Ainu of Kamchatkan lived in the  forest, moving between winter and summer villages, making much use of dugout or plank-built boats, and feeding themselves largely by catching fish.
Their homes ranged from the large subterranean winter lodges of the Nivkhs to light summer huts of branches, reeds and bark which in some cases were raised on stilts.
from the seventeenth century onwards a version of the Manchurian house with hypocausts became widespread among the peoples of the Amur.
Here too Chinese influence was apparent in the left-to-right wrap-over outer garment, the shallow conical hat and cotton trousers, and the scroll patterns used for the decoration of clothing and utensils.
All of these far Eastern peoples used dog-teams to draw their sledges.
Dog transport was also the norm among the settled coastal Koryaks, Chukchis and Eskimos of the arctic regions of the extreme north-east, whose main source of food was walrus, seals and whales, to hunt which they ventured out on the cold arctic waters in boats made of walrus hide.
A quite different (but economically interdependent) way of life supported the Chukchis and Koryaks of the interior, who roamed the tundra with reindeer herds.
Their homes were large tents (yarangas ) with partitioned-off sleeping quarters heated by means of seal-oil lamps.
Originally the coastal Eskimos, Chukchis and Koryaks lived in subterranean lodges like those of the Nivkhs.
All the peoples of the far north-east wore two-layer deerskin clothing, the men having a jerkin pulled over the head, while women wore a combination garment.
Among the peoples of the north the Yakuts were unique in having a way of life based upon cattle and horses which, like their Turkic language, betrayed their origins in the steppes of Mongolia.
Milk products typical of nomadic pastoralists formed the mainstay of their diet.
Their summer homes were large conical structures consisting of poles and bark, and in winter they moved into turf-covered timber ledges heated by open stoves.
Craftsmanship in wood, leathern iron and silver was quite highly developed among the Yakuts in the seventeenth century, and they were almost the only north Siberian people to make pottery.
The immediate neighbours of the Yakuts were the Tungus (now known as Evenkis and Evens).
They were the classic forest hunters of Siberian whose family bands moved from place to place, camping in conical, deerskin-covered tents, the most common type of nomadic dwelling in the north, to which the Russians applied the Komi term chum .
Like most peoples of the forest and tundra, the Tungus depended for their livelihood upon herds of domesticated reindeer, their use of which had several specific features.
They did not harness the deer to sledges but transported goods on their backs and rode on them, and they milked the does.
A similar way of life was followed by the Turkic-speaking peoples of the Sayan mountains known by two variants of the same clan name as Tuva and Tubalar  (or Tofalar).
The forest Tungus wore deerskin clothing consisting of long, supple leggings, a loin-cloth, and an edge-to-edge coat with a separate bodice to fill in its open front.
On the other hand, the ‘Horse Tungus, of the Mongolian borderland, like the related Oroch and Negidal peoples of the lower Amur, adopted the Mongolian wrap-over coat of deerskin or quilted material.
West of the Yenisei, the fishing and hunting economy of the Mansin Khanty, Selkup and Ket peoples was largely based upon the use of dugout or plank boats, in which they navigated the numerous rivers, lakes and marshes of the Ob basin.
Their winter homes were log cabins, either free-standing or half sunk in the earth and covered with turf.
In summer they lived in conical tents or huts roofed with birch-bark, and sometimes on houseboats similar in appearance to the Chinese sampan.
The transport animal in the middle Ob and Yenisei regions was originally the dog, but its use to pull sledges was on a primitive level, and only the Khantys and Mansis sometimes harnessed dogs in teams.
Much of the clothing of the forest peoples of western Siberia was made of cloth woven from nettle or linen fibre, but garments were also made from the skins of deer, fish or birds.
The way of life of the northern Samoeds of western Siberian now known as Nenets and Enets, was, like that of the Tungus, centred upon reindeer herding.
The design of their various types of sledge, and their use of deer teams was highly sophisticated, but their reindeer were never ridden, nor were the does milked.
In the arctic conditions of the forest margin and tundra, pullover parkas of deerskin, along with deerskin boots and fur caps, were worn by Nenets men, while women wore long wrap-over fur coats.
A different, and more primitive, form of reindeer culture existed among the Samoed people of the Taimyr Peninsula who were known to the Russians in the seventeenth century as Tavgi (today's Nganasan), and the Yukagirs who at that time occupied a very large area of arctic Siberia east of the river Lena.
While each family possessed a few reindeer for harnessing to sledges, they had no herds, and depended entirely upon hunting wild deer, which they followed or waylaid on their seasonal migrations.
food, clothing, and covers for their conical pole-tents were all obtained from the kill, and fish and birds were also caught for food.
Because of the roughness of the ground in Taimyr the Tavgi were the only Siberian people who did not use skis.
Neither the locations of the native peoples outlined above, nor their ethnic and cultural features, remained static during the period from the late sixteenth to the nineteenth century.
Considerable physical migration took place — mostly, but not entirely, caused by the activities of the Russians — and some peoples were reduced in numbers almost to vanishing point, while on the other hand at least one new ethno-cultural group was formed.
The principal directions of movement discussed below are indicated on map 5. 1.
The Russians themselves, along with other people from west of the Urals, settled most densely in a zone approximately 400 to 700 kilometres widen following the main land route across southern Siberia, with particularly large wedges near the Urals and between Omsk and Krasnoyarsk, where by the late nineteenth century practically no native people remained except for widely scattered villages of Tatars.
It was as a result of the Russian advance across the Urals that many Mansis and Khantys moved away from their homes, the latter crossing the Ob into the middle part of its basin, while some of the Selkups who had lived on the Ob, as well as Kets on the Yenisei, moved off to the north.
In their northward migration toward the tundra these peoples encountered the Nenets Samoeds and adopted many features of their reindeer-herding way of life, so that a northern type of Khantyn Selkup and Ket culture developed.
The Samoeds themselves, put into turmoil by the Russian invasion, moved partly to the north-east, where beyond the estuary of the Yenisei the separate Enets people became established.
Meanwhile the southern groups of Samoeds and Kets in the upper Yenisei and Sayan regions disappeared, having been assimilated by the Russian, Tungus, Buryat or Turkic peoples.
The most important change in this region from the Russian point of view was the withdrawal of the Yenisei Kirgiz to Dzhungaria, which enabled the Russians to complete the subjugation of the Minusinsk ‘Tatars’ and the Altaians.
farther east on the southern frontier, the wars against the Buryats caused great turmoil up to the end of the seventeenth century, when the back-and-forth migrations of Buryat and Mongol clans was brought to an end by the closing of the frontier between the Russian Empire and Chinese ‘Outer Mongolia’.
East of Lake Baikal several clans of Evenki Tungus who had formerly herded reindeer went over to horseriding and were partly assimilated to the Buryats, especially in the context of native cossack units.
To the north-west of Lake Baikal it was the Evenkis who absorbed Ket people as they advanced westward to the Yenisei and beyond.
Other Evenki clans sought to avoid subjection to the Russians by moving north of the Angara, and some of these also crossed the Yenisei into Nenets territory.
farther to the north-east, in Taimyr, it was the influx of Evenkis and Yakuts into land inhabited by Tavgi Samoeds that led to complex ethnic mixing and the emergence of the new nationality known as Dolgans.
This name comes from one of the Tungus clans, but their language is a dialect of Yakut.
As a result of this intrusion the Nganasans were pushed farther north into  the tundra, and a lasting enmity between them and the Dolgans was created.
This was only one of the many directions in which the Yakut people spread from their homeland on the Lena.
Even before the advent of the Russians some Yakuts had established themselves far to the north on the river Yana, where the Russian fort of Verkhoyansk was founded.
As they adapted themselves to reindeer-herding and continued to expand towards the north-east, the Yakuts absorbed the original Yukagir inhabitants of the tundra as far east as the Kolyma river.
far from being crushed as a nation by the Russian conquest, the Yakuts succeeded in adapting to the ways of their conquerors and extended their own influence over their Tungus and Yukagir neighbours, not to mention the Russians themselves.
As a result, in the nineteenth century a national region which could fairly be called Yakutia extended over 1,6000 kilometres from the Vilyui river to the Kolyma and nearly as far from the middle Lena to the shores of the Arctic Ocean.
The other self-assertive people of eastern Siberia were the Chukchis who, despite the Russian campaigns of the eighteenth century, advanced far beyond their original homeland in the farthest corner of the north-east into the territory of the Yukagirs, whom they absorbed.
Thus the Yukagirs almost disappeared as a people, partly through assimilation to their stronger neighbours, and partly because of the disruption of the whole Yukagir community by the recruitment of their menfolk as native auxiliaries in the Russian campaigns against other native peoples, such as the Lamuts or Even Tungus of the Okhotsk seaboard.
Other peoples which virtually disappeared from the map as a result of Russian colonialism were the Itelmens of Kamchatka and, eventually, their southern neighbours the Ainu.
The latter, a uniquely interesting people distinct from all their neighbours both physically and culturally, were driven out of the Kuril Islands and Sakhalin by the Russo-Japanese territorial conflicts which began in the nineteenth century.
Lastly, the sad record of colonialism in the far north-east includes the name of the Aleuts, who were largely annihilated by the Russians during the latters' trans-Pacific adventure in pursuit of sea-otter furs.
It is not surprising that the general trends for the indigenous population of the Russian colony of Siberia from the seventeenth to the nineteenth century were that some individuals, mainly ‘chiefs’ or traders, adapted to the ways of their conquerors and became successful according to the standards of Russian society, while the mass of their compatriots, exploited by the Russian system and lacking any means of redress, fell increasingly into poverty and degradation.
It was because of this, along with the commonplaces of fashionable racial theory, that most educated Russians at the beginning of the twentieth century were convinced that practically all the smaller peoples of Siberia were irrevocably doomed to extinction.