

THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF THE ANCIEN RÉGIME THE most reassuring explanation for the failure of liberal revolution in Spain is that political change was unaccompanied by those social and economic changes that give to political revolution its substance.
The black legend of a closed society, proud in its resistance to modern ideas, is transposed from the spheres of intellectual intractability into the lower regions of economic necessity; lack of capital, the persistence of artisan attitudes in industry, and routine in agriculture become the causes of liberal failure; the wooden plough, the sickle, the earth threshing floor, and the wood-fired blast furnace become its symbols.
It would nevertheless be misleading to take a vision of an unchanging Spain, foisted on Europe by the literary travellers of the Romantic movement, as the key to her history.
The social and economic changes of the nineteenth century were often dramatic and far reaching; but they were sporadic in incidence, a characteristic that was to produce economic imbalance and to  underlie civil war.
Thus by 1930, when a Roman would still have felt at home on an Andalusian estate, Catalonia contained some of the largest textile concerns in Europe and the immigrant labour, which poured into the Catalan towns in order to escape the wretchedness of rural life, brought into the labour movements of a modern industrial civilization the millenarian tradition of peasants and landless labourers.
Sharp contrast between regions of movement and regions of quiescence is not peculiar to Spain: in Italy the problem of the static south, ill-united with the progressive north, was as distressing as the comparable tensions in Spain between the unmoving centre and the developing periphery.
Even within one region economic and social change was not uniform but a fugue in which old voices do not cease to sound when new voices enter.
A conservative peasantry worked within sight of  the mines and blast furnaces of the north and the textile mills of Catalonia; a primitive society, local markets and local customs persisted, emphasized by the size of the country and the inadequacies of road and railway.
Probably not until the 1920'S were the old ways challenged all over Spain; then local tools vanish before factory products; local dresses and dances become conscious folk-lore; doctors begin to win the battle against village quacks; the lorry — vehicle of progress, especially to remote regions — replaces the donkey and the mule.
This coexistence of change and resistance owes something to the limits set by nature.
In an agricultural society poor soil conditions, often the consequence of centuries of abusive cultivation, together with the amount and nature of the rainfall, set bounds to the possibilities of progress.
Throughout the eighteenth and most of the nineteenth centuries the myth of a decline from former prosperity tended to conceal these limits and it was not until the 1890's that a first and very approximate calculation of her agricultural potential radically reversed the notion of a nation richly endowed by nature.
As it happened, these estimates were unduly pessimistic.
Nevertheless they made plain the painful contrast between the limited ‘privileged’ areas — the deep black soils of the Guadalquivir or the market gardens and orange groves of Valencia — and the parched, thin limestone and granite soils of the central tableland.
The crucial division is that which separates wet and dry Spain.
Except where aridity can be countered by irrigation, low rainfall tends to monoculture and social instability or to the poorest type of cereal farming.
Where rainfall is adequate soil is frequently bad: hence the rain-soaked, acid fields in parts of Galicia.
In those areas where rain falls seldom, it  falls in torrents, rarely in the summer months, on skeletal, degenerate soils poor in humus; they can retain no moisture and the thin covering of earth is readily swept away.
Possibly more than half the soils in the semi-arid regions are subject to severe erosion.
Once the vegetational cover of the hard schists was destroyed they could not easily be restored to cultivation.
The mixed forest and holm oaks which, it has been assumed, once covered much of the peninsula have gone.
Around the semi-arid core lie the green belt of the Cantabrian west and the favoured irrigated regions of the Mediterranean littoral.
In a few miles the traveller passes from the summer droughts and deserts of Africa to the climate of northern Europe.
‘The north western provinces’, observed Richard Ford, ‘are more rainy than Devonshire, while the centre plains are more calcined than those of the deserts of Arabia, and the littoral south or eastern coasts altogether Algerian’.
The main characteristic, therefore, of Spanish agriculture is its startling diversity: it ranges from wheat lands with the lowest yields in Europe to the richest of irrigated gardens.
Galicia is an area of minute holdings; from Santander, through the Basque provinces, Navarre, and Pyrenean Aragon to Catalonia stretches a band of small proprietors enjoying relatively secure tenures; to the south lie the medium and small cereal farms of Castile and Léon and the remnants of a once great sheep economy; in the deep south, reaching into Estremadura and New Castile, stretch the latifundia worked by day labourers; along the Levante coast small proprietors or tenants produce from carefully irrigated huertas specialized export crops.
In the mid nineteenth century, Fermin Caballero attempted to divide agricultural Spain into three parts: the Cantabrian regions, where the hard-working race of ‘gothic’ small farmers had survived to create a stable peasant economy; the basins of the Guadiana, the Guadalquivir, and Aragon, where the economic legacy of the Arab conquest was the latifundia; the centre, where the two races had mingled and left an intermediary, medium-sized farm.
Such divisions exclude striking exceptions and no ‘region’ is homogeneous; thus water will produce a huerta in a predominantly dry cereal region.
Estremadura, often considered as one vast scrub pasture, has  always contained valuable irrigated regions now devoted to market gardening, cotton, and tobacco.
The ‘bizarre confusions’ of the regions of Spain were the delight of nineteenth-century novelists and the despair of reformers in search of‘general legislation which can apply to all the provinces of the monarchy.’
1.
The Land
Travellers, taking the main road from Paris to Madrid, entered Spain through the steep green hills of the Basque Provinces; returning thither from the burnt highlands of Castile they were ‘revived by the sight of a rich studied culture, a clean-looking smiling people, good furniture, neat houses, fine woods, good roads and safe bridges’.
It is an indication of the slow decline of central Spain that these provinces, once dismissed as a poor region, were now considered as a fortunate Spanish Switzerland where Homeric simplicity was relieved by a certain luxury in eating and drinking.
All agreed in attributing this prosperity to the family farm: the homestead caserío was praised by every agricultural reformer in contrast to the settlement more typical of Spain — the agrarian village or small town in which the cultivator lived far from his fields.
In Guipúzcoa, Biscay, and northern Navarre these scattered homesteads gave the countryside the appearance of one vast village.
This disseminated type of settlement, in hamlets and isolated farms, had as its foundation the ten-acre holding preserved by inheritance laws that kept the farm, with its distinctive name, as a unit within the family.
In Basque law the farm could be left to any child — even a daughter — while co-heirs were bought out: this encouraged emigration of younger sons (the rich returned ‘Indian’ was a feature of Basque life) and thus mitigated some of the evils of rural over-population.
Not until the twentieth century did the increase in population force an uneconomic division of farms and seriously threaten Basque rural prosperity.
Beggars, the mark of over-populated underemployed Spain, were rare in an egalitarian society where the peasant held his land on a secure tenure and at a low rent; where the hold of the anarchic nobility had long been destroyed; where it was socially impossible to evict; and where women were the social and legal equals of men.
Such a society could work the traditional institutions of local government enshrined in the fiercely defended regional laws — the fueros .
There were few conflicts within this rural society: the conflict lay between the towns and the country.
The foral institutions, which preserved the status of the peasant, degraded merchants and lawyers into second-class citizens: seen from the towns, rustic democracy appeared an oligarchy rigged by rural notables.
The agricultural system was stable but not stagnant: it had come to depend on the cow, maize, and wheat, sensible rotations and no fallow.
The Basque was a careful farmer: forests, destroyed elsewhere in Spain without thought, were preserved by complicated methods of replanting that made good the losses to forges and shipyards.
In many ways farming techniques appeared archaic: the main cultivating tool, the laya (a two-pronged fork), seemed a primitive survival to enthusiasts for the plough.
Like many so-called archaic methods it was the  result of long adaption of means to ends; like many supposed pockets of peasant routine the Basque system could adapt itself to new demands.
Thus in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries wheat expanded, rye was replaced by maize and potatoes.
Without any alteration of techniques, the caserío could become, in the twentieth century, a commercialized concern with off-the-farm sales to the towns.
The social and political conservatism of a stable community — reflected in the harsh punishments for illegitimate children and the cows at funerals, which survived until the twenties of this century — does not imply economic inadaptability.
It was on the marginal farms of Castile, without capital and without markets, that change proved so difficult of achievement.
What the homestead enthusiasts regarded as virtues of the Basque countryside were more confined to the predominantly Basque-speaking districts in Guipúzcoa and Biscay where rainfall favours an intensive agriculture.
Towards the limits of the pluviose zone, in Alava and southern Navarre, the village begins to replace the homestead and the aristocratic element in society is stronger.
The crops become the typical crops of Spain — wheat and vines.
Castilian speech, Castilian ploughs, Castilian fallows, and the Castilian attitude to economic activity go together.
Thus it was the area where the archaic Basque language survived that was most progressive.
The Basques went into fishing, navigation, and finally into iron; the Caracas Company that developed Venezuela in the eighteenth century was a Basque concern, the Economic Societies were a Basque invention and it would seem that the Basques were the best-read Spaniards of the late eighteenth century.
Beside the mercantile society of San Sebastian and Bilbao, the capital of Navarre — Pamplona — appeared a somnolent ecclesiastical and administrative centre.
Thus the tension between town and country, which divided the liberalism of towns like Bilbao and San Sebastian from the  fierce catholic conservatism of Carlism in the countryside, was less evident in Alava and Navarre.
Navarre was a conservative, stable agrarian society in which Catholic Credit societies flourished in the late nineteenth century.
In 1936 Pamplona was the capital of militant Carlism and Navarre the only province that rose for Franco.
Towards the west the peasant society of the wet zone decreases in stability and prosperity until, in the extreme north-west, over-population and its consequence, the minute holding (minifundium ), have reduced Galicia to a depressed region.
Around Santander share-croppers and peasant proprietors enjoyed a less solid and secure prosperity than their neighbours to the east, the Basques.
The well-being of the community — largely composed of dairy-farmers — as a whole was bound up in the extensive municipal common lands, the existence of which not merely helped the poor but put a limit on the land hunger of the richer peasants.
Thus two developments could threaten this society of thrifty peasants, most of whom could read and write: the division of holdings — a process that custom prevented in the Basque Provinces — and an assault on the commons that created and sustained the municipal community and the egalitarian society.
By the 1830's the richer proprietors were pressing for the alienation of the commons.
Further west lies the rain-clouded Asturias, where the green fields around Oviedo reminded an English clergyman of the ‘richer parishes in England’ .4 But behind the coastal belt  stretches a poor region of upland and mountain pasture.
It was an unspectacular, stable society, like the Basque Provinces enjoying a large degree of local autonomy.
There were few peasant proprietors (perhaps six per cent.) but tenant farmers enjoyed the best customary tenure outside Catalonia and the Basque Provinces; if rents were higher, the tenant could not be evicted; he was compensated for improvement and his rents settled by arbitration.
Thus until the rise of the coal industry there was little social conflict.
Even the large landowners living in Madrid prided themselves on their interest in their tenantry.
The smaller resident landowners lived a simple life and were, like the Basque nobility, interested in the reform movement of the late eighteenth century and supplied many of its leaders.
The nobility were a real force; they played an important part in local government and took a lead in the resistance to Napoleon.
Like the Basque Provinces, Asturias exhibited a ‘progressive’ element centred in Gijón and Oviedo, side by side with a conservative, settled peasantry.
The general quality of life nevertheless was poor, especially in the less-favoured inland regions.
Asturias was a cereal-importing province, essentially bound to the wheat lands of Léon.
Excessive subdivision of holdings, at its worst on the borders of Galicia, revealed the pressure on the land.
As yet Asturian industry could not absorb the surplus population: hazel nuts were a more important export than coal.
Galicia, in the far western corner, was the Ireland of Spain, a land of granite and gorse: its landscape was created by an extreme subdivision of holdings, which produced the ‘handkerchief plots’ of an acre and under.
These minute holdings, the consequence of a growing population in combination with a form of gavelkind, were the Galician problem.
Thus the whole of Galician life and politics came to centre round theforos , the quasi-emphyteutic tenure on which these  minute plots were held.
The tenants (foreros ) paid a customary quit rent to the owner of the dominium eminens or forista ; as in most parts of the world where such tenures obtained, tenants came to look on themselves as outright owners.
Thus when population and prices rose in the eighteenth century the tenant foreros sublet at great profits to themselves since their payments to the foristas had long ceased to represent an economic rent.
It was now that the true landlords, the Church and the nobility, sought to assert their half-forgotten rights of eviction and rent-raising in order to trap some of the profits from rising land values.
A bitter and complex dispute was decided by the crown jurists in the interests of the foreros (1763), and when the entailed lands of the nobility and the church estates were put on the market by the liberal legislation of the nineteenth century they purchased their foros and became the outright owners of land they had rented; they became foristas .
These two measures, one the work of paternalistic Bourbon civil servants and the other of laissez-faire liberals, combined to create the rural bourgeoisie of Galicia: the merchants of Pontevedra, Vigo, and Corunna, the returned ‘Indians’ and lawyers who invested in the purchase of foros .
The dispute now lay between the new class of foristas and their sub-tenants who cultivated the land.
It was in this social struggle that the typical alliance of lawyers and small landowners that was to control Galician local politics developed; the lawyers prospered in the complicated disputes and as Morillo, Galicia's most distinguished Captain General noted, ‘had absolute domination over the countryside’.
Their manipulation of parliamentary elections made the Galician constituencies among the most easily manageable in liberal Spain.
Galicia's economy of rye, maize, potatoes, chestnuts, cattle, and pigs was poor despised by other Spaniards as a region  where women worked as farm-labourers, as railway porters, and road menders.
This poverty was supposedly reflected in the highest illegitimacy rate in the country.
As in all areas of mainly disseminated settlement and self-sufficient farms — woollen garments, kitchen utensils, even ploughs were home-made — misery was concealed by its dispersion.
Subsistence economies sometimes achieve a low-grade stability by the very poverty of the general standard of living.
Nevertheless, as was inevitable with a rising population, favoured as in Ireland by ease of settlement in a society of early marriage, conditions deteriorated in century.
There was an ‘Irish famine’ in 1853–4.
The agricultural future lay with cattle-raising (the cow or the pig was the only cash product of the small farmer and was sold, to pay his taxes, in the markets that were the centre of Galician social intercourse), and this could not develop until railways brought the market centre of Lugo into contact with the mass consumption of Madrid and Barcelona.
Otherwise the only internal development that could relieve the pressure of men on land was a fishing industry, developed by Catalans in the late eighteenth century and given wide markets by the railways and much later, the invention of the sardine tin.
The real outlet for the misery of the north and north-west could only be emigration.
Export of superfluous man-power from the poorer inland farms was an established tradition by the eighteenth century.
It was the seasonal migrants who impressed the rest of Spain with Galician poverty; under their ‘kings’ perhaps 30,000 labourers went south for the harvest in  the 1890's.
Besides seasonal migration there was the semi-permanent emigration to other parts of Spain and to America.
Galicians and Asturians and montañeses from the province of Santander were the waiters, water carriers, wet-nurses, and porters of the Spanish towns, and the Galician domestic servant was a stock theatre character.
In Asturias there was a strong tradition of early migration in the poor mountain villages.
Only industry could absorb locally this surplus the land would not support, and in the early half of the nineteenth century there was none.
Compared to these regions the mountains and plains of central Spain were the despair of the traveller: ‘the barest and most melancholy I ever beheld’.
Apart from regions of mountain pasture and forest, the plains of Castile afforded a bare landscape occasionally interrupted by nondescript villages, the colour of the soil from which they arose.
Only monotony granted a certain grandeur.
Neither geography nor history had been kind to the centre of the Spanish empire: rainfall was erratic with summer droughts, the soil poorish.
In Madrid, intolerable in the heats of summer, sentries froze at their posts in the winter.
A stable and balanced agrarian economy had degenerated into precarious monocultures and backwater towns.
From the seventeenth century a whole school of economic pessimists, unable to analyse the causes, described the symptoms of this degeneration: depopulation, ‘luxury’, monks, sheep, obsession with aristocratic values, too many schoolboys learning Latin, absenteeism.
They were no doubt correct in believing that the financial burdens of Empire fell heavily on the two Castiles: heavy taxation drove industry and population to the peripheral regions and emphasized the decline  of agriculture.
The generation of 1898 redressed in literature the balance that had been upset in the economic development of Spain: with some exaggeration the rediscovery of the desolate attractions of Castile by poets and essayists, many of whom came from peripheral regions, can be seen as a repentant gesture to the centre, devastated for the greater glory of Spain.
The agricultural history of Castile had been a battle between sheep-owners and agriculturists.
Sheep-owners were few, rich, and organized in a powerful corporation, the Mesta .
Because of the loans it could provide, its demands for prohibition of enclosure, extensive pastures, and rights of way were backed by the crown.
The agriculturists, on the other hand, had been poor and numerous, supported only by pamphleteers.
But, in the later eighteenth century, the pamphleteers became government servants at a time when rising wheat and oil prices brought the graziers' privileges and the accepted primacy of wool within the economy into question.
Complaints from Estremadura, where scrub pasture (dehesas ) covered much of the province, started a movement for agricultural reform that involved an attack on the Mesta .
Saved by the financial straits of the crown from effective attack by the reforming bureaucrats of the later eighteenth century, the sheep-owners could not hope to defeat the pressure of the municipalities and local courts, when supported by opinion increasingly hostile to corporate privilege, which was seen as an impediment to economic development.
In 1839 the Mesta , the greatest economic corporation in Spain, was finally destroyed; in the name of laissez-faire the liberals completed the task of the civil servants of the ancien régime .
This did not mean the end of large-scale sheep-farming, which was still the basis of large fortunes in the nineteenth century: migrant merino flocks still passed from summer pastures in the Sierras along the sheep roads to Estremadura and the south; but with the destruction of animal stock in the War of Independence, the disruption of the sheep routes, and the general decline of wool the great transhumant flocks persisted only in those regions where no other method of feeding was possible — in the more remote parts of the bleak province of  Soria for example.
The battle between graziers and agriculturists continued up to modern times, but in less dramatic wrangles between village councils, which preferred cultivators, and the larger owners who favoured the more reliable rents of the cattle and sheep men.
Nevertheless in most regions sheep and wheat complemented each other: commons were auctioned to sheep-owners by municipalities, and fallows by peasants, from the harvest until September.
In the smaller villages of the Sierras life was isolated and stagnant, a degraded survival, semi-pastoral, semi-agricultural, with timber as an important source of income.
It was there that Carlism found its supporters in Old Castile.
Outside the pastoral regions lay the classic cultures of the central tableland — cereals, olives, and vines; its agrarian history is the history of shifts from one of these crops to another where local needs for food permitted a response to market conditions.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the ‘thirst for new land’, as in the past, resulted in the breaking up of marginal scrub for wheat.
This meant that some of the old despoblados , the deserted towns that had been the despair of the economists for two hundred years, came back under cultivation, just as in the town of Salamanca, centre of a great wheat region, the empty houses left untenanted by the recession of the seventeenth century were occupied once more.
But these were risky gains: with little animal manure and no capital, the peasant broke up more land than he could use, only to abandon it in a drought or when prices fell.
In much of Castile harassed tenants and peasantry were driven by short, often verbal leases, high rents and bad years  into the clutches of village usurers and corn merchants.
Increasingly in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries landlords sought to raise rents with prices and to avoid secure customary tenures, a practice by no means confined to absentee landlords; most landowners were local nobles and bourgeois, though the great aristocratic houses had large ‘states’ scattered over both Castiles.
The eighteenth-century administration sought to protect those whom the intendant of Burgos called the ‘wretched slaves’ of the landlords: there were proposals to freeze rents at the 1770 level, to set up arbitration boards of peasants and landlords.
Such paternalism was impossible in the War of Independence against Napoleon (1808–14) and out of fashion after it.
The plight of the poor cultivator, in provinces like Avila with its stony fields, constituted the most intractable problem of the agrarian world.
Rack renting combined with taxes and tithes — according to the abolitionists of the thirties these alone consumed a quarter of the peasants' net income — drove out the enterprising and condemned those who remained to one of the most hopeless forms of subsistence farming.
There were striking exceptions to this pattern of poverty, from the irrigated land round Valladolid —‘a perfect garden’— to the timber villages in the mountains of old Castile.
Even cereal Castile was not uniform: the proprietors of Salamanca or Valladolid were independent men of substance, very different from the subsistence farmers of Avila.
Nowhere north of the Tagus was there a class like the landless rural proletariat of Andalusia and Estremadura, and this may account for the relative political stability of Castile: only one nineteenth-century revolt started in the classic wheat lands.
To the south of New Castile lay Andalusia; to the west, Estremadura.
It was in these arid regions, where twenty per cent.
of the total population lived, that agrarian reformers, from the eighteenth century to the second Republic, found the agrarian problem of Spain par excellence , tending to neglect, by comparison, the plight of the marginal farmer in central Spain.
Not all of Andalusia and Estremadura was a kingdom of vast entailed latifundia peopled by overseers and landless labourers, given over to huge fields of wheat, barley, and fallows, to olive monocultures (as in Jaén), or to the scrub pastures and the bull ranches of the great houses.
These gave Andalusia its reputation: to Bourgoing it was a desert.
‘The great landowner seems to reign there like the lion in his forest, driving from him by his roars all who seek to approach his presence.’
In the serrania (the mountain districts) there were large areas of poor pasture or small holdings and it was in these regions rather than on the great estates that Anarchism was later to find its most fanatical adherents.
The irrigated, fertile vega of Granada was an area of intense farming; round Cordoba, the clay soil was fertile and deep ploughing could resist the droughts that desolated the dry plains; Jerez was the centre of a sophisticated wine industry.
There were pockets where reasonable crop-sharing leases produced stable communities.
There were areas where sheep-farming or cattle-breeding was still the most important economic activity.
Nevertheless it was the great estates of absentee landowners that gave Andalusia its reputation.
The latifundia had persisted since Roman times: the descendant of the Roman villicus , the bailiff of the absentee landlord, still exploited the instrumentum vocale — the day labourer.
The white buildings of the cortijo , with its great gate and tower, still dominated the yellow landscape.
The cortijo was ‘a unit of exploitation, not a centre of population’; around it was a relatively small area, well cultivated  and manured, given over to barley and chick peas; the rest of a great estate was usually divided between fallows, grazed stubble, and wheat.
Only a small staff of permanent employees lived in the cortijo ; for the harvest the bailiff hired day labourers from the emigrant provinces and the local towns.
Huddled together in the barns of the cortijo and fed on doles garlic soup when they were employed, half starved at home the slack seasons that are the concomitant of extensive monocultures, the Andalusian braceros were a primitive revolutionary class, unique in Europe, alternating between waves of exaltation and fatalistic ‘Moorish’ resignation to misery.
In such a society, as in southern Italy, the stronger spirits took to brigandage or smuggling and became the epic heroes of a depressed race.
In the later eighteenth century the economy of the entailed latifundia began to be considered as an intolerable abuse.
Spectacular rises in corn prices encouraged landlords to evict in order to farm themselves, a process which led to the creation of despoblados ; middling tenants refused to sublet and a wave of rent rises seems to have started in the 1760's.
At the same time a group of agrarian reformers came to have influence with the crown.
In 1766 Charles III appointed Aranda, perhaps the most radical of the group, as his minister.
To the reformers the solution was simple.
‘Why in our villages are there men without land and in our countryside land without men?
Bring them together and all will be served.’
Thus started a movement for some redistribution of land to small cultivators as a solution to the problems of Andalusia and Estremadura.
It can be argued that the individual peasant proprietorship envisaged by reformers was not a practical solution to the agrarian problems of the southern secano .
Both the incidence of  bad years and the type of settlement were against it.
‘How can the cortijos' , Aranda's reforming government asked its intendants in vain, ‘be turned into villages?’
It was the economic fragility of peasant proprietorship in areas of monoculture and drought, where two bad years drove the small man to sell his lands, that led more far-sighted reformers to argue against outright peasant proprietorship and in favour of a state-controlled and state-aided colonization with the family as the settled unit.
Technically admirable, in that it saved the peasant from himself as well as from his oppressors, colonization demanded great expenditure to bring the land above the level of subsistence farming — an expenditure the liberal state of the nineteenth century could neither approve in principle nor afford in practice.
Nor could colonization and controlled tenures satisfy the deep-rooted popular desire for outright ownership.
A reparto , the division of the great estates among the agrarian poor, was the recurring demand of the endemic jacqueries of Andalusia as a once and for all cure for chronic underemployment.
The great estates were not always farmed directly by their owners.
The general practice of letting a cortijo as a unit to one substantial tenant created a powerful class, the labradores , who, as tenants-in-chief, controlled all rentable land, letting out only the distant or poorer parts of the estates to the small men — the peletrines .
Rack renting of this marginal land, bitterly attacked by reformers but never remedied, was the greatest single cause of hardship to those who had not sunk or been born into the vast reservoir of casual labour.
The control of the landlords and the labradores over municipal government completed their monopoly by giving into their hands the only other surplus land — the municipal commons — which became, according to reforming bureaucrats, ‘the private patrimony of the town counsellors’.
Thus the real struggle in Andalusia was between the alliance of landlord or his agents and the labrador , and the rest.
The former constituted the local oligarchy of the poderosos , the powerful ones, who, from the days of Aranda to the debates of 1934, any reforms intended to relieve the poor.
The only this group could admit were reforms that benefited  its members: the sale of the common lands and the entailed estates of the Church, an operation that they could dominate and from which they could draw profit.
The old kingdom of Valencia contained within its borders the contrasts typical of Spain.
The northern and western fringes were ‘all mountains, deserts and gullies.
The soil is unkind and denies to the cultivator the means of life: the heights are, in general, bare rocks with little water and bitterly cold.’
With weed-choked crops, badly pruned mulberries, olives killed off by frost, mean strips of wheat on terraces maintained at vast expense of labour, only the extension of the domestic wool industry could save this region from decline and depopulation.
As in Galicia, the lowness of the general standards concealed a hopeless poverty.
The continued existence of these mountain peasants, surviving on bread, oil, and beans, ‘proves how little the human race needs in order to exist and to propagate’.
How different was the rich, irrigated coastal plain!
Prosperity began at Vinaroz, with wells and easy access to the coast, the latter important because much produce was exported to northern Europe and America.
These regions, tedious to the eye, were a continuous market garden with five crops every two years.
‘The soil never rests in these huertas , crops succeed each other without interruption….
Night does not end work: each field is irrigated in its turn at the appointed hour, even in the middle of the night.’
Outside market-garden plots, vines and carobs flourished.
Prosperity and rising prices were reflected in new building in the towns and in a rapidly rising population — only in the rice regions did public prosperity impair public health.
Thus the Valencian huerta came to have the highest rural density in Europe: similar conditions produced an equal density in irrigated Murcia.
Yet this great growth and the consequent diminution of the size of holdings until a ‘large’ farm was two acres, meant that labour was getting less productive  — a phenomenon reflected in the huge difference in price between land with and land without vacant possession.
It was not land that was bought but the prospect of self-employment.
This intense cultivation of varied crops, so sharp a contrast to the monocultures of the centre, was dependent on irrigation.
The small-scale irrigation systems of the Levante present a combination of great technical and juridical sophistication.
Though they were attributed to the Moors, the Moors themselves regarded the irrigation works themselves as an inheritance from a previous Christian civilization; age-old, they represent a degree of social organization and co-operation that compels admiration.
Water belonged to the community and was sold with the land.
The constant disputes as to its use in time of scarcity were regulated by a communal organization; the most famous was the Water Tribunal of Valencia, which gave its verbal judgements, never contested, in an open-air court outside the cathedral.
In later irrigation schemes water belonged to the capitalists who had built the system and was auctioned to the cultivators: hence the conflict, inconceivable in the older systems, between water-owners and cultivators that was typical of the nineteenth century.
In Aragon, as in Valencia, there were great agrarian contrasts, emphasizing the historic contrast between the mountain core of the old kingdom and the reconquered territories where Arab influence, even today, is apparent to the architectural eye.
High Aragon was a region of poor crops and migrant flocks — some of the biggest transhumante flocks of the nineteenth century belonged to Aragonese magnates and villages.
An extreme climate and thin, stony soils made the windy plateaux (the páramos ) of Teruel and Huesca the most sparsely populated parts of Spain.
In the upland region an old-established pastoral economy and the local industry that supported it was in sharp  decline.
Thus the Carlism of the Maestrazgo — the mountain region of Lower Aragon — can be seen as a revolution of desperation in the creeping misery of a contracting economy.
Against these regions of contraction stood the prosperous secanos of the centre and the irrigated lands of the Ebro valley.
Towns like Daroca combined highly productive wheat-lands and vineyards with huertas , but it was the Ebro that created a green line of prosperity through the barest country imaginable.
The older areas of irrigation were extended and intensified by the Imperial Canal; begun under Charles V, its completion was the greatest public work of the eighteenth century.
More water and, later in the nineteenth century, artificial manure brought flexibility and variety, enabling rapid adjustment to market conditions.
In the eighteenth century the old irrigated lands were still largely devoted to wheat with yearly fallows: in the 1890's sugar-beet became the most profitable crop, later supplemented by lucerne and potatoes.
What Aragon could be like without water appears in the Monegros: a complete desert in a dry year, it could, with winter rains, give the heaviest yields in Spain.
These climatic contrasts were marked by sharp social-tenurial contrasts.
Thus in Jaca there were allotments for the poor labourers and no agrarian destitute class; around Saragossa the labourers had enforced a customary eight-hour day and worked in their free hours on their own plots; but on the great estates of dry Aragon labour conditions could only be matched in Andalusia.
Catalonia, like Valencia, showed contrasts of progress and stagnation; as in the Basque country an industrial civilization grew up surrounded by a conservative peasantry, a division that was to determine political alignments in Catalonia.
The  mountainous inland Young found ‘all poor and miserable’; bad crops, bad fallows, and wretched towns.
It was from these regions that Catalan industry was to draw its cheap labour, while the wild valleys of the Pyrenees were an enclosed world with a tradition of brigandage and family feuds; here Carlism was to take on the violence and cruelty of the local society.
The agricultural riches of Catalonia lay in the wheat plains and vineyards of the centre and the rich cultures of the coastal plain.
Agricultural prosperity rested on secure tenures that made the substantial farmers feel themselves to be full proprietors.
The symbol of this security was the masía — the solidly built farmhouse that dominated the landscape of rural Catalonia and often bore the name of the family that had lived in it for generations.
In the strict hierarchy of the Catalan countryside these peasant farmer families almost ranked as a petty nobility.
The typical Mediterranean wine-olive-wheat complex began, in the eighteenth century, an expansion and modification that were to continue, after the shocks of war, into the nineteenth and which were to transform the agricultural potential of Catalonia.
It was this drive that led travellers to comment on the Catalans' capacity to make ‘soil out of rock’.
The transformation was both extensive and intensive.
The profits to be made out of wine in the first half of the century encouraged substantial farmers to let out their outlying fields, landowners and municipalities their hitherto unproductive wastes, on rabassa morta — a lease of land based on the life of the vine and intended to bring bad land into cultivation.
It was thus that the classic wine-growing areas — the Camp of Tarragona and the Panadés — were expanded and the western regions re-peopled.
Small-scale irrigation works increased production (wheat yielded three times as much on irrigated land) and diversified it: lucerne, for instance, became a valuable crop.
But it was in the market-garden economies of the coast, stimulated by the demands of Barcelona, that the transformation was most intense.
‘Every scrap of land’, wrote Young, of Mataró, ‘is well cultivated.’
Such regions, by the late eighteenth century, had a ‘modern’ population density.
This transformation had important consequences.
It emphasized the contrast between the periphery and the centre of  Spain by the creation of an agrarian economy that fed the towns — Barcelona above all — and was linked to the wider economies of Europe and America.
Combined with industrial and commercial developments, it enabled Catalonia to support a population that doubled within the eighteenth century.
Large areas of Catalonia became dependent on a single specialized export — wine and cheap brandy were sent in such quantities Europe that the world price of brandy was set by the market of Reus.
2.
The Prospects of Progress
In the late eighteenth century the economy of Spain appeared to be on the move.
There were signs that agricultural production was responding to the rise in prices common to Europe and marked after 1760.
There was a notable industrial revival in Catalonia.
Along the whole Mediterranean coast there was a considerable increase in the volume of trade both in agricultural products sought by northern Europe and in exports to the colonies.
In 1785 the directors of the Bank of San Carlos (founded in 1782 as the first national bank of Spain and in itself an indication of a new spirit) could report in glowing terms.
They praised ‘the progress of our industry, the multiplicity of modern factories in Catalonia, the growth of agriculture, and the increase in demand for its products’.
British merchants, who had exploited the incapacity of the old-established monopolists of Cadiz and Seville to supply Spain's American Empire with goods, professed alarm at ‘the commercial spirit which is beginning to prevail in the Spanish nation’.
How were these advances achieved?
What was the balance between stagnation and growth?
On the development of the productivity of its agriculture depended the whole future of Spain.
Only by a greater yield from the land could a growing population be supported, and savings and a market be created for a resumption of ‘lost’ industrial prosperity.
By 1800 Spain was producing more wheat at steadier prices than at any time since the sixteenth century.
Slowly, in spite of lean years, devastating famines were passing away.
Since average yields on non-irrigated land could not rise much above fivefold the seed, the increase must have been the result of extending the cultivated area by ploughing marginal land: Jovellanos in the eighteenth century, Fermin Caballero in the 1850's, and the Report on the agricultural crisis of 1887 all accuse the farmer of ploughing up more than he could maintain in cultivation.
‘Thirst for new land’ set off a continuous process of abandoning and resuming cultivation until, in some districts, erosion took over.
The sedentary farmer succeeded the migrant shepherd as the agent by whom the soil of Spain was squandered; by the early nineteenth century cereals occupied perhaps three-quarters of the cultivable land, an imbalance between crop and animal husbandry as pernicious as that which prevailed in the heyday of wool.
Extensive cultivation was the capital vice of the secano farming, afflicting alike the great latifundia and the peasant farm.
It created the characteristic landscape of the central tableland: a tawny countryside pinned by drought to the classic Mediterranean monocultures — wine, wheat, and olives.
They shared the same social defect — seasonal unemployment — and the same natural hazards — extreme variability in yield between bad and normal years.
Shifts could be made from one monoculture to another in response to market conditions and were made both in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; but they were made without any fundamental change in the traditional crop economy or any mitigation of the problems of rural under-employment.
The great treeless plains from Salamanca to Valladolid were most economically employed with wheat and grazed fallows, while other poorer provinces — Avila for instance— could grow little else, even if it meant wretched crops and three-year fallows.
Wheat was favoured, not merely because of its immediate importance as a basic food, but because it demanded least capital and least care, even where it meant wretched cultivations: only one-tenth of the cereal secano was farmed in regular rotations of wheat and legumes; a quarter was cultivated only once every six or ten years.
Much of the contemporary and subsequent criticism of the secano farming attributed to peasant routine the inescapable consequences of poor soil, drought, and lack of capital.
When the philosopher-agronomists advocated new crops and new methods they were met with the excuse so often given to Cavanilles on his tour of Aragon, ‘We do as our fathers do.’
Sometimes this obstinacy was the refuge of the poor man who cannot afford change and to whom stagnation has become a habit of mind necessary for survival; at other times it represented a sound rejection of improper techniques culled by ‘philosophical’ amateurs from the journals of French and English agricultural societies.
Peasants often have more practical experience than philosophers and are just as keen to make money out of their produce.
The peasants' plough, according to critics, ‘scratched the soil’ but deep ploughing would have destroyed it.
Mules were ‘sterile monsters’, ‘the most fatal vice of our agricultural system’, but they work fast, and can stand heat.
There was ‘too much fallow’, but this fallow was an essential process in dry farming on poor land.
The worst consequence of extensive cultivation was a radical separation of animal and  crop husbandry.
Once wheat had triumphed on poor land, the imbalance between cattle, sheep, and cash crops became incurable.
Three factors, which acted in regions of dry cereal farming with particular intensity, have been blamed for the low levels of productivity; first extensive common lands; secondly, a maldistribution of landed property — the twin problem of the latifundia and the minifundia — combined with insecure tenures and high rents; thirdly, a type of settlement where the majority of the agricultural population lived in large villages and towns.
In the favoured regions of the north the common lands gave social strength to the community and were not detrimental to good husbandry.
In regions like Estremadura they could be agriculturally pernicious.
‘The waste and desert appearance is partly caused by the vast extent of the common lands belonging to the towns and villages, the system of management of which is ruinous in the extreme, and the finest districts, capable of enriching the proprietors and the country at large, are abandoned to, and only serve as pasture for goats, sheep or a few asses.’
This was an exaggeration; the desert appearance of poor pasture and dried-out stubble remained after the commons had gone.
Nevertheless critics of liberal legislation that ‘destroyed’ the common lands failed to remember that, although the commons may have contributed to ‘the independence and dignity so striking in the demeanour of the Spanish peasant’, the price of these social benefits was a level of agricultural production that precluded progress.
The abuses of the latifundia had been recognized before the systematic criticism of the later eighteenth century and the case against the great estate remained as the emotional drive behind all land reform.
Indubitably, too much land was concentrated in too few hands though the agricultural reasons for extensive farming were not always appreciated.
Many latifundia  were, no doubt, ‘abusive’; but many were on poor land suited only for extensive and occasional cereal production and ranching.
Many reformers were ignorant of farming conditions in Andalusia.
Olavide, in the later eighteenth century, dreamed of transforming the whole of lower Andalusia on the model of the English countryside, without seeming to suspect that climatic conditions were radically different and that the creation of artificial meadows was a snare and delusion under the arid sun of southern Spain.
Again reformers were undoubtedly right in pointing to precarious tenures as removable hindrances (estorbos ): many Castilian and Andalusian tenures made improvement by the tenant equivalent to economic suicide and encouraged short leases and rack renting.
What these critics did not see so clearly was that elsewhere customary tenures had so confused conceptions of ownership that a clear, profitable, and workable landlord-tenant relationship was difficult to conceive; while in many regions customary quit rents gave the landlord little surplus to invest, even had he been inclined so to do.
Moreover, the whole history of aristocratic landownership showed that socially secure customary tenures, in the long run, had meant a loss of economic control by the landowner.
In Galicia a liberal historian of property rights called the 1763 settlement (which gave tenants such security that the landlords could neither evict nor raise rents)‘an act of sheer expropriation against the aristocracy’.
Finally, the  prevalence of crop-sharing leases was an indication of incapacity or unwillingness to put capital into land, of a preference for social stability at the price of economic improvement.
Travellers' tales of uninhabited wastes are often based on the  sight of dried-out wheat stubble in areas where agricultural towns and villages (pueblos ) are spaced ten to twenty miles apart.
William Beckford travelled for five hours in Estremadura without seeing ‘any animals, bipeds or quadrupeds’.
To Fermin Caballero, writing at the turn of the nineteenth century, this pattern of agricultural settlement constituted the chief bar to progress: a more intensive system was the key to higher production but the physical relation of the labourer and farmer to the land, the distance from the house in which he slept to the field he worked, made intense cultivation impossible.
The fact that a peasant's farm buildings were in the pueblo limited the number of cattle and hens he could keep (it may be quite difficult to buy an egg in a town of 3,000 inhabitants) and was one more factor inhibiting a satisfactory balance between animal and crop husbandry.
Yet, outside the areas of dispersed settlement — Galicia, the Basque Provinces, and parts of Catalonia — the large agrarian village or small town was a social heritage it was impossible to destroy in the interests of agricultural efficiency; in arid country the peasant regards the land as the source of a poor livelihood, not as a mystique; he prefers to live away from it; the social satisfactions of the pueblo were subsumed in the concept of animacíon , the absence of rural boredom to be found only in an urban or semi-urban community.
It was the combination of this type of settlement with the excessive fragmentation of holdings that was the most generally unperceived but pernicious feature of the traditional system.
Handkerchief plots were by no means confined to Galicia.
In much of Castile minifundia were created by inheritance laws that divided equally among children, whereas in the Basque Provinces and Catalonia the family farm remained as a unit for generations.
As population grew so, in parts of Castile, the farm unit became smaller and the number of strips or fields  that comprised the unit minute.
The minifundium is frequently to be found side by side with the latifundium; indeed the existence of the great entailed estates increased the pressure of men on the land.
Thus within twenty-five miles of Madrid miserable plots exist side by side with ranch estates.
Combined with concentrated settlement in pueblos , the resultant wastage of labour in cultivation could be enormous; as much as twenty to thirty days a year could be lost on walking to scattered and distant strips.
The out-fields were badly cultivated, cattle husbandry almost impossible, trees a luxury on small plots where land could not be ‘wasted’; the sheer cadastral complexity of the system was one of the most serious bars to badly needed systems of agricultural credit for the small man.
One of the most obvious ‘improvements’ was a concentration of strip holdings, but to this day little has been accomplished.
It was natural that reformers should attack latifundia, where the under-utilization of the land and the pressure of population were obvious, rather than settle down to the complicated legal technicalities involved in the consolidation of vast numbers of dispersed strips.
The changes in the classic agricultural structure of Spain between 1750 and 1850 were achieved by rearrangement of the traditional economy, by its expansion in space, not by any fundamental change.
Most of Spain did not experience the dramatic rise in agricultural production per acre that was achieved elsewhere in Europe by an intensification of cultures and new fodder crops.
Drought — Spain is the only major European country where over large areas rainfall is less than fifteen inches a year — precluded such changes on the secano .
There were no new fodder or root crops, except for the various leguminous plants that did something to improve fallows in the eighteenth century.
Lucerne, on which Young set such high hopes, could only be grown on deep soils or on irrigated land, and there it was to produce a minor revolution.’
Thus great areas of central Spain were condemned to the extensive farming of cereals for low yields at great expense of labour.
In the latter half of the eighteenth century in Spain, as in other countries, an industrial revival and a surge of commercial optimism accompanied a rise in population and in agricultural prices.
Striking though the industrial revival was we need not examine it in detail.
Industry, outside the domestic crafts, created only a small proportion of the national income and, compared with primary products, of the foreign trade of Spain.
Moreover, many of the conquests of the eighteenth century were not to be maintained.
Thus the silk industry of Valencia, frequently noted by travellers as one of the most promising features of the economy, apart from a period of prosperity between 1835 and 1852, remained relatively stagnant throughout the nineteenth century; in the late eighteenth century a technically advanced industry, in the nineteenth it could not keep pace with Lyons.
The new departure, which became a permanent conquest, though there were hard times to come, was the localization of a cotton industry round Barcelona.
This was to be the basis of the first true industrial complex of modern Spain: the Catalan textile industry.
The roots of these developments in Catalonia, where the traditions of a mercantile civilization had long existed, are complex.
Intensification and specialization in agriculture, especially in the vineyards, gave rise to commercial exchange and opportunity for profit and saving.
There was, in the mid century, a gap between rising wages and even more rapidly rising prices that favoured investment.
There was, too, after 1760, the stimulation of the Latin-American market, the investment of American profits, and the effects of a new influx of Mexican silver.
There was a prohibition of the import of cotton cloth (1771); the gap between Castilian and Catalan taxation, which favoured Catalonia; the rapid importation of foreign improvements in textile manufacture (especially in the early years of the nineteenth century).
Finally — a factor peculiarly stressed by Catalan historians — there was the industrious artisan family's propensity to save, which provided the economic and psychological springs of industrial progress.
The Catalan renaissance was based on cotton and brandy together with the staples of the colonial trade (soap, shoes, paper) and the expansion of the merchant marine.
Barcelona became once more a great Mediterranean port — its trade, which had been the pride of medieval Catalonia, had quintupled since the early years of the century — and it now started its career as an industrial city.
Catalonia had possessed only a small section of a textile industry scattered all over Spain but it was round Barcelona that the cotton factory made its appearance.
Starting with the printing of imported calicoes in the forties, by the nineties Catalonia held the biggest concentration of dyers and weavers  outside Lancashire.
In the decade after 1770 the industrialized regions became centres of high wages drawing on the surplus labour of the hinterland, setting up a wave of immigration that was to spread outwards until, in the later nineteenth century, it tapped the poverty of the deep south and Murcia.
A shortage of domestic servants and farm labourers, noted in the later eighteenth century, is a crude index of economic progress.
Already in the late eighteenth century Catalonia exhibited another phenomenon of industrial civilization: unemployment consequent on the collapse of market and the deterioration of general trading conditions.
The prosperity of the Catalan economy had thus come to be at the mercy of events outside Spain.
It was jeopardized by the wars of 1779 and 1796, with the consequent loss of the American market, and the entry of French textiles in the War of Independence (1808–14).
After the war the industry was too depressed to re-equip itself as it had done in 1804.
Thus it could not compete with Lancashire, and rigid protection of the home market became the creed of all Catalan industrialists.
One smaller Catalan industry, cork, was more consistent in its growth because it held a monopoly of raw material.
From small beginnings in the eighteenth century it prospered in the depression after 1814.
In spite of its prosperity, the cork industry was the classic example of the unenterprising side of the Catalan artisanate.
With its strong guild, its suspicion of machinery, it remained representative of an older industrial civilization that persisted alongside the drive of the cotton men, and represented an attitude that could delay the modernization of the economy.
This was the obverse of the image of the industrious Catalan artisan as the basis of industrial progress.
As a result of her prosperity, uncertain though it often appeared, Catalonia began to appear as the model and exemplar  of mercantile and industrial civilization, a role that was to bring her into sharp conflict with traditional values and interests.
Catalan emigrants were taking new attitudes into Spain itself.
After restoring their own fishing industry, Catalans re-established that of Galicia.
Borrow found Catalans everywhere as innkeepers and carriers.
There are signs that their enterprise was resented, a foretaste of the accusations of selfish materialism that were to be pinned on Catalans for a hundred years to come.
Already Catalan employers were organized in powerful associations to fight for the maintenance of import prohibitions.
Already the enemies were smugglers, the English, free traders, and governments that wished to tax the industrious to support sterile bureaucrats and pensioners.
Already there were counter-warnings from Castile of selfish interests, of the dangers of high costs and failure to modernize that would be the consequence of excessive protection.
If they sleep in the shade of prohibitions for foreign goods, besides harming the Treasury and the Nation, they will harm themselves.
When a nation cannot produce as cheaply or as well as foreigners, then no barriers will save it against smugglers, fashion and the consumer's interest.
The true method is to adapt foreign machines which will enable national products to be as cheap and good as those of other countries.
In the expansive atmosphere of the turn of the century Catalan and Valencian manufacturers were doing precisely this: in 1790 the first steam engine came to Barcelona.
The new prosperity of ‘industrious’ Catalonia and ‘opulent’Valencia threw into contrast the industrial decline that had left central Spain a backwater of artisan industry.
Almost all the great Castilian wool towns were shadows, ‘skeletons of towns once populous and crammed with factories, workshops and stalls, now full of churches, convents and hospitals…destitute of commerce, supported by the church’.
Valladolid, Salamanca, Toledo, and Segovia were administrative and ecclesiastical capitals, glorified market towns with hat and soap factories, a hundred or so looms, flour mills, and brickyards.
Besides a domestic textile industry scattered through every town and village, certain small towns had specialities that served wider markets; steel knives at Guadix, horse rugs at Morella, textiles and pottery at Puente del Arzobispo, sickles at La Solana, in La Mancha.
Much of this small industry was stagnant or declining, especially after the disruption and contraction that accompanied and followed the War of Independence.
In the eighteenth century Aragon, where agriculture was prospering and olive groves had doubled in a hundred years, had become an industrially depressed region.
Textiles were in full decline; the old metal trades had vanished to the point where no artisan could explain the traditional techniques.
Only leather prospered.
The wretched towns of lower Aragon, detested by liberal soldiers, became strongholds of Carlism and it was the desolation of decaying artisan towns that set off the polemics on the effectiveness of ecclesiastical charity.
Sometimes decline can be explained as an inevitable concomitant of development; thus the heyday of Valencian prosperity was matched by a dramatic decline in the silk industry of Granada and the smaller industry of the Aragonese valleys may have suffered from Catalan competition.
Nevertheless, the most serious limitation on the development of the core of Spain was the shape of the Peninsula itself.
Even with good roads, transport costs, in a large square country where canals are an economic and physical impossibility, must remain high.
Napoleon was to find that the best roads in Europe could not create a European market.
It was space that lamed the prospects of a truly national economy; it was distance by land that doomed the government's expensive attempt to re-create, in the eighteenth century, a great wool industry in central Spain and hampered the creation of an  internal market in the nineteenth.
An industrial revival cannot for long remain based on mules and donkeys.
Not the least of the advantages enjoyed by the peripheral regions was cheap coastal transport.
It was the possibility of directly profiting from a revival of Spanish overseas trade that brought prosperity to these same regions: to the ‘companies’ of Catalan, to the merchants of the Levante ports, and to the Basque shippers.
Already, in the first half of the century, a Basque concern, the Caracas Company, developed a flourishing trade in cocoa with a hitherto undeveloped region of the American Empire — Venezuela.
The trade revival of the later eighteenth century was independent, in its origins, of the gradual process by which Charles III destroyed the long-standing monopoly of Cadiz and Seville in the later eighteenth century.
The old colonial system stood in the way of any attempt to replace an empire based on bullion imports by a mercantilist empire à la Colbert, reserved for Spanish products and feeding the prosperity of the mother-country; regimentation had failed when interlopers and smugglers had turned the Castilian monopoly into a fiction, when ‘Spain kept the cow, the rest of Europe drank the milk’.
Charles III determined to increase the Spanish share of the colonial market by increasing the number of Spanish ports privileged to trade with America and by a sustained effort to diminish the legal and illegal trade in foreign hands — especially British and French.
There can be little doubt that liberalization (by which is meant effective restriction of the colonial trade to a larger number of Spanish merchants than under the old system) greatly increased the volume and the proportion of Spanish goods in the legal trade, and therefore acted as a direct stimulant to industrial and commercial revival.
From the complaints of British and French merchants it is clear that the colonial trade was ceasing to be a ‘device by  which was canalized, under royal control, the supply of goods from the rest of Europe’.
It was this success that made the merchants of England reflect on the desirability of destroying ‘despotism’ in Spanish America in order to establish direct trade in a market that British goods and British credit terms would dominate.
It was the belief of Chaptal, Napoleon's Minister, that the attempt to create a colonial market came too late.
Its continued prosperity depended on three conditions: Spain's control of the seas, her continued political control of a vast empire, and her capacity to supply her colonies with the goods they needed.
If she could not, given a venal customs service, smugglers would.
War with England (1796–1802) was a sheer disaster, revealing all the inherent weaknesses of Spain's position in the American market; American ports were opened to neutrals when it became evident that Spain could no longer supply her colonies.
The war of 1808 and the movement for independence in the colonies was to complete the defeat of Spain's effort to create a mercantilist empire.
The opportunity vanished.
Spain did not become a great mercantile nation because she failed as a naval power to retain political control of her great empire, and as a producer to supply cheap goods.
By 1829 her foreign trade was a third of that of 1785.
There was a most serious consequence: Spanish trade, throughout the nineteenth century, was unable to conquer the import surplus, which in the eighteenth century had been concealed by the export of American silver.
Once wool had declined there was  no staple: brandy, wheat, fruits, oil, wine, and lead for Europe, shoes, textiles, paper, and hats for the colonies could not close the gap.
It was not until the Basque iron deposits were exploited by foreign capital, instead of by the archaic techniques of the Basque miners, that Spain was to acquire a substitute for wool.
What is significant for the future of the developments of the later eighteenth century?
Evident in all aspects of the economy is the imbalance between the prosperity of the periphery and the stagnation of the centre.
Change, in industry, commerce, and agriculture, was most evident and most rapid in the periphery.
In the eighteenth century, particularly after 1770, the population of Spain began to share the general European increase, rising by four million to over ten million.
What is noticeable about this rise is its concentration in peripheral Spain: Galicia, Catalonia, the Basque Provinces, Santander, and the Levante.
The contrasts between the wheat prices of Catalonia and the Basque Provinces and those of central Spain are another indication of divergence.
In Castile violent fluctuations in price were the consequence of continued dependence on the local harvest; Barcelona imported most of her meat and wheat, and imports levelled out prices.
These depended, therefore, on the harvests of northern Europe — an indication of the degree to which the more ‘modern’ economy of the periphery was involved in a wider world and of the perils of specialization: a drop in the European demand for wine meant disaster for the marginal rabassa morta cultivators.
Perhaps the most dramatic indications of this growing imbalance are the rising wages and population of Barcelona and Valencia, compared with those of Madrid, the centre of Old Spain.
‘In the undoubted progress realized in the eighteenth century’, writes Vilar, ‘was implicit a relationship between the various regions of the Peninsula quite distinct from that of the siglo de oro .
Demographically and economically the centre of Spain loses its dominating position.
There is a return to the balance of antiquity when peripheral Spain — especially Mediterranean Spain — attracted to itself population, activity and production.’
This differing developmental rhythm was to have profound social and political consequences.
TRADITIONAL SOCIETY AND ITS CRITICS
AT the Congress of Vienna the pretensions of Spain were dismissed as those of a cour secondaire ; at the accession of Charles III, in 1759, such an attitude would have been inconceivable and unrealistic.
The Spanish empire, which stretched over the American continent from California to the Straits of Magellan, was the most imposing political structure of the Western world; to Napoleon it was still the greatest supplier of silver and to British merchants the greatest unexploited market.
The reign of Charles III was to see an attempt to realize, in terms of prosperity and power, the potentialities of this great empire and of metropolitan Spain.
This essay in governmental reform has parallels in most other European countries.
In Spain it was distorted and cut short by the crisis of 1789 and the French invasion of 1808, but not before it had modified, if not the traditional structure of society, at least the traditional attitudes.
We must first examine within this society both those elements that resisted the change and those that would be considered as instruments of progress.
We must then attempt to evaluate governmental reform both in terms of what is set out to achieve and of its legacy to later liberalism.
This legacy was a programme for a revolution from above: often incoherent in its premisses, its common criterion was utility: institutions, classes, and laws must be judged in terms of their utility as producers of felicity.
Advanced in the interests of increasing the resources and efficiency of the State, the programme of the civil servants of Charles III contained in its armoury weapons that would destroy the complex of values upholding the static society of the old regime.
The revolutionary implications of utility were developed by radicals, and it is the interconnexion of governmental and radical reform that we must finally consider.
The Traditional Order
The secret of Spanish stagnation had long been sought in the excessive size of the ‘unproductive classes’, from grandees down to vagrant schoolmasters.
The census of 1797 still put these classes, slowly diminishing as an element in the State, at 30 per cent.
of the active male population.
Even worse, it was estimated that two of the unproductive classes, the nobility and the Church, held two-thirds of the land of Spain in entail and mortmain.
Much of the criticism of the Church and nobility, dressed out in the commonplaces of the Enlightenment, had its root in the conviction that the ‘slavery’ of entail was the greatest single obstacle in the way of progress.
The mayorazgo , the unbreakable Spanish entail, was the central institution of the old aristocracy.
Its declared aim was to preserve a family name by attaching it perpetually to an estate that passed undivided to a single heir.
Mayorazgos had spread geographically outwards from Castile, socially downwards from the great houses — hence the creation of small ‘abusive’ entails by non-nobles — and had come to include movables — jewels, relics, and pictures.
Among the aristocracy the growth of vast entails was consistently favoured by lawyers' evasions of the ‘doctrine of incompatibility’, designed to prevent accumulation of entailed estates.
Thus intermarriage could bring huge concentrations of titles and entailed property to a few surviving great houses.
The mayorazgos had been bitterly criticized since the sixteenth century for encouraging laziness as well as being an injustice to younger children.
In the eighteenth century criticism was less moralistic than utilitarian and economic.
It came from statesmen and reformers who held that entails, by  precluding a free market in land, artificially raised its value so that investment became unprofitable; it was a hindrance to a wider diffusion of ownership, which was universally held to be a precondition of increased production.
It had long been held as a general axiom — quite incorrectly, as Catalonian experience showed — that entail caused a régime of short, unstable leases and once again stood at the head of the estorbos , the impediments to progress.
Thus the campaign against entail was not a campaign against aristocratic landownership as such, but a crusade for capital investment in land and agricultural efficiency.
Most reformers admitted that entail was a social and political necessity if the nobility were to survive with decoro .
Reforms, therefore, concentrated on the suppression of small entails and the prohibition of future entails.
In 1793 the government gave permission to convert entailed property into treasury bonds.
This strange conjunction of the fiscal necessities of the crown and the campaign against entail would, if implemented, have converted the landed property of the aristocracy into paper assets.
The social prestige, and much of the income of the aristocracy, derived from their señorios .
These seigniorial rights were varied and complex: some were disguised rent payments; other residuary feudal dues; others arose from the sale or grant of municipal office.
The radical attack on señorios came from Aragon and Valencia where the confusion between rent payment and feudal dues was most marked and where the lords had transferred to their Christian subjects the obligations that had once rested on the moriscos.
There are a few signs of that fierce screwing up of feudal payments characteristic of the later stages of the ancien régime in France; in Catalonia, for instance, a steady increase in the price of the farms of feudal dues overtook the rise in agricultural prices.
Many judicial rights were more trouble than they were worth, but, burdensome or trivial, they  were nevertheless a foundation of aristocratic influence; in half the villages and towns as mayor, councillor, or judge, the lord or his representative stood between the subject and his king.
No doubt the moral and physical absenteeism of the Spanish nobility has been over-emphasized and misunderstood.
Nobles were urban, but outside the areas of disseminated settlement the peasants and farmers were likewise town dwellers.
There were differing levels of absenteeism at differing levels of the noble's world.
The great aristocratic houses were real absentees at court and a visit of a grandee to his estates ranked as a great event in local history.
The lesser aristocracy in the south concentrated in ‘noble’ towns like Ronda or Baeza where their social life could centre on the local horse-breeding club, the Maestranza .
But in the small towns of Castile and the north the local hidalgo was no more an absentee than his peasants.
He would have his seat in the parish church, his municipal office.
In some regions the lesser nobles, both titled and untitled, were interested in local concerns and in agricultural improvement: thus the Basque and Asturian lesser nobility were admirable local patriots, good landlords, influential in their districts.
It was these northern gentry who became the model for those who sought to save the influence of the nobility by involving it in a movement for reform and economic progress.
Economic Societies — an invention of the Basques — would allow the provincial nobility to ‘contribute to the happiness of the kingdom’.
As a whole the nobility failed to respond to this call.
The habits of mind that went with the mayorazgo were not those of the ideal improving landlord of the Economic Societies, ‘always occupied in the felicity of his village’.
The noble land-owners' outlook was that of passive rentiers who made it a point of pride to be cheated by their bailiffs; even if entail had not put technical difficulties in the way of raising capital it is hard to believe that Spanish aristocrats would have conceived of higher rents as a reward of investment.
They survived through the sheer size of their rent rolls.
Yet there was no widespread attack on aristocratic land-owners by those who suffered directly from their incurable indifference to country life — in spite of royal example they did not hunt, there was little shooting until the late nineteenth century, and they would have found English country-house life inconceivable.
In Catalonia there was little criticism of a territorial aristocracy that took little or no interest in its lands: the large farmers were confident and secure in an aristocratic rural society where an early and major defeat of the economic power of the nobility had left the masovers a rural bourgeoisie.
Together with the prosperous shopkeepers and merchants, rather than seeking to challenge the aristocracy, they found opportunities for investment and perhaps superior status in the farming of feudal dues.
They became involved in sustaining the feudal superiorities from which they profited in a small way.
It was the marginal cultivators that took land on rabassa morta , who found tithes and feudal dues an intolerable burden, and they were not powerful enough to challenge either the large farmers or the aristocrats from whom they held their lands.
Only in the War of Independence did they occasionally raise their voices against ‘the rich’.
By the end of the eighteenth century in political life, as in economic life, the old aristocracy had lost much of its influence, through incompetence and indifference.
Once the days of the great favourites and the aristocratic clique had passed, the higher nobility withdrew.
The grandees never recovered the influence lost in the War of Succession, when they proved themselves politically unreliable, incompetent, and excessively tetchy.
In their place the crown employed lesser nobles and lawyers who had no awkward pretensions to political influence.
The so-called Aragonese party (led by the strong man of the military aristocracy, Aranda, who came to power in 1766) may, perhaps, be seen as a belated attempt to recover power, at a moment of crisis for the king, from the hands of professional civil servants.
The last political triumph of the old aristocracy was the overthrow of Godoy — an obscure, Estremaduran hidalgo who, in social origins, was a typical servant of a monarchy whose only test was zeal in its service.
Thus the higher aristocracy kept its court positions but lost effective power to ‘the aristocracy of empleados' (State employees).
Spanish values had been noble.
In the later eighteenth century the concept of nobility was subject to an attack that reached surprising verbal violence: the useful bourgeois was set against the useless noble as the pattern of social virtue.
Combined with the decline in the political influence of the great aristocracy this has led to the notion of a ‘crisis of the nobility’.
Such a phrase neglects the fact that the attack on the was a European literary fashion and that the Spanish was undergoing a complex change, which was later to allow it to revive some of its social and political influence.
In Spain the attack on aristocratic values was enhanced by the extent of the nobility: when half a million Spaniards, from the poor hidalgo ‘eating black bread under the genealogical tree’ to the great grandees, claimed noble birth, the economic disadvantages of aristocratic attitudes — for example, contempt for ‘vile’trades — were serious.
In the eighteenth century this undifferentiated mass nobility had tended to contract, and it was the lower ranges of this class who, as ennobled civil servants, collected to themselves the influence lost by the great court aristocracy.
Like the provincial nobility of the northern provinces, this was a working nobility.
Thus the anti-aristocratic debate, in so far as it was not a literary fashion, was a polemical weapon in a struggle within the nobility between the nobility nobility allow it  trained golillas (pen-men, usually of modest noble origin) and the ‘military’ aristocracy, who may have regarded office as the reward of rank.
It represented, not the ambitions of an economically powerful bourgeoisie, but the claim of one section of the nobility to replace another as the chosen instrument of the crown.
The civil servants of enlightened despotism had little conception of systematically using institutional power against the aristocracy; bureaucrats thought of themselves as government servants, not as combatants in a class struggle.
The golillas's conflict with the so-called military aristocracy, if it represents anything, is perhaps best considered as a foretaste of the nineteenth-century conflict between soldiers and civilians.
Like every other class and institution, the nobility was tested in the crisis of 1808 and the French invasion: it does not seem to have failed in this test as completely as has been asserted.
Where the local nobility provided leadership in the rising against the French it was accepted, as the composition of the Juntas shows; the role of these local notables has yet to be studied, but they represent a type of ‘patriot’ in 1808.
Nevertheless, the intellectual climate of the Cortes of Cadiz was anti-aristocratic.
The notion of a Spanish House of Lords was rejected.
Thus the creation by conservative liberals of a semi-hereditary Second Chamber in the constitutions of the nineteenth century represents a recovery of aristocratic influence within liberalism, even though the extent of this influence was incomparably less than that exercised by the English aristocracy.
In modern times the Spanish aristocracy has given little cultural leadership: in the late eighteenth century the few esprit forts who corresponded with Voltaire or Rousseau were swamped by the traditional formality and tedium that made Madrid society a nightmare for intelligent ambassadors.
The conspicuous waste of the Spanish aristocracy was not the  patronage of art or civilized living but the maintenance of hordes of retainers and domestic hangers-on.
They thus created a class of semi-employed pensioners, which was the foundation of their social strength in the larger towns.
As a social institution the Church was superior in influence to the nobility.
‘The real power in Spain', wrote Wellington, ‘is in the clergy.
They kept the people right against France.’
In 1821 the former guerrilla leader Mina, an advanced liberal, recognized that a canon of Pamplona had more popular power than the provincial parliament of Navarre.
This power was in part a consequence of the Church's position as a landlord, as a charitable institution, and as a direct employer of labour in a ‘beggar economy’.
The great ecclesiastical towns lived on the churches and monasteries — perhaps a twentieth of the population of Valladolid depended on the Church — while soup and bread doles from the episcopal palaces and monasteries were an important element in the budget of the urban poor.
An English traveller described Leon as ‘kept in existence by The Church’.
Like the aristocracy, therefore, the Church could count on its urban mob, and in the riots of 1766 the Orders were accused of releasing this urban clientèle against a reforming administration; Aranda, the most conspicuous of Charles III's anti-clerical ministers, called to power to deal with the rioters, seems to have planned a serious attack on poverty precisely because he feared the influence of a Church with a monopoly of outdoor relief.
He set his closest co-operator, Olavide, to reform the Madrid Hospital for poor invalids and attempted to clear all beggars out of Madrid.
More profoundly the influence of the Church depended on its penetration at every level of social life.
Catholicism was, and is, not merely a personal faith but the formal sign of belonging  to Spanish society.
Heresy becomes a social solecism, a self-declared exile, as the personal history of Protestant converts amply proves: George Borrow's Bible peddling was regarded as a threat to society itself or an incomprehensible eccentricity.
The Church's great feasts, organized by the lay brotherhoods that canalized so much popular piety in Castile, were the expression of the corporate existence of a town.
Foreign catholics who saw grandees giving up their carriages to the sacrament, theatre audiences falling to their knees as the viaticum passed in the streets, were astonished by the universal reverence for the outward forms of worship.
The Spanish Church was democratic: one eighteenth-century primate was the son of a charcoal burner, a situation inconceivable in France.
Most of the bishops made their way by scholarships to the colegios mayores of the great universities from the obscurity of the minor provincial nobility.
There were no luxurious princes of the Church: a bishop was expected to give all his surplus income to charity once his simple household needs were satisfied.
The average parish priest was poor and remained so throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries: he earned less than a well-paid labourer and was often dependent, in rural parishes, on the sale of eggs and on other minor agricultural pursuits.
It was this condition that brought him close to his parishioners.
Coming almost certainly from a middle-class or working-class home, once his seminary days were over he had little opportunity for further education.
Hence the undeniable defect of the lower clergy was its low intellectual standards, especially when, perhaps as a result of liberal meanness in the settlements of the nineteenth century, the seminaries stagnated.
In the eighteenth century his simple accomplishments were enough to shine out in a world of darkness.
Thus the hold of the parish priest was uncontested in rural Spain especially in the stable peasant societies of the Basque country and Catalonia and where, as in Galicia outside the towns, he sided with his own class in the land war.
It was later to be challenged in urban Spain — not merely that of the great city but also the sizeable southern agrarian pueblo — because his parishioners were confronted with rival ideologies  and because the priests tended to side with the notables.
Violent anti-clericalism, as in 1835–6 and again in 1936, was an urban phenomenon imposed by the town on the countryside.
The weakness of the Church was the wasteful distribution of its resources relative to its recognized social functions.
There were too few parish priests in the countryside, too many canons, vast numbers of unbeneficed priests, and hangers-on in minor orders in the towns.
In the later eighteenth century the ‘useful’ poorly-paid parish priest becomes a reformer's hero; he might be counted on as a leader of the Economic or Patriotic Societies and as a propagandist of improved agricultural methods.
Thus the liberalism of 1808 could hope for the support of the intelligent lower clergy.
In an age in which social utility was paramount, the Regular Orders, on the other hand, were considered ‘useless’; nuns, wrote Jovellanos, should be made to knit.
The sheer number of monks became an obsession that bound together reforming bureaucrats and their liberal heirs, showing how both drew on the criticism of the ‘sterile’ classes, which goes back at least to the sixteenth century.
Moreover, the Regular Orders, with some exceptions, were in full organizational and intellectual decadence.
Their internal squabbles, a symptom of this decadence, made them peculiarly vulnerable; it was the quarrel between the Augustinians and Jesuits that opened the door to the regalist onslaught of the sixties on the privileges of the Church.
The dissolution of the monasteries by the French in 1809 was the violent culmination of a twenty years' campaign.
The liberals of the Cortes of Cadiz accepted this dissolution as a fait accompli and it was this that made the Orders the chief enemies of liberalism in Spain.
From the interruption of the war years the monasteries never recovered: their buildings had been stripped, their recruitment impeded, their incomes  dilapidated.
In financial difficulties, the Jesuits could not re-establish their educational system in 1814.
For this blow the Orders never forgave liberalism: they preached against its constitution and its philosophy as the ‘ultimate, supreme grade of evil’.
It may be hazarded that it was this inevitable alliance with reaction, especially after 1820, that weakened the popularity of the Regular Orders in Spain and produced the convent burning and assassination that disgraced popular urban liberalism.
Given the paucity and poverty of the parish clergy, the Orders were more closely connected with everyday religious life than is imagined.
They were popular preachers and evangelists — Diego de Cadiz, a Capuchin revivalist preacher, attracted audiences which fought for scraps of his clothing.
They thus found a ready acceptance, in the war against the ‘heretic’ French in 1793, for their violent Francophobia.
In the War of Independence they were the true mass leaders, the prophets of a primitive nationalism.
After 1814 this influence, as a matter of survival, could only be directed against liberalism and was therefore committed wherever possible to Carlism.
In Carlist territory monasteries were restored: in liberal Spain they became farms, barracks, schools, ministries, or simply fell into ruins.
2.
The Useful Classes
The reformers of the eighteenth century, like many critics of traditional Spain, looked to the ‘useful classes’ as the instrument of progress.
It has been an axiom of historical interpretation to attribute the failure of reform, in its eighteenth- and nineteenth-century forms, to the absence of a Spanish ‘middle class’.
Marxist theoreticians argued that without a confident class to support it liberalism failed to complete the bourgeois  revolution against feudalism; thus they sought tactical models in Tsarist Russia that represented a stage of development comparable to that of modern Spain.
This analysis, which acquired a great vogue in the Civil War of 1936, hid the presence of a middle sector of society that was to divide along classic lines into a grand and petty bourgeoisie, the Moderates and Progressives of the mid-century.
Running from army officers to shopkeepers, from the poderosos (the ‘powerful ones’) of rural towns to the cotton magnates of Barcelona, this inchoate conglomerate of the middle sections of society was to dominate the political life of the nineteenth century.
Its weakness as a political force lay, not in lack of numbers, but in the disparity and localism of its interests.
‘For forty years’, claimed a liberal statesman in 1855, ‘the middle class has governed the nation; it has lost the New World, compromised the stability of society and has not yet learnt how to form a government.’
In the eighteenth century the professions, which were to be the core of the nineteenth-century middle class, brought some social esteem but little economic power.
The persistent characteristic of the Spanish professional class, especially in its lower ranges, is the necessity of double employment.
Many university professors were paid less than labourers in the eighteenth century; if not clerics, they were forced, as were academics throughout the nineteenth century, to seek outside work to gain a living.
There were more schoolmasters per capita in Spain than in any other country in Europe, but they were vilely paid.
They became carpenters, gamekeepers, and letter-writers.
The universities, using an antiquated syllabus, turned out theologians, doctors, and lawyers and were dominated by the self-recruiting  major colleges (colegios mayores ).
These were residential colleges whose members had a virtual monopoly of the best jobs in the university and a privileged start in the civil service and the Church.
As centres of culture the decadent universities played little part in national life and the inquiries of a government reform in the 1770's reveal an abysmal indifference to learning.
Doctors hardly counted till after 1850 and no one could have foreseen the later social power of lawyers.
There was no noblesse de robe , no powerful corporation as in France.
Except in Catalonia, the lower ranges of the legal profession were despised — in the Basque Provinces lawyers were debarred from participation in the local assemblies.
University-trained lawyers dominated the civil service but only the highest posts gave social prestige.
The nineteenth century saw the transference of social prestige from a minority of lawyers acting as civil servants to a large number of lawyers acting as politicians.
Like the great civil servants of the eighteenth century, nearly all the great civilian politicians of liberalism were trained as lawyers and until the emergence of the technicians in the twentieth century — their first rivals were railway engineers — they constituted the professional class par excellence .
The predominance of lawyers in politics was to become a weapon in the crusade against the ‘artificiality’ of liberal parliamentarianism: deputies did not represent the ‘live forces’(fuerzas vivas ) of the community but the interests and ambitions of a small class of lawyer politicians.
This was a polemical exaggeration: as in the United States today, many lawyers were closely connected with local life and later with business concerns as company lawyers.
The position of lawyers is explained by what Spaniards call the ‘lack of preparation’ of other classes and the predominance of law as a general course of study in the universities.
This produced a lawyer intelligentsia to whom politics was one of the subsidiary occupations open to the under-employed professional classes.
A bourgeoisie on the European pattern, distinct in outlook from the oligarchy that controlled the municipal government and the guilds, could only be found in the merchants and shippers of the great ports.
A military accident stationed the first liberal parliament (1810) in Cadiz, the only town with a liberal society, a large French colony, a daily performance at the French theatre, a social life devoid of aristocratic prejudice, and where the test of status, even for nobles (who invested in trade), was wealth.
The prosperity of Cadiz, based on the American trade, was to decline sharply in the nineteenth century and allow Barcelona to take over its position as the exemplar of middle-class civilization, although it was never to replace the Andalusian towns as nurseries of liberal politicians.
In the early eighteenth century the old-established trading oligarchy of Barcelona and the Catalan towns was conservative: wholesale trade was reputed noble and the merchants of Barcelona wore the sword.
This class was badly hit in the crisis of the early years of the century and, with recovery, it was outdistanced by a new and more enterprising group.
In the Junta de Comercio , founded in 1758 as ‘an institution informed with a new spirit, audacious and progressive’, these new men fought the ‘prejudices’ of the guilds and participated in the most diverse enterprises.
The customary framework of the ‘company’ allowed an industrious and enterprising shopkeeper to participate, on a minute scale, in a variety of undertakings: shipbuilding, the fish and wine trade, the farming of royal or seignorial revenues, the new American trade, textiles, the importation of wheat and meat.
By such a mechanism, in which family ties played an important part, a relatively rapid ascent was opened up for the younger sons of the prosperous Catalan farmers who must leave the farm to the chosen heir (the hereu ); within a generation a man could make a modest fortune, exposed to the risk of loss as well as the hope of gain.
Connected  with the markets of Spain, Europe, and, later, America, where Catalan agents gauged the rates of profit and sold the cargoes of Catalan ships, the merchants and shippers of Barcelona suffered directly from the crises of bad trade and war.’
But even the war of 1808–14 and the French occupation produced its crop of nouveaux riches , flourishing on army contracts.
Such doubtful activities were the making of one of the most splendid Catalan fortunes — that of Gaspar de Remisa, who prospered while artisans starved and merchants were ruined.
On a smaller scale there was a nucleus of liberal lawyers and merchants in other coastal towns: in Cadiz, with its seventy-nine French exporting houses; in Bilbao and San Sebastian, where the pretensions of the rural oligarchy confronted the interests of an experienced and prosperous community of merchants; in Santander, which was to become a centre of the flour trade with Cuba; in Seville, with its American trade and its tobacco factory; in Valencia, with its silk manufacturers and its fruit trade; in Malaga, with its strong English and German connexions.
The urban improvements — town halls, paved streets — of the late eighteenth century reflected prosperity and local patriotism.
One inland town, Saragossa, produced in Goicoechea — a rich merchant, an enthusiast for poor-law reform, chairs of political economy, and agricultural progress — one of the best examples of late eighteenth-century enlightened, progressive city patriotism.
Yet these were islands standing out from a motionless sea: ten thousand individuals at the most.
Just as Catalan ships were small compared with the merchant marine of France or England, so her ‘companies’ reveal a concentration of what has been called ‘Lilliputian’capital.
Predestined heroes of the bourgeois ethic, favoured by the Government in the 1760's, the Spanish commercial and industrial classes were ill-fitted for leadership; the Economic Societies, centres of diffusion for the new gospel of productive labour, were early dominated by landowners, priests, and civil servants.
The ‘economic’ press of the late eighteenth century represented the ‘directed journalism’of an optimistic government rather than the needs of a developed commercial class.
Depression in the epoch of the absolutist restoration after 1814 was both to convert the commercial and industrial interests to liberalism and to destroy the confidence of the years of prosperity, cut short by the loss of the American market and the dislocations of the war of 1808–14.
It was not until the industrial recovery of the thirties that Barcelona became a force in liberal politics and a significant influence in the political crises of the mid century.
The institutional expression of the traditional, warm, intimate yet formalized urban civilization was the guild system.
To the reformers the guilds, like entailed estates, were yet another historical hindrance (estorbo ) to progress, a consecration of the forces of routine.
The liberals, who were to abolish the guild system in 1834, reinforced these views with their doctrinaire belief in the virtues of competition.
Yet this final dissolution was the culmination of a long decline.
The public functions of the guilds had been increasingly restricted to the organization of religious processions and the distribution of charity.
They were part of a society of determined hierarchies, impregnated with religious values and defended by conservatives for their social as distinct from their economic functions.
Even if their abolition increased mobility — in it allowed the recruitment of entrepreneurs from the ranks of prudent shopkeepers and industrious artisans — the closed life of the family, which the guild had represented, remained the most durable social institution of the urban middle classes.
Beneath the substantial merchants were a numerous class of  artisans, scattered in towns and villages all over Spain.
There can be little doubt that, in many large towns from the 1770's on, its fate was becoming less enviable, its living less secure.
This deterioration and the progressive proletarianization of the artisanate was to be particularly noticeable in Catalonia, where it represented an inevitable stage in the growth of capitalist industry: hence the outbreaks of Luddism in the 1840's.
Some artisans — smiths, carpenters, for instance— maintained their position; but the largest single section in this patchwork of local industries, textiles, was declining as an artisan pursuit throughout the century, though the decline was slow.
This contraction was most severely felt by the few employees in the smaller workshops.
In the late eighteenth century economic change began the destruction of long-established and comfortable patterns of town life; the intensification of this process in the nineteenth century was one of the psychological preconditions of primitive urban radicalism.
Outside the royal factories and the new concerns of Valencia and Barcelona, there was no proletariat physically and morally isolated from its employers.
Throughout most of the towns of Spain, up till about 1850, the employers out-weighed the employees, a relationship that changed slowly in the later nineteenth century with the breakdown of local markets in consumer goods.
The failure of democratic radicalism to develop a doctrine of class conflict was a reflection of this situation: master and man wanted the same relief from conscription and food taxes.
Every radical revolt of mid-nineteenth-century Spain could unite the artisans and workers in a protest against the consumos .
Only in Catalonia, where there was a true industrial civilization, could there be a radical proletariat; but the working-class politics of Barcelona remained a world apart until the late nineteenth century.
What struck every sensitive observer was the presence of beggars on the streets of every Spanish town.
Long after Barcelona  had become an industrial city, the miserable invaded the streets on religious festivals to reveal the massive urban poverty that Spain shared with nineteenth-century Europe.
These submerged classes survived on the charitable foundations of the past: Madrid convents provided 30,000 bowls of soup daily.
It was the danger of these semi-beggar squatters to public order in every urban economy that lead the statesmen of the eighteenth century to favour effective price control, to attempt a state reform of the ‘abusive’ charitable foundations of the Church, and to preach the chilly gospel of workhouse labour.
Nineteenth-century liberalism was to inherit hostility to religious charity without substituting for it the planned charity of the state.
The poor, as Catholic conservatives were later to point out, were disinherited by liberal legislation.
In Madrid there was a tradition of mob action by the semi-beggar class, attracted by ecclesiastical charity and by the conspicuous waste of the higher aristocracy; in the seventeenth century the monarchy feared a mob addicted to these great spenders.
In the late eighteenth century this symbiosis of peers and paupers is revealed in the fashionable aping of lower-class mores and dress, a version of the return to nature that came naturally to an upper class lacking a culture of its own.
The mob had shown its power in 1766 when Charles III was driven by a riot to sacrifice his minister, Esquilache, ‘out of love for the people of Madrid’.
The king never recovered from his fear of street noises.
By 1808 there was a developed pattern of street violence and the ‘people’ of the barrios bajos — the poor southern quarter of Madrid — after functioning as the ‘blind instruments’of an aristocratic fronde against Godoy were to become the heroes of the Second of May, when they rose against the French troops.
The pressure of the streets was to be of decisive importance in the liberal revolution of 1820, when it  was organized by the secret societies.
By the mid century respectable citizens were thoroughly alarmed at this revolutionary alliance, by then in the hands of the radical agitators and journalists of the cheap lodging houses rather than the instrument of conspirators in the clubs and lodges.
Three-quarters of the population throughout the eighteenth and most of the nineteenth centuries lived by the land.
Everywhere the land and its concerns seeped into town-life: the towns of the south had agricultural suburbs inhabited by day labourers hired in the square by the bailiffs of the great estates.
Even large towns like Saragossa were provincial agricultural capitals with a developed artisanate supplying the surrounding countryside.
We have already considered the highly diverse structure of this rural society, differing from province to province, from mountain valley to mountain valley.
In this diversified structure the self-contained economies moved slowly in response to general movements.
It was the ‘export’ provinces, which supplied a more general market, where economic changes shifted the balance of society.
Apart from the industrialists, merchants, and farmers of peripheral Spain it is probable that the main class that benefited from the rise in agricultural prices was the rural bourgeoisie of south, west, and centre.
As in every part of southern Europe, those furthest removed from the subsistence level tended to increase their margin of advantage.
A bad year was a disaster to the small peasant while it might well benefit the large farmers or merchants who could store grain for ten years, ‘observing this rule so consistently that they would pawn their last jewels or load their lands with mortgages until years of high prices’.
This independence and opportunity for large profit must have been the most important distinction between riches and grinding poverty and must have played a greater part in creating the economic hierarchy of rural society than any other factor.
It was emphasized by usury.
The small tenant and peasant easily fell into debt: in the Levante,huertas to the merchants of the ports; in Castile, to the corn merchants; in Galicia, to the lawyers.
Yet in all the dramatic descriptions of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century rural Spain these factors are scarcely mentioned.
This rural bourgeoisie was not, as is so often assumed, a ‘new feudalism’ created by the sales of church and common lands after the 1830's.
The poderosos , or powerful ones, are already, in the eighteenth century, a formidable force: local landowners, the substantial tenants of the cortijos , oil millers, corn dealers, the bailiffs of the large estates, small-town lawyers.
The hold of this class on municipal government was central to its power: as municipal oligarchs they controlled wages, prices, and the letting of the municipal commons in their own interests.
Thus the effect of the nineteenth-century sales was to turn them from a class of privileged municipal tenants into outright owners of the surplus land of the community.
These small-town bosses, characteristic of Andalusia and Estremadura, were not an attractive class.
Ill-educated, with a mixture of lawyer and peasant cunning, they were violent in the defence of their position, if need be in alliance with brigands and town gangs.
In the nineteenth century they manned the lower ranges of the political structure by combining with their traditional municipal powers the electoral patronage of parliamentary government.
We must, nevertheless, beware of looking at Spain through Andalusian spectacles and generalizing from the violent and precarious structure of the latifundia districts.
There were areas of settled peasant proprietorship, of long leases and stable crop-sharing tenures.
These weighed as heavily  in the social balance as the areas of social tension like Galicia.
Unless they are taken into account the conservatism of rural life in much of Spain is inexplicable: this conservatism was sustained by the intensity of local life.
All interpreters of Spain have insisted on the primacy of local ties and the rule of inverse proportion — the greater the area to which patriotism is applied the less intense it becomes.
The imperfect sense of national unity is thus explained, not altogether satisfactorily, in terms of those structures and mores that gave Spain social cohesion at a lower level.
National unity came late and could not conquer the sense of belonging to pre-national societies.
Of these societies (outside those areas of disseminated settlement where the parish tended to become the first unit beyond the family and that of those neighbouring farmers who helped each other out at harvest and ploughing) the most significant was the pueblo.
The word el pueblo means both town and town-dwellers and by extension ‘the people’ in general, an indication of the all-embracing nature of this primary concept in Spanish life.
A Spaniard's natural emotional loyalty is to his pueblo, to his province; he identifies himself progressively against those of another village or province, against other Spaniards, and finally against all foreigners.
Spanish popular speech is full of contemptuous, even obscene, references to the virility, morality, and poverty of the next-door village or province.
‘Rather be a tart than a Gallegan.’
This antagonism and rivalry existed between the large towns: to take one example, the rivalry of Santiago, the cathedral city, and Corunna, the seaport, was to have a decisive influence on the fate of liberal revolutionary movements in nineteenth-century Galicia.
The federal pattern of democratic revolution and the Centralista tradition can only be understood in terms of this municipal patriotism.
It was a constant in the revolutionary waves that swept across Spain in 1808, 1820, 1835, 1840, 1869–73, and finally in 1936.
It both created  the revolution and paralysed it.
In the Federalist rising of 1873 the canton of Castellón regarded the canton of Valencia as its greatest rival, though both were participating in a common democratic revolution in peril from a ‘reactionary’ attack.
The pueblo was a moral, economic, and governmental unit: as a centre of government the larger municipalities could rule a surrounding area as large as a small English county.
Within the pueblo all are moral equals and this moral equality overlay social distinctions based on wealth; wealth has its social expressions in the creation of bonds of obligation (god-parenthood, for instance) and not in the snobbery of conspicuous waste, absurd in a society where economic status is evaluated exactly by gossip.
This network of friendship and patronage became one of the less objectionable instruments of nineteenth-century electoral corruption and the instrument with which the small man met and defended himself against the state.
The patron became the cacique (electoral boss) who in return for a vote purveyed the benefits or averted the penalties of the national administration.
As the national administration made more demands in the form of conscription and taxation, so the recommendation of a patron became more important.
The government officials recognized the system since most bureaucrats owed their own position to nepotism and patronage, perpetuating ‘a procedure to which they originally resorted and to which they are committed and indebted’.
It is easy to over-estimate the strength and ‘Spanishness’ of the pueblo.
Its social cohesion was no stronger than that of an isolated nineteenth-century English village, and in the long run its solidarity against the outside world could neither defeat class conflict nor evade the power of the centralizing state.
Hatred of the absentee landlord, for instance, fitted the moral structure of the pueblo because he could be felt as an intruder from an alien city world: hence the emotional content of Andalusian village anarchism.
The persistence of the pueblo  as a social and economic unit depended on bad roads and bad political education.
It is significant because it affected a wide proportion of the inhabitants of Spain and because the preconditions of its strength persisted until very late.
Cut off from the outside world, the Spaniard needed an intimate social life and the interest it supplied to conversation.
Spaniards did not read books: they talked.
The central feature of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century social life was the tertulia — the group of relations or friends who gathered regularly to talk in the evenings.
The Economic Societies of the eighteenth century started with a tertulia of Basque gentry and conversation remained the main focus of intellectual life in the twentieth century.
Every splinter group of liberalism was to centre round a café table.
Spanish politicians discussed the political crises of the nineteenth century with the intimate precision with which a family discusses its affairs or a village gossips.
Enlightenment and Reform, 1760–1790
Under Charles III a group of ministers and civil servants, distinguished by their energy and their ability, undertook the task of modernizing the monarchy.
This effort, as far as the administrative machinery was concerned, was initiated by the French advisers who came to Spain in the early years of the century with the first Bourbon king, Philip V; later it was encouraged by Choiseul, who saw in the effective mobilization of the resources of his ally the means to defeat England and lay  the foundations of a Franco-Spanish world power.
In his declared aim of regenerating Spain for his own profit Napoleon was to inherit a portion of these ambitions.
In the overhaul of government that accompanied the War of the Spanish Succession the servants of Philip V rejected the system of the Great Councils, less because it gave the grandees too much political power than because it was incurably inefficient and incapable of organizing the monarchy for the defence of the French dynasty.
For the old polycentric system of the Council they sought to substitute departments controlled by ministers.
A ministerial system, run by career bureaucrats, was the instrument of Charles III, who had served his apprenticeship as an enlightened ruler in Naples; he did not destroy the great Councils but day-to-day business escaped them.
But in the last decades of the century rational administration was no longer an end in itself.
It aimed at the release of social energies crippled by outworn institutions and archaic policies in order to strengthen the power of the monarchy.
Civil servants accepted ‘the truths of political economy’; it was the task of government to remove the obstacles that lay in the path of ‘felicity’.
It was as architects rather than as builders that the Caroline bureaucrats bequeathed to liberalism this programme: their concrete achievements remained limited, but there is no practical reform of the nineteenth century, no reforming attitude of mind, that cannot be traced back to one of the servants of Charles III.
Thus it was Floridablanca, a stiff bureaucrat, who planned the road system radiating from Madrid, the completion of which was to be the achievement of Isabelline liberalism; indeed, the fate of the Corps of Road Engineers, set up in the eighteenth century, was bound up with the fate of liberalism itself; dismantled by Ferdinand VII it was set up by the Liberal Revolution in 1820; dissolved in the reaction of 1823, it was re-established by liberals in 1834.
It was Olavide, a radical esprit fort capable of jokes in bad taste about ‘superstition’, and Aranda, the Aragonese aristocrat and correspondent of the philosophes , both zealous proponents of the latest  advances from abroad, who put forward in the 1760's radical reforms that remained unfulfilled in 1931.
In order to illustrate the links between the programme of the Caroline bureaucrats and that of the nineteenth-century liberals we may take as examples the reform of the administrative structure (both in Spain and in America), agrarian reform, church reform, and educational reform.
A body composed of other and smaller bodies, separated and in opposition to one another, which oppress and despise each other and are in a continuous state of war.
Each province, each religious house, each profession is separated from the rest of the nation and concentrated in itself….
Modern Spain can be considered as a body without energy…a monstrous Republic formed of little republics which confront each other because the particular interest of each is in contradiction with the general interest.
Thus an enlightened eighteenth-century Spanish civil servant defined the state he served.
Uniform centralization was the administrative pre-condition of all other reform, as the Caroline bureaucrats found when their agrarian programme was blocked by oligarchic municipalities.
This centralizing mission the bureaucrats of Charles III found beyond their strength and they bequeathed its fulfilment to their liberal successors.
Uniform provinces and municipalities were the programme of radical liberalism in the Cortes of Cadiz; the final redrafting of the political geography of Spain into provinces was the work of Javier de Burgos, admirer alike of Napoleonic administrative techniques and the enlightened servants of Charles III.
In the 1830's this moderate liberal finally substituted for the omnicompetent Council of Castille a ‘modern’ Ministry of the Interior and a Supreme Court.
Finally, the uniform taxational system, by which eighteenth-century reformers hoped to replace the fiscal confusions of an historic conglomeration of indirect taxes, was the achievement of a mid-century liberal, Mon.
The centralizing mission of the old monarchy had been  limited by provincial privilege.
Whereas Philip V succeeded (where two hundred years of Hapsburg effort had failed) in dismantling the political institutions that gave Catalonia, Valencia, and Aragon a quasi-independent status his successors failed to diminish the fueros of the Basque Provinces — Guipúzcoa, Vizcaya, Alava — and of Navarre.
Thus the fueros , which supported the independence of these foral provinces, remained as the main political challenge to nineteenth-century liberalism.
Although the institutions of self-government varied in detail with each of the Basque Provinces, everywhere the sovereign body was a broadly chosen General Assembly with a smaller permanent Deputation.
Both were manned by a gentry proud of its local influence, provincial patriots who devoted themselves to improving roads and preserving historical monuments.
Royal agents were subject to stringent control as natural enemies of provincial liberties: the Viceroy of Navarre — the only viceroy outside the American Empire — was regarded as a constitutional monarch within his province, and reminded of his status by the meanness of his palace beside that of the Provincial Deputation.
Important as was the consciousness of self-government, the fueros would not have been defended with such obstinacy had they not conferred substantial economic advantages, designed originally to favour poor frontier provinces.
The foral provinces were exempt from Spanish conscription, taxation, and customs duties: thus the national customs frontier ran along the Ebro.
For those who enjoyed them, the preservation of the fueros was ‘an instinct and a poetry’ and the struggle to defend them linked the backward-looking Carlism of the 1830's with the cultural nationalism of the later nineteenth century.
To the foral provinces their attachment to Spain was a contract dependent on the maintenance of their liberties and economic  advantages: enlightened despotism and liberalism, refusing to accept the contractual status of the foral provinces, were by definition anti-Basque.
Every attempt by the absolute monarchy to raise the taxational quotas was met by the claim that the quota was a contract alterable only by both consenting parties.
Every attempt by liberals in the nineteenth century to replace foral liberties by the uniform liberty of a liberal constitution was resisted in the name of provincial liberties.
Nevertheless liberalism succeeded in destroying the fueros and it was only after its triumph that conservative liberals challenged the maxim that ‘centralization is neither more nor less than liberty itself’.
Apart from this tenacious defence of local liberties the Caroline bureaucrats, in common with other administrative technicians of the ancien régime in Europe, found that the main obstacle to modernization lay in the inertia of the average Spanish office-holder and the sheer size of the administrative apparatus — the superfluity of posts that nourished what was later to be termed empleadismo .
Thus reform often petered out in a rearrangement of government offices — a persistent feature of Spanish administrative history — which failed to eradicate the inherited vices of a paper-loving bureaucracy; the navy, for example, remained a ground-based pasture for underpaid civil servants to browse on, a defect that had costly results at Trafalgar.
It remains true that, apart from the foral provinces, government became more effective, defined, and concentrated as it approached the subject.
The Captain General, a civilian as much as a military administrator, was master of his province, the corregidor of his district as the minister was not yet master of his department.
Only the audiencias , burdened with written procedures in which lawyers were paid by the page, and fulfilling both the functions of an appeal court and a provincial  administrative council, recalled the polysynodical system of the great councils.
The fatal flaw was the last link in the chain of command — municipal government.
It was here that the Caroline reformers achieved nothing because the crown could not recapture the powers it had made over to local municipal oligarchs.
The impetus of reform and modernization was dissipated in the town hall where the government failed to insert effective instruments of its will.
As in the case of the foral provinces, the destruction of these ‘little republics’ was left to the liberal statesmen of the nineteenth century who added to the notion of rational administration that of civil equality.
It was only after the imposition of a system of local government imitated from France that the benefits of uniformity and centralization was questioned.
Paradoxically, it was the relative success of Charles III's reforms in America — the first systematic overhaul of the imperial administration since the sixteenth century — that undermined the foundations of empire.
Reform was inspired by the consciousness that ineffective administration produced revenues inadequate for imperial defence and by the desire to strengthen the hold of Spanish commerce in Latin America against competitors.
Charles III's minister, Floridablanca, believed good government would solve the colonial problem; this was a profound misconception, inherited by Spanish liberalism, for it was not mal gobierno that the creoles rejected but government by peninsulares (peninsular Spaniards) as such.
The efficiency of government could only be increased at the expense of its popularity; the more corrupt and less efficient the government, the more acceptable it was to creole merchants and  landowners.
Charles III's reforms improved the quality of the imperial civil service while denying to the creoles a share in the system — perhaps because, as Floridablanca maintained, creoles were too enmeshed in local graft to be trusted.
Reform was ‘a flash of lightning illuminating us for one moment only, to leave us in greater darkness’.
Thus the implantation of the intendant system weakened rather than strengthened the hold of metropolitan Spain, by ending corrupt practices that had allowed creoles control of their own affairs, and by creating bitter rivalries between the new officials and their subordinates.
The creoles' desire for office, economic freedom, and free trade could never perhaps have been satisfied within the static Spanish theory of imperialism.
In so far as Charles III's reforms encouraged local prosperity — as they did in the newly created Viceroyalty of Buenos Aires — they gave the societies of Latin America a more lively sense of the inconveniences of the Spanish connexion.
Where the absolute monarchy sought to solve the colonial problem by an efficient imperial administration, the liberals hoped to satisfy colonists who wanted free trade and home rule by an imperial, liberal constitution.
Just as the creoles did not want good government manned by the civil servants of an absolute monarch, so they would not accept rule by a metropolitan parliament, managed by Spanish liberals.
It was the waste of national resources and, to a lesser extent, the amount of human suffering in rural Spain, that in the years 1766–73 set off the most remarkable attempt at agrarian reform that Spain was to know until the days of the Second Republic.
Like their Republican successors in the 1930's, the agrarian reformers of Charles III's reign were obsessed by the violent social situation and the agrarian unemployment on the great latifundia and dehesas (scrub pasture) of Andalusia and Estremadura.
The simple proposition behind all agrarian reform was that surplus land should be distributed to surplus labour.
Aranda and Olavide entertained ambitious schemes of state colonization, of which the best known was their partially  successful attempt to settle German immigrants in a model colony of symmetrical plots along the brigand-infested road over the Sierra Morena.
It represented all the ‘prejudices’ of the reformers: neo-classical architecture, a preference for corn as opposed to sheep and goats, the exclusion of the Regular Orders from the settlements.
Such state-directed paternalism could not be the model for liberal land reform.
Its bible was the Irforme of Jovellanos published in 1795, a stylistic masterpiece that applied the commonplaces of economic individualism to the land problem in Spain.
Corporate property and entail were sins against the ‘natural tendency towards perfection’: individual interest, i.e. ownership, was the ‘first instrument of prosperity’.
Combining these two propositions, it followed that the task of nineteenth-century liberalism was confined to the creation of a free market in land by the abolition of entail, and the sale of the church estates and the common lands.
The sale of these lands on the open market did not solve the social aspects of the agrarian problem — particularly the chronic unemployment and grinding poverty afflicting the braceros .
Later reformers, therefore, professed to find in the policies of Aranda and Olavide the models of a ‘collectivist’ solution, which regarded property as a social institution.
Land that was not ‘used’ could be expropriated for the benefit of the industrious poor; rents should be controlled, the needy farmer aided.
This ‘school’ was set against that of Jovellanos whose laissez-faire individualism held property to be a natural right with the market as the regulator of the economic relationships between men.
Jovellanos regarded rent control as useless and an evil in itself; he considered land as a commodity that must find its natural price in the open market and held that it was ‘vanity’ to try to protect peasants from the effects of economic laws.
‘Interest’, complained a reforming chaplain, was the only stimulant in the new philosophy and it was this philosophy that inspired nineteenth-century liberalism.
The most controversial of all the legacies the eighteenth-century  reformers bequeathed to their successors was the subordination of the Church as a political, economic, educational, and charitable institution to the supremacy of the State.
As was the case with their administrative reforms, the liberals of the nineteenth century were to rest their offensive on different ideological foundations; but their practical demands on the Church remained, largely, an extension of the regalism of the late-eighteenth-century civil servants.
Regalism can best be defined as Erastianism and it represented little more than the modernization and systematization of the traditional claim of the crown to control what it considered the temporal aspects of church government.
The regalist offensive of Charles III's ministers, in spite of its respectable antecedents, was the most significant domestic issue in eighteenth-century politics.
Initially concerned mainly with royal patronage, it broadened until it involved a claim by the state to regulate every aspect of the activities of the Church, from its right as a corporation to hold property to its control over university education and charitable foundations.
The traditional arguments of the crown, set out by Macanaz for Philip V, were sharpened by the influence of Italian regalists and connected with what was loosely called Jansenism, by which was meant a Spanish edition of Gallicanism.
The crown's case was contested by the ‘corrupt and abominable’ ultramontane political theory of the Jesuits and the canon lawyers of the universities.
The Jesuits were expelled (1767) from both Spain and Spanish America — a measure that gave its author, Aranda, a European reputation as an esprit fort — and the reformers attempted to turn the universities into state-controlled educational institutions teaching useful knowledge instead of Aristotelean ‘words’.
By Charles IV's reign regalism proceeded to an attack on church property, and with Urquijo, most radical of the regalists, it bordered on schism.
In 1800, however, the regalists fell from favour and ‘Jansenism’ was condemned.
Before the conservative country-offensive had become official policy they had flirted with French supporters of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy (regarded by its Spanish admirers as a piece of thoroughgoing regalism), and had supplied a stock of ideas that were to govern, not only the church settlement made by the liberals in the Cortes of Cadiz, but the programme of liberalism until 1939.
Ministers of the Second Republic quoted the ministers of Charles III.
Finally we must examine the intellectual movement accompanied the reformers and that many of them favoured.
It has become the centre of a bitter controversy: Catholic conservative accusations of treason to the national spirit and of religious heterodoxy have obscured the implications of luces (Enlightenment), and the intentions of its advocates within the government service.
The Spanish Enlightenment, as an intellectual movement, was second-rate and derivative: hence the confusions consequent on combining borrowings from the earlier Spanish diagnosticians of national decadence (Ustáriz, Ulloa, and Ward), from Colbertism, the Physiocrats, and Adam Smith; hence its failure — if we except Goya, who shared the horror of superstition common to the supporters of luces — to fling up a European celebrity.
Its interest lies in its function as the creed of a reforming élite , confronted with the difficulties of a state-sponsored economic revival in an under-developed economy, a revival that had to contend with the resistances of the traditional structure and the misrepresentations of a peculiarly narrow Catholic conservatism.
The watchword ‘utility’, natural to men of government, produced exaggerations that ill became distinguished humanists: Jovellanos and his school held that poetry should be socially useful, Campomanes that the sewing-needle was ‘more profitable’ than Aristotle.
It led to impossibly  puritan attitudes, a crusade against the enjoyments of the artisan, onslaughts on the bullfight, not because it was cruel, but because it wasted working time; it supported an attack on charity as an anti-social habit, which merged with the bleak belief of later liberals in the virtues of competition.
Exaggeration and crudity were pardonable.
Jovellanos, in his campaign for technical education and the useful arts as a means of raising living standards, may be forgiven for his attacks on the dead languages.
As a reformer confronted with an ignorant and conservative society it is understandable that Olavide saw universities only as ‘workshops for the production of an élite to serve the state and enlighten the multitude’.
Liberalism was to place the centralized university system under state control: the result would be that, while theology could not be studied as a subject, professors could be expelled for their religious opinions.
The success of governmental reform depended on intelligent local co-operation.
The creation of an enlightened élite , committed to reform, among the provincial notables was the function of the government-sponsored Economic or Patriotic Societies and the ‘economic’ press which was to diffuse a government-sponsored view of the new gospel of progress.
This was part of a general campaign for education; the enemy of progress was ignorance.
The first Economic Society grew up spontaneously from the tertulia of a group of Basque gentry: it read foreign periodicals, discussed the useful sciences, set up a school and attacked the Gothic prejudice of aristocratic idleness.
By 1800, societies had been founded in provincial capitals all over Spain and the whole movement was centralized in the Madrid Society, ‘receiving its impulses from the provinces and reflecting those influences thither strengthened’.
The Economic Societies encouraged local industries, set up model farms, and sponsored new crops.
Much of the activity was puerile and faded away  once the initial pride in seeing the list of names and the hopes of government favour had vanished.
It is easy to scoff at the movement — with its prizes for knitting and  taffeta umbrellas, its hyperboles about the happy revolution to be accomplished by wheel ploughs, its scientific amateurism — as the naïve posturings of a minority engaged in a self-conscious crusade against the forces of routine and conservatism.
Nevertheless the influence of the Societies can be clearly traced in the reform movement of 1808–9 and again, as a remote cause, in the reforms of the 1830's.
The significance of the Societies survived their failure; they represented the first attempt to interest public opinion in the reform of the traditional structure of Spanish society.
The Spanish Enlightenment remained a government-sponsored, government-censored movement largely confined to the better spirits of the public administration.
Hence it was reduced to relative impotence when the radicalism of the French Revolution strengthened the forces of resistance in the government itself.
What we may call ‘the generation of 1760’ was composed of paternalistic modernizers and enlightened patriots in the eighteenth-century sense of the term.
Their neoclassical enthusiasms are an indication of their isolation from what even Jovellanos could term ‘the vulgar and idiotic people’ who preferred the Spanish drama to the precepts of Boileau.
It failed to foster an independent, bourgeois culture.
There were exceptional individuals but the intellectuals of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were priests or bureaucrats and it was in this latter capacity that journalists figured in the reign of Charles III.
The ‘enlightened classes’ failed to appear and respond to a creed forged in their supposed  interests: the propaganda of luces could no more create in Spain a bourgeoisie in the French image than the propaganda of free trade, half a century later, could create an English middle class.
4.
The Radical Challenge, 1790–1808
The radicalism which makes its appearance in Spain after 1790, under the influence of events in France, was far removed in tone and purpose from the governmental reformism of the generation of the 1760's.
From the first the government made every effort to exclude any knowledge or discussion of the French Revolution; Floridablanca's cordon sanitaire was the strictest in Europe; in 1791 he suspended the entire periodical press and kept a careful watch on the large French colony in Spain.
To the ministry enlightenment was government property, to be regulated, censored and, if dangerous, rejected: regalism and the campaign against the Inquisition became suspect; the government and the Inquisition now combined in an effort to search out dangerous books.
Godoy's modification of these procedures in 1793 and again in 1797 and the renewal of the alliance with intellectuals like Jovellanos and Meléndez Valdés was a temporary affair.
In 1798 Caballero, ‘the enemy of enlightenment’, swept the intellectuals and ‘Jansenists’ from office and instilled anew a fear of France and progress in the court.
Thus a great event like the French Revolution had little resonance in Spanish opinion and the efforts at revolutionary propaganda had little success.
The terror and the execution of the king paralysed and disgusted those intellectuals who, formed by French books and sharing the ideologies which had inspired the moderates in 1789, now saw ordered progress drowned in blood.
‘What atrocities!
What horrors!….
And we  were interested in such people.
Let us be ashamed of our involuntary deception and take a lesson for the future.
The efforts of the government and the reversal of the alliance with the intellectuals failed to keep out a trickle of French newspapers: contraband books were picked up by the Inquisition all over Spain between 1790 and 1792.
Thus, on the outbreak of war with France (1793), there was a small band of pro-French democrats in Madrid.
According to Godoy, the government decided on peace in 1795 because it was alarmed by Picornell's republican conspiracy in Madrid and rumours of republican, pro-French committees in the north.
Godoy himself traced the origins of liberalism to the pro-French peace party who greeted the returning French ambassador with cries of Vive la Liberté .
With peace and the French alliance, there could be no effective barrier to French influence.
With the Consulate France became respectable — the Concordat allowed Napoleon to appear as the protector of Catholicism.
Above all she had become powerful.
Belief in salvation from France was an essential element in the crisis of the intellectuals in 1808.
Though enlightened Spaniards might detest the brutal deceit of Napoleon's seizure of Spain they felt that perhaps he alone could regenerate her.
When confronted with the excesses of the anti-French mobs in 1808 it was almost natural that such men, with fear as much as hope in their hearts, should become supporters of French rule.
Clearly radical ideas were the property of a minute minority: in 1793 the people listened, not to French agents, but to friars preaching a crusade against atheism.
Yet it is clear that there was a more general temper — among the intellectuals of  Salamanca, Valladolid, and Seville for example— which was bitterly critical of Spanish society.
An echo of this criticism survives in Goya's Caprichos and in the poetry of Meléndez Valdés, vague but radical in its humanitarianism: one of the Salamantine group, the Abbé Marchena became a French propagandist, appealing to Spain to destroy the Inquisition and imitate the ‘sublime’ revolution of France.
This Jacobinism was exceptional; more significant was the gradual growth of the idea that the monarch's power, however beneficent it appeared when directed against the strongholds of privilege, must be limited by a constitution in the event of its being exercised by an irresponsible favourite like Godoy.
The virtue of the Prince must be ‘secured, like Ulysses, to the mast of the law, in order to save it from the seductive voices of flattery and vanity’.
This vague notion of the desirability of a constitution gained the support of a powerful myth when contemporary contractual theory and the ideas of Montesquieu were built into a version of Spanish history.
This myth was later popularized by Martínez Mariana's Teoría de las Cortes , where it was argued that the destruction of medieval Cortes by the Hapsburgs, a destruction completed by the suppression of the comunero rebellion of Padilla (1520), was the necessary prelude to three hundred years of ‘slavery and despotism’.
To revive liberty was to revive the Cortes.
Mariana's critics pointed out that his ‘gothic perfections’ hid what they considered a crass historical error: liberty was founded not on democratic pressures but on grants from the crown.
Nevertheless the Spanish translation of Rousseau's Social Contract could appeal to a ‘son of Padilla’; it was enthusiasm for the parliamentary institutions of medieval Spain which allowed the Cortes of Cadiz to present a constitution, founded on the constitutions of Revolutionary  France, as the culmination of the ‘true’ constitutional development of Spain.
It was thus that radicalism became, historically speaking, respectable.
Both radicals and the men of government criticized traditional Spain and its values; this criticism opened up the polemics of Europeanization which have lasted until today.
Were the old values of a Catholic society sufficient and necessary for a modern state?
Was any attack on them to be construed as national treason?
To the defenders of tradition there was little difference between the cautious civil servants of the generation of 1760 and the radical intellectuals of the nineties.
Both shared the belief of the Enlightenment that legislation could procure felicity; that the evils of society were remediable, not punishments for original sin since ‘more than natural causes political errors cause the decadence of peoples’.
Both shared the common assumption that Spain was itself decadent and ‘behind’ Europe: the radicals were pessimists and wholesale Europeanizers like the later Progressive Liberals, while the Caroline bureaucrats were moderate patriots who resented the airs of superiority which the French philosophes adopted towards Spain.
Finally, in the crisis of 1808 some of the reformists and many of the radical intellectuals deserted the national cause and served ‘the intruder’, the French king, Joseph I. To traditionalists this treason was inevitable since both derived their ideas from the national enemy.
The conjoint condemnation of enlightened reform from above and a radicalism which derived from doctrines of popular sovereignty was useful because it allowed conservatives to discredit any effort to reform traditional society; it was possible because the generation of 1760 included pious bureaucrats like Floridablanca,esprits forts like Aranda, and cosmopolitan experts like Olavide; it was made plausible by the Janus-like  face of reform itself.
Regalism was a traditional position of the crown, not an attempt to create a lay state — Charles III, the regalist king, was devoted to the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception.
Yet the private language of the regalists was as strong as that of any nineteenth-century anti-clerical: Azara dramatized his struggles with the Jesuits as ‘a modern Iliad’.
They were enemies of the sovereign, public thieves, full of vice, and atheists whose pernicious doctrine could only be met by illuminating men's minds with geometry, physics, and astronomy.
To fight for the crown against the Church and in order to neutralize the influence of canon lawyers, the regalists introduced the teaching of Natural Law, an innovation which was promptly suppressed in 1794 when the revolutionary dangers of secular political thought were made evident in France.
Equality before the law, for the reformers the principal condition of the effective exercise of royal power, contained the pattern of a social revolution which must destroy the privileged groups of traditional society.
Liberty entered into men's minds in the struggle against the economic prejudices of the ancien régime , a struggle waged by servants of the crown.
To destroy guilds was to defend ‘civil liberty’.
In a sense Spanish clerical conservatives were correct in thinking that there was no such thing as a ‘safe’ Enlightenment; however respectable the proponents of luces appeared, at the root of their creed lay a rationalism that denied Divine Providence and that must lead to an attack on the position of the Church in society, even if they professed to respect dogma.
Feijóo, ‘father of the Enlightenment’, whose encyclopaedic works first popularized ideas of experimental science early in the century, was a monk and devout believer.
Yet his  criticism of false miracles undermined the foundations of popular belief and it was to him that the future heretic Blanco White acknowledged his debt.
The outward religious respectability of the leading personalities of the Enlightenment in Spain is not necessarily a proof of their innocence of real hostility to the Church: the Inquisition, weak though it was, combined with stiff royal censorship to make the public expression of heterodox views an impossibility.
The trial and disgrace of Olavide by the Inquisition in 1778 was a penalty for the tactless folly of a man who could not resist mocking superstitious priests; its significance is that the Inquisition could still destroy a leading statesman.
Nevertheless the Church could not preserve men's minds from modern heresy; it failed in the campaign to exclude ‘dangerous’ books nor could it prevent the influence of contacts established by Aranda and others with the French intellectuals.
Indeed the Church's counter-offensive made common property the most familiar arguments of deists and natural law philosophers in order to refute them.
Thus there was in Spain a minority who, if not free thinkers, were extremely critical of the position and claims of the Spanish Church; in the Salamanca of the seventies, a small group of intellectuals had read books containing rejections of the central beliefs of Catholicism itself.
The Inquisition was an ineffective irritant, slow and erratic in its procedures; it merely put up the price of books, forcing readers to all sorts of subterfuges in order to consume often out-dated heresies.
Even a pious man like Jovellanos could feel bitterly at the attempts of the Inquisition to sabotage his plans for establishing a modern technical institute at  Gijon.
No Spaniard could freely obtain the works of Voltaire, Rousseau, or Buffon.
At the beginning of every avenue of progress, intellectual or material, stood the Church with the feeble Inquisition as a symbol of Spain's distance from cultivated Europe.
THE CRISIS OF THE ANCIEN RÉGIME 18081814
CHARLES III, the reformers' king, whose life was a mechanical ritual of hunting and hard work, died in the last month of the last year when reform was still respectable — 1788.
His son Charles IV was a domesticated, well-intentioned man, soon dominated by his wife Maria Luisa.
During his reign the factions of the court destroyed the stable ministerial tradition which had been the precondition of his father's achievements, substituting for it the rule of a favourite — the queen's supposed lover, Godoy.
It was this ministerial system in decline which had to face the strains imposed on the European state system by the ideas and the armies of the French Revolution.
The consequent crisis was an imperial crisis loosening the fabric of the absolute monarchy and bringing into question the principles on which it was based from the Basque Provinces and Catalonia to New Granada and the River Plate.
It accelerated Spain's descent from great-power status.
By 1824 she had lost all her American empire except for Cuba and Puerto Rico, while in metropolitan Spain the struggle waged in the thirties between constitutionalists and traditionalists was to reduce the core of the monarchy to bankruptcy and near anarchy.
This protracted crisis began on 17 March 1808 when a mob of soldiers, peasants, and palace grooms forced Charles IV to dismiss Godoy, found hiding in terror in a rolled-up carpet; two days later another mob forced Charles IV to abdicate in favour of his son, the Prince of Asturias who became Ferdinand VII.
In April, at Bayonne, Napoleon, who had already thrown French troops into Spain, compelled Ferdinand to abdicate the throne of Spain in favour of Joseph, the emperor's brother.
In the early summer, a national revolution in the name of ‘the  Desired One’, Ferdinand, now a captive in France, split Spain into a conglomeration of city-states and autonomous provinces ruled by committees (juntas) of local notables.
These Provincial Juntas organized resistance to the French occupation authorities and, on 19 July, the army of the Seville Junta defeated Dupont's isolated corps at Bailen.
This unexpected victory forced Joseph to withdraw from Madrid and, assured of English help with Moore's army, the patriotic cause appeared about to triumph.
With Napoleon's invasion of Spain it collapsed.
By 1810 the legal government of independent Spain (which had transformed itself from a Central Junta, composed of delegates from the Provincial Juntas, into a Regency) was cooped up in Cadiz surrounded by a French army; there it sought to find the sinews of war and to regularize the constitutional position by summoning a Cortes which met on 24 September 1810.
The subsequent liberation of Spain was largely the work of Wellington's armies; after the battle of Vitoria (June 1813) Joseph left Spain and in the spring of 1814 the Desired One returned to his kingdom.
From these events the monarchy of the ancien régime was never to recover.
When the Prince of Asturias put a candle in his window to start a riot against his father, he called into existence a process which led through constitutional monarchy to a democratic republic.
A king, who came to his throne through ‘popular power’, it was argued, must submit to limitations.
In 1812 the Cortes of Cadiz drew up a constitution which consecrated the dogma of the sovereignty of the nation.
This democratic revolution was accepted neither by the king himself nor by conservative-clerical Spain; to them the War of Independence was fought in defence of the ‘old constitution’, i.e. the absolute monarchy and the Church.
When the Cortes returned to liberated Madrid (5 January 1814) and the Desired One to Spain, the Persians, a group of conservative deputies, petitioned the king to denounce the constitution of 1812; this he did in the Manifesto of 4 May 1814.
Thus, in the reign of Ferdinand VII, the contest between liberalism and conservatism could not be fought out within a constitutional system; it concerned the existence of a constitution as such.
I. The French Invasion and the Patriot Rebellion, 1808–1809
The crisis of the ancien régime is marked by that interplay between foreign policy and domestic faction which typifies the collapse of enfeebled states.
For twenty years Floridablanca's ‘system’— the French alliance — had given Spain the appearance of a first-class naval, military, and colonial power.
Suddenly the French Revolution destroyed the premise of the system; the war against France (1793–5) exposed the weakness of Spain's position in Europe — incapacity to resist a French invasion.
‘How can you want Spain mixed up in such great events’, Aranda complained to the Prussian Minister, ‘when she lacks all means to wage war.’
Given this incapacity Spain could never hope to maintain diplomatic independence against France or to resist French demands for war against Great Britain, in spite of knowledge of the disastrous consequences of such a war to the Spanish colonial empire and its trade.
Napoleon, therefore, regarded Spain as a power to whose alliance he possessed a natural right.
Hence he never bothered to devote much time to Spanish affairs; wishful thinking and ignorance exposed his views on the value of Spain to a series of disillusionments.
She failed him as a great ‘silver’ power, as a naval power at Trafalgar, and by 1807 her domestic polities were so confused by court intrigue that she appeared scarcely a reliable political ally.
In spite of disappointments, neither Napoleon nor his agents revised their illusions.
Spain was potentially a great power, unreliable and ineffective because her resources were badly managed.
Towards the end of 1807 Napoleon determined to convert Spain into a satellite state in order to control its foreign policy and to manage its resources; but he was not yet clear how this should be accomplished.
In the meantime and, as a first step, under cover of a joint war against Portugal, he secured the partial occupation of Spain by French troops (Treaty of Fontainebleau, 17 October 1807).
It was at this point that Napoleon became entangled in the feuds of the court factions; his exploitation of these feuds after the tumult of Aranjuez gave a confused start to a national revolution.
‘The Revolution in Spain', prophesied General Augereau to the Directory, ‘will be directed, in the first instance, against  the Prince of the Peace.’
Godoy, Prince of the Peace, was neither a reactionary nor a brutal tyrant; indeed he was a mild progressive who consistently posed as the friend of enlightenment, earning for himself that hatred of priests and monks which contributed to his fall.
He attacked intramural burial, the Mendicant Orders, and bullfights — all characteristic policies of enlightened statesmen.
The breach with the inherited system lay not in Godoy's policies but in the relegation to impotence of the trained bureaucrats who had been the servants of Charles III; it lay in the scandalous origins and untrammelled nature of his power as the queen's supposed lover and the ‘dearest friend’ of the complaisant Charles IV.
His correspondence with the queen, while it may confute accusations of lasciviousness, reveals the poverty of his courtier mind; his main concern and topic was the health of the royal couple and his bond with Maria Luisa seems to have been  hypochondriacal rather than sexual in nature.
His offence was not flagitiousness but the vulgarity, ostentation, and political inexperience of a parvenu.
Godoy was a good-looking Guards officer of twenty-five when he was granted power more absolute than that possessed by any subsequent ruler of Spain until General Franco.
When Floridablanca's rigid hostility to Revolutionary France and Aranda's neutralism had both failed it was to such an adviser that the court turned to solve the problem of Franco-Spanish relations.
As a courtier, he saw all issues in the light cast by the shifting world of court favour: thus Godoy's support of the French alliance was consistently conditioned by his desire to use it against his enemies at court or his hopes of a safe retreat from these enemies in a Portuguese principality bestowed on him by France.
Napoleon despised him and exploited him because he guessed his motives and could not take seriously his defence of Spanish independence.
As in all mild dictatorships, the dictator's control of patronage  created an opposition of ‘outs’.
Thus the poet Quintana's friends, when royal patronage and the censor backed ‘Godoy's gang’ of literary admirers, set up Voltaire's dramatic theories against those of Batteux, favoured by the régime's dramatist and Godoy's friend, Moratín.
Like all such oppositions it was cliquy, largely conversational, expressing itself in ‘private grievances, expressive silences, above all in abstention from praise or at the most, timid insinuations’.
By 1808 the unpopularity of Godoy had spread beyond these circles to embrace all classes and the revolution prophesied in 1798 was turning against the court that supported his power: a monarchy which could disgrace itself and by its foreign policy plunge Spain into inflation, dear bread, commercial depression, and the loss of the American market must be limited by a constitution.
The Tumult of Aranjuez, which overthrew both Godoy and his king, was not, however, the work of informed ‘liberal’ opinion.
It was engineered by a group of malcontent nobles in alliance with the faction of the Prince of the Asturias, using as their instruments army officers and the mob.
The vague reformism of the epoch was, in these circles, channelled into an even vaguer brand of aristocratic constitutionalism which revived the claims of the old ‘rich men’(ricos hombres ) of Castile; grandees could stomach rule by career bureaucrats but the career of court favourite was an aristocratic preserve not to be exercised by the ‘sausage maker’, Godoy.
The Prince of the Asturias was in contact with this aristocratic opposition, publishing caricatures distributed in taverns in order to discredit his father's court and the favourite around which it centred.
Ferdinand believed Godoy was scheming for a regency to exclude him from the throne; Godoy knew that Ferdinand was  intriguing against him with the French ambassador.
By 1807 politics had become a fight to the death between the two factions.
Godoy struck first hoping, in the Escorial Trial, that Ferdinand might be found guilty of political parricide.
The trial only revealed Godoy's political and moral isolation and convinced Napoleon that these ‘dirty intrigues’ made either faction an impossibly unreliable ally.
As Godoy claimed, the Tumult of Aranjuez was the work of seduced plebeians, a revolution that seeped down from above.
Next day the prosperous citizens of Madrid put up their shutters while the mob pillaged the houses of Godoy and his supporters.
A court tumult had become ‘a formidable national revolution’.
As in 1766, the crown surrendered its chosen servant to the only forces it was to respect in the nineteenth century — the mob and the army officers.
The accidental factor, that belonged to the past, was the leadership of the aristocracy: in the later nineteenth century the sans culottes of Madrid streets could not be brought out by the traditional symbiotic relationship of aristocratic employers and plebeian clientele.
Yet it was from the delirious welcome accorded to him by his partisans in the Madrid streets that Ferdinand VII formed his conceptions of political power; in 1814 he was to use the Aranjuez mixture of plebeian loyalty and army support in order to defeat the liberal constitution.
What he did not realize was that the same combination of forces could be used against the monarchy.
Hence the revolutions that stretch from 1820 to 1931.
It is ironic that Godoy was overthrown and treated with ignominy as a traitor at the moment when he had decided to resist Napoleon: it was his plan to remove the king to Seville, out of the way of the French, which set off the Tumult of Aranjuez.
Years later Toreno, the liberal historian, acknowledged the ‘correctness’ of this policy.
When Godoy was contemplating patriotism his enemy Ferdinand, who had been intriguing for French support for some months, put all his faith in Napoleon's endorsement of the revolution of Aranjuez.
Rumours of this purpose account for the early popularity of the  French; they had come to support the ‘Desired One’.
Aranjuez, however, had clarified Napoleon's muddled thinking on the Spanish question and he had no intention of using the opportunity it presented in order to support a puppet king whose character and intentions he mistrusted.
Instead he played off the resentment of the ‘old court’ at their humiliations and Charles IV's frantic appeals that the French should save Godoy from the vengeance of his enemies against Ferdinand's craving for French backing.
Thus the emperor could settle the dynastic question by enticing Ferdinand to Bayonne and there forcing both him and his father to abdicate in favour of his own brother, Joseph (10 May 1808).
In their competition for French support Ferdinand and his father became the first afrancesados (Frenchifiers).
As long as Napoleon appeared the supporter of Ferdinand against Godoy, Spain ‘awaited its fate from the Emperor’.
By dethroning Ferdinand Napoleon turned the revolution of Aranjuez against himself: the rising against Napoleon was thus, in part, a revolution of disappointed hopes.
Since Ferdinand's instructions to the Junta of Government (which he left in Madrid to govern while he was at Bayonne) were to cultivate French friendship at all costs, and since these counsels were not modified until after the outbreak of a popular rising, it meant that official Spain could not take the leadership of the instinctive movement against France.
Resistance to the French troops who ‘occupied’ Spain under cover of the Treaty of Fontainebleau and the national revolution against France which broke out all over unoccupied Spain came, therefore, from those whom the French commanders termed le petil peuple and from those local notables who were outside an administration manned by appointees of Godoy.
In the confused situation of March and April 1808 the hesitations of the official classes in occupied Spain are understandable.
Neither the Council of Castile nor the Junta of Government could be expected to lead a hopeless revolt against French garrisons by disobeying Ferdinand's explicit orders.
Irritated by the exactions of French quartermasters and suspecting French intentions, the Council, nevertheless, cooperated with Murat, the commander of the French army of occupation.
After the abdication of Ferdinand at Bayonne, it refused to recognize the change of dynasty, grounding its refusal on legal formalities.
Though Murat considered this niggling opposition an encouragement to disaffection —‘the yeast of all this ferment’(25 July)— in the euphoria after the patriot victory of Bailén (19 July 1808) the dignified trimmings of magistrates appeared the feebleness of treason.
The possibility of resistance lay in an appeal to the sovereign nation in the form of the mob.
In the May of 1808 the constituted authorities all over Spain were confronted with the dilemma which discredited civil governors on the outbreak of the Civil War in July 1936.
Was the defeat of the usurper worth the dangers of an armed mob out of control in the streets?
The Council of Castile had refused public recognition of Joseph's title to the Spanish crown on the grounds that such a claim was ultra vires without consulting the nation.
Hence, in the mouths of conservative lawyers, we catch an appeal to the radical doctrine of the sovereignty of the nation; it alone could provide a theoretical basis for resistance to a French king whose claim was legally established by the formal abdication of both Ferdinand VII and his father.
To talk of the rights of the nation was one thing, to descend to the streets and appeal to the mob was unthinkable to magistrates whose obsessive concern was the preservation of order.
How could Ezpeleta, a soldier-administrator well on in his seventies and now Captain General in Barcelona, be expected to appeal to the unemployed dockers, artisans, and cotton operatives, called by the French commander l'immense canaille de Barcelone , against an overwhelmingly superior French garrison?
Ezpeleta and the local administration  followed events and there is no reason to suppose that judges and municipal officials would have abandoned their ambiguous collaborationism had not St. Cyr, the French commander, later forced on them an oath of loyalty to Joseph — repugnant to the very legalism which, combined with inertia and pay, had kept them at their posts.
To the propertied classes in occupied Spain, therefore, co-operation with the French authorities was the only reasonable course.
It was the urban mob which ended the hesitations of the official classes wherever resistance was a possibility.
The first act of rebellion, and what remained the symbolic centre-piece of revolutionary nationalism — the Madrid rising of 2 May 1808 — was the work of ‘low people’, alarming the Council of Castile as much as Murat.
At 1 p.m. it rode round Madrid with the other Councils in full dress to restore order and in the following days it co-operated with the French authorities in the collection of arms.
In unoccupied Spain the constituted authorities did not have the excuse of overwhelming military force and it was their failure in crisis which condemned the ancien régime .
Their desire to preserve order (that is, obey instructions from a government in Madrid dominated by Murat) and their shilly-shallying when confronted with a demand to arm and lead a national revolution against the French, were swamped by popular risings.
These were set off by news of Bayonne, of Murat's executions of the patriots of the 2nd of May in Madrid, or of the failure of the authorities to celebrate the feast of St. Ferdinand.
Cuesta, Captain General of Old Castile, took the patriotic cause ‘seriously’ when the students of Valladolid erected a gallows in his courtyard and after his colleague in Badajoz had been murdered.
In the Asturias a mob of a thousand peasants and university students, after pillaging the arsenal of its rifles, made an end of the hesitations of the Audiencia and the constituted authorities, who were afraid to defy Murat; the general assembly of the province, which happened to be holding one of its triennial meetings, took the leadership of the insurrection, and, on 25 May, declared war on Napoleon.
In the classic phrase of Toreno, ‘the people rose’ in ‘unanimous, energetic’revolt, in the weeks after 2 May.
The true nature of this revolt is still obscure.
Was it a political Great Fear, a contagion that spread from city to city, village to village?
Was it the last act of a popular drama begun at Aranjuez and thwarted by Napoleon's desertion of Ferdinand and protection of Godoy, a revolution of disappointed vengeance, a revolution directed against Godoy's creatures in the provincial administrations who now followed the French?
Was it an outburst of fanatical xenophobia led by monks and friars?
Napoleon and the French in Spain entirely failed to grasp the significance of this popular movement.
French officials knew that the patriotism of the official classes was dubious and lukewarm; they calculated that, if the Captains General went over, the people would follow; the people of Spain were vile cowards ‘like the Arabs’.
Murat and the French Ambassador, La Forest, saw the 2nd of May as the opportunity for one of those severe lessons which had been so effective in Naples.
On 1 July La Forest believed the revolution was dying.
The sole result of anarchy would be to drive the ‘honourable men of property’ into the arms of the French.
Of the great fear of the men of property our sources leave us in no doubt.
Alcalá Galiano, as an old man, remembered the terror of the middle-class citizens as the ragged ‘patriots’ of the  Valencian army, their hats covered with relics, marched into Madrid; in Cadiz only the Capuchins could disarm the rioters who, after murdering the Governor, had seized the Arsenal.
In Oviedo an infuriated mob was only prevented from lynching the distinguished poet Meléndez Valdés by the appearance of priests with the exposed host.
Perhaps it is hardly surprising that Meléndez Valdés became an afrancesado .
Nevertheless, this panic reaction was neither universal nor permanent; if it had been there could have been no War of Independence.
‘The nobles, clergy and soldiers united with the people in the nick of time and calmed the disorders.’
A significant proportion of local notables joined the popular revolution in order to master anarchy: this was to be the classic pattern of revolution in the nineteenth century.
Thus in Saragossa, the capital of Aragon, where a mob with red cockades in their hats demanded arms and patriotic resistance, Palafox accepted the leadership by becoming a ‘revolutionary’ Captain General and regularizing the movement by summoning the Cortes of Aragon.
Palafox was a great aristocrat, known to be a friend of the deposed Ferdinand and anything but a democrat; but, as his brother made clear, the future hero of the siege of Saragossa could not master the people on any other terms.
In Oviedo the popular revolt was respectably channelled into the Junta of the province and the leadership of the Marqués de Santa Cruz.
Elsewhere, the main instrument for this capture of control by the notables — an English diplomat called them the gentry — was the election of Juntas.
Once assured of their willingness to adopt the patriot cause the ‘people’ turned to their natural, local leaders and disappeared from the stage except for a few significant reappearances and a few protests against ‘the rich’.
Yet it was the people who  continued to embody what English agents called ‘enthusiasm’, the xenophobic church and king patriotism which never lost its terrors for the men of property.
‘Whatever good will there is,’ wrote Moore in December, ‘and among the lower orders I believe there is a good deal, is taken no advantage of.’
As the French armies advanced, in the contracting area controlled by the patriots effective government and the war effort of the years 1808–14 lay in the hands of the Juntas.
Like the committees of July 1936, they issued passports, raised local levies, licensed apothecaries.
At the base of the revolutionary pyramid lay the popularly elected town Juntas, sometimes two in the same town.
Above the town Juntas, and chosen originally from them, came the Provincial Juntas.
These bodies were controlled by the ‘men of 1808’, local landowners, clergy, officers, and administrators who had taken the patriot side.
In the Asturias, the Junta was driven from mountain village to mountain village with a stable as a committee room, without pen or ink.
Its members wearied of the task, seeking relief in absence which reduced the Junta to a handful of members.
They were feeble in policy, loth to tax the propertied classes and the clergy, paralysed by opposition, yet they remained the centre of the civilian war effort, taxing, organizing  guerrillas , chasing deserters, and countering defeatist propaganda.
These harassed men were revolutionaries in spite of themselves.
When the Juntas were thwarted in their organization of a war effort by the spiky legalism of those local organs of the ancien régime which survived in unoccupied Spain, they could defend their authority only be deriving it from the elections of ‘a free people who did not wish to perish’.
It was this democratic claim that shocked the conservative lawyers of the Council of Castile, and the judges of the Audiencias .
In the first months the Provincial Juntas acted as independent sovereign states.
Delegations were dispatched to London ‘as nation to nation’, armies were regarded as provincial forces not to be sacrificed either to the needs of neighbouring provinces or to  those of the nation.
The Seville Junta behaved with criminal selfishness and, but for the moderation of its general, it might have declared war on Granada; it refused to send the Andalusian Army to the critical Ebro front where the French, after Joseph had withdrawn from Madrid in the panic caused by the defeat of French corps by the patriots of Bailén, were massing for a reinvasion of Spain.
To later Federal Republicans the Spain of the War of Independence was already a federal republic, run by conservatives.
The deepest chord in Spanish revolutionary politics is the centralista tradition which holds that central government is an emanation from the direct democracy of the popularly elected municipality.
Nevertheless the conservatives who manned the Juntas were not provincial separatists: they were inspired, not merely by a vague programme of reform on a national level, but by a sense of order that forced them to see the necessity of a central government.
The Council of Castile, in spite of its repeated claims to be the only legally constituted authority, was discredited by its supposed subservience to Murat; its orders were treated with contempt by the Provincial Juntas.
It could not be allowed to represent the nation in arms.
A central authority would only be accepted if it represented the Juntas; backed by British agents, who thoroughly disliked the military consequences of federalism, the movement for the creation of a Central Junta triumphed over the jealousies of the important Juntas.
The adhesion of Seville, the virtual capital of the early months and now strong in the victory of Bailén, was decisive.
In September 1880 the delegates of the Provincial Juntas met at Aranjuez — the jealousy of Seville precluded Madrid — as the Central Junta.
The Central Junta has a bad reputation; a clumsy body of thirty-five presided over by the aged Floridablanca, President of the Junta of Murcia, its pretensions as a sovereign body with the title ‘Majesty’ were slightly ridiculous.
It was opposed by the renascent claims of the Provincial Juntas as direct representatives  of the sovereign people; by conservatives and malcontent grandees who hoped to put an end to Junta government altogether; by the emergent power of the generals whose incipient Caesarism was represented by Palafox and Cuesta, both of whom were intriguing for political power.
Above all its claims were rejected by the Council of Castile as a usurpation of sovereign power which belonged to the king and to his appointed administrators.
Overpoweringly jealous of the revolutionary claims of the Provincial Juntas, it could not bring itself to recognize the legality of their offspring.’
After the shattering defeat of Ocaña (November 1809 — the Central Junta's attempt at decisive defeat of Joseph's armies) the demand for a ‘concentration of government’ became irresistible.
Discredited and abused, the Junta retreated before the French, first to Seville, then to Cadiz: there its members resigned, to be insulted by the ‘patriots’ of Cadiz who searched their baggage for stolen government funds and finally imprisoned them.
Its successor, the conservative Regency of Five (presided over by the Bishop of Orense, later to gain notoriety by his public denunciation of the doctrine of national sovereignty) was caught between, on the one side, the urban democracy of Cadiz, where a ‘Junta of merchants’, elected by a ballot of householders, had assumed the airs of a sovereign body and, on the other, the antiquated obstructionism of the Councils.
Without the support of British troops, the nominal central government of Spain might have collapsed altogether.
2.
The Cortes of Cadiz and the Liberal Settlement in Spain and Latin America, 1810–1813
Except to hidebound conservatives, it was evident that, whatever body of men governed patriot Spain, it must seek strength and legitimacy by summoning the nation to a Cortes.
The debate on the nature and functions of the Cortes brought  into the open the issue which, since May, had divided conservative officials from revolutionary patriots.
As representatives of the sovereign nation whose king was a captive in Talleyrand's chateau, the patriots claimed to supplant the structure of the ancien régime that had so signally failed in the supreme test of patriotism.
The debate, pursued in periodicals and pamphlets, was the first public debate on the fundamental conditions of political life that Spain had known.
It concerned the nature of the War of Independence itself.
Was the war, as liberal patriots maintained, a revolution to regenerate Spain by new laws?
Had the social contract been broken and the nation, ‘which had done all’ in the way of resistance to the intruder, resumed its constituent powers?
Were, as conservatives replied, the old laws, which they continued to administer, and the old institutions which they still manned, the only valid constitution?
Were, therefore, the deputies of the Cortes to limit themselves to the study of the ‘means and methods of expelling the French army’, or was their sacred task to endow Spain with a constitution that would limit the despotism which had ended in French invasion?
The supporters of ‘our revolution’ believed, like the Prussian patriots of 1806, that men who fought as soldiers must be rewarded as citizens, that ‘independence would be accompanied by a reform of abuses’.
Conservatives taunted them that they might find themselves, fugitives in Africa, ‘drawing from under their arm a very fine plan of a constitution while they had not a foot of land to stand upon’, after having opened the doors to ‘the revolutionary spirit which had destroyed France’.
Between this bald administrative and military conception and the threat of radical constitutionalism stood Jovellanos's Burkean defence of the ‘ancient and venerable constitution of Spain’.
The issue between radical patriots and conservatives centred on whether the privileged estates should preserve the separate representation they had enjoyed as ‘arms’ of the medieval Cortes, or whether all should merge in a general congress.
Jovellanos say in a House of Lords the only wall that could stem the tide towards democracy that would run in a single chamber.
The reactionary Regency, which succeeded the Central Junta as the executive power, abandoned the second chamber before what the liberal Argüelles called ‘the irresistible pressure of public opinion’ embodied in the deputies from the provinces assembled in Cadiz.
Given the political feebleness of the Regency and the imprecise antiquarianism of the conservative programme, there could be no other result once the constituent issue had been raised.
The Spanish House of Lords, a product of Jovellanos's correspondence with Lord Holland, seemed an artificial piece of antiquarianism in a country which had enjoyed no constitutional life since the sixteenth century and where the aristocracy were suspect as indifferent patriots.
‘Has a grandee ever liberated a village?’
The Cortes of Cadiz, elected in theory by a complicated system of indirect household suffrage, assembled in the besieged Isla de Leon on 24 September 1810.
It was to draw up the Constitution of 1812, the ‘sacred codex’ which defined Spanish liberalism as a political creed.
This ‘codex’ was to become the classical liberal constitution of Latin Europe in the early nineteenth century.
The Constitution of Cadiz was always represented by conservatives as the handwork of a radical minority, divorced from any representative opinion in Spain.
In a sense this was false, as recent historians have been at pains to prove.
The replies to the consulta of 1809 (by which the leading authorities were asked for their views on the task of the Cortes) reveal a widespread, if ill-defined, feeling for a constitution based on a division of powers, for uniform, modern laws, for civil equality, and the curtailment of corporate privilege.
The liberals of Cadiz, therefore, did not represent merely a minority group within the political nation in spite of their imperfect election credentials; as far as there was a political nation, it was reformist.
What remains true is that the enlightened were a minority within the nation as a whole , which neither shared nor understood the patriotism of these ‘medieval knights, noble, generous men of the spirit’.
It is also true that the Constitution of 1812 went beyond the naïve reformism of liberal priests, lawyers, and local notables who formed the substantial majority of the deputies.
When it came to the drafting of the constitution those with clear ideas imposed them: these ideas, disguised by historical arguments, derived from the radicalism of the 1790's and the only principle which underlay ‘our Revolution’— the sovereignty of the people.
It was outside rather than inside the Cortes that a conservative opposition built up against the liberals and by 1811 the unity of patriotic reformism was broken.
Within the Cortes the strength of the liberals lay in their eloquent leadership — the ‘divine’ Argüelles; Torrero, the radical priest; Toreno, an Asturian aristocrat and historian of the Revolution — rather than in a party organization.
The only bases for such an organization were journalistic cliques and the tertulia , evening gatherings of familiar acquaintance.
This reliance on the compulsive power of oratory started a rhetorical tradition which in the long run weakened liberalism; rhetoric is unsuitable to the politics of interest and easily becomes the property of extremists.
The liberal working majority was based on the votes of the suplentes (the substitute deputies for occupied districts and Spanish America, elected under radical pressure at Cadiz).
This gave liberalism a southern tinge (many deputies came from Estremadura and Andalusia) and meant that, as ‘proprietary’ deputies arrived from liberated Spain, so the liberal position weakened.
Organized Cadiz radicalism favoured the liberals throughout: from the public galleries the great liberal speeches received what an English observer called the ‘loud approbation of the public’.
Thus the nature of liberal support, conveniently for conservatives, could be made to rob the work of the Cadiz liberals of any claim to represent the nation: liberalism appeared the vested interest of a ruthless political minority, ‘the criminal conspiracy of a handful of facciosos ’.
The political theory of liberalism was derived from a variety  of sources: the facts and necessities of the national rising; the commonplaces of the eighteenth-century natural law school and Montesquieu; the historically tinged constitutionalism and the generalized feeling for reform that was characteristic of the Godoy epoch; the more radical brand of constituent reform that found strong press support in 1808; the influence and example of France; the works of Bentham.
Thus the central dogma of the constitution — that the sovereign nation could enact the constitution that suited it — could be derived alike from the premisses of the radicals or from the necessity of rebutting Joseph's claim to be legal king of Spain as a result of the abdication of Bayonne: a transfer of the crown by Ferdinand alone was invalid por falta de consentimiento de la nación .
Jovellanos recognized that such assertions of popular sovereignty ‘destroyed our old constitution’ by eliminating its monarchical character, yet they were the logical necessities of resistance, practical consequences of the action of a king who, in  Toreno's words, had left his nation an orphan.
The strongest ideological current in the Cortes was the historic constitutionalism associated with the works of Martínez Mariana.
‘There is nothing in the project of the constitutional committee that cannot be found in the most authentic and solemn fashion in the different codes of Spanish laws.’
The deputies were ‘re-establishing laws which had made our ancestors free men’.
Hence debates had an antiquarian tone: little was heard of the rights of man, a great deal about the rights of the crown of Aragon, of the Councils of Toledo and Leon, of the Goths as founders of liberty.
Nevertheless, for all their historical theorizing the liberals were concerned with power: they were not restoring a lost medieval constitution but meeting the potential absolutism of a restored monarchy with fundamental laws derived from contractualist political theory.
Their historical fictions collapsed in debate.
When a  deputy demanded that each medieval law revived should be cited, Calatrava called such conduct worthy of a court of law, not of a constituent assembly.
Argüelles was forced to admit that no ancient law could infringe the sovereign rights of the nation: the ancient constitution was kept only because it was supposed to contain the ‘first principles of national felicity’.
Respect for medieval precedent was a tactical device, a protective colouring to make the constitution respectable to conservative Spain.
‘The spirit and ideas of the liberals were republican although in order not to affront openly the opinions of the masses, they pretended no other aim than a limited monarchy, basing their projects on laws and events in the history of Spain adapted to their purposes.’
Their constitution embodied a radical fear of the executive and an extreme division of powers that could have no conceivable medieval precedent.
The king kept only those functions which the Cortes could not in practice exercise itself, together with a severely limited suspensive veto.
His control over the administration was subjugated, via the responsibility of his secretaries of state, to an automatically elected unicameral assembly.
In the intervals between its sessions the king was watched by a Deputation.
In the exercise of his remaining prerogatives the king was watched over by a Council of State — a miniature second chamber chosen by the king from a list submitted by the Cortes.
In 1820, when the Constitution of 1812 was in force, the king found that he could not change the Captain General of New Castile on his own order.
Blanco White, from his London exile, saw the liberals' mistake: their treatment of the king as ‘a constitutional wild beast’ inevitably condemned the constitution to destruction on the king's return.
Like Gustav III of Sweden, he would easily overturn an unreasonable constitution within which no self-respecting monarch could move.
The transcendent importance of this constitution in the subsequent history of Spanish constitutionalism conceals that liberalism was more than a political creed.
The men of 1812 meant to create the legal framework of a bourgeois society; they had given political power, by an intricate combination of universal suffrage and indirect election, to the middle classes considered as the ‘regulator’ of other classes.
The details of the liberal programme (attack on regional, ecclesiastical, and aristocratic privilege, guilds, and the Mesta ) were inherited from regalists and political economists, from the servants of Charles III who had attacked the privileged in the interests of a modernized monarchy unencumbered with private jurisdictions.
Now the programme was justified in different terms: civil equality, personal liberty, the rights of property, and freedom of contract.
‘Liberty, Equality and property are natural rights, God-given natural rights which men protect when they enter society.’
In the name of these principles the Cortes produced on paper (for neither the constitution nor its legislative consequences were ever effective) a Spain that would have delighted the monarchical bureaucrats: a clumsy taxational system, with endless provincial divergencies, was to be replaced by a uniform income tax; the machinery of the ancien régime with its characteristic confusion of administrative and judicial function was dismantled.
The ‘bizarre’ quasi-federal structure of local government vanished, to be replaced by a system of uniform municipalities and provinces under a jefe político , ancestor of the all-powerful Civil Governor.
Though later liberals were to divide on the issues of the election or selection of local government officials (with radicals in favour of popular election and conservatives for appointment of mayors and councils by the ministry),all liberals, in spite of lip-service to the ideal of the medieval municipality, accepted two propositions: that the Cortes, as ‘sole representative of the sovereign nation’,must enforce a uniform and centralized system and that, within this system, the municipalities were ‘subaltern corporations’.
This conception of the relationship  between local and central government, derived from the French model, stamped the whole subsequent history of Spain.
The destruction of the historic provinces and their replacement by ‘artificial’ entities — the new provinces — was at the root of the regionalist and nationalist movements of Catalonia and the Basque Provinces; these looked to a revival of medieval institutions, finally destroyed by the legislators of liberalism, as the safeguard of local interests and true liberty alike.
The control over local affairs that the new system entrusted to the agent of the central government was held responsible both for the electoral mechanics which distorted parliamentary liberalism and for the decay of local citizenship.
Thus when, in the early years of the twentieth century, conservative statesmen wished both to satisfy regionalist demands and make the parliamentary system work as a vehicle for the ‘real’ demands of the electorate, it was the system of local government, first set up in Cadiz, that they attempted to reform.
But after a century this ‘artificial’ system had created a political life and interests of its own which were strong enough to resist its replacement.
It is in their attitude to agrarian reform that the premisses of liberalism emerge most clearly.
The liberals of Cadiz were not primarily concerned with a socially desirable redistribution of landed property but rather with the establishment of clear and absolute property rights — the Roman Law notion of jus utendi et abutendi as against the medieval confusions of multiple claims to enjoy the use of the same piece of property.
The  untrammelled right of the individual to dispose of his own property as he saw fit was the essential foundation of a liberal economy and a bourgeois society.
Hence the establishment of the right to enclose land, to sell or rent it, subject only to the ‘will of the contracting parties’: the right to enclose was a blow at the  pasturing rights of the Mesta which patently infringed the individual's right to dispose of his property.
The individual was superior to the corporation.
There can be little doubt that radicals would have liked to have gone beyond the sale of monastic land to a wider offensive against ecclesiastical property.
This would have solved the problem of the national debt (the influence of French precedent is revealed by their translation of biens nationaux as bienes nacionales .
Moreover, they were the heirs of the regalists' campaign against mortmain and the political economists' attacks on the entailed mayorazgos .
Political prudence and the dangers of a frontal attack on the Church restrained them to the sale of common lands and the abolition of civil entails, ‘pulling up by the roots the tree which bears such bitter fruits’.
Most controversial was the abolition of seignorial jurisdictions (señorios ): this was not a measure to relieve an oppressed peasantry but to establish property rights on an acceptable contractual basis and to abolish enclaves of private jurisdiction in constitutional Spain.
Typically enough, the liberals claimed to be re-establishing the early medieval fuero juzgo — a claim which caused endless legal confusion — when in fact they were crowning the work of the eighteenth-century civil servants with the economic individualism of the French Revolution.
It has been argued that the liberals' respect for property precluded any satisfaction of land-hungry labourers (some of whom had seized land in the troubles, a process of which we know nothing), and that the abolition of the guilds — again the programme of the eighteenth-century economists — worsened the condition of the small artisan.
It is true that liberalism could not back a jacquerie and that it preferred to paternalism the teaching of political economy in schools.
Yet the liberals of 1812 were involved in the myth of the people who had risen while the aristocracy had remained inert and they were not unaware of the advantages of creating a class of small peasants devoted to the  liberal revolution — again an implication of their interest in the French Revolution.
Hence half of the common lands was to go to war veterans and the propertyless.
The conflict between the economic necessity of a free market in land, which must benefit the rich buyer, and the desirability of peasant support was to confuse the liberal tradition until the days of the Second Republic.
The contradictions of liberalism — particularly those involved in the conflict between local liberties and a uniform liberal constitution — were nowhere more disastrous and more evident than in America.
It was these contradictions which, in the crisis of 1808–14, combined with inherited grievance to damage the structure of the Spanish Empire beyond repair.
Already, after the American War of Independence, Aranda had argued that to retain any sort of hold in America, Spain must abandon the old theory of Empire and set up local independent Bourbon thrones or even slough off Peru.’
Nevertheless it is difficult to judge how far a movement for independence in Latin America, inspired by North American example and the ideology of the French Revolution, had advanced beyond the traditional colonial grievances.
Republican conspirators had found little support; Picornell, whom we have met as a republican conspirator in Spain, failed to engineer a rebellion, while Miranda's expedition of 1806 was a fiasco.
It was the wars of the French Revolution and Napoleon which first drove the colonials to independent action; war exposed the impotence of Spain as an imperial power and revealed her incapacity to supply her colonies with merchandise.
With Great Britain, the greatest maritime and trading power, as an enemy the disadvantages of the Spanish connexion and the advantages of independence became clear.
In spite of these inconveniences, and their exploitation by British policy, it was the collapse of Spanish authority rather than a creole revolution which began the processes by which the Empire was  destroyed.
In 1806, when British troops captured Buenos Aires, the Spanish authorities retired.
It was the creoles themselves who raised a citizen army to defend Spanish sovereignty.
By twice defeating the British invaders the creoles discovered their own strength.
They also discovered the benefits of free trade; pushing aside the objections of peninsular officials and Spanish merchants, they traded with British merchants who flocked to the River Plate.
‘The economic emancipation of Buenos Aires was determined before its political independence began.’
The defeats of the Spanish armies in the Peninsula, the abdication of Ferdinand VII, and the final disgrace of the Central Junta left the Spaniards in America rootless and confused.
It was not that the Americans rose against Spain; it was that Spain fell away from America.
In the imperial crisis of 1809–14 the local bodies which sprang up, as the Juntas had sprung up in Spain, professed to be preserving the authority of Ferdinand VII against agents of Joseph seeking to capture American allegiance for the French kingship.
Nevertheless, local action often entailed the deposition of the existing authorities and their replacement by local notables.
Within the framework of a ‘loyalist’ revolt emerged the idea of ‘the liberty of the nation’.
On the news of the occupation of Andalusia by the French armies Buenos Aires set up a Junta which deposed the Viceroy in order to ‘preserve’ the Viceroyalty for Ferdinand VII.
Yet this action (25 May 1810), by creating a creole government, is rightly celebrated as the birthday of an independent Argentine Republic, although formal independence was not to be declared until 1816.
In what was ultimately to become Venezuela the revolutionary implications of the movement were decisive; a Junta in Caracas swept aside the existing administration and, in the  name of preserving America for Ferdinand VII, disowned the authority of the Cadiz Regency, that is of the legal government of Spain.
The implications of this action became clear; the Junta declared the ports open to trade from every nation to which the Regency replied by a blockade; in 1811 a Congress declared itself independent and decreed a republican constitution.
Spanish governments between 1809 and 1814 had neither the force to suppress the revolt nor could liberal political thought embrace the notion of colonial autonomy.
Liberal premisses produced divergent theories of empire on different sides of the Atlantic.
Latin Americans quoted the verse of the Spanish patriots of 1808 in defence of the patria against the despotism of the foreigner: but for them the patria was ‘all the great extent of both Americas’ and the oppressor Spain.
The solution of the Cadiz liberals for the colonial desire for self-government was the concession of full political rights to American citizens within a unified empire; the colonies were an integral part of metropolitan Spain and would be ‘freed’, with the same constitution that gave Spain herself freedom.
The first step therefore was to grant representation to the colonies — though the word was avoided — in the Cortes.
This was merely to recast the Hapsburg theory of Empire in liberal terms.
‘From this moment, Spanish Americans, you see yourselves free men….
Your destiny no longer depends on minister, viceroys or governors; they are in your own hands.’
America, like Spain itself, had been ruined by three centuries of theological intolerance and political despotism; if a unitary liberal constitution was the remedy in Spain, it must also be the remedy in America.
Once the boon of common liberal institutions had been granted by a generous metropolis, a refusal to accept the rule of Spain was conceived as ‘indecent’ ingratitude, as a separatist rebellion.
The liberals did little to win colonial opinion; they  restricted the number of American deputies in the new constitution lest American opinion should ‘swamp’ the Cortes; they neglected the protests that the ‘American’deputies already in Cadiz had no claims to represent American opinion; they refused any substantial concession of freer trade.
They resented British pressure for a mediated settlement as the outcome of selfish mercantile designs on the American market.’
Their insistence on the integrity of the Spanish monarchy and their rooted hostility to any form of autonomy thus allowed those creoles who wished to sever the Spanish connexion to present rebellion as the only course.
This rebellion had two main foci : the Viceroyalties of the Rio de la Plata and of New Granada, where resistance was to be symbolized by Bolívar, the greatest of the liberators of Latin America.
Independence was the achievement of a heroic minority working with a myth — the ‘slavery’ of the South American populations to Spanish despotism.
The mass of the population (especially the mestizos and the coloured and Indian populations who were truly ‘slaves’) were either indifferent or actively hostile to the political ambitions of the white creoles of the towns and the large estates, who represented a more immediate oppression than that of the Spanish crown.
Thus by 1814 Bolivar was driven out of Venezuela by a savage backlands revolt, accidentally royalist, led by Boves, a smuggler and sergeant of the Spanish marines, who established a brutal domination over the mounted herdsmen of the plains.
Boves's mestizos aimed to exterminate the creoles and to destroy their property.
By 1814, with the war in the Peninsula ended and the  arrival of 10,000 Spanish troops under General Morillo, the prospects for independence were gloomy; Bolívar had been driven out of Venezuela and New Granada was about to be recaptured.
Only in the homogeneous white population of the United Provinces of the River Plate did independence seem secure.
Ferdinand VII could believe that, as in Spain itself, the years 1808–14 could be treated as if they had not existed and the ancient order could be restored.
3.
The War of Independence and its Legacies, 1808–1814
If, in perspective, the loss of the American Empire was the greatest single consequence of the crisis of 1808, the legacy of the War of Independence moulded the subsequent history of Spain itself.
It gave liberalism its programme and its technique of revolution.
It defined Spanish patriotism, endowing it with an enduring myth.
It saddled liberalism with the problem of generals in politics and the mystique of the  guerrilla .
Most awkward and indigestible of all it left the problem of the afrancesados .
Twelve thousand Spanish families who had served the French kingship followed Joseph across the Pyrenees after the battle of Vitoria.
For a generation these exiles, who included the ablest men in Spain, were to be distrusted by both liberals and reactionaries.
Modern Spanish nationalism of a type comparable to nascent nationalism in other European countries was created by the fact of resistance to Napoleon.
It gave to the administrative unity of Bourbon Spain, ‘the supreme creation of the eighteenth century’, an emotional content.
For a generation of European Romantics it created the image of a nation sui generis , a natural force uncontaminated by Europe, an image consecrated by the greatest writer of nineteenth-century Spain, the novelist Galdós.
A myth of enormous potency, available to radicals and traditionalists alike, grew out of Spain's unique and proud resistance.
Nevertheless, given the strength of local ties, the patriotism that w as to mark the great crises remained an abstract emotion, imperfectly felt at the most intimate levels.
The patriotism evoked in the Episodios nacionales of Galdós's is less deeply felt than that of Hardy's Dynasts .
For this reason defeat was psychologically disastrous.
Exalted patriotism attached itself to victory  over the United States in 1898, to conquest in Morocco, even to the success of Peral's submarine.
When campaigns ended in disaster and the submarine sank disillusionment and self-criticism set in.
Thus the War of Independence remained, if we except O'Donnell's African conquests (1860), the only satisfactory exhibition of nationalism on a large scale.
How far do the realities of Spain's war effort correspond with the patriotic myth of a nation rising and driving out its oppressors?
The Spanish victory of Bailén (July 1808) was the inevitable consequence of Napoleon's belief that the conquest of Spain was a police operation that could be entrusted to inferior troops.
Dupont was assigned the task of conquering Andalusia with a corps composed mainly of conscripts straight from the depots: half-starved by the rupture of its supply lines, this nondescript force was utterly defeated by the numerically superior levies of the Seville Junta under Castaños, and by what Napoleon termed Dupont's ‘horrible generalship’.
Madrid was evacuated, the Spaniards believed they had defeated ‘the victors of Austerlitz’ and victory engendered a mania for pitched battles.
They brought, not another Bailén, but defeat after defeat, justifying Napoleon's judgement that the Spanish regular army was the worst in Europe.
Wellington's judgement was fixed by the generalship of Cuesta and the flight of the Spanish troops at the battle of Talavera.
‘I have never known the Spaniards do anything , much less do anything well.’
As commander-in-chief — he would not co-operate with Spanish generals on any other terms — Wellington was loth to regard native troops as an instrument that could be used with safety in battle.
Nor were such views confined to prejudiced and exasperated Englishmen: performances like Medellin  (March 1809), Ocaña (September 1809), astonished the French.
Exalted patriotism was generated by the battle of Bailén, by the sieges of Saragossa and Gerona.
If Bailén was a fluke, the siege of Saragossa astonished a Europe accustomed to the conventional sieges of the Italian and German campaigns.
For two and a half months Saragossa, a poorly fortified town, resisted a good siege train, and when the walls were gone the inhabitants fought in the streets.
It was a unique war with a unique morality.
Spanish regular officers shamelessly violated the capitulation of Bailén, leaving 10,000 troops to starve on a barren island because they felt under no obligation to obey the rules of war with a ‘captain of bandits’.
Atrocity stories — the shootings on the night of 2 May, Dupont's sack of Cordoba, the pillage of soldiers in a country where the Napoleonic system of living on the country broke down — fed xenophobic hatred of the French as vandals and heretics.
‘They have behaved worse than a horde of Hottentots.
They have profaned our temples, insulted our religion and raped our women.’
Enthusiasm was fed by falsehoods and exaggeration.
‘This race despises foreigners, a contempt explained by the exaggerated opinion it holds of itself.
Milfs Gloriosus is the Spaniard.’
Exaltation was subject to evaporation in the squabbles of defeat, and Moore noted with bitterness that ‘the enthusiasm of which we heard so much nowhere appears’.
After feeding themselves with rumours of Napoleon's defeat, Andalusia and Valencia made no attempt to resist the French.
Andalusia's welcome to Joseph in 1810 appeared ecstatic to his courtiers: priests, nobles, and peasants came to greet him in every town.
If ever Joseph felt King of Spain it must have been on his triumphal progress in Andalusia.
Wellington's graceless contempt for the Spanish war effort is as unjustifiable as the Spanish claim that the English did little but pillage.
The contribution of Spain to her own deliverance was sheer continuity of resistance.
No Austerlitz was possible against the amorphous political and military federalism of the Juntas; no king in situ could negotiate his kingdom away; the politicians of Cadiz, whatever their failings, never contemplated  a deal with the usurper.
Ill-equipped and deplorably led armies behaved shamingly in action; but resistance continued.
‘In any other country’, wrote Jourdan after Cuesta had destroyed his army by advancing on a four-mile front, four men deep with no reserves, ‘two such successes as Medellín and Ciudad Real would have reduced the countryside to submission.’
It was this continuous resistance, feeble though it often was, which broke Napoleon's doctrine of maximum concentration in the attempt to solve the contradictory demands of operation and occupation in a hostile countryside.
‘If I concentrate 20,000 men,’ wrote Bessières, worn out in the north by 1811, ‘all my communications are lost and the insurgents make great progress.
We occupy too much territory.’
Jourdan saw the military problem as insoluble without a partial evacuation, an admission of failure that neither Napoleon nor the great military feudatories would accept.
Spain would have been cowed without Wellington's field force: Wellington could not have operated with a small army without the diversionary effects of Spanish resistance.
It was Spaniards who proved Wellington's own maxim: ‘the more ground the French hold, the weaker they will be at any point’.
Since the failures of the regular army were patent, the guerrilla tradition became central to Spanish patriotism.
There were, perhaps, 30,000 guerilleros ranging from small bands to Mina's organized group of 8,000 men who were scarcely distinguishable from regular troops.
It is not in the nature of partisan warfare to produce victory in the field: loth to leave their territories or to receive orders from soldiers, guerrillas were difficult to use in strategical combination.
Smaller bands could not hope to act in planned campaigns.
Their function was to reoccupy areas evacuated by the French and impose a patriot terror, bullying the population into resistance.
They attacked only where they could do so with overwhelmingly superior numbers; in danger they disbanded.
El Empecinado's boast that he had never lost a man in action represented sound  partisan thinking.
French commanders were committed to wearying hunting operations, with bad maps and no help from the peasantry; guerrilla screens thickened the fog of war; important dispatches fell into the hands of Wellington's intelligence officers.
Above all territory must be effectively occupied or it would fall to the partisans; this kept French troops from the battlefield.
Guerrilla warfare shared many of the characteristics of resistance movements in the Second World War.
It was a rural phenomenon, like Carlism an aspect of peasant hatred for urban civilization.
This was inevitable: partisan warfare is confined to rough country and the French governed the great towns with little difficulty.
It had undertones of social war.
‘C'est, à proprement parler, la guerre des pauvres contre les riches.’
It frequently approximated to brigandage when large areas were laid under irregular taxation.
The ethics of partisan warfare, the cult of the individual leader, patriotic contempt for the law of the foreigner and his collaborators, introduced a new element of instability into society.
Guerrilla warfare ‘accustomed the Spaniard to live outside the law, to reject the norms of social life and take as his great achievement the maintenance of his own personality’.
It romanticized revolution and regularized insubordination, sanctifying that preference for violent individual action that was to bedevil the politics of nineteenth-century Spain.
When his political convictions were outraged the Spaniard could ‘put on his alpargatas [the canvas shoes of the guerrillas]and take up his rifle’.
Both the Carlist right and the extremist left could later appeal to this primitive rebellion.
The most lasting legacy of the war was the claim of the army officers to rule the state.
In the War of Independence the Central Junta and the Provincial Juntas represented the civilian state; very soon the generals were on bad terms with both and intriguing to replace them.
General Cuesta, an old-fashioned soldier and military administrator, hated the revolutionary claims of the Provincial Juntas.
He actually arrested two members of a Junta.
Commanders resented the Central Junta's  emulation of French revolutionary assemblies with missions of representatives to the Ebro front (August 1808), its interference with promotions, and, in 1809, its readiness to blame defeats on generals who considered themselves ill-supplied by civilian authorities.
This military opposition found its leaders in General Romana and in the staff of Palafox's Army of Aragon.
Palafox and Romana are thus the first of a long succession of generals who claimed that the army officers embodied the general will of the nation, perverted by a selfish clique of unpopular politicians.
In 1809 these were the harassed members of the Juntas.
‘The greater part of the nation detested the [Central]Junta's proceedings, loved its king, desiring his return and the end of the Junta, in such a fashion that the necessity of a counter revolution was already considered.’
The malcontent generals saw their role as leaders of this counter revolution which would save the nation and end the war.
Romana believed the Junta of the Asturias to be ‘republican’ in sympathy, and accused it of starving him of supplies.
He became the instrument of the resentment of the shocked conservatism of the Audiencia and chapter of Oviedo; in May 1809 he sent fifty grenadiers to dissolve the Junta.
This provincial brumaire was bitterly criticized by civilians of the Central Junta: Jovellanos could neither forgive nor forget Romana's ‘tyranny’.
The quarrel spread to Seville and Cadiz, where the friends of Romana and Palafox were the bitterest opponents of the Central Junta's claims and were intriguing for an amenable Regency or a military government based on popular feeling whipped up against the Junta.
‘All eyes are fixed on him [Romana]in the hope that he will overturn the present system.’
Throughout the war talk of a military take-over from inept civilians never ceased.
It was to resist this wave of caesarism that Jovellanos pressed  for the summoning of a general Cortes which would represent the nation against the generals.
Though the generals were brought to some sort of obedience by the Cortes and the Regency, in the provinces they used the ‘egoism’ of the Juntas and their endless disputes with the relics of the old administration in order to extend their own power.
‘Can one deny’, wrote the old Marqués de Santa Cruz, an Asturian conservative patriot, ‘that Spain is governed by soldiers?
How can you say she is defending her laws when none are respected?
How can I avoid seeing that it is this kind of government that threatens my grandchildren?’
What he could not foresee was that generals would renew their political role after 1814, not as representatives of the old order, but as liberal paladins.
Already in Catalonia, Campoverde, a self-appointed general, had staged a popular pronunciamiento in support of the claims of an elected congress against the ‘egoism of the rich’ represented by the Provincial Junta.
The afrancesados were the collaborators of the War of Independence — the timid, the misguided, the conformists by nature who took the French side against the patriots.
Before the patriot victory at Bailén, collaboration with the intruder represented the legal hesitations of the constituted authorities, left without instructions by the king and caught between the overwhelming superiority of French garrisons on the one side and the Federal anarchy of the patriot revolution on the other.
After Bailén, what divided collaborators from resisters was ‘opinion as to the result of the war’.
Before the Russian campaign, an event no one could reasonably foresee, those who were to be afrancesados held it ‘morally impossible’ that the French would be defeated.
Resistance was not a matter of patriotic feeling but of calculation, of patriotic responsibility.
No one had a duty to plunge his country into a hopeless struggle which would, moreover, involve a dangerous appeal to the people against the only legal government that existed.
Joseph's afrancesado minister, Azanza, held that to encourage resistance was to ensure ‘the dissolution of society’ by encouraging anarchy feared by all conservatives  in 1808.
‘Your Majesty’, wrote Llorente, the historian of the Inquisition and a prominent afrancesado , ‘recognized Joseph as the legal sovereign….
I have always been and am a royalist.
I believed I was being useful to my country and conserving the monarchical system against republicanism.’
The core of the afrancesado position was that collaboration, not resistance, was the best way to protect national independence: allegiance to Joseph at least saved Spain from direct military rule from Paris and the division of the kingdom by right of conquest.
The premiss of afrancesado policy was, therefore, the cessation of the patriot rebellion which made French military intervention a necessity: they consistently clung to the idea of a negotiated settlement as a way out of their difficulties.
Since negotiations failed and the rebellion, once supported by England, could only be defeated by increasing injections of Napoleon's soldiers and money, the ideal of an independent civil government appealing to hearts, in Joseph's phrase, was rejected by the emperor and his generals who knew no law but military necessity.
Joseph and his Spanish supporters tried to break the fiefs of the occupying generals by sending out civil commissioners, who soon found that, if they were to get anything done at all, it could only be done as subordinates of the generals on the spot.
An impoverished Spanish government, appealing for funds to France, was in no condition to defend Spanish independence.
Against the decree of February 1810, which put the Ebro provinces under direct military rule, the afrancesados and their king protested violently but in vain: the raison d'êAtre of Joseph's monarchy had vanished and the afrancesado policy was bankrupt.
Many of the prominent afrancesados were cultured bureaucrats who saw in the Napoleonic system a hope of ordered regeneration  by modern laws and administrative practices.
It was this group which brought Murat round to the idea of a new constitution and who co-operated with Napoleon in that masterpiece of enlightened despotism, the Constitution of Bayonne.
War allowed little time for reform; the regenerating Constitution of Bayonne was never applied to Spain; ambitious schemes for a new system of education, for a modern code based on the Code Napoléon came to nothing.
To Napoleon, the reduction of the monasteries and the abolition of the Inquisition were not part of a plan to reform and regenerate Spain but improvised responses to financial necessity and to the French idée fixe that rebellion was the work of monks.
Yet there can be little doubt that Joseph's reformism was genuine and was combined with an attempt to appeal to the national past; he encouraged the national theatre, set up a commission to exhume Cervantes' remains, patronized a national museum of painting.
His street planning was symbolic of his reign; he had no money to build where he had destroyed.
Taxation was crippling on the small area of his effective kingdom.
The population of Madrid starved on bread substitutes.
When Wellington entered Madrid, he was greeted with cries of ‘Viva the peseta loaf’.
Laziness, a desire to hold on to salaries and to stay with families, accounts for much afrancesado collaboration.
As in the Civil War of 1936 loyalty was often geographical: those caught in French areas became afrancesados .
In Andalusia little was to be gained by resistance at a time when French power looked invincibly stable: the intellectuals of Seville went over en bloc and acceptance of the inevitable became active collaboration in those groups where hatred of Godoy's ‘tyranny’ had been combined with a qualified admiration for the French Revolution and enthusiastic regalism.
Thus the poet Lista, a reformist  priest, became a freemason and a journalist in Marshal Soult's Pay.
In Barcelona active resistance ended with the plot of May 1809: when the French Government looked stable, theatres opened, social life picked up, and some of the émigrés returned.
Each stage of the occupation had its specific brand of collaborator.
When the uneasy initial co-operation of the authorities was broken by the oath to Joseph (April 1809) Duhesme's corrupt military government was served by Casanova: a profiteer in identity cards, ransoms, and municipal marketing, an adventurer with a mistress and a mansion, he became one of the richest, as well as the most powerful man, in occupied Barcelona.
Less offensive were those who could not face dismissal: ‘He who won't swear the oath will lose his job.’
Augereau (January–May 1810), advised by sincere afrancesados , tried to clear out these time-servers and appeal to enlightened Catalan opinion in order to convince local patriots of the positive advantages of French rule and a modern system of government.
This ‘moral conquest’ could not take root, if only because modern government meant efficient taxation.
The new municipal councils worked only where troops were stationed and with military defeat the system collapsed.
Yet despite taxation, starvation, and the paramount claims of the French army in Joseph's kingdom and in the independent feudatories of the generals, a rational, modern administration replaced the confusions of the ancien régime .
In Aragon and Valencia, General Suchet overhauled the finances, reformed the municipalities, and dissolved the monasteries.
Spanish officials were trained by French experts.
Some of Joseph's creations — the all-powerful Ministry of the Interior, working through the  prefect — fascinated a generation of bureaucrats: Javier de Burgos, who served Joseph as a sub-prefect, was to make his French experience the basis for the administrative reconstruction of Spain.
It was the enlightened afrancesados who were to confuse political issues by their peculiar relation to liberalism.
Conservatives maintained that the ‘foreign’ nature of liberalism was proven by the identity of the laws of the Cortes of Cadiz and the decrees of Josephine Spain.
The ‘nerve’ of the national defence was constituted by the ‘popular masses’and the clergy who hated both afrancesados and liberals.
Thus patriot liberalism and the treason of the afrancesados were involved in a common anathema.
This conjunction misses an essential distinction.
The liberals were democrats, while the afrancesados believed in reform from above.
Liberalism meant the sovereignty of the nation, not merely a Spain divided into ‘rational’ provinces and rid of the Inquisition and monks.
4.
The Conservative Opposition and the Return of Ferdinand VII, 1813–1814
The liberals of Cadiz were well aware of the perils of attacking the position of the Church in an assembly where the largest single group was the clergy; they saw their majorities on church questions sink alarmingly.
Whatever their private opinions, the liberals were willing to establish catholicism as the sole religion of Spain, to make heresy a crime, to allow episcopal censorship of religious works; as Larra was to observe, it was a one-legged freedom that permitted only ‘political’ discussion and it shows the limitations imposed on liberalism by fear of the Church.
It was therefore the extreme claims of the clerical right that forced the issue: these claims were incompatible with the minimum demands of the liberal state even when these represented, as in so much else, the continuation of the work of the monarchy.
The liberals hoped that the Inquisition, like the monasteries, would die a natural death as the result of French legislation: the publication of the Diccionario crítico burlesco , a crude piece of Voltairean anticlericalism, stung the clericals into a demand for the re-establishment of the Holy Office.
The debate on this issue (November 1813) was a series of oratorical field days lasting seventeen sessions.
The regalist commonplaces of Macanaz were supplemented by the historical and legal knowledge of a small group of ‘Jansenist’ priests who regarded the Inquisition as an ultramontane institution, usurping the powers of the bishops.
The Inquisition was declared unconstitutional and the old laws of the Partidas a sufficient defence against heresy.
‘With this declaration no innovation was made.’
The liberals once more hoped to hide their liberalism under the mantle of reverence for the historic constitution.
Protective antiquarianism could not conceal the true issues: the rights of the sovereign nation to decide on all matters (liberal regalism, with the Cortes playing the role of the prince) and the contest between traditional and liberal Spain involving the significance of her historical past.
The Inquisition ‘had suppressed the truths of philosophy, physics and geology’; it had enslaved the Spanish mind and denied progress.
Here was the seed of the whole debate of the nineteenth century.
The preponderance of the Church was responsible for Spain's decadence, laming her in the race of progress.
The Church claimed that lip service to catholic unity, which liberalism still professed, meant nothing without the instruments to enforce it: that the contemplative life of the regular clergy was essential to a catholic country; that liberalism and catholicism were incompatible, in spite of liberal assertions to the contrary.
The strangest feature about the early triumphs of liberalism at Cadiz is the absence of any consistent conservative opposition to the enactments of a political philosophy based on the constituent powers of the sovereign people.
After the early but ineffective protest of the Bishop of Orense against the sovereignty of the nation, the most radical clauses of the constitution passed  without effective criticism.
It was not until 1811 that the seeming unity of patriotism split, not until 1813 that the privileged orders saw the possibility of a conservative reaction appealing to the ‘people’ against a radical minority.
Wellesley, sensing this swing of opinion, wondered whether the time had not come for ‘striking at democracy’ by constitutional revision.
The conservative opposition was composed of the privileged orders and institutions whose position had been challenged by liberal legislation.
The opposition of the Council of Castile, as long as it existed, was consistent: the old constitution, and with it the powers of the Council, was unalterable without the king's consent.
A similar attitude was taken by the provincial audiencias , now confined to strictly judicial functions.
The nobles protested against the abolition of the señorios , the old municipalities against their constitutional successors.
Legislation created a host of unemployed bureaucrats, municipal and seigniorial officials, who exhibited what liberals called ‘passive’ opposition to the constitution — the refusal of local authorities to carry out the administrative changes and apply the laws of the Cortes.
This opposition became more acute when, in 1813, the liberated areas, where a modern administration was only known as a French imposition, came within the new constitution.
It was the opposition of the clergy that gave this resistance of the privileged orders a country-wide leadership and a cause equal in emotive appeal to the myth of the sovereign people.
If the lower clergy had been sympathetic to church reform on ‘Jansenist’ lines the hierarchy was hostile and, as the liberal attack on church property developed, it was joined by all but a handful of liberal priests.
A group of bishops fled to Mallorca.
Their pastoral letter of December 1812 condemned the Cortes's attack on the discipline, doctrine, privileges, and property of the Church.
It was the church question which gave the opposition an intellectual content beyond the two-hundred-year-old theory of the unbreakable original contract  with the monarch.
Liberalism was heretical: Jansenism and Jacobinism went together.
Thus liberals regarded this resistance as part of ‘a vast and daring plan’, a great clerical conspiracy backed by the Regents and the Papal Nuncio.
By 1812 the polemical tone had become bitter: the two conceptions of Spain became the subject of a journalistic war.
The serviles , as the conservative opposition was known, had few prospects in the Constituent Cortes: on 23 May 1813 the Cortes summoned its successor, the Ordinary Cortes, which was to meet first in Cadiz and then Madrid.
It would seem that the priests fought a hard election campaign for the liberals began to press for the limitation of clerical deputies — a step inconceivable in 1809.
Thus conservatives, supported by a violent press, and better represented in the Ordinary Cortes, felt able to challenge ‘Jacobinism’.
The liberals were equally determined to use their parliamentary power to prevent reaction: in masonic circles there seems even to have been talk of a republican dictatorship.
It was at this time that the idea of a citizen militia to defend the constitution against its enemies gathered support.
The political future of Spain now depended on Ferdinand VII.
On 24 March 1814, released by the French, the Desired One entered his kingdom, hesitating over what system he should adopt.
The liberals,in extremis , had made the recognition of the king dependent on his solemn oath to the constitution (2 February) and carefully stipulated his route to Madrid.
Two considerations ended Ferdinand's doubts as to the possibility of defying liberalism.
General Elio offered the support of his troops to maintain him in the fullness of his rights; at the same time the Manifesto of the Persians, signed by 96 ‘servile’ deputies, reached the king at Valencia.
It condemned the 1812 constitution root and branch and suggesting a return to the ‘traditional’ constitution.
Secure in the backing of an army corps and a party in Madrid the king refused to recognize the authority of the Regency; on 4 May he published his first decree declaring the work of the Cortes null and void and adopting a modification  of the Persian programme.
General Eguía, secretly appointed Captain General of Castile, entered Madrid and imprisoned the liberal leaders (10 May).
Next day the ‘lowest plebeians’ terrorized the ‘respectable classes’by sacking the Cortes building and breaking the stone of the constitution.
The coup d'état of May was a throwback to the Aranjuez coalition: Ferdinand, the army, the mob.
The king's action determined the nature of the political struggle in Spain.
It was the first of the total rejections of a previous régime which sent the supporters of that régime into exile, and the exiles of 1814 were the first representatives of a phenomenon typical of Spanish politics throughout the nineteenth century: ‘a trans-Pyrenean colony’ with no alternative but to plot the overthrow of the government by revolution.
It demonstrated, in language of royalist papers, that political opponents were ‘bloody dogs’ who must be put down.
Louis XVIII, another restored monarch, accepted a constitution in 1814 on condition that the constitution was reasonably ‘balanced’ and was seen as an act of grace by the crown and not as an imposition upon it.
Ferdinand refused any form of constitution outright.
Ferdinand's rejection of all compromise, as Wellesley saw, was just as alarming as the ‘Republican Principles’ which had made the constitution of 1812 a political edifice which no king could inhabit with dignity.
REACTION AND REVOLUTION 1814–1833
1.
Absolutism Restored, 1814–1820
FERDINAND VII was not the dedicated despot of liberal historiography.
A martyr to gout, simple to the point of austerity in his personal tastes, and, contrary to liberal assertions, loved by his servants, he was a trimmer by nature, altogether lacking that fermeté which French agents found in his younger brother, Don Carlos.
Early in his reign he realized that liberalism was unpopular with the masses, and he deliberately scorned the classes: his power, as Lord Liverpool observed from a distance, was based on an alliance of proletariat and priests against ‘landlords’ and middle classes.
For Ferdinand the memories of Aranjuez, the welcome to Madrid, and the popular terror of May 1814 represented the roots of power.
Like the Neapolitan Bourbons, he adopted a royal version of lower-class life.
One of the main purposes of his low-born camarilla was to maintain contact with ‘opinion’ in order to manipulate it by his agents.
As elsewhere in Restoration Europe, the secret police served as a partial and imperfect substitute for parliamentary institutions by informing the ruler of the state of popular feeling.
Yet, late in his reign, this complex and careful trimmer was ready to pose as an enlightened despot and woo his educated subjects.
A rigid absolutist in political principle, in practice, it was observed, he ‘ceded to the exigencies of the moment’.
He would have provided an excellent model for Stendhal's portrait of the capricious but timid despot of Parma whose minister warned him that ‘to have received power from Providence is no longer enough in these times; it requires brains and a strong character to succeed in being a despot’.
Ferdinand's declared programme in May 1814 was based on the programme of the Persians.
For one school of modern historians this programme (to which it attributes transcendent importance in the development of Carlism) represents a reversion to a traditional monarchy ruling with the historic Cortes and subject to God and the law, a via media between imported liberalism and the equally foreign ministerial despotism of the eighteenth century, a truly Spanish solution of the political problem of modern Spain.’
Its institutional imprecision and evident anachronism weakened it as the basis for a compromise settlement; whatever its intention, the fate of the Persian Manifesto was to serve as a base from which to sally against liberalism and all its works.
The king took from the Persians only their attack on the constitution of 1812; the project for a Cortes was ‘lost’ in the unsympathetic deliberations of the Council of Castile.
In so far as Ferdinand had a system it was the restoration of the machinery of government and the society that he had known in 1808: ministerial despotism superimposed on the old Councils, the very system the Persians professed to abhor.
The novel feature was the incoherence and instability of ministerial government and its rejection of those reforming traditions incompatible with the atmosphere of 1814.
Thus the Jesuits were readmitted: as elsewhere in Europe, the appropriation of the Gallican-regalist tradition by revolutionaries made its continuation by the restored monarchies an impossibility.
Ministerially the king lived from hand to mouth, on occasions with a double ministry of foreign affairs.
Each minister was responsible directly to the monarch, subject to sudden dismissal and disgrace, and kept in total ignorance of his colleagues' policies.
Cevallos, as foreign minister, was for four months in ignorance of the fact that Spain had ‘joined’ the Holy Alliance.
The purchase of ships from the Russians was kept from the  Minister of Marine: when he insisted on the examination of the ships he was dismissed.
Between 1814 and 1820 the average life of a minister was six months.
The explanation of this instability lies in bankruptcy, which in turn reflected the post-war depression, deepened by a restrictive monetary policy.
Ministerial despotism could not be profitably run by clerical reactionaries ignorant of the financial world.
The employment of able servants, particularly in the Treasury, entailed recurrent attempts to conciliate what was usable of the reformist tradition and even to appease the purged remnants of liberalism.
In January 1816, Cevallos ended political persecution in the hope that ‘the names of serviles and liberals will disappear’.
Garay, Finance Minister from December 1816 to September 1818, was a friend of Jovellanos.
His ‘reformist’ policy of strict economy and taxation of the privileged orders was strenuously resisted by representatives of the ancien régime , lead by Eguía, who wore an eighteenth-century wig.
Driven away from conciliation by an obscure masonic conspiracy in 1816, it would appear that, on the verge of the revolution of 1820, the king once again contemplated some form of concession.
We lack the knowledge to explain the true meaning of these lurches: the early reign did not lack certain eighteenth-century reformist traits — chairs in political economy, an interest in ‘safe’ elementary education, the building of the Prado.
The king would probably have liked to attract liberals on his own terms but all attempts at an amnesty after 1816 came to nothing.
With this unstable machine and the limited resources of post-war Spain, Ferdinand hoped to recover the American Empire; his dilemma was that only American silver could stave off bankruptcy while only a solvent state could reconquer America.
The American question was thus of central importance for the success of restored despotism.
Few Spanish statesmen could recognize that America was irretrievably lost; it is only after 1820 that a handful of liberals talked of the ‘inevitability’ of the fruit falling from the tree.
Indeed, reconquest did not appear impossible.
With the war ended in Spain Ferdinand could send 10,000 men under Morillo, a ranker general of great  courage and ability: relatively easily, he pacified Venezuela and captured Cartagena in New Granada.
But in 1816 Bolívar came back to Venezuela, where the horsemen of the plains now joined the Liberator and his small army of creoles and foreign volunteers.
In semi-tropical warfare, as the history of Cuba was to show, Spanish regular troops faced almost insuperable difficulties.
By 1819 the balance of war had turned against Morillo, first in Venezuela, then in New Granada; with his armies shrunken to 2,500 men, without pay or supplies, bothered by corrupt local officials, only a new expedition could save the situation in the north.
In the United Provinces of the River Plate matters were beyond recovery: San Martin, in a beautifully planned campaign, had taken his army across the Andes into Chile and was preparing to move by sea against Peru, the centre of loyalist power in South America.
Ferdinand failed to save what might have been saved from the wreck of the American Empire by his refusal to face realities and his obstinate insistence on reducing America to its traditional obedience to his crown.
Some form of local autonomy, some abandonment of the old commercial system might have weakened the revolt; the most Ferdinand would concede (and that as a short-lived experiment) was the appointment of creoles within the old administration.
Spain refused to recognize that nothing could be done in America without Britain, the greatest naval power; but Castlereagh considered Spain ‘proud and vindictive’, while British diplomacy showed little consideration for the susceptibilities of a declining imperialism, recommending an imitation of George III's ‘generosity’ to America and the British commercial system in India.
Britain offered mediation, based on respect for Spanish sovereignty, in return for open markets and concessions to the rebels: since she would neither intervene against the rebels herself nor let others intervene should concession fail, her talk of Spanish sovereignty seemed hypocritical.
Unwisely Spain intrigued for an anti-British coalition as she intrigued for an anti-American coalition in 1898; as Wellington observed, Spain acted ‘as if Europe were at her feet’.
The refusal to concede that gives an obstinate glory to Spanish policy, conquered any thought of a negotiated settlement.
The last gamble, which would make concession unnecessary, was a new expeditionary force to defeat the rebels.
But Ferdinand's bankrupt Spain could not produce the small army that might have postponed defeat.
In 1818 the government began to concentrate in Andalusia an expeditionary army to reinforce Morillo: the expeditionary force defeated, not American rebels, but the monarchy itself.
In January 1820 two of its junior officers ‘pronounced’ for the constitution of 1812.
The pronunciamiento was the instrument of liberal revolution in the nineteenth century.
It was an officer revolt, justified by a crude political theory which made the officer corps the ultimate repository of a general will.
When that will was vitiated either by the monarch's evil counsellors or, as the later theoreticians of military indiscipline were to maintain, by the corrupt operation of Parliamentary institutions run by a clique of national’ politicians, then it could be salvaged by the heroic gesture of a general or the conspiracy of an officers' mess.
The origins of military intervention in politics lay perhaps in the role of generals in the eighteenth-century administration, and in the conflicts of politicians and soldiers during the War of Independence, but it was in Ferdinand's reign that this intervention developed the rigid form of classical drama.
First came the preliminary soundings (the trabajos ) and the winning over of officers and sergeants by a small activist group in touch with civilian conspirators; then the compromisos by which accomplices were bound to action; finally the chosen leaders set off the last stage by the cry — the grito .
It was here, in the traditional speech to the drawn-up troops, that revolutionary formalism was most apparent.
As a species of conspiracy it had its persistent weakness: fear of discovery led to revolt before the compromisos were firm enough.
Most pronunciamientos went off at half-cock.
Throughout the century the relative immunity which an inefficient police gave conspirators, and the idiosyncrasies of the prison system, encouraged conspiracy.
Malcontent generals  could invent excuses of bad health in order to meet fellow conspirators — thus, from Lacy to Prim, mineral spas were favoured plotting places.
Quiroga, arrested as a suspect in 1819, was allowed extraordinary liberties: he played billiards with brother officers, walked about the streets on parole, and Alcalá Galiano, agent of the Cadiz masons, actually passed the night in his cell.
Scarcely surprisingly, he became one of the figureheads of the revolution of 1820.
A ramshackle despotism encourages irresponsibility; there was always a chance of success and it was the weakest of the conspiracies — that of 1820 — which defeated the government.
The pronunciamientos of 1824–20 were a combination of officer discontents, thwarted ambition, and liberal principle.
Ferdinand was bankrupt.
He could not even pay the small army he desperately needed to reconquer America; still less could he pay the inflated army bequeathed by the War of Independence.
Economy forced a return to the regular army of the ancien régime .
This threw into opposition the ablest men in the army — the new officers whose liberal sympathies and patriotic energy had earned them rapid promotion in the War of Independence.
Porlier found his career as a guerrilla general rewarded by posting to a provincial garrison.
Lacy, a poor professional soldier who was a Captain General at thirty-seven, was banished.
Mina, who regarded Navarre as his personal fief, saw his guerrillas dissolved — as they must be for they could not be paid — and his efforts on their behalf cold-shouldered by the new courtiers.
Richart, who plotted to assassinate the king in a brothel, was a liberal army paymaster who was passed over for  absorption into the civil service — the only career for superfluous officers.
It was neglect which made liberals out of those passed over in promotion.
In spite of the promptings of self-interest these men took great risks and were illuminated by the concept of the romantic hero: failure meant death and entry into the liberal calendar of martyrs.
To their opponents they were oficialillos deluded by rapid war promotion into posing as cheap, imitation Bonapartes: to themselves they were ‘drunk with glory’.
At least the pronunciamiento had not become a speculative business enterprise for generals.
Riego took real risks in 1820 and, in the end, he was executed.
The established military rebels of the mid-century rarely faced such a fate.
The opposition of the civilian liberals to Ferdinand was inevitable after the persecutions of 1814, when the leaders were arrested, imprisoned, or sought safety in exile.
It was the opposition of those whose careers were ruined — bankrupt restorations cannot reward the victors and conciliate the vanquished — and of those who, having lived in a free society, could not tolerate the frustrations of an unfree society in which private criticism could not be translated into public action.
The ‘insipid monotony’ of a social life without a press (only two government papers were tolerated), without clubs, without ‘respectable cafes’, was broken only by religious and court festivals.
Only the opera flourished.
Thus the military conspirators could count on a growing area of civilian support.
Mina's attempt to  seize Pamplona in 1814 was a purely personal undertaking, but in 1815 Porlier's attempt to raise Corunna was supported by the town's leading liberals and earned enough popular support for ‘serenades and a brilliant illumination’.
He failed because he could not carry his sergeants with him and because of the jealousy of ecclesiastical Santiago against mercantile Corunna.
Lacy and the Valencian conspirators could count on wider support, from merchants  like Beltrán de Lis — in contact with officers as an army contractor — to shoemakers and farmers.
Civilian revolution was organized in Masonic lodges and it is the undoubted contribution of Freemasonry to the Revolution of 1820 that created the myth of its occult force.
According to clerical conservatives, liberalism was nothing but a permanent Masonic conspiracy.
Though Masonry was always to be an element in the liberal forces — particularly in later non-socialist brands of Republicanism — it was never again, as it was from 1815 to 1820, its chief framework; even then it was not so much a system of belief as the only clandestine organization available for conspiracy.
As such it had serious defects: like all other Spanish parties, the Masons were distinguished by their domestic divisions.
Spanish Masonry had its ultimate origins in the deistic humanitarianism of a few eighteenth-century esprits forts .
In 1814–20 it was a trifid movement: a conservative-tinged Freemasonry which had been introduced among the official classes by the French during the occupation; a liberal-nationalist group, perhaps influenced by English Masonry, with its first stronghold in Cadiz — the Masonry of Istúriz, Alcalá Galiano, Mendizábal; a purely military Masonry of young officer activists.
Civilian ‘lodges’, widespread by 1817, were driven towards action by military ‘trenches’.
These conspiracies were broken by the government, inefficient though it was, leaving the initiative in 1820 in the hands of the military Masonry.
Why after the earlier failures did the military rising of 1820, ‘risky to the point of being ridiculous’ in the opinion of one of the conspirators, nevertheless succeed?
Alcalá Galiano's explanation was simple: ‘the repugnance of the rank and file against embarking for America’ for the first time made soldiers and sergeants receptive to ‘the sublime and generous ideas of their officers’.
Revolution meant no American campaign.
Officer conspirators were working on their sergeants by offers of land and release from the army — a reduction in service was  later to be the standard inducement to mutiny offered by generals to their troops.
As the army of America waited month after month, in cantonments round Cadiz, whole regiments became infected — a concentration of malcontents which the war minister warned would destroy the monarchy.
After the failure of a ‘respectable’ revolution in 1819 the conspiracy fell into the hands of young officers and Masons who used the mysterious procedures of the sect in order to hide the fact that they did not have the ‘old gang's’financial backing for the reward of wholesale desertion.
In the army no one above the rank of colonel would compromise himself: hence the conspirators ‘made’ their own general out of Colonel Quiroga, later to be eclipsed by Major Riego.
It was Riego who gave the revolution its programme by declaring on 1 January 1820 for the constitution of 1812: thus a single man, acting on impulse and without consulting civilians, committed liberalism to the constitution that was to destroy it.
Yet it is not altogether inapt that the Hymn of Riego became the anthem of liberalism.
Childishly vain, he was brave, resourceful, and alone had the determination to persist in revolution until the régime collapsed.
In January and February 1820 an extraordinary situation developed.
The Masons failed to stage a revolution in Cadiz where rain and inefficiency kept Quiroga inactive; Riego took his men on a round tour of Andalusia where only the mountain pueblo of Grazalema welcomed the liberator.
The Revolution remained a military sedition and appeared likely to die a natural death.
It was resurrected by the rising of Corunna which, by a reversion to the revolutionary federalism of 1808, claimed to be the capital of all Galicia, and by risings in Barcelona, Saragossa, and Pamplona where officers had been plotting with the  poet Quintana (21 February to 5 March).
The success of the Revolution is therefore explicable in terms of the weakness of the king's government.
For two months a vastly superior army refused serious action against the rebels and finally backed them.
The triumph of liberalism was therefore the result of the attitude of the army: a minor officers' revolt had been backed by what was later termed a ‘negative pronunciamiento’— the refusal of the army to support the government.
It was this same denial of support which drove Maria Cristina to abdicate as Regent in 1840 and Alfonso XIII to withdraw from Spain in 1931.
To Riego liberalism had been installed solely by officers: civilians had missed any title to glory by failing to raise Cadiz after the army had pronounced.
He pushed aside the civilian Junta using it only to give decent sanction to new promotions.
In Madrid civilian liberalism had waited on events.
‘Nothing is more remarkable’, wrote Wellesley, ‘than the apathy of the people who have taken neither side of the question but look on the quarrel as to be one between the army and the king.’
The crowds who gathered round the palace were respectable citizens cheering a king who had already conceded to the army and to provincial garrisons: they were not an organized pressure group which had forced the crown to become liberal by accepting the constitution of 1812, appointing a liberal municipality, and a Junta to supervise the establishment of the constitution.