

Crisis?
What Crisis?
The penal system is in a state of crisis.
Few if any British readers of this book will be surprised by this statement.
Almost everyone in England and Wales is aware that the penal system is in ‘crisis’, even people who have little idea of what ‘the penal system’ is, except that it has to do with prisons and punishment.
Media reports have acquainted everyone with the notion that rocketing prison populations, overcrowding, unrest among staff and inmates, and especially prison riots (such as those at Strangeways prison in Manchester and at over 20 other prisons in April 1990) add up to a severe and deepening penal crisis.
The term ‘crisis’ has been common currency in both media and academic accounts of the penal system for over 20 years now; the word recurs in newspaper headlines and in the titles of learned books and articles (eg Bottoms and Preston, 1990; Rutherford, 1999).
Nevertheless, a cynic could be forgiven for finding the penal crisis uncannily reminiscent of the supposed ‘crisis of capitalism’, which some Marxists were once ever assuring us was real, severe, ever-worsening and likely to prove terminal in the near future.
Yet both capitalism and the penal system seem to keep going somehow, making an ironic contrast with regimes, parties and theories founded on Marxism.
No one disputes that the penal system has serious problems — but is it really in a state of crisis ?
Then again, how long can a crisis last while remaining a crisis rather than business as usual?
Surely there is something paradoxical in claims that the crisis has lasted for decades, or even that the system has been ‘in a perpetual state of crisis since the Gladstone Committee report of 1995’(Fitzgerald and Sim, 1992: 3).
If to be in crisis means that the whole system is on the brink of total collapse or explosion, then we probably do not have a crisis.
(Although it should not be forgotten that when systems do collapse or explode — like the communist system in Eastern Europe in the late 1990s and early 1990s, or the system of order within Strangeways in 1990 — it tends to happen with great suddenness.)
But it can be validly claimed that there is a crisis in at least two senses, identified by Morris (1999: 125).
Firstly, we have ‘a state of affairs that is so acute as to constitute a danger’— and, we would add, a moral challenge of a scale which makes it one of the  most pressing social issues of the day.
Secondly, we are at a critical juncture , much as a seriously ill person may reach a ‘turning point at which the patient either begins to improve or sinks into a fatal decline’.
In other words, either the present situation can be used as an opportunity to reform the system into something more rational and humane, or else it will deteriorate into something much worse even than the present.
In this book we will be using the ‘C-word’ in these senses to refer to the present penal situation in England and Wales, albeit with slight embarrassment and the worry that it has been used so often and for so long that there is a danger that it may be losing its dramatic impact.
There are various competing accounts about how the different problems of the penal system are related to each other and what the underlying causes of the crisis are.
We now proceed to examine these rival accounts.
The Orthodox Account of the Crisis
The orthodox account is the one most often encountered in the mass media, and is also regularly found in some official reports purporting to explain phenomena such as prison riots.
It is well exemplified by the 1990 book Prison Crisis (by the journalist Peter Evans), and is even better summarized by the following extract from a newspaper article of 1977 (Humphry and May, 1977):
Explosive problems remain in many of Britain's prisons — a higher number of lifers, often with strong political faiths, who have nothing left to lose; overcrowding which forces men to sleep three to a cell and understaffing which weakens security.
Prisons, too, are forced to handle men with profound psychiatric problems in conditions which are totally unsuitable.
This passage gives us almost all the components of the ‘orthodox account’ of the penal crisis.
The crisis is seen as being located very specifically within the prison system — it is not seen as a crisis of the whole penal system, or of the criminal justice system, let alone as a crisis of society as a whole.
The only implicit link between the problems of the prison and national politics is the cryptic reference to politically motivated prisoners (presumably meaning Irish Republicans).
The immediate cause of the crisis is seen as the combination of different types of difficult prisoners — what has been called the ‘toxic mix’ of prisoners (Home Office, 1994a: para 124)— in physically poor and insecure conditions which gives rise to an ‘explosion’.
The orthodox account points to the following factors as  implicated in the crisis:(1) the high prison population (or ‘numbers crisis,);(2) overcrowding;(3) bad conditions within prison (for both inmates and prison officers);(4) understaffing;(5) unrest among the staff;(6) poor security;(7) the ‘toxic mix’ of life sentence prisoners, politically motivated prisoners and mentally disturbed inmates;(9) riots and other breakdowns of control over prisoners.
These factors are seen as linked, with number 8 — riots and disorder — being the end product which shows there is a crisis.
We think it is roughly correct to say that the orthodox account sees the different factors interacting as in Figure 1.1.
The high prison  population is held responsible for overcrowding and understaffing in prisons, both of which exacerbate the bad conditions in England's ageing prisons.
The combination of poor conditions and inadequate staffing have an adverse effect on staff morale, causing unrest which (through industrial action, for example) serves to worsen conditions still further.
The four factors of bad conditions, overcrowding, understaffing and staff unrest are blamed for poor security.
Finally, the combination of the ‘toxic mix’ of prisoners with these deteriorating conditions within which they are contained is thought to trigger off the periodic riots and disturbances to which the prison system is increasingly prone.
Figure 1.1 The Orthodox account of the penal crisis
We do not believe that the orthodox account provides a satisfactory explanation of the crisis, for reasons we shall be giving shortly.
But most of the factors this account points to are real and important, as we shall now detail.
The High Prison Population (the ‘Numbers Crisis’)
One of the few things about the penal system that almost everyone agrees on is that England and Wales have an alarmingly high (and most of the time rapidly rising) number of people in prison.
In 1975, in a statement that has been much quoted ever since, the then Home Secretary Roy Jenkins said that if the prison population in England and Wales ‘should rise to, say 42,000, conditions in the system would approach the intolerable and drastic action to relieve the position would be inescapable’(quoted in Stern 1997: 39).
Jenkins' figure of 42,000 was reached in October 1976; by July 1991 the figure was 45,500; the 50,000 mark was passed in June 1997.
On an average day in 1999 there were 49,979 people in prison in England and Wales, in a prison system which had room for only 44, 179.
The position improved somewhat in 1999 and 1990, and on 31 March 1991 the prison population stood at 45,106 in a system with accommodation for 43,262 (NACRO, 1991b).
But it began to worsen again in 1991, a trend which seems likely to continue (see Chapter 10).
There are several factors implicated in this increase in prison numbers in recent years.
In Chapter 4 we discuss the relationship between some of these factors, and conclude that the most crucial is the pattern of decisions by the courts : not only about what sentences offenders should receive (whether they should be sent to custody and, if so, for how long), but also decisions about which counts they should be tried in and whether they should be remanded in custody in the meantime.
Even before these recent increases, the United Kingdom had a prison population which was extremely high in comparison with neighbouring countries.
In proportion to the population as a whole, the UK prison population is now the highest in Western Europe (see Table 1.1).
In fact, of the major industrialized countries the UK is currently being beaten in the world prison population stakes only by Canada, the former USSR, South Africa and (the current world champion) the United States of America.
This does not seem to be because the UK has more crime, or more serious crime, than comparable countries; rather it is because more offenders are sent to custody, and for longer periods, in the UK than elsewhere.
There can be little doubt, then, that the present and future size of the prison population is a major and crucial problem.
If drastic steps are not taken — a crucial qualification — it seems set to grow even further in the coming years.
As we shall be explaining in the following chapters, we do not believe that the steps taken in the Criminal Justice Act of 1991 will prove drastic enough.
Overcrowding
We previously quoted the following figures for 31 March 1991: the average prison population was 45, 106 while the certified normal  accommodation was 43,262, making the prison system as a whole overcrowded by a factor of 4.3 per cent.
This may not sound too drastic, but these overall figures do not do any kind of justice to the overcrowding problem.
For overcrowding is not spread evenly throughout the system.
The top-security ‘dispersal prisons’ are frequently not filled to capacity, while overcrowding is concentrated in local prisons (which predominantly house remand prisoners and those on short-term sentences).
For example on 31 March 1991, Chelmsford prison had a certified normal accommodation of 244 but an actual inmate population of 403, making nearly 13,000 prisoners were sleeping two or three to a cell (NACRO, 1991b)— typically in prison cells which were built in the nineteenth century and designed for a single inmate.
Bad Conditions
Overcrowding, of course, contributes to bad physical conditions in prisons.
(It also leads to hundreds of remand prisoners being kept in even more inadequate conditions in police cells.)
But there are other causes of bad conditions as well as overcrowding: many prisons are old and decaying, and the newer prisons have often turned out to be so badly designed that they are not a noticeable improvement.
In particular, the issue of sanitary facilities in prison (or the lack of them) has become a cliché, but deservedly so.
The fact that many prisoners have routinely had to spend long periods in their cells without access to a toilet, having to use chamber pots and queue up to‘slop out’, has been a potent symbol of the squalor of British prisons.
Perhaps it was this symbolic importance which led Home Secretary Kenneth Baker, when responding to the Woolf report in February 1991, to announce that all prisoners would have access to toilet facilities by the end of 1994 (more than a year earlier than Woolf asked for).
But the problem of prison conditions is hardly limited to ‘slopping out’.
As we shall see in Chapter 5, other elements of prison life are equally important, such as the amount of time prisoners are kept cooped up in cells and the lack of opportunities for activities of all kinds.
In these respects, there has been a general and continuing decline in prison conditions over a long period of time (King and McDermott, 1999).
The poor conditions in prisons affect staff as well as inmates, contributing to low staff morale and unrest.
At times they have become an overt issue in industrial disputes.
For example prison officers at Wandsworth threatened industrial action in 1997 partly over the issue of the prison's infestation by rats and cockroaches  and the methods used to combat it (Guardian , 24 January 1997).
Understaffing
There are essentially two views about understaffing in prisons.
One view is that it is the result of government parsimony towards prison staff; the other is that such staff shortages as occur are due to the arcane system of rigid restrictive practices developed by the Prison Officers' Association (POA).
In 1986 a report commissioned by the Home Office estimated that prison officers worked an average of 16 hours per week overtime, but that prisons could be run safely and efficiently if officers worked on average eight hours less but with revised shift systems and working practices.
This conclusion was hotly disputed by the POA, although there can be little doubt that the running of the prison system had come to depend unhealthily on overtime (for which the prison officers were of course paid extra at higher rates) and that at least some of this need for overtime was generated by unnecessary restrictive practices.
Some prison officers became known as ‘overtime bandits’ for working as much overtime as possible, sometimes working as many as 60 or 65 hours per week.
The Government's response was a new scheme, introduced in 1997 after two years of negotiation and dispute with the POA, called ‘Fresh Start’, under which prison officers can opt to work either 39 or 48 hours per week without overtime but with an improved basic salary.
Prison officers allege that the implementation of Fresh Start has led to understaffing because not enough new prison officers have been recruited.
At around the same time, the effects were being felt of a new system (introduced by the government in 1995) of individual budgets for each prison — in effect cash limits on what can be spent on staff in each prison — which has also been blamed for giving rise to understaffing.
Whatever the rights and wrongs of the Fresh Start controversy, it is worth noting that research on its effects found twice as many examples of deteriora-tion in prison regimes as of enhancement (McDermott and King, 1999).
If prisons are understaffed (or if those running the prison believe they are understaffed) this affects conditions.
Prisoners may be left locked in their cells for longer, because there is not the staff to supervise out-of-cell activities or to escort them from place to place.
Visits to prisoners may be restricted or cancelled.
And prison staff may become restless.
Staff Unrest
For many years now the relationship between the prison staff and the Home Office has been — at its very calmest — one of simmering discontent.
Both local and national industrial action by prison officers has been a recurrent event.
In 1979 widespread disruptive action led the then Labour government to set up the May Inquiry, intended to be a major review of the entire prison system (May, 1979).
May's report, published in 1979, failed to satisfy the POA, and within a year prison officers were refusing to admit new prisoners.
The spring of 1996 saw the most alarming disruption to date: protest action including a national overtime ban by prison officers over the issue of staffing levels (especially in local prisons and remand centres) led to major riots by inmates.
Industrial action over staffing arrangements has continued since the introduction of ‘Fresh Start’— most notably at Wandsworth prison in early 1999, where police officers were drafted in to replace prison officers.
In July 1991 there were official disputes at 49 prisons in England and Wales.
Staff unrest shows every sign of becoming a permanent feature of the British penal scene.
Poor Security
Despite the moral panics which occasionally blow up — as for example when two IRA suspects escaped from Brixton prison in July 1991 — the English penal system does not have a bad record over ‘security’, in the sense of keeping prisoners inside prison.
Escapes, especially from the high-security ‘dispersal prisons’ are not common (see Chapter 5).
The system is also generally successful in keeping prisoners under control —except when prisoners decide to engage in collective protest action or riot.
Nevertheless, prison staff often complain that understaffing (combined sometimes with other deficiencies in material resources) reduces security in prisons, making prison officers more vulnerable to attack from inmates and making breakdowns in control and even escapes more likely.
It is often ‘security considerations’—fears about security and control — which exacerbate the physical conditions of prisoners; for example, they may be left for 23 hours a day in their cells because they are not trusted to be let out without a high degree of staff-intensive supervision.
The ‘Toxic Mix’ of Prisoners
We can agree with the orthodox account on many details concerning the component factors of the crisis.
But the notion of a ‘toxic mix’ of prisoners is an issue on which we definitely part company.
We do not deny that some characteristics of prison inmates may  make them more or less likely to cause problems — if the prisons predominantly housed old people or nuns rather than young men with past records of anti-social behaviour they would doubtless experience fewer riots.
But there are several difficulties with ‘toxic mix theory’, as we shall see.
The first constituent of the so-called ‘toxic mix’ is usually said to be lifers — prisoners serving sentences of life imprisonment.
Such prisoners are often said to have ‘nothing left to lose’(Humphry and May, 1977).
Yet (while there are more lifers than there used to be) most of them have a great deal to lose.
A ‘life sentence’ does not usually mean that the prisoner is kept in prison until he or she dies (although it may), but lifers are only released at the discretion of the Parole Board and the Home Secretary.
Nothing jeopardizes a prisoner's parole chances more than misbehaviour within prison, and especially participation in riots and protests.
(The same logic applies to other prisoners who are serving long ‘fixed-term’ sentences but who are eligible for parole.)
Yet ironically, recent government policies have created a situation where more and more prisoners serving life and other long sentences have rather less to lose, for it has now been decreed that various categories of serious offender will not normally be considered for parole, or not considered for a very long time (see Chapter 6).
There is widespread agreement that there are many mentally disturbed people in prison who would be better off in hospital.
According to an official working group, in 1996 there were 333 prisoners whose condition warranted detention in psychiatric hospital rather than imprisonment, and a grand total of 1,497 who were mentally disturbed (Home Office and DHSS, 1997: 9, 27).
Other surveys have estimated that as many as a third or a quarter of prisoners may have mental health problems (Fennell, 1991).
As human beings we are suitably horrified by this state of affairs; but as penologists we wonder cynically how great a contribution this factor really makes to the penal crisis.
Despite popular stereotypes, most mental illness makes the sufferers if anything more amenable to control rather than less, and mentally ill prisoners have not been prominent in organizing riots.
The role of Irish Republican prisoners we find more difficult to assess.
Perhaps they have had some effect, by importing into English prisons a tradition of collective action by prisoners in pursuit of demands made of the prison authorities.
(They may also have generated some demands by spreading the word about regimes and rules in the Northern Ireland prison system, which are in several respects more liberal than in England.)
But the idea that English prisoners have allowed themselves to be coopted into the  Irish Republican political cause is a remarkably implausible one.
In any event, as we shall shortly show, this ‘toxic mix’ cannot always be implicated in causing riots for it is often simply not present in prisons which experience disorder.
Riots and Disorder
To the general public, the most noticeable symptom of the penal crisis is of course the prison riot.
Apart from the Parkhurst riot of 1969, disturbances were comparatively infrequent in British prisons until the year of 1972, which saw a major wave of rooftop demon-strations in many prisons.
Subsequently — just to select some of the outstanding incidents — there were major riots at Hull in 1976, Gartree in 1979 and Albany in 1993.
And since the mid-1990s there have been more prison riots in Britain than in any other European country.
In 1996 a national overtime ban by prison officers sparked off riots in seventeen prisons.
April 1990 saw the worst ever series of prison riots, including a 25-day riot and siege at Strangeways Prison, Manchester.
More riots occurred in several prisons in the summer of 1991.
Like staff unrest, inmate disorder shows no sign of disappearing from the scene.
Criticisms of the Orthodox Account
Generally speaking, then, most of the factors emphasized by the orthodox account are genuine enough (with the outstanding exception of the ‘toxic mix’ idea).
Where we believe the orthodox account to be seriously misleading is in the causal relationships it postulates between the different factors, and especially its explanation of prison riots.
One problem with the orthodox account is that it simply does not square with the facts about when and where riots happen — and in particular, whereabouts in the prison system they occur.
If prison riots are caused by overcrowding, understaffing, bad physical conditions and poor security, one would expect them to occur exclusively in the local prisons and remand centres which are the most overcrowded and understaffed, where conditions are worse and security less tight than in many longer-stay establishments.
Yet prior to the 1996 riots, major disorder was almost entirely confined to ‘dispersal prisons’— prisons which house prisoners on long sentences and which are not overcrowded or understaffed, where conditions are relatively good, and where security is at a maximum.
Since 1996 the pattern has been largely reversed, with most major disorders occurring in local prisons (such as Strangeways), remand centres and lower-security  establishments.
But these riots are not satisfactorily explained by the orthodox account either, for such institutions lack the parti-cular, toxic mix' of prisoners which is supposed to be an important causative factor in inmate disorder.
Again, the prisons hit by riots in 1996 and 1990 were not all overcrowded (for example Northeye in 1996 and Dartmoor in 1990) or the worst in terms of physical conditions (Wymott and Wayland in 1996).
One could try to modify the orthodox account to accommodate these factual discrepancies.
Indeed, such a modified version appears in Sir James Hennessy's (1997) official report into the 1996 disturbances (which, as we shall see, contrasts interestingly with Lord Justice Woolf's report into the 1990 riots).
Hennessy downplayed the importance of overcrowding and poor physical conditions, while revising the theory of ‘toxic mix’.
Previous accounts, as we have seen, pointed to the presence of long-term prisoners who supposedly have ‘nothing left to lose’ by rioting.
Hennessy asserted repeatedly that the mix of offenders in the prisons affected by riots in 1996 had altered for the worse.
But in doing so, he stood the traditional ‘toxic mix’ theory on its head by claiming that prison order was rendered unstable by young inmates serving short sentences, even suggesting that at Wymott ‘a more stable inmate population might have been achieved if the predominantly young and short-term population had been diluted with some older men or those with longer to serve’(para 7.09).
But such an explanation could not of course be extended to explain the riots in dispersal prisons in earlier years (or those in two dispersal prisons in 1991).
The very phrase ‘toxic mix’, with its pseudo-scientific ring, indicates another major deficiency in the orthodox account.
As we have portrayed it in Figure 1.1, the whole process of the crisis on this account seems very mechanistic (or positivistic : see Chapter 2).
One thing leads automatically to another: prisoners and prison staff both seem to react to conditions in a mindless manner.
The prisoners in particular seem to behave like molecules in a test tube: place such a combination in such a physical environment, agitate, apply heat, and an explosion is the automatic result.
We do not believe that people are like that.
Rioting is not mindless behaviour,; it is meaningful human action.
Lord Scarman has said of inner city riots that ‘public disorder usually arises out of a sense of injustice,(Scarman, 1986: xiii), and as the Woolf report recognized, this is as true in prisons as it is in the inner city.
And a sense of injustice is not a mindless automatic reaction, but an active interpretation of a situation.
So for an adequate description and explanation of the penal crisis, we need to explore why there is this perception of  injustice, and even to ask whether this perception is correct.
In our opinion this is the main gap in the orthodox account, and one we hope to go some way towards rectifying.
A Radical Account
In their book British Prisons (1992), Mike Fitzgerald and Joe Sim provide an alternative, radical account of the crisis.
Like the orthodox account, they locate the crisis specifically within the prison rather than in the penal system as a whole.
According to Fitzgerald and Sim ‘there is not one crisis, rather a whole series, which taken together account for the parlous state of the prisons’(1992: 5).
Altogether they identify five crises: the crises of ‘conditions’, ‘containment’, ‘visibility’, ‘authority’, and ‘legitimacy’.
The crises of conditions and containment are essentially to do with factors we have already discussed: overcrowding, bad conditions, security and riots.
The crisis of authority relates to the factor of ‘staff unrest’.
Fitzgerald and Sim call this a crisis of ‘authority’, for they see staff unrest as not primarily caused by material economic considerations.
Instead they see the root cause as being prison officers' alarm at developments which they see as having undermined their ‘authority’.
They believe that their accepted right to control prisoners and wield power over them is threatened by the development of welfare services and personnel within prisons and the (gradual and still fairly minimal but growing) recognition of prisoners' rights.
The crisis of visibility concerns the notorious secrecy that surrounds prisons and what goes on inside them.
This secrecy has come under attack in recent years, and ‘slowly, but surely, the secrecy behind the prison walls is being breached, as alternative sources of information about the prisons are more securely established’(Fitzgerald and Sim, 1992: 11).
A good example of such a breach of secrecy followed an incident in 1979, when the until-then-secret ‘MUFTI’ team of specially trained prison officers in riot gear broke up a protest demonstration by prisoners in D Wing of Wormwood Scrubs.
The Home Office originally announced that no prisoners had been injured, but it was finally admitted that 54 had been, and that there had been criminal assaults on prisoners by staff.
The wall of secrecy and official disinformation had been effectively breached by a combination of prisoners smuggling information to their outside contacts, together with dissident members of the system (including two official prison visitors who appeared in television interviews and lost their visitor status as a result)(Stern 1997: 96–9).
Other cracks in the wall of  secrecy have appeared in recent years, as we shall see in Chapter 5.
Fitzgerald and Sim seem to see the existence of secrecy as a ‘crisis’ in itself.
Morally speaking, we have no doubt that it is; but again reverting to our cynical sociological standpoint, we suspect that on the contrary it is often the dispelling of secrecy that causes problems for the system and exacerbates the crisis.
For if we assume that there is much in prisons that will not bear being exposed (and if not, why keep it secret?) then opening up the prison is likely to decrease the legitimacy of the system.
If ‘knowledge is power’ then there is a danger that the system will lose much of its power if it loses control of information about itself.
(It may also increase staff unrest by leading prison officers to feel that their ‘authority’ is further threatened.)
On the other hand, if greater visibility should lead to prisoners being better treated (for fear of abuse being exposed) then visibility rather than secrecy could help to defuse the crisis.
It is also noticeable that many incidents of prison disorder — especially the popular form of demonstration on the prison rooftop — are clearly motivated by the very desire to make prisoners' grievances and allegations visible in a way that would never normally happen.
So, while we have no doubt that prison secrecy should be dispelled, it seems as if (paradoxically) both secrecy and openness can contribute to the crisis — as long as there are secrets to hide.
The crisis of legitimacy is ‘the final and most crucial aspect of the crisis in British prisons’(Fitzgerald and Sim, 1992: 23).
Sociologists use the term ‘legitimacy’ to mean power which is perceived as morally justified .
The penal system wields power over its subjects, but its moral right to do so has been coming under strong attack.
Fitzgerald and Sim relate the ‘crisis of legitimacy’ to ‘calls for the abolition of imprisonment’and to ‘a more fundamental political crisis which transcends the prison walls’(1992: 23–4).
There may be an element of revolutionary wishful thinking here: if all the system had to worry about was the minority of people who seriously call for the abolition of prisons or the prospect of the imminent overthrow of capitalism there would not be much of a crisis.
Nevertheless, even among non-abolitionists (and across most of the political spectrum) there has been grave disquiet about the state of the prisons.
Even very conservative commentators can regard the conditions within some prisons as morally intolerable to a civilized community.
The squalor produced by prison overcrowding is perhaps the issue which most scandalizes the public conscience, but there are others.
These include the rising number of suicides among prisoners (Dooley, 1990); the state of the prison  medical service (Sim, 1990); the presence in prisons (as noted previously) of large numbers of people with mental health problems; and the over-representation within prisons of members of ethnic minorities (see Chapter 9).
But it is not only the system's legitimacy with outside observers and the general public which is important.
The system will also suffer severe difficulties if it lacks legitimacy with its own employees, including prison staff and probation officers.
Perhaps most important of all is the legitimacy of the system with those who are its subjects .
A penal system can only run with the acquiescence of offenders.
No prison could run for long if not for the fact that most prisoners most of the time are prepared simply to cooperate with the staff and ‘do their bird’.
This is not to say that they normally have no sense of injustice.
They may bear grievances about the fact that they are locked up in prison, perhaps for longer than they feel they deserve or for longer than other offenders whom they regard as comparable.
(We shall see in Chapters 2, 4 and 9 that they may well have good grounds for this belief.)
They may have other grievances concerning the prison regime, parole, the behaviour of prison staff and the prison disciplinary system (see Chapters 5 and 6).
Even so, prisoners do not normally riot unless this sense of injustice has been somehow inflamed beyond its normal simmering state.
A Critical Mainstream Account
A third, mainstream yet critical account of the penal crisis was outlined by Tony Bottoms (1990a) in the introduction to a book entitled The Coming Penal Crisis .
Unlike both the previous accounts, Bottoms does not concentrate exclusively on prisons.
Instead he describes a crisis which he sees as spreading throughout the entire penal system, affecting other penal disposals such as probation, community service, fines and so on.
In essence (although we have rephrased and restructured his argument to some extent), Bottoms sees the penal system as suffering both a crisis of legitimacy and a crisis of resources .
Bottoms' version of the crisis of legitimacy is caused by the collapse of the rehabilitative ideal .
Prior to the 1970s, the penal system could plausibly legitimate itself by claiming as its raison d'être the rehabilitation of offenders, the provision of training and treatment which would cure them of their criminality, benefiting both them and society as a whole.
As we shall see in Chapter 2, this claim has now become less plausible and less acceptable.
This has led to a crisis of legitimacy for the system: not only for the  prisons (whose claim to be providing effective rehabilitation was always shaky in many eyes) but equally for other components of the penal system, notably the probation service which has for some years now been uncertain about what its proper rationale and direction should be.
The system has found itself in dire need of a new way of legitimating itself, and this need has given rise to a variety of responses.
These have included the revival of the philosophy of ‘just deserts’(see Chapter 2)— and, we would add, what we shall be calling ‘law and order ideology’.
The second crisis identified by Bottoms is the crisis of penological resources .
‘This crisis takes two forms: the size of the prison population’(combined with the lack of prison places and the running expenses of locking up and catering for such a large number of prisoners)‘and the demands on the probation and after-care service’(Bottoms, 1990a: 5).
This twofold crisis of resources has generated an imperative to limit the numbers in prison and to deal with more offenders outside the prison ‘in the community’, but without overloading the probation service.
Another aspect of this crisis presumably is the lack of resources to keep the prison officers sufficiently materially satisfied to defuse the industrial relations problem in the prison.
The overall response of the British state to this twofold crisis has to a large extent been characterized by penological pragmatism : responding to developments and attempting to manage the resources crisis ‘with no clear or coherent philosophical or other theoretical basis’(Bottoms, 1990a: 4).
This pragmatism has not been completely shapeless, however.
One strong theme was identified and christened by Tony Bottoms in a highly prescient paper back in 1977: the strategy of bifurcation (Bottoms, 1977, 1990a).
‘Bifurcation’ refers to a dual-edged approach to the problem of offending: differentiating between ‘ordinary’or ‘run of the mill’offenders with whom less severe measures can be taken on the one hand, and on the other hand ‘exceptional’, ‘very serious’or ‘dangerous’offenders who can be made subject to much tougher measures.
In this way ‘a bifurcated policy allows governments to get tough and soft simultaneously’(Pitts, 1999: 29).
This ‘twin-track strategy’, as government ministers have taken to calling it, has been a growing trend in the English penal system for as considerable time now, and is one major theme of the Criminal Justice Act of 1991 (along with‘just deserts’).
On the one hand, the Act tries to encourage judges and magistrates to sentence more petty offenders to punishments in the community rather than to custody; but on the other hand, the Act allows people convicted of violent or sexual offences to receive harsher sentences than  hitherto.
From the point of view of the resources crisis, this looks like a reasonably rational response: because there are so many more ‘run of the mill’ than ‘serious’offenders, a bifurcated policy should save many more resources than it costs.
In terms of legitimacy with the general public such a strategy could also be effective, since the public can be reassured that the really ‘serious, offenders about whom they are most concerned will be kept locked up for long periods.
But in terms of legitimacy with the prisoners — and in terms of preventing riots — bifurcation could prove seriously counterproductive since it seems so unfair on those who are singled out as the ‘very serious’ cases.
Bottoms' account is valuable in a number of ways — for example, in the connections it makes between the crisis within the prisons and throughout the rest of the penal system.
But perhaps its most important characteristic is one which is only implicit.
This is the recognition that there are two interacting aspects to the penal crisis: there is an ideological crisis (of legitimacy) and a material crisis (of resources).
We shall be suggesting later that this insight is of crucial importance in understanding the penal crisis.
The Woolf Diagnosis
The warm reception accorded from most quarters to the Woolf report on the prison riots of April 1990 (Woolf and Tumim, 1991) suggests that its diagnosis and prescription bid fair to become established as the standard liberal account of what causes prison riots and what should be done to prevent them.
Although it retains some features in common with the ‘orthodox account’ it also departs from it significantly, especially in its emphasis on the importance of ‘justice’within prisons.
Woolf's central finding was that
there are three requirements which must be met if the prison system is to be stable: they are security, control and justice…‘security’ refers to the obligations of the Prison Service to prevent prisoners escaping.
‘Control’ deals with the obligation of the Prison Service to prevent prisoners being disruptive.
‘Justice’ refers to the obligation of the Prison Service to treat prisoners with humanity and fairness, and to prepare them for their return to the community in a way which makes it less likely that they will re-offend.
(paras 9.19–9.20; our italics)‘Security’ and ‘control’are hardly novel concepts, figuring significantly in both the orthodox account and in Fitzgerald and Sim's ‘crisis of containment’.
Woolf also acknowledged as relevant factors such as overcrowding and insanitary physical conditions, but did not regard these as crucial.
Their significance for Woolf  was in contributing to prisoners' sense of injustice.
Woolf did not use the word ‘legitimacy’, but it is clearly the prison's lack of legitimacy with inmates which he saw as of central importance: ‘It is not possible for the Inquiry to form any judg-ment on whether the specific grievances of these prisoners were or were not well-founded.
What is clear is that the Prison Service had failed to persuade these prisoners that it was treating them fairly’(para 9.25).
Despite not committing himself about specific grievances, Woolf believed that genuine injustice contributes to a lack of legitimacy which in turn makes disorder more likely.
A substantial number of prisoners participated in the riots ‘at least in part, because of the conditions in which they were held and the way in which they were treated.
If a proper level of justice is provided in prisons, then it is less likely that prisoners will behave in this way.
Justice, therefore, contributes to the maintenance of security and control’(para 1.151).
While talking about the need to keep security, control and justice in ‘balance’, Woolf appeared to emphasize the importance of justice, and the imbalance he was most concerned about was the prospect of security and control measures exacerbating prisoners' sense of injustice.
Although Woolf stated that ‘there is no single cause of riots’(para 9.23) it may not be too great a distortion to say that he saw the lack of legitimacy of the prison for its inmates as the key factor in explaining the disorders.
For this reason he stressed in his recommendations not only measures to improve prison conditions but also reforms of grievance and disciplinary procedures (see Chapter 5) which might both improve the objective standard of justice within prisons and be seen as fairer by prisoners.
This humanistic attention to the subjective interpretation by prisoners of their situation marks a distinct departure from the orthodox account.
Another clear point of difference is Woolf's implicit rejection of the ‘toxic mix’ theory.
Although some prison staff claimed to the Woolf inquiry that there had been a worsening ‘mix’ of prisoners in their prisons prior to the disorders, Woolf did not state that this was a cause of the riots.
And he recommended that most prisons should be ‘community prisons’ catering for a wide variety of prisoners from their locality, a prescription which does not seem readily compatible with the notion that this sort of mixture is conducive to disorder.
The Woolf report represents a substantial advance upon the ‘orthodox account’.
It is superior firstly in that it accords better with the facts of prison disorders.
Secondly, it is founded on an implicit but plausible humanistic view of human nature compared  to the crude positivism of the orthodox account.
Other welcome aspects of the Woolf report include its recognition of the interdependency of the prison system with the rest of the criminal justice system and the role of sentencing in creating the ‘numbers crisis’.
Woolf correctly identifies some of the components of an adequate theory of the penal crisis.
But a full account will need to supplement the Woolf diagnosis, as we shall see.
Ideology, Politics and ‘Law and Order'
Although stating that sentencing policy is outside its terms of reference, the Woolf report noted the difficulties caused by the fact that the UK has the highest rate of imprisonment in proportion to its population in Europe (para 10.149).
Woolf seemed to ascribe this to the ignorance of English sentencers about prison conditions on the one hand and other countries’ practices on the other.
But it is not likely that the mere provision of information would necessarily alter sentencers' practices.
Andrew Ashworth (1991: 320) has remarked on the formidable resistance displayed by English judges against accepting as relevant international comparisons of prison populations.
At work here are what Ashworth calls the ‘ingrained attitudes’— which could equally well be termed ideologies — which influence sentencing decisions.
One such ideology is a determined Anglocentrism.
Another, equally peculiar to the judiciary in this country, is their particular version of the doctrine of the ‘independence of the judiciary’(see Chapter 4), which leads them to resent what they perceive as interference by governments in their sentencing practice.
Yet another relevant ideology, which infects judges, governments and the general public in greater or lesser degrees at different times, is the ideology of law and order , which has been notably and provocatively analysed by the Marxist theorist Stuart Hall (1979, 1990; Hall et al., 1979).
‘Law and order ideology’— as we shall be using the phrase — is not simply the unexceptionable belief that society should be governed by law, and crime effectively controlled.
It is a complex if naive set of attitudes, including the beliefs that human beings have free will, that they must be strictly disciplined by restrictive rules, and that they should be harshly punished if they break the rules or fail to respect authority.
Hall sees law and order ideology as an important component of what he calls ‘authoritarian populism’, which in turn constituted an important component of the political phenomenon of ‘Thatcherism’.
The ‘drift into a law and order society’ which Hall identifies did not by any means begin with the accession to power of  the Conservative Party under Mrs Thatcher in 1979, and its effects have hardly disappeared with her resignation in 1990, but the ideology made its presence most felt in her heyday in the early to mid-1990s (see Chapter 10).
(There is a strong resemblance between the rise to prominence of ‘law and order’ under Thatcherism in Britain and its similar rise under Ronald Reagan's presidency in the United States (1991–1999); other countries also provide partial parallels.)
For Hall, law and order ideology forms part of a pro-ruling-class response to a wider crisis of social order whose roots lie partly in the problems of the British economy and of Britain's declining role in the world.
It has had the natural result of generally tending to increase the harshness of punishment — and consequently the size of the prison population and the scale of the penal crisis.
Thus, Worrall and Pease (1996: 196), examining the steep rise in prison numbers in 1985, found that the most plausible, if speculative explanation was that ‘a general penal climate in Great Britain has permeated sentencing practice and made it harsher’.
Bifurcation, which we mentioned earlier, can be seen as another product of law and order ideology, combined with the pragmatic imperative to do something to limit the numbers in custody: visibly dealing more harshly with the ‘serious’ offenders who can be most easily scapegoated (in the popular press and the public mind), while dealing more leniently but less visibly with the much greater number of ‘run of the mill’offenders, is an apparently rational response to a situation where one's own rhetoric conflicts with practicalities.
Even more obvious is the influence of law and order ideology on the 1991 Criminal Justice Act's strategy of ‘punishment in the community’, which we have termed ‘punitive bifurcation’ since it insists that the non-custodial measures whose use is to be encouraged for less serious offenders are to be punitive rather than rehabilitative in intent and nature.
Various other strands of penal policy — the prison building programme (see Chapter 5), privatization (see Chapter 10), and the Fresh Start on prison officers' pay — can also be seen as the product of a combination of political ideology and material circumstances.
And this, as we now proceed to discuss, is the crucial interaction which we see as the key to understanding the penal crisis and responses to it.
A Radical Pluralist Account of the Crisis
Apart from the orthodox account, all the theories examined so far have something in common.
On the one hand, they all regard material circumstances as important in explaining the penal crisis: witness Bottoms'’ crisis of resources', Fitzgerald and Sim's ‘crisis  of conditions’, Woolf's concern with prison conditions and overcrowding, and Hall's with the backwardness of the British economy.
But they also recognize the crucial role played by ideas of different kinds: for Bottoms the collapse of the rehabilitative ideal looms large, for Fitzgerald and Sim there are crises of legitimacy and authority, Woolf stresses prisoners' sense of injustice, while Hall charts the creation of an ideology of law and order.
All seem, at least implicitly, to view material and ideological factors as interacting with each other in a manner which could be described (if we may risk being unfashionable by using a Marxist term) as ‘dialectical’.
If this perception of the nature and causes of the crisis is a correct one — and we think it is — can it be located within a general theoretical framework which is both intellectually respectable and useful?
We wish to suggest that it can.
We think that the penal crisis, and the penal system, can best be understood in the context of a theory we call radical pluralism .
The nature of this theory will be explained in greater detail in Chapter 3, but it is a composite, compromise theory which is capable of synthesizing the insights of Fitzgerald and Sim, Bottoms, Hall, and Woolf.
We are ‘pluralists’ in that we recognize that a large number of varied elements (including a variety of interest groups with greater or lesser power) are involved in the penal system and its crisis, and that these elements interact in a highly complex manner.
We see a need to analyse the crisis in the context of the relationships between politics and economics, ideology and material conditions.
We do not believe that this kind of analysis can be politically or morally neutral — and nor should it, for our understanding of the situation is that the penal system is morally indefensible and is in dire need of a programme of radical reform which will inevitably be highly political.
On the other hand, the penal crisis is not simply a by-product of a ‘crisis of capitalism’, and it could be largely solved without a complete political and social revolution.
Our account is represented in diagrammatic form in Figure 1.2.
The most striking feature of the diagram is its complexity; and yet Figure 1.2 is vastly oversimplified.
An arrow in the diagram means that one factor affects (often this means ‘exacerbates’) another in the direction shown.
Some of the connections pictured have already been discussed or mentioned.
(For example, our sections on Bottoms' and Hall's analyses indicated how economic decline and the collapse of the rehabilitative ideal gave rise to a resurgence of ‘law and order ideology’.)
Other factors and relationships will be dealt with in later chapters.
A few more points are worth stressing about this kind of account.
Firstly, it is crucial to understand that the crisis is  composed of both material and ideological elements, and we have consequently tried to organize Figure 1.2 accordingly.
These interact in a complex fashion: indeed certain features of the system, for example bifurcation, cannot be neatly placed on one side or the other of the (ultimately artificial) material/ideological divide since they are both ideologies and material practices at the same time.
Figure 1.2 A radical pluralist account of the penal crisis
The penal crisis is sometimes described (for example by Fitzgerald and Sim) as not one but several interlocking crises.
We think the penal system is best seen as one highly complex system and the  penal crisis as a single entity — albeit with multiplex causation and a variety of symptoms.
For there is a single unifying factor of the crisis, into which all the exacerbating elements flow and from which all the symptoms of the crisis proceed (as Figure 1.2 shows).
This key factor is the crisis of legitimacy — ignored by the orthodox account, but rightly identified as crucial by Bottoms, and Fitzgerald and Sim.
Riots, staff unrest, the malaise in the probation service and the political problems caused by the penal system are not the direct results of a high prison population or a lack of money or of decent prison buildings (although these do contribute to the crisis), but result from what people believe and how they feel — from the moral reactions of people within and outside the penal system to the material situation.
(In sociological jargon, the effects of the objective material conditions are ‘mediated’ through the subjective perceptions of human actors which are structured by ideology.)
The crisis of legitimacy is at least threefold.
The penal system needs to legitimate itself with three groups of people: with the public (including politicians, commentators etc.), with penal staff (including prison staff and probation officers) and with the penal subjects (prisoners, probationers and others who are subject to penal treatment).
Failing to satisfy the sense of justice of these different audiences leads to the alarming visible ‘symptoms’ of the crisis: political problems, industrial relations problems, malaise among prison and probation staff, and disorder amongst prisoners.
In saying that the crisis of legitimacy is central, we are saying that the penal crisis is in essence a moral crisis.
By this we do not Just mean that many people believe that the system is unjust.
As we hope to make clear (especially in Chapter 2, but also throughout the whole of this book), the penal system is indeed in our opinion the source of very substantial injustice, and the crisis is unlikely to be solved unless this injustice is mitigated.
Finally, we are at pains to stress that, despite all the arrows in Figure 1.2, we do not believe that human actions and beliefs are mechanistically determined.
for example, bifurcation is a policy which has been occasioned and encouraged by the conjunction of overcrowding and lack of resources in an ideological atmosphere of ‘law and order’ and legitimacy crisis, but it was not inevitable: policymakers could (and probably should) have decided to do something else instead.
Nor is ‘law and order ideology’ an inevitable result of economic decline and/or the collapse of the rehabilitative ideal.
All of which means that the crisis was not inevitable and is not insoluble.
But it cannot be solved unless we change people's ideas about punishment.
Justifying Punishment
In Chapter 1 we argued that the most crucial factor in the current malaise in the penal system is the ‘crisis of legitimacy’.
A social institution is ‘legitimate’ if it is perceived as morally justified ; the problem with the penal system is that this perception is lacking and many people inside and outside the system believe that it is morally indefensible, or at least defective.
We need to investigate whether such moral perceptions are accurate, if only to know what should be done about them.
If they are inaccurate, then the obvious strategy would be to try to rectify the perceptions, by persuading people that the system is not unjust after all.
But if the perceived injustices are real, then it is those injustices which should be rectified.
This chapter accordingly deals with the moral philosophy of punishment and attempts to relate the philosophical issues to the reality of penal systems such as that of England and Wales today.
The basic moral question about punishment is the age-old one: ‘What justifies the infliction of punishment on people?’
Punishing people certainly needs a justification, since it is almost always something which is harmful, painful or unpleasant to the recipient.
Imprisonment, for example, causes physical discomfort, psycho-logical pain, indignity and general unhappiness along with a variety of other disadvantages (such as impaired prospects for employment and social life).
Deliberately inflicting suffering on people is at least prima facie immoral, and needs some special moral justification.
It is true that in some cases it happens that the recipient does not find the punishment painful, or even welcomes it — for example, some offenders might find prison a refuge against the intolerable pressures of the outside world.
But even in these cases punishment is still something inflicted : it is an intrusion on the liberty of the person punished, which also requires a moral justification.
The two most frequently cited justifications for punishment are retribution , and what we will call reductivism (following Walker, 1972).
Retributivism justifies punishment on the ground that it is deserved by the offender; reductivism justifies punishment on the ground that it helps to reduce the incidence of crime .
Various other theories also exist, some of them combining elements of both retributivism and reductivism.
In the following discussion, we shall be making use of Hart's (1969) distinction between the general justifications (or ‘general justifying aims’) put forward for having  a system of punishment, and the principles of distribution which it is claimed should determine how severe the punishment of individual offenders should be.
Reductivism
Reductivism is a forward-looking (or ‘consequentialist’) theory: it seeks to justify punishment by its alleged future consequences .
If punishment is inflicted, it is claimed, the incidence of crime will be less than it would be if no penalty were imposed.
Reductivist arguments can be supported by the form of moral reasoning known as utilitarianism.
This is the general moral theory first systematically expounded by Jeremy Bentham (an important figure in penal thought and history) which says that moral actions are those which produce ‘the greatest happiness of the greatest number’ of people.
If punishment does indeed reduce the future incidence of crime, then the pain and unhappiness caused to the offender may be outweighed by the avoidance of unpleasantness to other people in the future — thus making punishment morally right from a utilitarian point of view.
But it is not necessary to be a utilitarian to be a reductivist.
Indeed, at the end of this chapter we will be arguing an alternative position (based on human rights) which although non-utilitarian nevertheless takes account of the possible reductivist effects of punishment.
How is it claimed that punishment reduces crime?
There are several alleged mechanisms of reduction, which we shall discuss in turn.
Deterrence
Essentially, deterrence is the simple idea that the incidence of crime is reduced because of people's fear or apprehension of the punishment they may receive if they offend.
The deterrence mechanism can be divided into two categories, individual deterrence and general deterrence.
Individual deterrence occurs when someone commits a crime, is punished for it, and finds the punishment so unpleasant or frightening that the offence is never repeated for fear of more of the same or worse.
This sounds a plausible theory, but unfortunately it seems not to work too well in practice.
If individual deterrence did work as the theory suggests, we would expect that if we introduced a new kind of harsh punishment designed to deter, the offenders who suffered the new punishment would be measurably less likely to re-offend than similar offenders who underwent a more lenient penalty.
This was the alleged rationale of the introduction of the ‘short sharp shock’ detention  centre regime for young offenders by Mrs Thatcher's Conservative government in the early 1990s (see Chapter 9).
As had been widely predicted by criminologists and other commentators, the detention centres with the new harsher regimes were no more successful than detention centres with unmodified regimes in terms of the reconvic-tion rates of their ex-inmates (Home Office, 1994b).
Some other research suggests — quite contrary to what the theory of individual deterrence would have us believe — that offenders who suffer more severe penalties are more (not less) likely to re-offend (West, 1992: 109; Brody, 1976: 14–16).
And one particularly thorough research study on boys growing up in London concluded that if a boy offends, the best way to prevent him from offending repeatedly is not to catch him in the first place (West, 1992: 104–11)!
This research evidence seems contrary to common sense, but such findings are not as incomprehensible as they look at first sight.
They do not show that punishment has no deterrent effect on offenders, or that no offender is ever deterred.
But they suggest that overall , punishment has other effects which cancel out and even outweigh its deterrent effects.
These anti-deterrent effects of punishment are known as ‘labelling effects’.
‘Labelling theory’ claims (and is supported by research studies such as those just mentioned) that catching and punishing offenders ‘labels’and stigmatizes them as criminals, and that this process can in various ways make it more difficult for them to conform to a law-abiding life in future.
They may find respectable society and lawful opportunities closed to them while unlawful ones are opened up (custodial institutions are notoriously ‘schools for crime’ where offenders can meet each other, learn criminal techniques and enter into a criminal sub-culture), and their self-image may change from that of a law-abiding person to that of a deviant.
Harsher penalties in particular could help foster a tough, ‘macho’ criminal self-image in the young men who predominate in the criminal statistics.
(For a fuller discussion of labelling theory, see Taylor et al., 1973: ch. 5.)
So the notion of individual deterrence seems to be of little value in justifying our penal practices.
But there is another, perhaps more promising category of deterrent effect:general deterrence .
This is the idea that offenders are punished, not to deter the offenders themselves, but pour encourager les autres .
General deterrence theory is often cited to justify punishments, sometimes in specific cases.
One faintly ludicrous example is a 1993 case where the Court of Appeal said that a sentence passed on a Mr Fairman would ‘indicate to other people who might be minded to set fire to armchairs in the middle of a domestic row that if they do, they were likely to go to prison for as long as two years’.
Now, there can be little doubt that the existence of a system of punishment has some general deterrent effect.
When during the Second World War the German occupiers deported the entire Danish police force for several months, recorded rates of theft and robbery (though not of sexual offences) rose spectacularly (Chris-tiansen, 1975; Beyleveld, 1990: 159).
And if, for instance, on-the-spot execution were to be introduced for parking on a double yellow line, there might well be a significant reduction in the rate of illegal parking.
But short of such extreme situations, it seems that what punishments are actually inflicted on offenders makes little difference to general deterrence.
For example, in Birmingham in 1973 a young mugger was sentenced to a draconian 20 years' detention amid enormous publicity, and yet this sentence made no difference to the incidence of mugging offences in Birmingham or in other areas (Baxter and Nuttall, 1975; Beyleveld, 1990: 157).
This does not mean that deterrence never works, but that its effects are limited and easy to overestimate.
There is evidence that general deterrence can be improved if potential offenders' perceived likelihood of detection can be increased but little evidence that severer punishments deter any better than more lenient ones.
This in turn means that, while general deterrence might well form the basis of a plausible general justification for having a system of punishment, it is more difficult to argue that the amount of punishment imposed by our system is justifiable by deterrent considerations.
If deterrence is the justification for punishment, it seems almost certain that the penal system in the United Kingdom is engaging in massive and unjustifiable ‘overkill’.
As we saw in Chapter 1 (especially Table 1.1), the UK has more prisoners proportionate to its population than any other country in Western Europe.
Contrasts with the Netherlands (which has 44.6 prisoners per 100,000 population compared with the UK's 96.5) are particularly illuminating.
Unlike the UK, the Netherlands has for most of the time since 1950 pursued a consistent policy of reducing and limiting the prison population; overall it is difficult to argue that this reduction in punishment has adversely affected the Netherlands' crime rate, which has risen in a roughly similar manner to that in the UK over this period (Downes, 1999: 33–41, 194–5; NACRO, 1991a: 93).
Similarly, a recent reduction in the West German prison population has not led to an increase in major crime or made the streets less safe (Feest, 1999).
A utilitarian deterrence theorist ought to conclude from this that the UK's penal system is an immoral one.
Bentham (1970: 179) himself propounded the principle of ‘frugality’(or ‘parsimony’), which states that punishments should be no more severe than they need to be to produce a utilitarian quantity of deterrence.
‘Overkill’ causes unnecessary suffering to the offender, and all suffering is bad unless it prevents a greater amount of suffering or brings about a greater quantity of pleasure.
So utilitarian deterrence might justify having a penal system, but does not justify the one we actually have.
We shall argue later that the same is true for our preferred approach based on human rights.
Reform
Reform (or ‘rehabilitation’) is the idea that punishment can reduce the incidence of crime by taking a form which will improve the individual offender's character or behaviour and make him or her less likely to re-offend in future.
Reform as the central aim of the penal system was a highly popular notion in the 1950s and 1960s: penological thought was dominated by ‘the rehabilitative ideal’.
Many proponents of reform (of a kind known as ‘positivists’: see later in this chapter) have favoured a particularly strong version of this ideal called the ‘treatment model’.
This viewed criminal behaviour not as freely willed action but (either metaphorically or literally) as a symptom of some kind of mental illness which should not be punished but ‘treated’ like an illness.
However, reform subsequently became discredited, partly as a result of research results which suggested that penal measures intended to reform offenders were no more effective in preventing recidivism than were punitive measures.
The received wisdom about reform came to be that ‘research shows that nothing works’, that ‘whatever you do to offenders makes no difference’, although this was always an exaggeration.
It is true that extensive reviews of research in the United States (Lipton et al., 1975) and in Britain (Brody, 1976) found it to be generally the case that different penal measures had similarly unimpressive outcomes in terms of re-offending, but they also found examples of reformative programmes which seemed to work to some extent with certain groups of offenders (see Palmer, 1975).
The generalized conclusion (first widely popularized by Martinson (1974)) that ‘nothing works’ became widely accepted less because of its validity than because it was a message suited to its time, and because the disappointment of the high hopes invested in reform led to an over-reaction against the rehabilitative ideal.
We may now be seeing something of a revival of the reformative approach.
For example, recent claims for the reformative success of ‘intensive intermediate treatment’ programmes for juvenile offenders have tended to meet with interest rather than scepticism  (see Chapter 8).
But the claims made for reform are more modest than previously.
Few nowadays hold to the ‘medical’ or ‘treatment’models of punishment, or claim that science can provide a cure for all criminality.
Reform tends now to be seen not as treatment which is imagined to work independently of the will of the offender, but as measures which enable or assist rather than force offenders to improve their behaviour — or, in Norval Morris' terms, ‘facilitated change’ rather than‘coerced cure’(Morris, 1974: 13–20).
Intensive intermediate treatment programmes, for example, typically attempt to confront offenders with the consequences and social unacceptability of their offending in the hope that they will decide to change their attitudes towards offending.
This approach does not deny the offender's free will, rather it appeals to it.
It follows that reform can never be guaranteed to work (as of course research well and truly confirms).
But it may still be well worth trying.
The empirical evidence may destroy the reformative aim as a plausible general justification of the penal system , but reform remains a reductivist aim which it may well be right to pursue within a penal system.
Incapacitation
Incapacitation means simply that the offender is (usually physically) prevented from re-offending by the punishment imposed, either temporarily or permanently.
The practice in some societies of chopping off the hands of thieves has (among other things) this kind of incapacitatory effect.
Similarly, one of the few obviously valid arguments in favour of capital punishment is that executed offenders never re-offend afterwards.
Lesser penalties can also have some incapacitatory effects.
Disqualification from driving does something to prevent motoring offenders from repeating their crimes.
Attendance centres may be used to keep hooligans away from football matches.
And imprisonment ensures that the offender is deprived of the opportunity to commit at least some kinds of offence for the duration.
It is certainly a plausible claim that incapacitation could be a justification (or partial justification) for certain kinds of punishments — disqualificatory sentences and attendance centre orders are possible examples.
Sometimes extravagant claims are made for the incapacitatory effectiveness of ordinary prison sentences, and it is argued that if prison sentences were longer this could produce a substantial reduction in crime by means of incapacitation.
The American writer James Q. Wilson (1975) has claimed that a 20 per cent reduction in street robbery could be achieved simply by locking offenders up for longer.
We are not  impressed by such claims, nor are most commentators.
While the difficulties of accurately estimating incapacitation effects are immense, the best calculations suggest that such claims are wildly inflated.
For example, one British study (Brody and Tarling, 1990) concluded that we could have a substantial effect on the crime rate if everyone convicted of an indictable offence received a mandatory 19-month prison sentence.
Unfortunately however, such a policy would also have the effect of increasing the already excessive prison population by an enormous extent.
On the other hand, the prison population could be substantially reduced without creating a massive crime wave: if the numbers in prison were cut by 40 per cent, this could be expected to lead to an increase in criminal convictions of only 1.6 per cent .
It seems unlikely, then that incapacitation effects can provide a general justification for our present practice of imprisonment, let alone justify increasing our use of imprisonment.
Retributivism
The retributivist principle — that wrongdoers should be punished because they deserve it — is in some ways the complete antithesis of reductivism.
Where reductivism is forward-looking, retributivism looks backwards in time, to the offence.
It is the fact that the offender has committed a wrongful act which deserves punishment, not the future consequences of the punishment, that is important to the retributivist.
Retributivism claims that it is in some way morally right to return evil for evil, that two wrongs can somehow make a right.
If people are to be punished because they deserve it, it is natural to say that they should also be punished as severely as they deserve — that they should get their just deserts .
Retributivism thus advocates what is known as a tariff : a set of punishments of varying severity which are matched to crimes of differing seriousness.
The punishment should fit the crime in the sense of being in proportion to the moral culpability shown by the offender in committing the crime.
The Old Testament ius talionis (an eye for an eye, a life for a life, etc.) is one example of such a tariff, but only one: a retributive tariff could be considerably more lenient than this, as long as the proportionate relationship between crimes and punishments was retained.
Retributivism is sometimes combined with reductivism to produce a compromise theory.
Often these compromise theories state, in effect, that punishment is only justified if it is both deserved and likely to have deterrent effects (eg von Hirsch, 1976: chs 5 and 6).
Retributive theory has several attractive features.
One is its con-sonance with what is generally acknowledged to be one fundamental principle of justice: that like cases should be treated alike .
(’ Like' for retributivists meaning alike in the intuitively appealing sense of ‘similarly deserving’.)
Another attractive feature of retributivism is that there is a natural connection between the retributive approach and the idea that offenders have rights .
Reductivist theory (at least in its utilitarian form) has always found it difficult to encompass the notion of rights, even when it comes to providing entirely innocent people with a right not to be punished.
(For if we could achieve the desired reductive consequences by framing an innocent person, and if these effects are all that is needed to justify punishment, what is wrong with punishing the innocent?)
Retributivism has no such problem, since it follows automatically from the retributive principle that it must be wrong to punish non-offenders.
Nor may we punish criminals to a greater extent than their crimes are felt to deserve (for example in the hope of reforming them or deterring others): under the retributivist principle offenders have a right to go free once they have ‘paid their debt to society’.
Retributivism thus fits in well with our commonsense intuitions which insist that it is indeed morally relevant whether the person punished has behaved well, badly or very badly in the past.
Probably for this reason, it has proved a remarkably resilient idea.
Although for many years retributivism was regarded (at least in academic circles) as outmoded and even atavistic, it has enjoyed a major revival in recent years, notably in the forms of the ‘Justice Model’ and ‘law and order ideology’discussed later in this chapter.
But retributivism is not without its own philosophical difficulties.
One problem is how to give the retributive principle a moral grounding in the first place.
It may accord with some of our moral gut reactions, which seem to tell us that wrongdoers should be made to suffer.
But maybe these reactions are merely irrational vindictive emotions (akin to vengeance) which we ought morally to curb rather than indulge.
A related objection is that it is not immediately clear how the retributivist principle relates to any general notion of what is right or wrong.
At least utilitarian reductivism has the virtue that it slots into the general moral and political theory of utilitarianism.
Some theorists have attempted to counter these objections by reference to the ‘social contract’, a theory which provides a general account of political obligation (see especially Murphy, 1979).
The idea is that all citizens are bound together in a sort of multilateral contract which defines our reciprocal rights and duties.
The terms  of this contract include the law of the land, which applies fairly and equally to all of us.
The lawbreaker has disturbed this equilibrium of equality and gained an unfair advantage over those of us who have behaved well and abided by the rules.
Retributive punishment restores the balance by cancelling out this advantage with a commensurate disadvantage.
It thus ensures that wrongdoers do not profit from their wrongdoings, and is justified because if we failed to punish lawbreakers it would be unfair to the law-abiding.
This ‘modern retributivism’ has been influential if far from universally accepted (see eg Honderich, 1994: 224–31).
But even if we assume that it is sound at an abstract philosophical level, it would be extremely dubious to assert that this theory can justify our present practices of punishment or anything like them.
The main difficulty is that the theory is only valid if our society is a just one in which all citizens are genuinely equal; otherwise there is no equilibrium of equality for punishment to restore.
If — as appears to be the case — detected offenders typically start from a position of social disadvantage (which means that the obligation to obey the law weighs more heavily upon them than on others) then punishment will tend to increase inequality rather than do the opposite.
In fact, this is exactly the conclusion reached by the modern retributivist Jeffrie Murphy (1979: 95), who states that ‘modern societies largely lack the moral right to punish’.
Even if such a sweeping conclusion is not warranted, retributivists should be strongly critical of many aspects of our penal system, not least the lack of consistency in sentencing practices (see Chapter 4) which means that offenders are to a great extent not dealt with in proportion to their just deserts.
So despite its popularity and even fashionableness, retributivism remains an implausible justification for our practices of punishment.
Other Justifications
Reductivism and retributivism do not exhaust all the possible justifications for punishment, or the aims which it has been suggested punishment can rightly pursue.
We shall deal with three of these: denunciation, reparation, and the associated notions of disqualification, requalification and reintegrative shaming.
Denunciation
Giving evidence to the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment in the 1950s, Lord Denning (Gowers, 1953: para 53) made the following statement:
The punishment for grave crimes should adequately reflect the revulsion felt by the great majority of citizens for them.
It is a mistake to consider the objects of punishment as being deterrent or reformative or preven-tive and nothing else…
The ultimate justification of punishment is not that it is a deterrent, but that it is the emphatic denunciation by the community of a crime.
The idea that punishment does and should demonstrate society's abhorrence of the offence, and that this in some way justifies punishment, is quite a popular one.
It was explicitly cited as a rationale for the sentence in the 1991 case of Marcus Serjeant, an unemployed teenager who fired blanks at the Queen during the Trooping the Colour ceremony.
Sentencing Serjeant to five years' imprisonment, Lord Lane (the Lord Chief Justice) said: ‘The public sense of outrage must be marked.
You must be punished for the wicked thing you did’(The Times , 15 September 1991).
Denunciation might be advocated for more than one reason.
What we term instrumental denunciation is actually a form of reductivism (which we discuss at this stage for convenience).
This is the idea that denunciation can help to reduce the incidence of crime — a notion which may at first seem somewhat obscure, but which has a distinguished intellectual pedigree.
Emile Durkheim (1960: vol. 1, ch. 2; see below, Chapter 3) argued that one function of the criminal law and punishment was to reinforce the conscience collective of society and thereby ensure that members of society continued to refrain from crime.
Punishment, Durkheim thought, has an educative effect.
It does not only teach people to obey the law out of fear and prudence (which is deterrence); it also sends a symbolic moral message that the offender's action is socially abhorred, and therefore wrong.
As with general deterrence, it is difficult on the evidence to make very strong claims about the effectiveness of denunciation.
Research suggests that members of the public are not influenced in their moral attitudes towards offences by the punishments which are imposed (or which they believe are imposed).
People seem to have sufficient respect for the law to disapprove more strongly of an action when a law is passed against it, but they do not have sufficient respect for the penal system to be influenced by the severity of punishment inflicted (Walker and Marsh, 1994).
This suggests that (like general deterrence) instrumental denunciation cannot justify any particular level of severity of punishment; nor can the penal system (as is sometimes fondly imagined)‘give a lead’ to public opinion about the rights and wrongs of how people should behave.
A different version of denunciation theory (and the one we  suspect Lords Denning and Lane subscribe to) is what we term expressive denunciation .
This is the (non-forward-looking) notion that punishment is justified simply because it is the expression of society's abhorrence of crime.
Sometimes this is explained in terms of the community showing its recognition of and commitment to its own values (eg Lacey, 1999).
The claim is therefore that denunciatory punishment is justified even if it has no good consequences such as educating the public conscience and thereby reducing the amount of crime.
When posed in such stark but accurate terms it becomes difficult to see why this is supposed to amount to a distinct moral justification for punishment.
It looks suspiciously like knee-jerk retributivism, spuriously ennobled by reference to the ‘community’.
Perhaps it is right that the official institutions of a community should express moral judgements on behalf of its law-abiding members — but why should it have to take form of punishment ?
Why — unless perhaps we are closet retributivists or reductivists — should not offenders simply be formally denounced with words and ceremony and then set free?
Unless we care nothing for human freedom and are impervious to human suffering, denunciation seems an implausible general justification for a system which deliberately inflicts punishment on people.
Nevertheless, there may be something to be said for the notion of denunciation.
Whether or not things could be otherwise in a radically different society, as things are, the conviction and punishment of an offender necessarily carries a moral, condemnatory message and is seen as so doing.
Perhaps, as we have seen, members of the public are currently not greatly influenced by such messages; but there is still something morally wrong about making incorrect moral statements (cf. von Hirsch, 1996: ch. 5).
It follows that it is wrong to convict and punish someone who has done nothing morally wrong.
And if it makes sense to punish at all, there is some point in trying to punish offenders at least roughly in proportion to the moral gravity of their offences.
Denunciation may not on its own provide a general justification for having a penal system, but it may help provide us with one acceptable prin-ciple of distribution for punishment.
Reparation
Reparation is the notion that people who have offended should do something to ‘repair’ the wrong they have done, and in so doing acknowledge the wrongness of their actions.
This could take the form of compensating the victim of the offence or doing something else to assist the victim.
If there is no individual or identifiable  victim, reparation can be made to the community as a whole by performing community service or paying a fine into public funds.
The idea of reparation has come very much to the fore in discus-sions about punishment in recent years, and we shall have more to say about various reparative forms of punishment in Chapter 7.
Reparation is a sound and valid principle which we favour.
(Among the virtues of reparation are that it could be of great value in assisting the ‘reintegration’ of offenders, as we discuss shortly.)
Reparation can be seen either as a desirable aim in its own right, or as a valuable but secondary aim which may be pursued when imposing punishment which is justified on other grounds (such as reductivism).
If punishment is to be inflicted, it is surely better that the punishment should directly benefit the victim or society than that it should merely hurt or restrict the offender.
But it is obvious that the reparative principle cannot begin to justify the penal system that we have, since most punishments (and most notably imprisonment) contain little or no reparative element, and may even make it difficult or impossible for the offender to make amends.
If reparation were more consistently pursued we should have a much more civilized and morally acceptable penal system than the present one.
Disqualification, Requalification and Reintegrative Shaming
Michel Foucault (1977: 130) says of penological ‘classicists’ such as Beccaria (of whom more shortly) that they ‘saw punishment as a procedure for requalifying individuals as subjects, as juridical subjects’.
Lawbreakers have placed themselves outside of society by committing their offences, but the penal process should ultimately aim at returning them to society as full members.
Tony Bottoms (1983: 176–7) has compared this notion to that of the ‘sin-bin’ in ice hockey: the player who has committed a foul is excluded (or ‘disqualified’) from the game for a while and symbolically marked out as an offender, but after a term of fixed duration the player is allowed to rejoin the game as a full participant or ‘requalified subject’.
The process therefore has two stages, the disqualification stage in which the offender is publicly and symbolically shamed by punishment, and the requalification stage when the punishment comes to an end and the offender is reintegrated into society as a full citizen.
The disqualification stage in this bears some resemblance to denunciation, which we found to be of limited value as a justification of punishment.
Requalification of the offender on the other hand strikes us, like reparation and reform of the offender, as one  valid aim which a penal system should pursue.
At present, however, it cannot be said that our system does this very effectively.
The stigma of disqualification tends to linger on well past the point where offenders have served their official punishment, and they often continue to be excluded from law-abiding society rather than being reintegrated into it.
Which (as labelling theory rightly suggests) is bad not only for the offenders but for the rest of society, because it makes re-offending much more likely.
The trouble with our system is that we overdo the disqualification and pay insufficient attention to requalification.
Recently, John Braithwaite (1999) has put forward a general theory of crime and punishment which has some affinities with these notions of disqualification and requalification.
He claims that successful societal responses to crime are those which bring about the reintegrative shaming of the offender.
Offenders should be dealt with in a manner that shames them before other members of their community.
But the shaming should not be of a ‘stigmatizing’ nature which will tend to exclude them from being accepted members of the community; it should be of a kind which serves to reintegrate them within it, by getting them to accept that they have done wrong while encouraging others to readmit them to society.
(As we said above, we think that reparative measures could be particularly suitable in pursuing reintegrative shaming, for the performance of reparation shames the offender symbolically while seeking to set matters right between the offender, the victim and the community.)
If such a strategy were to be an effective one — and the jury is still out, although it seems a promising idea — then reintegrative shaming would be a valuable method of reforming offenders, which (as we have said) is a valid reductivist aim to be pursued within a morally defensible penal system.
Schools of Penal Thought
The various justifications for punishment we have outlined have waxed and waned in relative popularity over time.
In this section we provide a brief history of the development of penal thought in the West to show how different combinations of penal justifications have found favour in different eras.
The Classical School: Deterrence and the Tariff
The year of 1764 saw the publication of one of the most influential works of penal philosophy of all time —Dei Delitti e delle Pene (On Crimes and Punishments) by the Italian, Cesare Beccaria (Beccaria, 1963).
This book, the seminal work of the ‘classical’ schools of  criminal law and penology, provided a thoroughgoing critique of the criminal justice systems of eighteenth-century Europe along with a blueprint for reform along more rational and humane lines.
To understand the classicists it helps to have some understanding of what they were reacting against.
Punishment under the ancien régime of eighteenth-century Europe was both arbitrary and harshly retributive, dominated by capital and corporal penalties.
Moreover, ‘due process’ in the form of effective legal safeguards against wrongful conviction was all but absent in the criminal justice system of the time, and even the laws which defined which actions were criminal were vague and extremely wide.
On the other hand, the existence of wide discretion in the hands of judges and of the sovereign (notably in the form of the pardon, which was extensively used) meant that the guilty were as likely to go un-punished as were the innocent to be wrongly convicted and harshly dealt with.
The classicists claimed that such a system was not only inhumane and unfair, but profoundly irrational and inefficient for the task of controlling crime.
Beccaria's blueprint called for clarity in the law and due process in criminal procedure combined with certainty and regularity of punishment.
There should be a definite, fixed penalty for every offence, laid down in advance by the legislature in a strict tariff.
These penalties should be proportionate to the gravity of the offence, but as mild as possible in contrast to the ‘useless prodigality of torments’ which characterized the existing system.
Once an offender was found guilty, however, the sentence should follow automatically; in the strict classicism of Beccaria there was no room for clemency by way of pardons, reduction of sentences because of mitigating circumstances, or early release from the punishment laid down.
All people were to be treated as fully responsible for their own actions, including their own offences.
The intellectual influence of classicism, and of Beccaria in particular, was enormous.
Its principles were praised by reforming monarchs such as Frederick II of Prussia, Maria Theresa of Austria and Catherine the Great of Russia; the French Code introduced by the revolutionary regime in 1791 was an attempt at direct implementation of his plan for a rigid tariff of punishments; Beccaria also greatly influenced such English jurists as Romilly and Blackstone.
Its greatest impact was, however on the framing of codes of criminal law rather than on penal systems.
Beccaria's blueprint was never implemented in full.
Classicism grew out of the Enlightenment, the eighteenth-century philosophical movement which stressed the importance of human reason and which undertook the critical reappraisal of existing  ideas and social institutions.
Beccaria made particular use of the Enlightenment notion of the ‘social contract’ as the source of legitimate political authority.
He argued that rational people drawing up a just social contract would only be willing to grant governments the power to punish to the extent that was necessary to protect themselves from the crimes of others.
It followed that punishments should be no harsher than was necessary to achieve reductivist ends by means of deterrence; from this he derived his proposal for a tariff of fixed, certain penalties, proportionate to the offence but relatively mild by the standards of his own day.
(Thus, like retributivists he advocated a proportional tariff, although he was himself a reductivist.)
Beccaria opposed capital punishment as being cruel and inefficient as a deterrent.
Punishments should, he said, be public and of a kind appropriate to the type of offence: corporal punishments for crimes of violence, public humiliation for ‘crimes founded on pride’ and so on.
This would, he thought, assist in deterrence because ‘in crude, vulgar minds, the seductive picture of a particularly advantageous crime should immediately call up the associated idea of punishment’(Beccaria, 1963: 57).
But as we have seen, Foucault and Bottoms detect in classicism a concern not only with deterrence but also with ‘requalifying individuals as juridical subjects’.
Once they have suffered punishments fitting to their crimes, the social contract dictates that offenders have a right to re-enter society as citizens.
In general, Beccaria's philosophy exhibits what could be regarded as a curious combination of concern with the rights of the individual under the social contract on the one hand, and utilitarian reductivism on the other — curious because rights theory and utilitarianism are often thought to be philosophically incompatible.
Yet he explicitly appeals to both concepts.
(Indeed, not only did Beccaria use the concept of utility, but Bentham himself acknowledged his intellectual debt to Beccaria in the most fulsome terms and is even believed to have first encountered the phrase ‘the greatest happiness of the greatest number’ in Beccaria's master work: see Beccaria, 1963: x-xi, 9.)
This intriguingly attractive blend of rights theory with forward-looking reductivism is perhaps one of the features that make Beccaria a continually fascinating and influential penal thinker even today.
Bentham and Neo-Classicism: Deterrence and Reform
The Englishman Jeremy Bentham (1749–1932), the main founder of the utilitarian philosophy, was also a major penal thinker and reformer.
His penal thinking was an application of his general philosophy that law and government should pursue ‘the greatest  happiness of the greatest number’, which logically led him to espouse a purely reductivist approach to punishment, with no place for retributivism of any description.
Despite the intellectual debt he acknowledged to Beccaria, his ideas differed from those of his Italian predecessor in several respects.
At a philosophical level he had no time for notions of the social contract or human rights (he famously described the idea of natural rights as ‘nonsense upon stilts’.)
Nevertheless, like Beccaria he regarded clarity and due process in the criminal law as desirable, but from a purely utilitarian point of view.
Similarly, he followed Beccaria in advocating a proportionate tariff of punishments for offences.
Like Beccaria he said that punishment should be primarily justified because of its deterrent effects, but he also proclaimed that punishment of the right kind could serve a further reductivist aim: that of reform.
His model of utilitarian punishment was exemplified most famously in the Panopticon — a prison he designed and narrowly failed to persuade the British government to let him build.
The Panopticon was designed in such a way that prisoners were under constant surveillance by inspectors in a central observa-tion tower.
Prisoners were to be made to perform productive work within the prison in a consistent and regular manner in order that they should acquire rational work habits which they would continue after release instead of returning to crime.
Thus, whereas classicism's image of human nature portrayed all human beings as being fully responsible for their own actions, Bentham saw criminals as having limited rationality and responsibility, but thought that they could be made more rational by the correct application of reformative techniques in his ‘mill for grinding rogues honest’, as he called the Panopticon.
His thinking also took account of limited human rationality on the question of responsibility for offences; unlike Beccaria he allowed for mitigating circumstances such as duress, infancy and insanity to reduce or even remove an individual's liability to punishment.
Beccaria's ideas had been fated to win great praise but achieve less by way of practical influence in the running of penal systems.
Bentham's success was greater but far from total.
Utilitarian reductivism became a prominent rationale for punishment but never displaced retributivism entirely.
Criminal justice systems in the nineteenth century developed along neo-classical lines.
This meant that criminal laws were clarified and in some countries codified, as both Beccaria and Bentham advocated, but leaving a greater degree of flexibility and judicial discretion than either would have found congenial.
For example, the highly Beccarian French Code of 1791 was soon revised to reintroduce recognition  of mitigating circumstances, judicial discretion in sentencing and the prerogative of mercy.
The Benthamite approach had its greatest impact in respect of one of its greatest points of difference from Beccarian classicism: the form punishment should take.
Beccaria's scheme had no place for imprisonment as a punishment.
(He only discussed imprisonment as the temporary incarceration of a suspect before trial.
He did advocate penal servitude as a punishment for certain offences, but this was not to be served in prison.)
Bentham by contrast saw prison, in the shape of the Panopticon, as a useful method of dealing with offenders.
Although the Panopticon was never built exactly as he designed it (a modified version was constructed at Millbank on the Thames and opened, with extremely poor results, in 1917), imprisonment rapidly became the pre-eminent method of punishment.
As Foucault (1977) famously observed, the end of the eighteenth century and the early nineteenth century saw a massive shift from corporal to carceral punishment.
Moreover, this was a new form of imprisonment whose aims were not confined to con-taining offenders for a period and deterring the populace from crime.
It also set out to retrain (or ‘discipline’ to use Foucault's word) the inmates, along the kind of lines Bentham advocated.
As Foucault (1977: 16) put it, punishment no longer addressed itself to the body of the criminal, but to the soul.
Positivism: The Rehabilitative Ideal
Just 102 years after Cesare Beccaria's Dei Delitti e delle Pene saw the light of day there came the publication of another work by an Italian called Cesare, equally seminal and revolutionary but in most respects diametrically opposed to Beccaria's way of thinking.
This was Cesare Lombroso's L'Uomo Delinguente (The Criminal Man)(1976).
Lombroso is best known for his theory, derived from Charles Darwin, that criminals were atavistic throwbacks to an earlier stage of evolution.
But more important than this particular theory (which he was later to modify substantially) was Lombroso's role as the founder of the positive school of criminology .
The positivist view is that crime, along with all other natural and social phenomena, is caused by factors and processes which can be discovered by scientific investigation.
These causes are not necessarily genetic, but may include environmental factors such as upbringing in the family, social conditioning and so on.
Positivists believe in the doctrine of determinism : human beings, including criminals, do not act from their own free will but are impelled to act by forces beyond their control.
Thus, where Beccaria's vision of human nature had been one of untrammelled  free will while Bentham had admitted that the responsibility of some humans was limited, positivism denies responsibility altogether.
It follows that it is wrong to hold people responsible for their crimes and punish them in ways that imply that their crimes are their own fault.
Criminality is no more the fault of the offender than illness is the fault of the invalid, and both require treatment not blame.
So retributivism is clearly excluded as a justification for punishment.
Positivism is also typically sceptical about deterrence, on the grounds that empirical evidence scientifically assessed demonstrates that punishment is ineffective as a deterrent.
The reductivist methods favoured by positivism are incapacitation, and especially reform.
Criminological science should be able to predict which offenders (and perhaps even which people who have not yet offended) are likely to commit further crimes.
Such people should be diagnosed by experts and given appropriate treatment which will prevent them from re-offending; if necessary they can be detained to incapacitate them in the meantime.
Positivism in its purest form rejects two important doctrines common to both classicism and neo-classicism, namely due process and proportionality.
Due process is not appropriate in the diagnosis and treatment of crime any more than it is in medicine, since the scientific investigative process does not and should not proceed along legalistic lines.
Proportionality is similarly seen as a mistaken notion, since there is no reason why the treatment needed by the offender should be in proportion to the gravity of the offence.
Instead of the punishment fitting the crime, the treatment should fit the individual criminal.
(For this reason the positivistic approach is sometimes referred to as the ‘individualized treatment model’.)
Positivism particularly favours the indeterminate sentence : it is premature to decide at the time of sentence how long the offender should be detained for, since this may depend on how quickly the treatment works; ideally therefore the release decision should be left in the hands of treatment experts to take at a later date.
Positivism, and the rehabilitative ideal associated with it, gradually came to dominate criminological thinking and rhetoric, reaching its zenith in the 1950s and 1960s, especially in the United States.
For example, indeterminate and semi-indeterminate sentences (such as ‘one year to life’) became more and more common in the USA, with release dates dependent not upon the sentence passed at trial but upon the parole process.
This was a time of ‘rehabilitative optimism’: there was a widespread belief that criminology and other behavioural sciences would progressively  discover the causes of crime and the way to cure all offenders of their criminality.
In the 1970s, however, the positivist approach was dealt a series of severe blows which led to the collapse of the rehabilitative ideal.
One of these blows (mentioned in the section on ‘Reform’ above) was cruelly self-inflicted: positivistic criminological research, far from demonstrating the effectiveness of treatment measures, seemed instead to show that treatment did not work.
At much the same time, positivism came under a powerful and sustained political and theoretical critique associated with the ‘Justice Model’.
The Justice Model: Just Deserts and Due Process
The Justice Model (Bottomley, 1990; Hudson, 1997) first emerged in the USA as a critique of the positivistic ‘individualized treatment model’.
The first book-length statement of the Justice Model in the 1970s was the American Friends Service Committee's report Strug-gle for Justice , published in 1971.
The authors claimed that the treatment model was ‘theoretically faulty, systematically discriminatory in administration, and inconsistent with some of our most basic concepts of justice’(American Friends Service Committee, 1971: 12).
Theoretically faulty, because the individualized treatment model identified the cause of crime as a pathology within the individual, whereas the authors saw the true causes of crime as structural, resulting from the way in which society is organized.
Systematically discriminatory, because the wide discretion which positivism vested in supposed experts within the criminal justice system operated in practice to disadvantage offenders from poorer sections of society.
And inconsistent with justice, because the lack of due process and proportionality in the treatment model offends our moral intuitions about the rights of the individual and the unfairness of treating offences of similar gravity in possibly widely varying ways.
It was also felt that the positivistic notion that offenders were not rational and responsible agents, and that they should be reprogrammed until they conform to society, was a profound insult to human dignity.
The Justice Model asserted two central principles, both of which harked back to the classicism of Beccaria.
The first was due process in procedure, and the general limitation of official discretion within the criminal justice system.
The second was proportionality of punishments to the gravity of offences — or in other words, that offenders should receive their just deserts .
Disproportionate sentences with the alleged purpose of reforming the offender were to be rejected.
This was so whether the reformative sentence would be disproportionately long or disproportionately  short, although most adherents of the Justice Model in the 1970s (who tended to be liberal or moderately radical in political persua-sion) wanted a just deserts system which would punish less harshly overall — again like Beccaria two centuries previously.
It was not only reform as an aim of punishment that the Justice Model eyed with suspicion.
Justice Model writers were also mostly sceptical of the effectiveness of deterrence and even more so of the validity of deriving a just tariff from deterrent considerations (as Beccaria and Bentham claimed to do).
The Justice Model's philosophy consequently relied heavily on retribution as at least a partial justification for punishment.
Perhaps the most definitive Justice Model statement, the Committee for the Study of Incar-ceration's Doing Justice (von Hirsch, 1976: chs 5 and 6), adapted Jeffrie Murphy's (1979) modern retributivist theory and concluded that retribution and deterrence in combination provided the general justification for punishment.
The Justice Model made its impact on both sides of the Atlan-tic.
In the USA many states moved substantially away from indeterminate sentences and positivistic devices such as parole, while one embodiment of the Justice approach in Britain was the abolition in 1992 of the indeterminate borstal sentence for young offenders and its replacement with a fixed-term custodial sentence (see Chapter 9).
Law and Order: Just Deserts with a Vengeance
It is often said that the agenda of the Justice Model, although originally proposed by liberals and radicals who wished to reduce the overall harshness of punishment, was ‘co-opted’ in the late 1970s and 1990s by the political Right (eg Bottoms, 1990a: 11; Hudson, 1997: 72).
This is one way of describing the situation; we prefer however to distinguish between the Justice Model outlined in the previous section and a different movement which shares only part of the Justice Model agenda: the ideology of ‘law and order’ we discussed in the first chapter.
This approach may lack an academic master work expounding and defending it, but it more than makes up for this with populist political appeal.
Essentially it means ‘getting tough on criminals’.
It shares with the Justice Model a retributivist approach and a preference for proportionate, ‘just deserts’ punishments, but it advocates more severe fixed-term sentences.
Reformative measures are disfavoured not because they may be disproportionately harsh, but because they may be too soft.
Law and order departs from the Justice Model markedly in its attitude to due process: if anything it disap-proves of excessive procedural safeguards on the grounds  that they are likely to act as an obstacle to ensuring offenders receive their just deserts.
In Britain the law and order approach has been particularly associated with the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher (Prime Minister from 1979 to 1990), but its effects have been felt in other countries as well, notably the USA.
In both Britain and the USA there has been a shift towards proportionality associated with increasing harshness of punishment and rising prison populations (Hudson, 1997).
In Britain there has been a notable tension between the demands of law and order ideology and the practical impossibility of increasing prison populations exponentially, and this tension has been one factor encouraging the phenomenon of ‘bifurcation’(see Chapter 1).
The most recent manifestation of this has been the ‘punitive bifurcation’ of the 1991 Criminal Justice Act.
It is both notable and ironic that the Justice Model's central phrase ‘just deserts’ was used by the government to christen the package of proposals embodied in the 1991 Act.
This indicates how the proponents of ‘law and order’ have picked up and run with the ball that was set rolling by the Justice Model, with very different effects from those that the Justice Model's original advocates desired or expected.
Conclusions: Punishment and Human Rights
This chapter has been a complex one, but it has nevertheless been an exercise in oversimplification.
As well as reducing some sophisticated philosophies down to some fairly crude statements, we have probably also given the impression that penal systems ‘in the real world’ at different stages in history possess a consistency and coherence that is in fact largely lacking.
The philosophies we have described do exert a very real influence on the shaping of penal systems and penal practices, but none of the various schools of thought has ever been totally dominant, even at the height of its popularity.
No penal system has ever been entirely retributivist, or entirely reductivist, or thoroughly Beccarian.
This impurity of the real world can be seen in the existing English system: the justifications for punishment accepted by the Court of Appeal include retribution, deterrence, denunciation and reform (and probably all the others as well) in a promiscuously eclectic mixture.
The government's 1990 White Paper which preceded the Criminal Justice Act 1991 was equally all-embracing.
It stated that ‘the first objective for all sentences is denunciation of and retribution for the crime’ but continued: ‘Depending on the offence and the offender, the sentence may also aim to achieve public protection, reparation  and reform of the offender’(Home Office, 1990a: 2.9).
(Deterrence received less support but was not totally disapproved.)
Given this confusing welter of competing and combining philosophies, can we reach any valid conclusions about the rightness or otherwise of punishment?
We think we can, although any such conclusions (which we can only sketch out here) will inevitably be inherently controversial.
Any verdict we pass on punishment must be soundly based on an acceptable general moral philosophy.
This does not necessarily mean that a diversity of penal aims is ruled out, but each of the different aims must be justified by the same general philosophy if our position is to be coherent.
Our preferred philosophical basis is human rights theory rather than utilitarianism.
Along with theorists such as Ronald Dworkin (1979) and Alan Gewirth (1979) we would hold that each individual human being has certain fundamental rights which we possess equally by virtue of being human.
These fundamental rights are variously described and vindicated by a variety of philosophical arguments to which we cannot do justice here.
Suffice it to say that we think that at least one important human right can be described as a right — belonging equally to each human individual — to maximum ‘positive freedom’, by which we mean the ability of people to make effective choices about their lives.
(This ‘positive freedom principle’ is discussed more fully in Cavadino, 1993 and 1999: ch. 10; cf. also Gould, 1999.)
If there is a right to positive freedom, then punishment (which reduces the freedom of the person punished) is prima facie wrong and requires special moral justification.
It is difficult to see how punishment could be justified on purely retributivist grounds consistently with the positive freedom principle, and the same would seem to go for expressive denunciation as a general justification of the system.
For if retribution and denunciation were all punishment achieved, the criminal's freedom would be gratuitously diminished without this doing anything to improve anyone's prospects for exercising choice.
However, rights theory allows for one person's prima facie right to be overridden in the interests of other individuals' more important ‘competing rights’(see Dworkin, 1979).
The relevant competing rights here are those of the potential victims of crime in the future.
The commission of crimes against them will have the effect of diminishing their positive freedom, to which they also have a right; for example crimes of injurious violence reduce the victims' freedom to operate physically free from pain, while property offences will deprive them of resources and thereby remove their freedom to choose to act in ways which require the use of those resources.
The general justification for  having a system of punishment must therefore be forward-looking and primarily reductivist : based on the claim that punishment does something to reduce the incidence of crime, and thereby prevents the diminution of some other people's positive freedom.
The most plausible mechanism by which punishment may be thought to achieve this aim is general deterrence, although other reductivist effects such as instrumental denunciation and incapacitation may make a secondary contribution.
The reductivist aim must, however, be pursued in a manner consistent with the human rights of the offender (or suspect).
We think that retributivists and denunciationists are right to insist that there is no justification for punishing someone who has not deliberately and wrongfully broken a just law and thereby exercised a freedom to which they are not entitled (because to do so has diminished other people's freedom or has threatened to do so).
Rights theory therefore provides a basis for a principled compromise between reductivism and retributivism.
It also follows that, although offenders do forfeit some portion of the rights citizens should normally enjoy, they still retain the status of human beings and therefore retain important human rights (Richardson, 1995)— a point on which we are closer to some retributivist thinkers than to classical utilitarianism.
We further agree with retributivists, denunciationists and Justice Model theorists that one valid general principle for the distribution of punishment is that offenders should be punished at least roughly in proportion to the moral gravity of their offences.
Our main reason for this is the argument we referred to when discussing denunciation: that to punish disproportionately is to convey incorrect moral messages about the relative gravity of offences.
(The principle of justice that like cases should be treated alike is also relevant here.)
But this principle — called by Hart (1969: 9)‘retribution in distribution’— is only one valid principle among others, and is hardly inviolate in every single instance.
We would take some convincing that it can be right to depart from it by punishing more harshly than an offender ‘deserves’ on a standard tariff, for example by sentencing an offender to an exceptionally long custodial sentence for purposes of reform or incapacitation.
But we see no reason why it should not be acceptable (and consistent with our human rights philosophy) for aims such as reform, reparation and requalification to be considered and at least sometimes pursued when it has to be decided what punishment (if any) should be allocated to individual offenders, as long as this does not have the result of making the punishment harsher.
The operative principle should therefore be one of a ‘retributive maximum, as  advocated by Norval Morris (1974: 75): while an individual offender may be punished up to the level indicated by the tariff, there is no obligation to do so if other valid considerations indicate that a more lenient course will be more constructive or humane.
As Morris says, ‘deserved justice and a discriminating clemency are not irreconcilable’.
If this is the correct moral framework for punishment, what should be our judgement on our current penal practices?
Our own judgement is a severely negative one, and for one central reason:we punish too much — and in particular, we imprison too much.
For the ‘principle of parsimony’ applies as much to our forward-looking human rights theory as it does to utilitarianism: offenders have a right not to have their freedom gratuitously diminished to a degree greater than is necessary to produce the desired reductivist results.
As we saw in the section on deterrence, all the evidence is that the penal system is engaging in a massive overkill operation — which amounts to a massive infringement of the human rights of those it punishes excessively.
It is not necessary to subscribe to human rights philosophy to agree with this conclusion.
Indeed, we find it impossible to imagine a plausible moral philosophy which could justify our present penal practices or anything like them.
(We have already seen that utili-tarians and retributivists should also condemn our existing system.)
It is difficult to resist the implication that our penal system is morally unjustifiable — morally bankrupt might not be too strong a phrase.
Of course, not everyone is well versed in moral philosophy.
But this is hardly necessary in order to make valid observa-tions about how the penal system treats people unfairly, causes unnecessary suffering, does little to reduce crime and fails to punish offenders in accordance with their moral deserts.
So perhaps it is no wonder that we are not the only ones who perceive the system as unjust, and that it finds itself with a crisis of legitimacy on its hands.
Explaining Punishment
Why do we have a penal system?
Why does punishment take different forms in different societies and at different stages in history?
Why have penal ideas and practices altered over time in the West in the ways described in the ‘Schools of Penal Thought’ section of the previous chapter?
The sociology of punishment is the area of inquiry which seeks to answer questions like these.
The answers put forward are often controversial.
Like many areas of sociology, the sociology of punishment lends itself to (often radically) differing approaches which provide rival explanations of penality.
(We shall be using the word ‘penality’ to include ideas about punishment as well as concrete penal practices (cf.
Garland and Young, 1993a; Garland, 1990).)
Again like other fields of sociology, these approaches can be conve-niently located within competing traditions which each owe their orientation to one of the three great ‘founding fathers’ of the discipline of sociology: Karl Marx, Emile Durkheim and Max Weber.
It is equally convenient for us to divide this chapter accordingly.
The Marxist Tradition
Karl Marx (1919–1993) was not only the founder of modern communism but also originated one of the most influential traditions in sociology.
His message was that societies had to be understood in terms of their economic structures, and in particular their social relations of production and the conflicts between the different economic classes which exist as a result of those relations.
He claimed that capitalist society was polarizing ‘into two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie and Proletariat’(Marx, 1977: 222).
The bourgeoisie or capitalist class (the ruling class under capitalism) is the class of people which owns the means of production (including factories, industrial machinery etc. in an industrialized society), while the proletariat or working class comprises those who need to sell their ‘labour power’(their ability to work) to the capitalists in order to live.
The struggle between these two classes was for Marx the key to understanding modern society and its likely future, which he envisaged as the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism by the proletariat leading ultimately to a classless communist society.
In a key passage, Marx wrote (1977: 399):
The sum total of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which rises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness.
The mode of production of material life conditions the social, political, and intellectual life process in general.
It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but, on the contrary, their social being that determines their consciousness.
This passage is the source for one of the most debated features of Marxist social theory, known as the ‘base and superstructure metaphor’: the idea that the economic ‘material base’ of society determines developments in the ‘superstructural’realms of law, of politics and of people's ideas generally.
Marx described the consciousness of people in a situation of class conflict as ideological , meaning that although they might represent and believe their ideas to be objective and of universal validity, in reality these ideas express and serve class interests.
In particular, Marx claimed that ‘the ruling ideas of each age have ever been the ideas of its ruling class’(Marx, 1977: 236).
Marxist penology applies this method of analysis (known as ‘historical materialism’) to the study of penality.
It relates punishment to the economic structure of the society in which it takes place and to the class interests furthered by penal practices and ideologies.
A general point is that punishment is inflicted by the state for breaches of the law.
Marxists see both state and law as operating in the interests of the ruling class rather than society as a whole.
Punishing people for disobeying the existing laws — which maintain the status quo and the position of the ruling class — functions to reinforce the power and privilege of that class.
Historical materialism can also be used to explain the history of penal thought sketched in the previous chapter.
For example, it has often been observed (by no means only by Marxists) that the ideas of Beccaria — and the Enlightenment generally — were linked to the interests of the bourgeois class who were gaining in economic and political power at the time but still needed legal protection against the old ruling class, the landowning aristocracy who retained a corrupt control of the levers of state power (Beccaria, 1963: xxi; Taylor et al., 1973: ch. 1).
Similarly, Bentham's penology — and utilitarianism generally — were functional to the interests of the bourgeoisie at a slightly later historical stage (Ignatieff, 1979; Hogg, 1979).
Positivism in turn can be seen as a set of ideas tending to reinforce the ideological domination (or ‘hegemony’) of the bourgeois class at a yet later stage when it had become the ruling class in Europe: if criminal actions can be described as the result of mindless pathology rather than rational choice this both  absolves capitalism of any blame for crime and helps to delegi-timize protest against the existing order (Taylor et al., 1973: ch. 2).
Conventional histories of penology tend to represent these developments in penal thought and practice as rational, progressive, scientific and humane; Marxists are sceptical of such claims and see the furtherance of class interests as of prime importance.
When we come up to date with the recent rise of ‘law and order ideology’ encouraged by politicians of the Right, Marxists need have little difficulty perceiving whose interests are being served (Hall et al., 1979; Hall 1979, 1990).
While much of the above would probably be unobjectionable to most Marxists, there are some important fissures within the Marxist tradition itself, especially in relation to the ‘base and superstructure metaphor’, which have an important bearing on the nature of the explanations of punishment offered by different kinds of Marxists.
It will be instructive therefore to examine some of these different strands within Marxism.
Economic Determinism.: Rusche and Kirchheimer
In the minds of many people, Marxism means simple economic determinism: the idea that economics determines everything, that the ‘superstructure’ of law, politics and ideology merely reflects the state of the economic ‘base’.
Few Marxists today believe this (and certainly Marx himself never believed anything so crude), but the misconception is understandable since this simplified version of Marx's message was communist orthodoxy for a long time.
The ‘economic determinist’ approach produced one classic, pioneering work of Marxist penology: Georg Rusche and Otto Kirchheimer's Punishment and Social Structure (1939).
Rusche and Kirchheimer attempted to demonstrate that penal practices in any society were directly connected to the mode of production.
‘Every system of production tends to discover punishments which correspond to its productive relationships’(1939: 5).
For example, ‘it is self-evident that enslavement as a form of punishment is impossible without a slave economy; that prison labour is impossible without manufacture or industry, that monetary fines for all classes of society are impossible without a monetary economy’.
Moreover, ‘if a slave economy finds the supply of slaves meagre and the demand pressing’ it will be likely to introduce penal slavery.
But once society had advanced from a slave economy to feudalism, penal slavery was no longer an option.
Nor were fines an option for punishing the majority of (thoroughly impoverished) offenders, so feudalism relied instead on capital and corporal punishments (1939: 6).
A similar economic explanation was offered for the rise of the ‘house of correction’(the forerunner of the modern prison) from the end of the sixteenth century on.
Early capitalism needed more labour power, so it became uneconomic to kill and mutilate offenders.
It was better for capitalism that offenders should be incarcerated and set to productive work (whose profits would, naturally, be pocketed by the capitalist class in the usual manner).
Punishment could therefore be used to ‘fill out the gaps in the labour market’(1939: 7).
Even where this was not the case, Rusche and Kirchheimer argued that the choice of methods of punishment is largely influenced by fiscal interests, such as how much a punishment costs to administer.
This analysis of punishment is inadequate for at least two reasons.
Firstly, it fails to explain the mechanisms linking an economic imperative with a penal practice.
Capitalism needed the house of correction, and somehow it magically came into being as a result.
Unless the capitalist class was engaged in a conspiracy which was simultaneously crudely self-interested, brilliantly well-hidden and (remarkably) informed by economic analyses of a kind which had never been published at the time, it is hard to see how and why this occurred.
It is also hard to see in this theory any picture of real human beings (capitalist or otherwise) operating with limited rationality and knowledge in a recognizably real world.
Or to put it another way, the analysis lacks both a sense of humanism and a theory of ideology.
A second problem is that the theory embarrassingly fails to fit the facts of history.
Rusche and Kirchheimer themselves admit (1939: 102) that imprisonment became the standard method of punishment at a time when the demand for prison labour had fallen as a result of technological and other developments.
Again, a theory of ideology seems necessary to explain this seeming disjuncture between base and superstructure (Garland and Young, 1993b: 25).
This is not to say that economic imperatives play no part in penal developments.
For example it seems very likely that pragmatic considerations including economic ones have played their part in the expansion of the parole system (see Chapter 6).
It has also been argued strongly, especially by Andrew Scull (1977), that the move towards creating ‘alternatives to custody’ in the 1960s and 1970s was primarily a product of fiscal calculation (see Chapter 7).
And the current ‘crisis of resources’ in the penal system is an economic reality which certainly has its effects on penal policy.
But economics do not determine penal practices in a simple and direct manner; if they did we should hardly have the  extremely wasteful penal system which exists in this country today, with its needlessly and expensively high prison population.
Economic considerations are mediated through the minds of human beings who live in a social world, which means that the impact of economics is crucially conditioned by ideology — a notion which has been explored and expanded by the Marxist theorists to whom we now turn.
Ideology and Hegemony: The Legacy of Gramsci
Antonio Gramsci (1991–1937) was not a penologist — but he was, famously, a prisoner.
Imprisoned by the Italian fascists for his communist affiliation and activities from 1926 until his death, his contribution to Marxist theory was written inside prison (Gramsci, 1971).
Gramsci's writings marked a major shift away from the one-sided economic determinism of writers such as Rusche and Kirchheimer.
For Gramsci, the ‘superstructure’ of ideology, law and politics was of great significance in the revolutionary struggle in an advanced capitalist society.
Central to his ideas was the notion of hegemony — the ideological domination exercised throughout society by a successful ruling class.
Hegemony meant that one class has persuaded the other classes to accept its own moral, political and cultural values.
This was important because the ruling class (and the state which was its instrument) did not merely rule by coercion — which for our purposes means in particular by punishing people for breaking its laws.
Equally important was the ideological factor of consent : in a situation of hegemony, subordinate classes ‘consent’ to the existing social relations because they are effectively represented as being universally beneficial.
The production of this consent is one vital task for the state, and one necessary component of the continual reproduction of existing social relations.
Thus ideology and the ‘superstructure’ are not merely reflections of the material economic ‘base’, but exist in a dialectical interactive relationship with it.
The economics of the base could not explain everything that existed or occurred in the superstructure; as Marx's collaborator Engels had suggested, the economy was only the mainspring of history ‘in the last analysis’(Gramsci, 1971: 162).
And the superstructure could make a difference to the base.
If consent were not successfully produced and reproduced, this could ultimately affect the condition and prospects of the economic base, not least by making a great deal of difference to the likely success of the revolutionary struggle.
Importantly, Gramsci did not believe that consent was produced  as the result of a ruling class conspiracy to hoax the workers; for him, ideologies arose out of the material realities within which human beings live and work.
Or, as Marx said, people's consciousness was determined by their social being (albeit not entirely determined by their economic position).
Nor was hegemony an inevitable or universal phenomenon, and conscious efforts to combat it at the ideological level were a necessary part of the socialist project.
(These ideas of Gramsci's have been notably developed and applied to recent criminal justice policy by Stuart Hall, whose account of ‘law and order ideology’ we discussed in Chapter 1.)
There is much more to Gramsci than this: for example, Marxist theory is indebted to his pioneering use of concepts such as ‘praxis’, ‘civil society’, ‘class fractions’ and the ‘historical bloc’and his analysis of the nature, role and composition of the state in class societies.
Perhaps above all, Gramsci injected a sense of humanism into Marxism: for him, history was made by human beings.
He believed that socialism would not come about as the inevitable result of impersonal laws of economic development but would have to be built by active human beings working purposively and creatively.
However, it is in his treatment of ideology that Gramsci's legacy has been most pervasive and where he is the unmistakable precursor of all the Marxist and post-Marxist theorists we now proceed to discuss.
‘Structuralist Marxism’ and Althusser
The French philosopher Louis Althusser (1919–1990) created a sophisticated reinterpretation of Marxism often referred to as ‘structuralist Marxism’.
Although Althusser himself disclaimed the label ‘structuralist’ it is at least loosely apt to describe his ideas, since he regards the structure of the social system (and in particular the relationships between its different ‘levels’or ‘instances’) as central to the task of understanding society.
Among the important features of Althusser's ‘structuralism’ is a rejection of humanism as a valid element in Marxism.
He claimed to detect an ‘epistemological break’ in the writings of Marx in the year 1945, discarding Marx's (undoubtably humanist) early works as juvenilia and constructing a non-humanistic ‘scientific’Marxism on the basis of his later works only (Althusser, 1969).
History according to Althusser, is not made by freely acting human beings but by ‘structural causality’.
Society, according to Althusser, is a complex unity of different, unevenly related ‘levels’ or ‘instances’.
The economy is the ultimately determining instance, but the superstructural instances  of ideology and politics are not mere reflections of it: they possess a ‘relative autonomy’(Althusser, 1969: 111, 240, 1971: 135).
Indeed, the different instances are mutually determining: there is a ‘reciprocal action’ of the superstructure on the base (Althusser, 1971: 135), and the ideological and political instances are part of the essential conditions of existence of the entire social formation.
It is still the case that the economy is determinant ‘in the last instance’, but the economy never functions in isolation from the other instances.
As Althusser put it (1969: 113): ‘the economic dialectic is never active in the pure state ; in History, these instances, the superstructures, etc. — are never seen to step respect-fully aside when their work is done…
From the first moment to the last, the lonely hour of the ‘last instance’ never comes.,
It is difficult to see how, on this account, the economy is supposed to retain its ultimately determining role.
Since the political and ideological instances are just as necessary for the existence of a social formation, they seem to be equally determining, and the economic ‘base’ no longer looks to be especially basic.
Perhaps Althusser was unwilling to acknowledge this outright, because to do so would be to run the risk of departing from the fundamental Marxist doctrine asserting the primacy of the economic in social explanation.
Consequently Althusser denied the logical conclusion of his own theory by continuing to invoke ‘economic determination in the last instance’ as a dogmatic but essentially metaphysical, almost religious assertion.
Be that as it may, it is clear that ideology was at least as important to Althusser as it was to Gramsci.
All societies (not only class societies, according to Althusser) need ideology as part of their conditions of existence.
And a society's ideology must be constantly reproduced if the society is to survive, just as (for example) an industrial society must continually renovate and update its machinery and ensure that the next generation of workers is produced, kept alive and prepared for productive labour.
For production could not continue unless the proletariat were ideologically conditioned in each generation to submit to the rules of the established order within which production occurs.
Althusser stressed the role in this reproductive process of what he called ‘Ideological State Apparatuses’(ISAs)(Althusser, 1971:.
127–84).
Among these he included the educational system and also many institutions that are not usually thought of as part of the state, such as the family, churches, the media, trade unions and political parties.
These (ISAs) were to be distinguished from the more instantly recognizable ‘Repressive State Apparatus’(RSA), consisting of ‘the Government, the Administration, the Army, the  Police, the Courts, the Prisons, etc.’.
As the names suggest, the RSA functions predominantly by overt coercion to ensure that the conditions of production are maintained, while ISAs function predominantly to reproduce existing ideology, which is the ideology of the ruling class.
For our purposes it is interesting that although Althusser locates the penal system logically enough within the Repressive State Apparatus, he also makes it clear that there is no such thing as a purely repressive apparatus, and that the RSA also functions (if only secondarily) by ideology.
(Similarly, he identifies the law as both an ISA and part of the RSA since it functions both to coerce and to reproduce ruling class values.)
This provokes the consideration that the penal system may perform a dual function in the reproduction of the social formation.
On the one hand, and most obviously, it comprises a set of repressive practices which among other things may help to preserve the conditions of production by deterring crime.
But it may also function ideologically, by convey-ing conservative moral messages.
For example, retributive punishment might help inculcate law-abiding ideology in the populace by telling them that breaking the law is wicked and deserves punishment.
Reformative punishment could assure people that the existing state was effectively combating crime to the benefit of all, including even the offender.
A Marxist approach which takes the role of ideology seriously needs to analyse punishment in terms such as these.
In the last analysis (as it were) we doubt whether Althusser's theory represents a significant step forward from the work of Gramsci.
In some important respects — particularly Althusser's dogmatism, determinism and anti-humanism — we think it represents a definite step in the wrong direction.
But aspects of his work, especially his insistence on the importance of ideology, have been a positive influence on modern Marxism and on some Marxist studies of crime and punishment.
For example, Stuart Hall's analysis of ‘law and order’ owes much to Althusser as well as to Gramsci.
Fitzgerald and Sim's British Prisons (1992) is another example of recent radical analysis which pays at least as much attention to ideology as to economics.
Whatever the overall balance sheet, Althusser's impact has been undeniable.
Post-Structuralism, Discipline and Power: Michel Foucault
Michel Foucault (1926–1994), who studied under Althusser, took the step his teacher never did and distanced himself from Marxism while remaining politically radical.
Perhaps even more than  Althusser, Foucault represents a decisive move away from economic determinism.
Like Althusser, Foucault was once called a structuralist, but although he shows great interest in structures (including the structures of thought and of ‘discourse’ in different ages) he differs significantly from both Althusser and other struc-turalists, often being described consequently as ‘post-structuralist’— and ‘post-Marxist’and ‘post-modernist’as well.
He shares struc-turalism's anti-humanism, but has a much more dynamic conception of structures.
The structuralist account portrays structures as relatively unchanging and self-reproducing; the post-structuralism of Foucault discerns and investigates a continual flux and change in society and in structures themselves.
As Alan Sheridan (1990: 90) says, ‘there is a sense in which his work is profoundly anti-Structuralist.
Far from wishing to ‘freeze’ the movement of history in structures, his whole work has been an examination of the nature of historical change.’
For penology, Foucault's most important examination of historical change is his great work Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (1977).
In this book Foucault investigates the massive shift (mentioned in Chapter 2) from corporal to carceral punishment between the late eighteenth and mid-nineteenth centuries.
His explanation for the coming of the prison at that time is that this was ‘the moment when it became understood that it was more efficient and profitable in terms of the economy of power to place people under surveillance than to subject them to some exemplary penalty’(Foucault, 1990: 39).
The new industrial social order required new techniques of power and new institutions to control the subordinate classes.
The prison was one of these new institutions, along with the factory, asylum, school and workhouse, all of which shared certain common features with the prison.
Two central concepts here are discipline and power .
Discipline was the new feature of the Benthamesque industrial-age prison, whereby the inmate was ‘normalized’ or schooled into conformity by constant surveillance and the imposition of a highly regulated physical routine including repetitive forced labour.
Where the earlier forms of corporal punishment were directed at the body of the convict, disciplinary punishment aimed, via the body, at the ‘soul’ of the offender.
Not that the prison was successful in its intended goal of reforming criminals; on the contrary its failure in this respect was almost immediately apparent.
But the prison was (and is) paradoxically successful in a different way precisely because of this.
It successfully produces delinquents , creating a criminal section of the population and thereby dividing the subordinate classes into mutually antagonistic fractions.
The criminals  created by prison could be used by the bourgeoisie for a variety of political purposes, for example as informers,agents provocateurs and strike breakers (Foucault, 1977: 264–92, 1990: 40–2).
The concept of power for Foucault is intimately connected with that of ‘knowledge’, which in turn is not a matter of objective truth separable from power relations.
‘Power and knowledge directly imply each other…there is no power relation without the correlative constitution of a field of knowledge, nor any knowledge that does not presuppose and constitute at the same time power relations’(Foucault, 1977: 27).
Thus the disciplinary surveillance of the prison created a new kind of ‘knowledge’ of the convict's body which created a new kind of power.
However, power is not merely exercised in a simple manner by the state or by one class over others via punishment and other mechanisms, but is a ubiquitous and many-sided phenomenon; there exists a ‘multi-plicity of power relations’ in society which are the constant focus of negotiation and struggle.
It follows that punishment — or indeed any social phenomenon — is an inevitably highly complex phenomenon which requires extremely subtle analysis.
Foucault's cryptic style leaves the nature of his theory obscure in many respects.
It is safe to say that the traditional Marxist ‘base and superstructure’ is notable for its absence in Foucault, but it is less clear what he thinks is the role of economics in social and penal change.
As Stan Cohen (1995: 24) remarks, Foucault ‘veers between a materialist connection between prison and emerging capitalism and an idealist obsession with the power of ideas’.
Clearly though, he is more concerned with the ideological genesis and effects of punishment than with its relationship with economics.
Foucault has been much analysed, and criticized by some on both theoretical and historical grounds (Ignatieff, 1991; Garland, 1995, 1990)— although even his critics in the field of penal sociology have been profoundly influenced by Foucault.
Foucauldian concepts such as‘normalization’ and ‘discipline’have become standard tools of analysis; for example , there is one major debate (discussed in Chapter 7) as to whether we are witnessing a ‘dispersal of discipline’emanating from the prison and spreading throughout society (Cohen, 1979; Bottoms, 1993).
Foucault's contribution has certainly transformed the sociology of punishment.
Humanistic Materialism: The Case of E.P.
Thompson
The English historian E.P.
Thompson represents a humanistic current of Marxism far removed from either Althusser's structuralism or Foucault's post-structuralism.
He has contributed not only  to general Marxist theory, but also directly to penology in Whigs and Hunters (1977), his painstaking historical study of the passing of the ‘Black Act’ of 1723, a penal statute of extraordinary scope and ferocity.
Thompson's The Poverty of Theory (1979) is an extended polemic against Althusser and his disciples.
Above all, Thompson insists that history is made, not by the inevitable operation of impersonal structures, but by the actions of real human beings.
‘For all these ‘instances’ and ‘levels’are in fact human activities, institutions, and ideas.
We are talking about men and women, in their material life, in their determinate relationships, in their experience of these, and in their self-consciousness of this experience' (Thompson, 1979: 299).
He also accuses Althusser of covert ‘idealism’ in that his structuralism in effect denies the genuine role of the economy in constraining legal and ideological forms.
He claims, for instance, that when he was researching Whigs and Hunters , ‘on several occasions, while I was actually watching, the lonely hour of the last instance actually came ’(Thompson, 1979: 299).
A change in the mode of production from feudalism to agrarian capitalism required and forced the emergence of new forms of law and punishment appropriate to the new economy, such as Enclosure Acts and laws to penalize poor foresters who attempted to exercise their customary rights of grazing and timber-cutting in the forests.
Thompson has much to say about law.
He accepts that law is ‘relatively autonomous’ of the economy, but he finds little use for the ‘base/superstructure metaphor’, rejecting what he sees as Althusser's rigid division of social formations into different ‘instances’or ‘levels’.
Law, he says, is to be found ‘at every bloody level’.
Law can function ideologically, to legitimate the existing order and ‘mystify’ subordinate classes into acquiescence (what Gramsci called ‘consent’).
But ‘people are not as stupid as some structuralist philosophers suppose them to be.
They will not be mystified by the first man who puts on a wig…
If the law is evidently partial and unjust, then it will mask nothing, legitimize nothing, contribute nothing to any class's hegemony’(Thompson, 1977: 262–3).
So law was never the exclusive possession of the ruling class; rather it provided ‘an arena for class struggle, within which alternative notions of law were fought out’(Thompson, 1979: 299).
The foresters' view that customary law vindicated their rights to use the forest conflicted with an emerging capitalist version of law under which these customary rights were extin-guished; thus a class battle was fought in the forum of legal debate.
Much of what Thompson says about law can also (we think use-fully) be applied to punishment.
Penality can also be found ‘at every bloody level’, although it can perhaps be roughly divided into (material) penal practices and (ideological) penal rhetoric .
The relationship between the two is not necessarily straightforward; for example, penal rhetoric might be predominantly positivistic at a time when actual penal practice is predominantly classicistic and deterrent.
(Arguably this was the case in the English penal system during the supposed reign of the ‘rehabilitative ideal’.)
Yet such discrepancies are not caused by the logic of structures but by the messy and often far from inevitable ways in which people come to understand the world around them and their own practices.
Again, like law, punishment and ideas about punishment can serve to mystify and legitimate oppression, but can also afford ‘an arena for class struggle’; and as we suggested earlier in this chapter, the history of penal thought can be fruitfully viewed in these terms.
Readers will doubtless have already gathered that, if forced to choose a version of Marxism, we should favour one similar to Thompson's.
The Durkheimian Tradition
Emile Durkheim (1959–1917) addressed himself directly to the question of punishment to a much greater extent than either Marx or Weber ever did.
He did this especially in two works:The Division of Labor in Society (1960, first published 1993) and the article ‘Two Laws of Penal Evolution’(1973, first published 1900).
The Division of Labor expounds Durkheim's theory about the development of specialized work in society.
Durkheim distinguishes between simple, pre-industrial societies in which there is little division of labour (sometimes referred to as Gemeinschaft societies) and more advanced (Gesellschaft ) societies in which people perform specialized jobs.
The central question for Durkheim was social solidarity , or ‘the bonds which unite men one with another’(cited in Lukes, 1975: 139).
This solidarity took different forms in the two different kinds of society, but in each case Durkheim saw punishment as playing an important role in the creation and maintenance of the solidarity which was a necessary condition for social order and the continued existence of society.
Durkheim said that simple societies were held together by ‘mechanical solidarity through likeness’: people were united by the similarity in the labour and the general social roles they performed, which also gave rise to a homogeneous conscience collective.
Conscience collective is variously translatable as ‘collective conscience, or ‘collective consciousness’, and means ‘the totality of beliefs and sentiments common to average members of the same society’.
Crime, for Durkheim, could be defined in terms of the conscience collective : ‘an act is criminal when it offends strong and defined states of the collective conscience’(Durkheim, 1960: 79–90).
Criminal acts call forth a collective hostile response in the shape of punishment, and the punishment serves to restore and reinforce the outraged conscience collective .
So punishment is not primarily deterrent or reformative; it is produced by collective retributive emotions and has a useful denunciatory effect.
‘lts true function is to maintain social cohesion intact.’
The conscience collective ‘would necessarily lose its energy, if an emotional reaction of the community did not come to compensate its loss, and it would result in a breakdown of social solidarity’(Durkheim, 1960: 109).
In The Division of Labor , Durkheim claimed that the conscience collective played only a small part in maintaining social cohesion in more advanced, industrial societies.
Differentiated labour meant that people now differed from each other to a much greater extent, including in their consciences.
Social solidarity was now ‘organic’, deriving from the interdependence of people who were no longer largely self-sufficient as a result of their own labour alone.
The conscience collective became weaker, vaguer, less religious and more humanistic in character.
Punishment would consequently also dwindle in importance as the division of labour progresses, and punitive law be replaced by ‘restitutive law’ which requires lawbreakers to make reparation to their victims rather than suffer retributive punishment.
By the time Durkheim came to write Two Laws of Penal Evolu-tion , he had modified his theory about the decline in importance of the conscience collective (a phrase he ceased to use) and had come to believe that collective sentiments were a crucial factor in any society.
However, he still held that the nature of these collective sentiments differed at different stages of society's development, being of a predominantly religious character in simple societies but much more secular, humanistic and individualistic in industrial societies.
His first ‘law of penal evolution’ was a two-pronged ‘law of quantitative change’: ‘The intensity of punishment is the greater the more closely societies approximate to a less developed type — and the more the central power assumes an absolute character’(Durkheim, 1973: 295).
The first part of this law he explains as follows.
In simple societies, whose collective sentiments are based on religion, all crimes (even crimes such as murder) are essentially ‘religious criminality’: they are seen as offences against God or the  gods.
Consequently punishments tend to be severe because any sympathy for the offender is overwhelmed by the need to appease the God.
But as collective sentiments change, it is ‘human criminality’, comprising only offences against other people, which shocks collective sentiments and attracts a punitive response.
The shock value, however, is less.
‘The offence of man against man cannot arouse the same indignation as an offence of man against God.
At the same time, the sentiments of pity which he who suffers punishment evokes in us can no longer be so easily nor so completely extinguished by the sentiments he has offended and which react against him; for both are of the same nature’(Durkheim, 1973: 303).
The same humanistic sympathy which causes crimes against people to be criminalized also serves to mitigate the punishment; so in general the severity of punishment should diminish as societies develop.
But this progression will not continue indefinitely until punishment disappears; on the contrary, Durkheim predicted that the tendency would reverse, and less serious crimes against the person would come to be criminalized.
A second independent factor on severity of punishment is the degree of absolutism in government.
Where government takes the form of absolute power ‘the one who controls it appears to the people as a divinity…this religiosity cannot fail to have its usual effects on punishment’(Durkheim, 1973: 305), making punishment more severe than one would expect for a society of the same level of development but a less absolute government.
For Durkheim this explained the harshness of punishment in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when absolute monarchy was at its height.
Durkheim's second ‘law’ was: ‘Deprivations of liberty, and of liberty alone, varying in time according to the seriousness of the crime, tend to become more and more the normal means of social control’(1973: 294).
Durkheim saw the centrality of the prison as largely brought about by the operation of the first part of his first law: prison was a milder penalty than capital and corporal punishments and so became adopted as collective sentiments became more sympathetic to the criminal's suffering.
(This account obviously stands in marked contrast to Foucault's explanation of the same historical phenomenon.)
Durkheim's social theory differs sharply from Marxism in several respects.
One of these is the role of economics.
Although Durkheim did not see economic developments as unimportant, for him they were in no way basic.
The most important determining social force to Durkheim was collective sentiments, and especially religion — a factor which some would describe as ‘cultural’ and Marxists tend to characterize as ‘ideological’.
In this respect, the  more recent Marxist theories which give greater explanatory weight to ideology have narrowed (but far from closed) the gap between Durkheim and Marxism.
Another difference from Marxism is the stress Durkheim places on the existence of consensus and the need for order in society (and for change to be of a peaceful and evolutionary nature), where Marxism stresses the centrality of class conflict and the necessity of revolution.
To some extent this can be seen as a matter of political temperament determining which side of the coin one emphasizes.
Even a Marxist like Gramsci, who spoke of the ‘consent’ of the subordinate classes, saw consensus as false consciousness and hoped for revolutionary change.
On the other hand Durkheim, a reformist socialist of sorts, was passionately opposed to violent revolution and agitation, and was concerned to identify and encourage the social consensus that made possible a peaceful social order for the benefit of everyone.
One of Durkheim's main legacies is the sociological tradition known as functionalism .
Functionalism analyses social phenomena in terms of their functions — that is, their positive effects in helping the entire social system to continue operating.
(The two most eminent functionalists to follow Durkheim were Robert Merton (1969) and the ‘structural-functionalist’ Talcott Parsons (1937, 1951).)
Like Durkheim, functionalists assume that a certain degree of order is necessary for societies to survive, and see shared social values as vital in securing this order.
They see society and human action as being structured by social rules and values, and portray social systems as reproducing themselves via socialization — the transmission of social values to new generations through the family, the educational system and so on.
Another functionalist concept, present in Durkheim's work and elaborated by his successors, is social control , a term which encompasses all the methods whereby society keeps it members obedient to its rules.
Although functionalism has often been attacked as a conservative sociological tradition, some of its terminology and certain aspects of its analysis have been appropriated by Marxist and radical theorists.
Clearly, for example, Althusserian structuralism has at times a quite tangible functionalist flavour, especially in its account of the reproduction of capitalist relations of production.
Most notably, the concept of ‘social control’ has been taken over wholesale by radical criminologists with little apparent sense of embarrassment (see Cohen, 1995)— but for radicals ‘social control’is usually a term of abuse denoting capitalist repression.
The Durkheimian tradition remains a source of influence for non-Marxist penologists as well.
Tony Bottoms (1977) has used  Durkheim's ‘two laws of penal evolution’ to offer an explanation of the emerging trend towards ‘bifurcation’in British penal policy, whereby less severe punishments for the majority of offenders is combined with harsher measures for the minority of really serious offenders (see Chapter 1).
The trend towards greater leniency for most offenders can be explained by the operation of the first part of Durkheim's first law, which postulates increasing leniency as collective sentiments become more secular.
On the other hand, Bottoms sees the central power of the British state as having become more absolute in recent years, which part two of law one says should lead to harsher punishment.
This duly transpires, but only for the more serious offenders.
The concentration of punitive attention on more serious and violent offenders is an ‘attempt to reassert an agreed conscience collective , or other kind of consensus, in a time of great social and moral doubt and confusion.
Such a reassertion will, in the criminal field, result in the attempt to create consensus at any rate around the crimes which we almost all abhor, such as serious violence’(Bottoms, 1977: 90).
Whether or not Bottoms' analysis is correct, the Durkheimian concern with shared social values and sentiments as an explanatory factor remains highly relevant to sociology, and to the explanation of punishment in particular.
The Weberian Tradition
Despite being one of the major streams of modern sociological thought, the theoretical tradition founded by Max Weber (1964–1920) has to date produced little explicitly Weberian penology.
But this probably reflects negatively on penology and penologists rather than on Weber and his thought.
We shall concentrate briefly on those aspects of Weber's sociology which have the most obvious relevance to penology.
Weber's sociology is sometimes described as ‘a debate with the ghost of Marx’.
Weber recognized the importance of economics in shaping social reality, but was concerned to demonstrate that culture and religion influenced economic development just as much as economics influenced culture.
He explored this theme most famously in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1930) and related works, arguing that Calvinistic Protestantism's individualistic ethos and positive attitude to the accumulation of private wealth provided the key to understanding why capitalism had arisen in the West rather than in Asia where the economic conditions for capitalist development existed to at least an equal extent.
But he also accepted that economics in turn influenced  culture; it was the version of Marxism which saw culture as a mere ‘reflection’ of the economic base that Weber was concerned to refute.
The difference between Weber's position and the more sophisticated Marxisms which see culture as relatively autonomous and interacting with the economy in a reciprocal (or ‘dialectical’) relationship is perhaps not great.
Another major contribution of Weber's was his analysis of different kinds of power in society (Weber, 1969: chs 1 and 3).
He distinguished between simple power (the ability to make one's will prevail against the resistance of others),domination (or Herr-schaft : enduring power associated with a habit of obedience on the part of the subordinate person or group), and legitimacy (power which exists and endures because those subject to it believe it is morally right to obey).
All governments and powerful groups seek to acquire legitimacy, for the very good reason that it is the most efficient and stable basis for exercising power.
As we saw was true of Durkheim, much of this analysis and terminology of Weber's has been adopted by radical and Marxist theorists; thus we find radicals such as Fitzgerald and Sim (1992; see Chapter 1) identify-ing a ‘crisis of legitimacy’ in the penal system.
Weber went on to distinguish three types of legitimate authority: traditional authority, charismatic authority and ‘legal authority’.
He saw legal authority as characteristic of modern Western societies.
A person who wields authority in such a society does not do so typically by virtue of traditional rules (about kingship or hereditary authority, for example) or because of that person's supposed special charismatic qualities, but as a result of an impersonal rule which has been consciously created by a rational legislative process, Weber says that the appropriate administrative form for a system of legal authority — because it is the most efficient form — is bureaucracy (Weber 1969: chs 3 and 11).
Characteristics of bureaucracy include impersonality, the inter-changeability of officials, routinization of procedure and a depen-dency on the existence of recorded information.
In Weberian vein, Kamenka and Tay (1975) suggest that advanced capitalist societies tend to develop ‘bureaucratic-administrative law’ which increasingly regulates human activities for impersonal collective purposes such as general economic efficiency.
Tony Bottoms (1993) suggests that this analysis may explain some recent developments in penal systems, such as the rise in importance of relatively impersonal and standardized penalties such as the fine.
Other penal developments can also be seen in this light.
Obvious examples are the emergence of fixed penalties for certain motoring offences, the (highly bureaucratic) parole system (see Chapter 6), and the move towards  standardization in sentencing by means such as sentencing guide-lines (see Chapter 4).
Finally we should mention Weber's general importance in the development of humanism in sociology.
For Weber, the sociologist needed to understand (verstehen ) the subjective experience of ‘ideal-typical’ human individuals located within particular societies, classes and cultures — not, of course, denying that social forces shape and influence individuals, but insisting that individual human beings and the meanings they use to interpret their social world are of prime importance in understanding society.
This must be as valid an insight in the penal field as in any other.
Pluralism and Radical Pluralism
In our opinion the most satisfactory framework for explaining penal phenomena is one which draws on several different sociological traditions.
We call this a radical pluralist position, since it represents a compromise between Marxism and the pluralist tradition in sociology.
Pluralism holds that, at least in modern Western democracies, power is not monopolized by a single ruling class but is distributed between a plurality of interest groups of different kinds, which are represented in the political arena by a variety of organizations including political parties.
Politics is a process of competition, bargaining and compromise between the different interest groups in which the state plays an impartial and independent role as ‘honest broker’ between the various parties.
This vision of society contrasts with that of Marxism, which sees power in capitalist society as concentrated in the hands of the (bourgeois) ruling class, and society as primarily divided into two great opposing classes rather than a motley of interacting interest groups.
Similarly, the state for Marxists is by no means neutral and independent, but is, in the words of Marx and Engels ‘but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie’(Marx, 1977: 223).
Although the state might operate as an honest broker between different sections of the ruling class and may seek to give the appearance of neutrality to mystify its class nature and role, it will never be neutral as between the general interests of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat.
Neither traditional Marxism nor conventional pluralism seem adequate to us.
Marxism's main flaw is its insistence on economics and the economic category of class as the one fundamental explanatory factor.
This has meant, for example, that despite some valiant efforts Marxism has been ultimately unable to deal with  other important social dimensions such as race and gender differences without reducing them to a mere aspect of class oppression and class struggle.
We are not convinced that the penal realities concerning race and gender outlined in Chapter 9 can be satisfactorily explained in this manner.
Pluralism on the other hand is unembarrassed by the existence of a plurality of important social divisions.
But conventional pluralism has its own flaws, chiefly its ‘honest broker’ conception of the state.
It seems clear, at least to us, that the state is by no means fully independent of, and impartial between, all groups and classes in society.
(’ Relative autonomy' is not perhaps a bad description.)
For one thing, the personnel of the state are members of some of these interest groups themselves, and the more powerful state personnel will tend to be members of, or sympathetic to — or sharing the ideology of — the more powerful and entrenched classes and groups.
Again, as all viewers of the BBC's television comedy Yes, Minister are aware, the state bureaucracies and their members have their own organizational and personal interests to pursue which are often at variance with those of their supposed political masters, which in turn are not invariably identical with those of the electorate or of any coalition of interest groups.
(In the penal field, this would appear to be true of the Home Office which has been largely successful over the years in getting its strategy of ‘penological pragmatism’ implemented: see Chapters 1 and 10; Bottoms, 1990a; and Fitzgerald and Sim, 1990.)
However, the chasm between the pluralist and Marxist views has been narrowing encouragingly in recent years (McLennan, 1999).
Marxists have discovered the state to be relatively autonomous and classes to be composed of ‘class fractions’ which seem to interact in a manner curiously reminiscent of the pluralist account.
(They have also recognized the political virtues of pluralistic multi-party democracy, which pluralism appeared to celebrate while Marxists previously derided it as ‘bourgeois democracy’ which merely served to mystify the reality of class oppression.)
The modified Marxism of E.P.
Thompson approaches even closer to pluralism.
For Thompson (1979: 299–9), classes are not the inevitable creation of economic relations, but ‘arise because men and women, in determinate productive relations, identify their antagonistic interests, and come to struggle, to think, and to value in class ways’.
Furthermore, law and the state afford ‘an arena for class struggle’(1979: 299) in which victory for the ruling class is not necessarily assured.
If this is true of classes, why should it not also be true of other interest groups, and what ultimately differentiates this from pluralism?
Especially since there has been convergence from the  pluralist side as well.
Recent pluralist work has accepted that class division and class competition are pervasive factors in modern society, and that not all interest groups are equal in power or equally able to compete in the political arena.
A radical pluralism could build on the common ground emerging between these two traditions.
It could also incorporate some features of the Weberian and Durkheimian traditions — and perhaps not only the ones which, as we have seen, have already been purloined by Marxism.
Equally, it could avail itself of the insights of ‘systems analysis’, a mode of examining the penal system which we explain in Chapter 9.
There are some who would object on philosophical grounds to this kind of synthesizing approach.
Different theoretical traditions, it is sometimes claimed, belong to ‘incommensurable paradigms’(Kuhn, 1962); one can work within only one of them at a time.
But there is no good reason, philosophical or otherwise, why a synthesis of different theories should not be sought, as long as the assembled components do not actually contradict each other.
(It would be incoherent, for example, to amalgamate wholesale the theories of E.P.
Thompson and Michel Foucault since the humanism of the former is incompatible with the anti-humanism of the latter.)
We think that a coherent radical pluralism can be constructed on the basis of a humanism which accepts, as Marx put it, that human beings ‘make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please; they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves’(Marx, 1977: 300).
These constraining circumstances include the economic, political, cultural and ideological factors which shape our social world, but neither economics nor ideology is ‘basic’.
The economic situation may set limits on what is socially possible, but (as Weber for one insisted) this is equally true of the prevailing ideological situation.
Economics and ideology are thus both ‘determining’ in a weak sense, and they interact with each other, but neither make a single future inevitable.
As we said in Chapter 1, we think that the current ‘penal crisis’ should be seen in terms such as these.
Material factors (such as the shortage of penal resources) interact with ideological developments (such as‘law and order ideology’ and the all-important ‘crisis of legitimacy’) in a complex and sometimes unpredictable manner.
Much of this complexity and unpredictability is precisely because the intersection between the material and the ideological occurs in the practices of living human beings: offenders, sentencers, employees of the penal system, politicians and members of the public.
This vital human element makes the study of penality a  complex and uncertain business.
But it also means that people can, by their efforts, have a positive effect on the reality of punishment.
Court Decisions: The Crux of the Crisis
There is nothing inevitable about the penal crisis which we have described in Chapter 1.
Nor is it merely the result of ‘law and order’ ideology, although that is one potent factor.
To a large extent the prison numbers crisis, and many of the problems that are associated with it, are the unintended outcome of a series of uncoordinated decisions taken, independently, by the various institutions that make up the criminal justice system in England and Wales.
Figure I.1 in the Introduction identifies the key agencies concerned.
They have been likened (Rutherford, 1996a) to a series of filters which between them determine who gets embroiled in the criminal justice system, and for how long.
One feature that is peculiar to criminal justice agencies in England and Wales is the extent to which they are encouraged to exercise discretion under conditions of low visibility and subject to minimal restraint on the part of other bodies.
If we want to understand the current penal crisis we need to examine the way this discretion is exercised, its consequences for the rest of the penal system, and the reasons for the continuing failure over the years to subject it to more effective control.
Although the police and Crown Prosecution Service have a vital role in determining which alleged offenders proceed to subsequent stages of the criminal justice system, the most direct and immediate impact on the penal system is exercised by the courts themselves.
In this chapter we will chiefly be concerned with three of the most crucial sets of decisions for which the courts are responsible:remand decisions (whether accused persons are freed on bail or remanded in custody);jurisdiction decisions (whether they are tried in the magistrates' court or committed for trial in the Crown Court); and sentencing decisions.
In the first three sections of this chapter we will outline the legal framework and organizational context in which each set of decisions is taken, and will also say something about the decision-makers themselves.
The picture we paint is a fairly dismal one of a system that is largely out of control.
We will then examine the effect of this virtually unregulated decision-making process on the broader penal crisis which we outlined in Chapter 1 and consider why it has not been tackled until now.
Finally, we will examine the reforms introduced in the Criminal Justice Act 1991, and consider their prospects for success.
The Remand Explosion
Responsibility for taking the decision to imprison a person before trial is shared between the police, Crown Prosecution Service and the courts.
The defendant's first appearance in court is secured in one of two ways, depending on the procedure adopted by the police.
If proceedings are commenced by way of summons, the question of pre-trial detention does not normally arise.
However, where proceedings are commenced by way of charge, the police must decide whether to hold a suspect in custody or to grant ‘police bail’ pending the first court appearance.
Relatively few defendants are refused bail by the police, though research has shown (Simon and Weatheritt, 1974; Jones, 1995) that there is a very close correlation between court decisions on bail and earlier decisions taken by the police.
So the latter can have important repercussions at a later stage.
Once a case has reached the magistrates' court, responsibility for granting or refusing bail becomes a matter for the court itself, but only after hearing representations from the Crown Prosecution Service if the latter decides to oppose a bail application.
There are three main stages at which a decision on bail may need to be taken.
One is where an adjournment is sought before or during the course of a summary trial.
A second is where the defendant is committed for trial to the Crown Court (dealt with below, page 94).
The third occurs after conviction, whereupon a court may request an adjournment so that reports on the defendant may be obtained before passing sentence.
The legal framework which governs the decision-making process is the same in each case, and is set out in the Bail Act 1976.
After more than a decade of concern over different aspects of the bail process, steps were taken to reduce the number of defendants remanded in custody by introducing a statutory presumption in favour of bail (section 4 of the Act), and by seeking to structure the decision-making process so that magistrates would give effect to it.
The Bail Act also sets out the criteria which have to be satisfied before bail can be refused.
The court has to be satisfied that there are substantial grounds for believing that, if released on bail, the defendant would fail to appear for trial, would commit an offence while on bail, or would obstruct the course of justice.
In addition, bail may also be denied if the court thinks it necessary for the defendant's own protection, if there has been insufficient time to enable the court to obtain enough information to reach a decision, or if the defendant has previously failed to answer to bail.
The Act also contains guidance for the courts as to the factors which they should take into account in deciding whether any of the statutory exceptions to the presumption in favour of bail apply in a particular case.
However, it does not require magistrates (or anyone else for that matter) to secure the information needed if this is to be done effectively.
Finally, the Act requires that bail decisions are recorded, and that reasons for refusing bail are given to the defendant.
Following the Act's implementation, the proportion of defendants who were refused bail while awaiting summary trial declined for a time, and even though it rose thereafter, in 1999 it was still 1 per cent below the 1979 figure of 16 per cent.
However, controversy continued to rage over certain aspects of the remand decision-making process.
One of the main complaints levelled against the Act has been its failure to eliminate, or even significantly reduce, the arbitrary exercise of discretion by magistrates.
It is clear, for example, that there are still striking regional variations in the use of custodial remands, in spite of the Bail Act's attempt to structure the decision-making process, which might have been expected to iron out some of the more extreme disparities.
As a result, an accused person in Dorset (for example) is 10 times more likely to be remanded in custody than a similar person in Bedfordshire.
These variations do not appear to be fully explained by differences in the types of case coming before the courts concerned (Jones, 1995: 116).
One obvious reason for the persistence of pronounced regional anomalies on this scale is the fact that the guidance contained in the 1976 Act still affords massive scope for the exercise of discretion by magistrates, thereby enabling different policies to be pursued in individual court areas.
As a result, there is also concern that the provisions of the Act are failing to provide adequate safeguards against excessive caution on the part of some magistrates who may be tempted to refuse bail even where it would have been safe and proper to grant it.
Anxiety on this score is further fuelled by evidence relating to the outcome of proceedings in cases where bail has been denied.
For one thing, a disturbingly high proportion of these defendants are acquitted altogether.
This was true of 6.5 per cent of defendants appearing in the Crown Court and 12.2 per cent who were proceeded against in the magistrates' courts in 1999, all of whom could be said to have suffered a double injustice.
For in their case an initial violation of the presumption of innocence is further compounded by a complete absence in Britain (almost uniquely — see Shelbourn, 1979) of any entitlement to compensation for wrongful detention before conviction.
But even in relation to those  who are ultimately convicted, the fact that many of them go on to receive a non-custodial sentence — in 1999 the figures were 19.4 per cent in the Crown Court and 25.9 per cent in the magistrates' courts — calls into question the need and justification for pre-trial detention on the present scale, particularly in view of the deplorable conditions in which most remand prisoners are held.
Moreover there is also a strong possibility that in some of these cases at least, the outcome of the trial itself, and ultimately the choice of sentence may be affected by earlier remand decisions.
Firstly, a defendant who is remanded in custody is likely to find it much more difficult to prepare an adequate defence than one who is free on bail.
Secondly, a change in a defendant's domestic circumstances — eviction from rented accommodation, dismissal from work, loss of family ties — could well have an adverse effect on the choice of sentence following conviction.
Other things being equal it appears that those remanded in custody are more likely to plead guilty, substantially less likely to be acquitted and very much more likely to receive a custodial sentence on conviction than their counterparts who are remanded on bail (see, eg, Bottomley, 1970; Davies, 1971; and also Home Office, 1990f, Tables 9.6 and 9.9).
One reason for excessive caution on the part of magistrates when dealing with bail applications in the past was the lack of adequate information about defendants, their home circumstances, or the circumstances in which their offence had been committed — information which can help the court assess the defendants' chances of absconding or re-offending while on bail.
In 1997 a small number of experimental ‘bail information schemes’ successfully demonstrated that the provision of verified information enabled the Crown Prosecution Service to be more selective when opposing bail, as a result of which bail was granted more generously in those areas operating the scheme, without any increase in the failure rate (Stone, 1989; Mair, 1999).
Since then, the number of bail information schemes has expanded considerably, and it is estimated that there will be more than 100 in operation by April 1992 (NACRO, 1990a).
Until their coverage is extended nationwide, however, which is still some way off, large numbers of defendants will continue to be remanded in custody unnecessarily because of a lack of adequate information.
Another factor contributing to the excessive use of custody for defendants who have not yet been convicted is the shortage of bail hostels for those who have no fixed accommodation.
In 1999 there were only 100 such hostels in England and Wales, providing 1,960 places.
In an attempt to remedy the problem, the government has made provision for 1,000 additional bail hostel places to be made  available by April 1993.
More controversially, it has also pressed ahead with experiments to test the feasibility of electronic monitoring (or ‘tagging’) of defendants released on bail as an alternative to remands in custody (see also Chapter 7).
Continued government support for the scheme is not backed by the findings, however (Mair and Nee, 1990), which showed a low take-up rate by the courts matched by a high failure rate on the part of defendants (Muncie, 1990; Nellis, 1991).
Finally, the Bail Act has signally failed to avert an explosion in the remand population, which in turn has contributed substantially to the prison numbers crisis.
The size of the remand population in British prisons has rocketed in recent years.
In 1999, the average daily number of remand prisoners (including those detained in police cells) was 10,470, more than double the 1976 figure of 5,090 (Home Office, 1977b, 1990f).
As a result, remand prisoners in 1999 accounted for 22 per cent of the total population in custody, compared with just under 12 per cent in 1976.
This may seem surprising since the Bail Act is thought to have contributed to a fall in both the actual and proportionate use of custodial remands.
So how do we account for the dramatic increase in the average size of the remand population over the same period?
Partly it is because the courts have been dealing with greater numbers of offenders.
But one of the main causes of the recent remand explosion has been a tremendous increase in the length of time spent on remand (Morgan, 1999).
Between 1976 and 1996 the average length of time spent in custody by male prisoners awaiting trial more than doubled, from 27 days in 1976 to 57 days by 1996, before falling to 53 days in 1999.
In response to this growing problem, the Prosecution of Offences Act 1995 empowered the Home Secretary to introduce statutory time limits and since 1997 these have been operated on an experimental basis in a number of areas.
However, they are most unlikely to solve the problem of excessive delays, partly because the limits themselves are so generous and partly because the prosecution is free in any event to ask for additional time.
Although delays are far from negligible even in magistrates' courts, the problem is particularly acute in relation to Crown Courts where the average waiting time for those denied bail is around ten weeks from committal to trial.
It follows that any significant increase in the number of defendants who are committed for trial to the Crown Court instead of being dealt with by the magistrates will itself engender further delays and so add to the growing remand problem.
This is precisely what has been happening in recent years, to such an extent that we can  without exaggeration speak of a ‘committals explosion’ in addition to the remand explosion which we have just outlined.
The Committals Explosion
As far as magistrates' courts are concerned, both their jurisdiction and their sentencing powers are limited by law, but a considerable degree of optionality is built into the system for determining the distribution of business between the two sets of criminal courts.
The most serious offences are ‘triable on indictment only’, which means that the magistrates' courts must commit them for trial to the Crown Court.
But these are relatively few in number.
The vast majority of offences that are tried in the Crown Court (almost 70 per cent) are ‘triable either way’(see page 3 in the Introduction), so could be tried by either tier of court.
So decisions as to venue for trial constitute another important set of pre-trial decisions for which responsibility rests largely with magistrates (though defendants have a right to elect for trial in the Crown Court, even if the magistrates would be prepared to accept jurisdiction).
But even where a case is tried summarily, magistrates still have the power to commit a convicted defendant to the Crown Court for sentence where they feel that their own powers are inadequate.
As with the bail decision, the exercise of both these sets of powers can have profound consequences, not only for the defendant but also for the rest of the penal system.
In triable either way cases magistrates have first to decide which venue would be more appropriate for trial of the offence, in the light of representations made by the prosecutor and the defence.
Among the factors which they are required to take into account in reaching a decision are the seriousness of the offence, and whether their own powers of punishment would be adequate if the defendant were to be convicted (section 19, Magistrates' Courts Act 1980).
In practice, the predominant influence on the way magistrates exercise their discretion is the attitude of the Crown Prosecution Service.
Indeed, so close is the degree of correspondence between prosecution preference and decision as to venue (96 per cent according to one study: Riley and Vennard, 1999) that magistrates might almost be said to have sub-delegated their responsibility to the latter.
In recent years, there has been a dramatic increase, amounting to a veritable explosion, in both the number and proportion of defendants who are committed for trial at the Crown Court in respect of triable either way offences.
Between 1979 and 1999 the number increased from 55,300 to 97,900, a rise of over 70 per cent.
In proportionate terms this represents an increase from 15 per cent to 24 per cent of all defendants who were proceeded against for either way offences over the same period (Home Office, 1990: Table 4.5, 1990f: Table 6.3).
Not only are defendants who are committed for trial in the Crown Court at risk of heavier penalties than magistrates are likely to impose (see below), but the increased numbers are also likely to add to the already serious problems of delay in the Crown Court to which we have already referred.
Moreover, the resulting upward pressure on prison numbers is further reinforced by a parallel trend in relation to the use of custodial remands for those who are committed.
Over the same period of time the number of defendants committed for trial at the Crown Court who were remanded in custody also increased from around 13,000 to 21,000 (having been as high as 24,000 in 1997).
Since almost half of the untried prison population (44 per cent) consists of defendants committed for trial at the Crown Court, it can be seen that the committals explosion is the central contributor to the growing remand problem, which in turn is a major cause of the overall prison numbers crisis.
Not all triable either way cases that are currently committed to the Crown Court for trial would be suitable for trial by magistrates.
However, it has been calculated (Justices' Clerks' Society, 1992) that 57 per cent of such cases received sentences that were within the sentencing powers of the magistrates' courts, and this suggests that a majority of these offences could have been tried summarily.
Had this been the case, it would have greatly relieved pressure on the remand population in prisons.
It could of course be argued that it may be the defendants themselves who are responsible for the high level of committals by exercising their right of election for jury trial.
After all, many defendants believe that this offers a much better prospect of acquittal, and there is some research evidence to support this view (Vennard, 1995).
However, recent research (by Riley and Vennard, 1999, but see also Bottoms and McClean, 1976) has established that a significant proportion of such cases (amounting to at least 40 per cent) are committed at the discretion of the magistrates.
This is important because it suggests that the courts themselves may well be largely responsible for the dramatic increase in the number (and proportion) of triable either way cases coming before the Crown Court in recent years.
It also suggests that there may be scope for significantly reducing the number of committals without interfering with the defendant's right to opt for jury trial.
In an attempt to secure such a reduction, national guide-lines were issued in October 1990, which identified a number of  offence-specific factors that would justify a committal, but only where a magistrates' court feels that its sentencing powers are insufficient.
The guide-lines also set out a number of general principles to be observed, of which the most significant (and conten-tious) is that the grounds for committal should relate solely to the seriousness of the offence in question, and not the offender's previous convictions.
Early indications are that the impact of the guide-lines on committal rates has been minimal.
This is hardly surprising since not only do they still confer enormous discretion on magistrates, but in any case they are only advisory.
A much more radical proposal was under active consideration (Home Office, 1999d) shortly before the guide-lines were issued, though this appears to have been shelved for the time being.
The effect of this would have been to transfer responsibility for venue decisions from the magistrates to the prosecution, while preserving the defendant's right to opt for jury trial.
So important is the committal rate that in the absence of a significant reduction, pressure for such a reform is likely to resurface in the future.
One explanation for the cautious approach adopted so far is the resistance that is encountered whenever attempts are made to curb the discretion of the judiciary, as we shall see in the next section.
Sentencing out of Control
The single most distinctive feature of the English sentencing system is the breadth of discretion that is conferred on sentencers at all levels within the system.
That is why we begin this section by describing briefly who the sentencers are.
For under conditions of largely unrestricted discretion, factors such as the character, attitude, training and social background of sentencers may make a considerable difference to the way their discretion is exercised.
Who Are the Sentencers?
The English criminal justice system is unique in conferring the power to pass sentence on two completely different sets of sentencers who contrast not only in the powers at their disposal, but also in their social background.
composition, mode of selection and training and much else besides.
Adult offenders who are convicted in the magistrates' courts will normally be sentenced by a bench of lay (meaning unpaid, and largely untrained) magistrates, though in some of the larger conurbations lay benches are supplemented by full-time professional magistrates known as stipendiaries, who sit alone.
Between them they are responsible for handling 95 per cent of the criminal cases tried in the country  though a few who are convicted in this way (just over 4,000 in 1999, which is 1.6 per cent of all indictable offenders convicted in the magistrates' courts) are committed to the Crown Court for sentence.
Although magistrates are officially supposed to be broadly repre-sentative of the community that they serve, in reality they conform much more closely to Lord Devlin's cliché about the composition of the jury in pre-reform days.
In 1956, at a time when eligibility for jury service was still limited by a property qualification, Lord Devlin described juries as ‘predominantly male, middle-aged, middle-minded and middle-class’.
Although magistrates are no longer predominantly male, successive studies (notably Baldwin, 1976; but see also Hood, 1972, and Burney, 1979) have shown them to be overwhelmingly middle-aged and middle-class.
They also tend to be middle-minded, not just because of the selective (and, until recently, highly secretive) recruitment procedure by which they are appointed, but also because in the course of their training and socialization they are imbued with a particular self-perception about their role that amounts almost to a consistent ideology (Parker et al., 1989).
The sentencing powers of magistrates are subject to certain general statutory restrictions in addition to the maximum penalties prescribed for each individual offence.
For example, they cannot impose a custodial sentence that is longer than six months in respect of a single offence.
Nor can they impose a fine of more than £5,000.
Lay magistrates are also given a certain amount of training, in which sentencing matters feature fairly prominently, and are assisted in the exercise of their powers by a legally qualified clerk.
However, studies have shown (Hood, 1962, 1972; Parker et al., 1999) that the chief formative influence on sentencing practice in magistrates' courts is not the law or the advice received from other professionals in court, nor even the way similar cases have been decided by that particular court in the past.
Instead, the principal influence is the ‘sentencing culture’ of a particular bench, into which new recruits are gradually socialized by watching their more experienced colleagues at work.
The ideology which gives substance to this culture is based on a twin belief in the uniqueness of the magisterial role itself, and also the uniqueness of each individual case.
The latter belief explicitly rejects consistency as a virtue in its own right, while the former demands a balancing of public interests against those of the particular defendant in the light of moral judgements that only the magistrate is qualified to make.
Because sentencing is viewed by magistrates as a craft or mystery, whose rites are known only to  initiates ,(as opposed to a rational enterprise dedicated to the pursuit of externally defined goals), this renders it both impervious to criticism from outside, and highly resistant to attempts at external control.
Defendants who are convicted in the Crown Court are sentenced by a Crown Court judge.
Crown Court judges differ from lay magistrates in a number of important respects (though it could be said that their ideologies are similar).
One important difference between them is that judges are not only legally trained but have invariably spent most of their working lives as practising barristers.
It is important to note, however, that they are not trained as judges (in marked contrast to most continental jurisdictions which adopt a professional career structure for judges who are recruited immediately on graduating from law school).
Instead, the level of judicial training that is provided for Crown Court judges, as for magistrates, is fairly rudimentary, consisting of a three-day seminar for new recruits, and a refresher seminar every five years once they are permanently appointed.
This means that the only opportunity for perfecting the art of sentencing is by practising on actual offenders.
The fact that English judges are recruited almost exclusively from the ranks of successful practising barristers has also had the effect of narrowing considerably the background from which judges are drawn, even in comparison with the far from represen-tative magistracy.
Judges who sit in the Crown Court tend to be slightly older than magistrates on average (around 60 for judges and 56 for lay justices).
However, in contrast to magistrates judges are not just predominantly male, they are almost exclusively so.
In 1990 only 21 of the 506 Crown Court judges were women, which is less than 5 per cent.
In terms of race the position is even worse for again in 1990 there was only one black Crown Court judge (0.2 per cent).
As for the social composition of the judiciary, the many surveys that have been carried out in recent years (see Griffith, 1995: 25) show the overwhelming predominance of upper-class and upper-middle-class backgrounds.
The figures on schooling and educational background are particularly revealing, not just because they disclose that roughly 90 per cent of the country's judges received a public school education, or that over three quarters had attended either Oxford or Cambridge universities, but because they also confirm that this social profile has remained virtually unaltered over the last four decades or more.
The significance of these social and occupational characteristics of the judiciary is twofold.
In the first place, they draw attention to the enormous social distance that  exists between those who pass sentence in the Crown Court and those on the receiving end.
At the very least this might call into question the legitimacy of the proceedings, not least in the eyes of many defendants.
But, even more important, they also help to explain the uniqueness of English judicial culture compared with that elsewhere.
One particularly effective way of making the point is to compare the contrasting judicial cultures in England and the Netherlands.
In the Netherlands, Downes (1999: 91) has suggested that one of the factors explaining the remarkably liberal judicial attitudes towards imprisonment is the strong influence of criminological thinking (including the results of empirical studies) as to the effectiveness of imprisonment, to which all Dutch judges are routinely exposed in the course of their legal training.
This forms part of their occupational culture and helps to explain the strongly negative values placed on imprisonment because of the damage it is known to inflict, not least on a person's capacity to re-enter the community subsequently.
The contrast with English judicial attitudes towards imprisonment could not be more marked.
Here, in blissful ignorance of formidable evidence to the contrary, judges continue ‘to regard imprisonment as at best an effective antidote to crime, and at worst a justified form of incapacitation, even for petty, persistent offenders’(Downes, 1999: 203).
Part of this has to do with the lack of systematic training to which we have already referred.
But particularly in the absence of a coherent professional philosophy it is reasonable to suppose that social and occupational origins also play an important part in shaping judicial attitudes to imprisonment in this country.
In England, the restrictive social and occupational background from which almost all senior judges have been drawn has provided a fertile medium in which an alternative and extremely powerful indigenous judicial culture has been able to develop.
This has been founded on a set of shared ideas that have at least until recently constituted the ruling ideology (in both legal and political circles), at any rate on matters of sentencing policy.
The cornerstone of that ideology is the doctrine of judicial independence, to which we now turn.
The Doctrine of Judicial Independence
The doctrine of judicial independence is by no means unique to this country.
Indeed it is to be found in most legal systems whose constitutional arrangements and traditions provide for a separation of powers between the legislative, executive and judicial branches of government.
According to the narrow and uncontroversial  version of the doctrine (to which most other democratic countries, including the Netherlands, subscribe) it simply requires that governments should not try to influence the decision of the courts in an individual case .
However, in England the principle has been inflated into a much more extreme dogma which we may call the ‘extravagant version’ of the doctrine.
This relies on a constitutional sleight of hand to substitute the following, much broader, interpretation in place of the orthodox version that is prevalent elsewhere:
attempts by the executive arm of government to influence sentencing are unconstitutional; attempts by the legislature to interfere with the sentencing discretion of the courts are, even if not strictly unconstitutional, bound to result in both practical confusion and injustice to defendants; the sentencing powers of the courts should therefore be left to the wisdom of the courts, under the guidance of the Court of Appeal.
(Ashworth, 1983a: 59)
In accounting for the curious distortion of the doctrine that has taken place in England, it is clear that this cannot be explained by the mere presence of constitutional arrangements based on a separation of powers or it would be much more prevalent than it is.
A much more plausible explanation might be found in Weber's distinction (1968: ch.
XI) between those countries that developed formally rational judicial systems under the influence of Roman and ecclesiastical law, in which the demand for predictability encouraged measures to control judicial discretion; and countries such as England, in which a historically powerful cadre of lawyers successfully resisted such demands and jealously guarded their traditional independence.
Although he did not refer to sentencing practices as such, the traditional English approach to sentencing certainly provides an excellent example of Weber's khadi justice which ‘knows no rational ‘rules of decision’ and eschews the giving of reasons for decisions.
Weber's analysis also suggests that as they develop and become more bureaucratic (see Chapter 3), societies are likely to replace khadi justice with more rational and predictable forms of justice.
As we shall see, there have been some moves in this direction, even in England.
It has been persuasively argued by Ashworth (1993a: 59–68) that the myth of judicial independence has no foundation in constitutional reality, for Parliament is at liberty to legislate on any aspect of sentencing should it choose to.
Nevertheless, governments have come to accept the extravagant version as a taboo, and, like many such myths, its influence over the years has been in inverse proportion to its constitutional validity.
We will be tracing its pervasive effects below, firstly in relation to the largely untrammelled  sentencing powers that have traditionally been enjoyed by the courts in England, and secondly in inhibiting policy initiatives that have sought to substitute an element of strategic planning for the policy vacuum that continues to characterize the English sentencing system.
Traditional Constraints on the Powers of Sentencers
In discussing the extent to which sentencing discretion in England and Wales has been subject to control in the past, or is likely to be in the future, we will adopt the threefold classification elaborated by K.C. Davis (1969): viz. confining discretion (or restricting the scope of discretionary power that is available);structuring discretion (or regulating its exercise in advance); and checking discretion (or reviewing the way it has been exercised in the past).
Another useful preliminary distinction is that between external control over sentencing discretion as opposed to self-regulation practised by sentencers themselves.
For, as we shall see, one of the most obvious effects of the myth of judicial independence on sentencing practice over the years has been the extent to which sentencers have been left to police themselves according to their own rules arid principles.
Although not totally unfettered, the sentencing powers that are available under the English penal system are subject to only minimal external constraints on the way they are exercised.
Wide discretion on the part of sentencers is a hallmark of the system, and this extends both to the initial choice of sentencing aim which the sentencer thinks it appropriate to pursue in any given case, and to the selection of a particular measure from the extensive range that is available.
These conditions have fostered a ‘pick-and-choose’ or ‘supermarket’approach to sentencing on the part of the courts which neither Parliament nor the Appeal Courts have until recently sought to discourage, though the Criminal Justice Act 1991 (see below, page 107) appears to herald at least a partial break with that tradition.
Confining Discretion
Compared with other jurisdictions, little attempt has been made in England and Wales to confine the exercise of sentencers' discretion by limiting the extent of their powers.
Mandatory penalties are very much the exception, and although there are statutory maximum penalties for particular offences, most of these were devised so long ago, and in such different circumstances, as to render them largely irrelevant for the control of judicial sentencing today.
Moreover the tendency during the present century has been to  create broadly defined criminal offences (such as theft), with a sufficiently generous maximum to cater for the worst contingency.
Even magistrates, whose sentencing powers are more closely confined by law, enjoy a considerable degree of discretion within those upper limits.
There are a few additional restrictions on the use or combination of certain measures, but apart from these limited inroads little attempt has been made to confine the discretion of sentencers by statute.
One notable exception was a provision in the Criminal Justice Act 1967 compelling courts to suspend all sentences of imprisonment of up to six months.
This provoked fierce opposition on the part of the Magistrates' Association, however, which viewed it as an unwarranted attack on the independence of magistrates, and just five years later the measure was repealed as a result.
Structuring Discretion
Some legislative attempts have been made to structure the exercise of sentencing discretion by setting out the criteria which courts should apply when deciding on a sentence, but these, too, are limited in scope.
Most relate to the use of custodial penalties and are based on a technique that dates back to 1949 when courts were directed to avoid passing custodial sentences on young adult offenders unless it appeared that no other method was appropriate.
Since then, the same device has been resorted to on a number of occasions, though with varying degrees of success.
We will examine some of these attempts in more detail when discussing the sentencing of young offenders (in Chapter 8).
But apart from these very limited attempts to control the exercise of sentencing discretion by law, the only other guidance that is available comes from the past practice of the courts themselves in determining the ‘going rate’ for particular offences, and, in particular, the checking and structuring functions of the Court of Appeal.
Checking (and Structuring) Discretion.: The Role of The Court of Appeal
Although there is no such thing as a ‘correct’ sentence, there is a notional scale of penalties known as the tariff , which is based on the ‘normal range’that has been developed by courts in the past, under the guidance of the Court of Appeal.
The key principle underlying the tariff is that the severity of a sentence should be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of culpability on the part of the offender (or the offender's ‘just deserts’).
The main sentencing aims reflected in the tariff are those of general deterrence, retribution and, possibly, denunciation.
Where a sentence is imposed that clearly exceeds the tariff, it is liable to be reduced on appeal, and traditionally the role of the Court of Appeal was confined to checking a sentencer's discretion retrospectively in this way.
However, once its sentencing decisions came to be regularly reported in the Criminal Law Review (from 1954 onwards), the way was then open for the Court of Appeal to start laying down general sentencing principles for lower courts to apply in similar cases in the future.
This structuring function of the Court of Appeal was further strengthened by the appearance in 1970 of Thomas' Principles of Sentencing which provided an accessible digest of a great many of its decisions, both reported and unreported.
Since 1990, the Court of Appeal itself has sought to provide more systematic guidance for sentencers by laying down so-called ‘guide-line’ judgements.
These go beyond the immediate issues raised by a particular case and spell out the range of penalties felt to be appropriate for varying degrees of seriousness within a given offence category.
In the early 1990s the Court of Appeal also sought to formulate more general guidance on overall sentencing levels by attempting to ‘talk down’ the level of custodial sentencing for ordinary ‘run-of-the-mill’offences.
At first, the Lord Chief Justice's pronouncements appeared to have had the desired effect, as the average length of prison sentences imposed on males aged 17 and above for indictable offences fell in both the magistrates' court and the Crown Court in the months following the cases of R. v.
Upton and R .
v.
Begum Bibi .
However, the falls were relatively modest and, in the case of the Crown Court at least, were soon reversed.
Although this self-regulatory mechanism sounds as if it might be quite an effective constraint on the exercise of discretion by sentencers, in practice it is subject to a number of serious limitations.
The most obvious of these relates to the concept of the tariff itself, which is inherently vague.
While the Court of Appeal is ultimately responsible for establishing the tariff, this is far from being a cut-and-dried list of appropriate penalties.
It is merely a rough guide to the general sentencing levels that this court feels is appropriate, and allowance needs to be made for inconsistency on the part of the Court of Appeal itself (Thomas, 1993), plus the considerable ‘latitude’ which is normally allowed before it will interfere with a sentence passed by the Crown Court.
In the past, it was not even entirely clear whether the tariff should properly be constructed solely on the basis of the seriousness of the current offence , as the Court of Appeal insisted in the case of R .
v.
Queen , or whether it was permissible for a  court to sentence on the basis of the offender's previous record , for which, as Ashworth (1990) has pointed out, there is also Court of Appeal authority.
In practice, it was undoubtedly the case that petty persistent offenders were frequently given sentences that were disproportionate to the offences they had actually committed.
In cases such as these, trial courts were clearly operating with an offender-based tariff rather than one that was offence-based .
In the Criminal Justice Act 1991, it was made clear that whatever penalty is imposed must be commensurate with the seriousness of the offence , but it remains to be seen whether this attempt to structure sentencing discretion by adopting an offence-based tariff will have the desired effect.
Another difficulty with the tariff is the fact that there are probably at least as many different tariffs in practice as there are levels of court (Court of Appeal, Crown Court and magistrates' court).
Consequently, the guidance handed down by the Court of Appeal is frequently way out of line with the levels of sentence that are typically imposed for similar offences by the lower courts.
One notable example of this gap in sentencing levels (Ashworth, 1993a) was the 1990 case of R .
v.
McCann , in which the Court of Appeal reduced the sentence for a relatively minor burglary by an offender who had only one distant previous conviction, from two years' imprisonment to nine months.
Even this reduced sentence exceeds, by a considerable margin, the maximum penalty which could have been imposed in a magistrates' court (which is where the majority of burglars of this type would normally be tried).
And in reality, as the Criminal Statistics for 1990 bear out (Home Office, 1991a), less than a third of such cases would have been dealt with in the magistrates' courts by means of a custodial penalty at all(compared with just under two-thirds in the Crown Court).
It seems, then, that the Court of Appeal is out of touch with actual sentencing practices operating elsewhere in the system.
Indeed, it is ironic that the case of McCann was itself one of a series of cases intended to reduce sentencing levels on the part of lower courts.
So it is not altogether surprising that the impact of such decisions was both relatively modest and (in the case of the Crown Court) short-lived.
Nor is it too surprising that the Court of Appeal guidance on sentencing levels appears to disregard the actual practice of magistrates' courts in particular.
For appeals against sentences imposed by magistrates are heard not by the Court of Appeal, but by the Crown Court.
The only appeals against sentence that the Court of Appeal gets to hear are those imposed by the Crown Court which almost certainly operates a  harsher tariff than does the magistrates' court.
This was certainly the view of the Justices' Clerks' Society (1992), which conducted a comparative survey of the use of custody in the two levels of court for a selected range of offences.
This revealed that the proportionate use of custody in the Crown Court was five times greater than in the magistrates' court, and that the average length of prison sentence was three times as long.
as if in recognition of the inherent limitations of the appeals system in this respect, the Magistrates' Association issued a set of national guide-lines, in 1999, which set out for the first time a scale of recommended penalties covering the 25 commonest offence types likely to come before the magistrates, together with guidance on the approach to be adopted for different degrees of seriousness.
Until recently the role of the Court of Appeal in structuring the discretion of Crown Court sentencers was further constrained by the fact that only the defendant could appeal against sentence.
This had the effect of limiting the range of sentences that were likely to be appealed mainly to prison sentences in the upper reaches of the tariff and, as a result, relatively little guidance was available on the use of non-custodial penalties.
But it is not likely that the Court of Appeal's new power to review excessively lenient sentences (see the Introduction), will greatly alter this state of affairs as there are a number of restrictions surrounding its exercise.
A final difficulty associated with attempts to formulate a sentencing tariff arises from the coexistence of other sentencing aims alongside that of simply punishing in proportion to the offender's ‘just deserts’.
For example, if reform of the offender or reparation are aims to be pursued in a particular case, this introduces a new element of complexity into the reviewing role of the Court of Appeal.
For in cases such as these, tariff considerations may be much less relevant, if at all.
Here the Court of Appeal has ducked the challenge completely by failing to provide any guidance at all as to which of the competing philosophies of punishment on offer should take precedence.
A first attempt has now been made in the Criminal Justice Act 1991 to remedy this omission (see below), but the fact that sentencers have had to wait so long for such a lead is evidence of a serious weakness in the self-regulatory capacity of the Court of Appeal itself.
Sentencing Aids
In order to assist sentencers in their task, various reports may be supplied to the court.
The commonest and most important of these are pre-sentence reports (formerly known as social inquiry reports), which are prepared for the court by probation officers (or by social  workers in the case of some juvenile offenders).
As the task of sentencing has increased in complexity in recent years the role of this report has become steadily more important.
At one time it simply commented on an offender's suitability for probation, but following the recommendations of the Streatfeild Committee in 1961, the probation service was encouraged to make more general recommendations as to sentence, in addition to the provision of more factual information concerning the offender's character and personality, social background, educational record, employment and prospects.
The precise form and content of the new-style pre-sentence reports remains to be worked out, but the government has indicated (Home Office, 1990a: para. 3.10) that their purpose will be ‘to provide courts with detailed information about how the offender could be punished in the community, so that option can be fully considered.
Its purpose will not be to make recommendations about sentencing or to be a plea in mitigation.’
A standard format is to be introduced which will have to include the following: a detailed programme of activities which might enable the offender to make reparation through community service or a supervision programme tackling the offender's problems; a description of the restrictions on liberty which the programme would involve; relevant information about the offence and the offender, including the latter's attitude towards it; and an assessment of the offender's ability and willingness to tackle his or her offending behaviour.
The government estimates that an additional 11,250 reports will be required each year, on top of the 250,000 or so social inquiry reports that were being called for in the years preceding the Criminal Justice Act 1991.
Court Decisions: The Crux of the Crisis?
The Effect of the Principle of Judicial Independence on Sentencing Policy
Continued deference to the principle of judicial independence has resulted in the virtual abdication of responsibility for sentencing policy by successive English governments, even though this must be one of the most important components of a coherent penal strategy.
Not only do we lack a clearly articulated set of policy objectives, in the absence of a coordinating Ministry of Justice, we also lack the necessary institutional framework within which such a strategy could be implemented.
Given this continuing policy vacuum on the one hand and the implacable opposition of the judiciary to any attempts to fill it on the other, it is not altogether  surprising that few attempts have been made to fashion an overall criminal justice strategy that would bring together sentencing and penal policy.
One short-lived and singularly ill-fated exception was the Royal Commission on the Penal System which was set up in 1964 ‘to re-examine the concepts and purposes which should underlie the punishment and treatment of offenders’.
Just 19 months later it achieved the dubious distinction of being the only Royal Commission to be wound up without producing a report when it collapsed over internal differences as to the scope of its report and how it should proceed.
In the wake of this débâcle, subsequent attempts at policymaking were less ambitious, if not conspicuously more successful.
For example, as we shall see in Chapter 7, the main response of successive governments to the growing prison numbers crisis from the 1960s to the 1990s was to provide a range of additional penal measures and then, out of deference to the principle of judicial independence, to rely on exhortation rather than legislative direction in an attempt to change the sentencing practice of the courts.
The 1990s saw Home Office ministers and the Lord Chief Justice apparently working together to press the case for restraint in the use of custody.
The result of this ‘softly softly’ approach was that sentencers were effectively allowed to shape policy through their own sentencing practice, leaving official policymakers to respond and adapt to an agenda over which they had but limited control.
However, the policy vacuum which was allowed to develop in this way was inadequately filled by leaving it up to the courts to formulate their own sentencing policy.
This is partly because, as we have seen, the Court of Appeal showed no inclination to formulate a coherent set of sentencing aims for the guidance of sentencers, and partly because the self-regulatory mechanisms on which it sought to rely in the pursuit of its more limited policy objectives were themselves seriously defective.
As a result, the discretionary powers of sentencers remained largely unconstrained and out of control.
The lesson of this period is that this type of legislation by itself, even when backed by executive exhortation, is insufficient to change sentencing outcomes; and that unless sentencing discretion is restricted there is little hope of modifying sentencers' own objectives in the pursuit of policy goals favoured by the executive (Sabol, 1990).
In the next section we will examine the consequences of not having a rational sentencing policy before asking to what extent the courts are responsible for the ensuing crisis, and what options exist for tackling it.
Fuelling the Penal Crisis
It should be evident by now that, until very recently at least, the very considerable discretionary powers of English sentencers were largely exercised in a policy vacuum.
They received little guidance as to the aims they should be pursuing, few broad policy direc-tions, and only minimal direction as to the principles they should apply in approaching their task.
In the virtual absence of effective external constraints, one of the most formative influences on the way this discretionary power was exercised came from the ideological framework within which all sentencers operate.
This not only boosted confidence in the sentencer's own unique ability to reach the right result (Parker et al., 1999: ch. 5), but also emphasized the inviolability of the sentencing function in the face of perceived interference from outside.
The end product of this highly devolved system of decision-making was an escalating penal crisis that was stubbornly resistant in the face of attempts at reform.
We have already noted that two key ingredients contributing to this crisis have been the burgeoning remand population during the 1990s and, closely linked with and contributing to this, the explosion in the number of committals for trial to the Crown Court.
In this section we examine the contribution to the crisis that has been made by the sentencing decisions of the courts.
One inescapable consequence of operating a highly discretionary decision-making process is a marked degree of disparity in the way similar offenders are dealt with by sentencers in different parts of the country.
Evidence of disparity on the part of magistrates' courts was provided by a Home Office study (Tarling and Weatheritt, 1979; but see also Hood, 1962, 1972; Tarling et al., 1995) of 30 large courts selected at random .
This showed for example that the use of custodial penalties varied from 5 per cent to 23 per cent, though an even greater variation occurred in the use of the fine.
For while one court fined 46 per cent of offenders appearing before it, another fined 76 per cent.
Moreover, these variations were found not to be fully explained by differences in either the kind of offences with which each court had to deal, or the offenders coming before them.
In other words,apparent disparities turn out, on closer inspection, to be real disparities.
This is not at all surprising given the insistence by magistrates on the uniqueness of the cases appearing before them, which is why they utterly reject calls for consistency (Parker et al., 1999), since these are seen to betray an ignorance of their own unique role in deciding each case on its particular merits.
There is also evidence of similar disparities in the sentencing practices of comparable Crown Courts in different parts of the  country, though attempts to conduct more rigorous investigations of the kind described above have so far been met with judicial opposition and refusal to cooperate (see Ashworth, 1994).
Nevertheless, the 1999 Home Office statistics reveal significant differences in the average use of custody on the part of first-tier courts (those dealing with the most serious offences).
These range from 39 per cent at Wood Green to 69 per cent at Mold Crown Court, compared with an average of 51 per cent for first-tier Crown Courts as a whole (NAPO, 1990).
Interestingly, the disparities appeared to be greater the less serious the offence, which may have something to do with the virtual absence of Court of Appeal guidance in respect of less serious offence types, which we remarked on above.
These findings are significant in relation to the wider penal crisis in at least two respects.
Firstly, it seems highly likely that even apparent disparities in the way offenders are treated will fuel resentment and thereby contribute to the feelings of injustice which lie at the heart of the penal system's crisis of legitimacy.
And the same may be equally true of other apparently arbitrary decisions taken by the courts in relation to bail or custody, and venue for trial.
Secondly, and more importantly, the fact that some courts get by with comparatively few custodial sentences suggests that it would be perfectly possible for other courts to reduce their custody rates to this level, and thereby reduce the prison population.
In other words, those courts which send more than their fair share of people to custody are, we would argue, another significant factor fuelling the prison numbers crisis.
The precise relationship between sentencing practice and penal policy is a matter of some complexity, but we may begin by noting that the size of the sentenced prison population at any given time is determined by three key variables, only two of which are the direct responsibility of the courts.
One is the number of people committed to prison in any one year (referred to as the rate of imprisonment or number of prison receptions); the second is the length of sentence actually imposed by the courts; and the third (over which the courts have no direct control) is the operation of the various forms of executive release , such as parole (and, formerly, remission), which we will be looking at in Chapter 6.
In essence we can say that the sentenced prison population is a function of the number of people received into prison and the average length of sentence that they actually serve (sometimes known as effective sentence length : Fitzmaurice and Pease, 1992: 575).
It follows that the courts can contribute to the prison numbers crisis either by sending more people to prison than they need to, or by  sending them there for longer than is necessary.
As we shall see in the next section, there is plenty of evidence that the courts are doing both.
But for the rest of this section we will try to explain how the sentencing decisions of the two levels of court contribute to the crisis.
In terms of their overall impact on prison numbers, it is possible to apportion responsibility fairly accurately between the two levels of court in England and Wales, though the data need to be interpreted with care.
Figures produced by the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders (NACRO, 1990b) indicate that in terms of annual receptions , magistrates' courts were responsible for 45 per cent of those sentenced to immediate custody in 1988, compared with 55 per cent for the Crown Court — in spite of the fact that very many more indictable offenders are tried and convicted in magistrates' courts than in the Crown Court (90 per cent and 20 per cent respectively).
However, the proportionate use of custody is very much lower in magistrates' courts (at 5.1 per cent for adults in 1999) than it is in Crown Courts (where the corresponding figure was 47.6 per cent: Home Office, 1990f).
And since the custodial sentences imposed by Crown Courts tend to be longer than those passed by magistrates' courts, the sentencing practice of the Crown Court is clearly a much more potent factor in generating the prison numbers crisis.
For males aged 21 and over who were sentenced to immediate imprisonment at the Crown Court, the average length was 20.5 months in 1999, compared with 2.7 months in the magistrates' court (Home Office, 1990f).
Such figures help to explain why those sentenced by magistrates make up a very much smaller proportion of the sentenced prison population on any one day (10 per cent in 1990: Home Office, 1991 a) than those sentenced by the Crown Court (90 per cent).
In addition, they help to explain why it is that the average length of custody imposed by the higher courts is a historically proven index of prison population generally, once allowance has been made for changes in the level of recorded crime (Home Office, 1956; but cf.
Bottomley and Pease, 1996: ch. 4).
Finally, such figures also help to explain the significance of the committals explosion.
For we have already seen that an increased proportion of defendants committed for trial to the Crown Court during the 1990s has led to an expanded population of remand prisoners.
On the evidence we have been considering so far, we can also safely assume that many more of these defendants will be given custodial sentences than would otherwise have been the case, and that the terms imposed will also be substantially longer in many cases.
There are various other ways in which both magistrates and judges may contribute, either directly or indirectly, to the prison numbers crisis — for example, by imposing a fine without taking sufficient account of a defendant's ability to pay, with the result that imprisonment is imposed for default (see Moxon, 1993); or by imposing a suspended sentence in place of a fine or probation with the result that, in the event of a further offence, imprisonment is more likely to be imposed than might otherwise have been the case.
As we have seen, it is relatively straightforward to explain how the penal crisis has arisen in terms of the contributions made by the different courts involved.
But to what extent are the sentencing (and other) practices of these courts responsible for the crisis, in the sense that they could choose to do otherwise, rather than being the victims of external factors (such as the crime rate) over which they have no control?
This is the question we will be addressing in the next section.
Responsibility for the Crisis
It is one thing to say that decisions made by magistrates and judges contribute directly to the crisis by adding to the number of people held in prison at any one time.
But as we pointed out at the beginning of this chapter, the courts are only one of a series– of filters regulating access to the criminal justice and penal processes and, as such, they are also affected by decisions taken elsewhere in the system.
To what extent they are affected, and whether this makes them dependent upon forces that are beyond their control in the way they exercise their discretion, as opposed to being ‘free agents’ and therefore capable of choosing to follow a different policy in the light of changing circumstances, is the subject of this section.
Undoubtedly there are factors over which the courts have no control, and for which they have no responsibility.
One of the most important of these relates to their ‘input’, in terms of the number of offenders who come before them each year.
In England and Wales, as elsewhere in Western Europe, that number has increased dramatically in the post-war period.
For example, the number of indictable offenders found guilty in all courts increased from just under 40,000 in 1939 to 340,000 in 1999.
This is largely the result of a dramatic increase in the level of reported and detected crime over the same period, though it also reflects decisions by the police and prosecuting authorities to deal with such offenders by means of prosecuting them instead of cautioning them or taking no further action.
Like the courts themselves, the police also operate under conditions of low visibility and subject to minimal restraint on the part of other agencies.
As they control entry to the rest of the criminal justice system they clearly have considerable power to influence the workload of the courts, and so may indirectly affect the size of the prison population also.
The context in which courts operate is of major importance, and for this reason, care should be taken not to exaggerate the link between sentencing practice and penal policy.
In particular, it would be a mistake to suppose that the causes and remedies of the prison numbers crisis are to be found simply by looking at the final stages of the process, namely the custodial decisions of the courts.
On the other hand it is equally important not to minimize the effects of sentencing practice on penal policy by assuming that the courts are at the mercy of pressures over which they have no control, and to which they can only passively respond.
The point we wish to make is that, even when these other factors are taken into account, decisions for which the courts are themselves directly responsible do have a major part to play in determining imprisonment rates.
This can be illustrated with reference to three sets of data on the differential use of imprisonment.
Firstly, as we have already explained, even after allowing for differences in the mix of offender or offence types there is considerable variation in the use of custody on the part of both magistrates courts and Crown Courts in different parts of the country.
This suggests that those courts making relatively heavy use of imprisonment ‘frequently have no reason to do so if the experience of other courts is any criterion’(Hood, 1962: 122).
Secondly, there is further evidence of excessive use of immediate custody, on the part of the Crown Court at least, in respect of minor property offenders.
A study by Moxon (1999: 15) shows that as many as two-fifths of those whose offences involved less than £200 received unsuspended custody (largely as a result of past offending or being in breach of an existing court order) in spite of the persistent concern in recent years about the need to restrict custody to only the most serious property offenders.
These findings are also in line with figures produced by the Justices' Clerks' Society (1992) which we cited earlier, suggesting that for a given range of offence types, Crown Courts are very much more likely to resort to custody than magistrates courts, and to do so for longer.
Once again, this points to excessive use of imprisonment, at least on the part of the Crown Court.
Thirdly, there is also growing evidence of a marked difference in the use of imprisonment between courts in England and Wales and those in comparable jurisdictions, even when dealing with similar offence types (Collier and Tarling, 1997; International Bar  Association, 1990; NACRO, 1991a; Pease, 1991).
While such international comparisons need to be interpreted with care they do show that the United Kingdom has a higher prison population, both in absolute numbers and also relative to its overall population, than any other member state of the Council of Europe (see Chapter 1).
So it certainly seems that England and Wales are distinctively severe in their use of imprisonment, at least for the more serious offenders (Pease, 1991).
It could, of course, be objected that geographical comparisons of this sort are not entirely compelling because of important differences between the criminal justice systems, not to mention levels of recorded crime, in the countries concerned.
However it would be unwise to press these objections too far.
For one thing, Rutherford has argued convincingly (1996a), on the basis of detailed historical and geographical evidence relating to England and Wales, Japan and the Netherlands, that there appears to be no consistent relationship between levels of recorded crime and rates of imprisonment in these countries, which suggests that the latter are largely determined by the decisions of courts in the different countries.
Secondly, a recent comparison between rates of imprisonment in England and Wales, and Australia (two countries whose criminal justice systems are not too dissimilar) offers even firmer evidence that differences in the use of imprisonment between the two jurisdictions are largely the outcome of decisions for which the courts themselves are responsible.
In 1996 the number of people in prison per 100,000 of the population was appreciably higher in England and Wales than in Australia (at 93 compared to 70 respectively).
In a detailed and thorough analysis of possible factors which might account for this difference, J. Walker et al.(1990) ruled out differences in crime rate or detection rate or the use of different definitions of imprisonment.
Instead, the evidence strongly suggested that the higher imprisonment rate in England and Wales was brought about by the courts' decisions to commit a greater number of people to prison, both on remand and also under sentence.
The courts are not solely responsible for the prison numbers crisis, however.
For the use made of imprisonment as a penalty, together with the size of the prison population, and a good many other aspects of the penal system are the result of policy decisions (or, to be more precise, a refusal to develop a coherent policy) for which the courts share collective responsibility, together with other criminal justice agencies, and, of course, government itself.
But in practice, as we have seen, courts have enjoyed a considerable  degree of autonomy thanks to the failure of successive governments over the years to develop an overall sentencing policy of their own, or even to articulate a coherent set of principles from which a jurisprudence of sentencing might emerge.
So to that extent, it is not unreasonable to hold the courts largely responsible for the current crisis.
for in the final analysis both the remand and the committals explosions appear to be largely the result of excessive caution in the way magistrates exercise their discretion in relation to bail and venue decisions.
Similarly, the explosion in the population of sentenced prisoners, which was an ongoing phenomenon for most of the 1990s, appears to be largely attributable to the persistent practice of ‘over-sentencing’— both in the sense of using custody unnecessarily for minor property offenders and others, and of imposing longer sentences across the board than is required for strictly reductivist purposes — for which responsibility rests mainly, but not exclusively, with the Crown Court.
The Way Ahead?
Faced with a deepening penal crisis on the one hand, and continuing intransigence from sentencers on the other, there was growing pressure throughout the 1990s from a broad constituency — comprising not only penal reformers but also senior civil servants, prison visitors, and prison governors — for the government to accept the need for more effective techniques for the control of sentencing discretion than it had been prepared to concede in the past.
In this section we examine some of the policy options that have been suggested as solutions to the crisis, and in the next we will conclude with an examination of the government's response, and its prospects for success.
Policy Options
Sentencing Guide-Lines
One relatively recent approach which gained favour in the United States and Australia during the 1990s is based on the adoption of sentencing guide-lines for the courts.
There are various ways in which this might be done, but by prescribing in advance the appropriate penalty for a whole range of offender/offence combinations, they are all based on a much more systematic approach than could ever be achieved by a system of appellate review (including the Court of Appeal's attempt to formulate a series of ‘guide-line judgements’).
By providing sentencers with one set of criteria relating to the circumstances of  the offence in question, and a different range of criteria taking into account relevant characteristics of the offender, the guide-lines operate rather in the manner of a road mileage chart, enabling the appropriate, or ‘presumptive’, penalty to be simply ‘read off’ from the matrix supplied.
However, the guide-lines normally only provide a starting-point, which the sentencer is free to depart from if this is regarded as appropriate, and provided reasons are given for doing so.
Several advantages are claimed for the guide-lines approach, not least of which is the achievement of greater consistency in sentencing.
It would also enable sentencing practice to be monitored and subjected to regular review.
More important, it could (if prescrip-tive) provide an effective way of harnessing sentencing policy to the broader aims of penal policy, including the urgent need to find some method of rationing the ‘expensive commodity of penal punishment’(Wilkins, 1997: 19).
There would also be a number of practical difficulties, however, in extending such a model to the English sentencing tradition, particularly if a system of legislative guide-lines were adopted, and more so if they were explicitly aimed at reducing overall punitiveness.
Quite apart from the drafting problems that would be encountered, the imposition of such a system might well be resented by sentencers who would probably not find it difficult to subvert the intended aims through a process of ‘destructive interpretation’.
Another problem is the fact that most systems of guide-lines have been devised with a limited range of penalties in mind, usually just imprisonment or probation, and it would obviously be difficult to adapt the principle to cater for the plethora of measures available to English sentencers.
One way around this particular problem would be to adapt the approach recommended by the Canadian Sentencing Commission (1997), in which guide-lines are used in the first instance simply to indicate offences for which the presumptive sentence would (or would normally) involve a community sanction, and those which would (or would normally) involve a custodial penalty.
Further guidance, in the form of a presumptive penalty, is only provided in the case of offences involving a presumption of custody.
The application of community sanctions would remain at the discretion of sentencers, though there would then be a price to be paid in terms of consistency of application.
An even bigger obstacle to the successful introduction of legislative guide-lines in this country might be the existence of a number of different tariff ranges according to the different levels of court, to which we referred earlier.
If a set of presumptive  penalties were to be constructed on the basis of Court of Appeal recommendations, for example, this would clearly have disastrous implications for sentencing levels elsewhere in the system, and particularly in the magistrates' courts.
Similar, though somewhat less extreme difficulties would ensue if the normal range of penalties applied by Crown Courts were used as the basis for the guide-lines.
Finally, it should be noted that while a system of guide-lines might be expected to reduce disparity in sentencing, there is no guarantee that it would reduce the overall level of punitiveness.
This is particularly unlikely to happen if, as is often the case, guide-lines are constructed with reference to existing sentencing levels.
But even if they were to be drawn up from scratch with the express aim of reducing the level of severity in sentencing, there would still be a danger that discretion might simply be displaced to an earlier point in the system, such as the prosecutorial decision.
Because of this, it is important not simply to attempt to control the discretion of sentencers in isolation.
A Sentencing Council
One way of avoiding most of the problems associated with legislative guide-lines, while still ensuring a reasonable degree of control over the way sentencers exercise their discretion, would be to hand over the task of preparing the guide-lines to an independent sentencing commission or council, of the kind proposed by Ashworth (1993a: 447, 1997: 91).
By ensuring adequate representation of sentencers from all levels of court, in addition to other professionals with experience of the penal system, he suggests that such a body would be capable of developing realistic guidance for sentencing at all levels that should at the same time be acceptable to sentencers themselves.
Ashworth suggests that the three main tasks for such a body would be, firstly, to establish a coherent set of sentencing aims and principles; secondly, to review and reduce sentencing levels for the offences most frequently encountered; and thirdly, to devise a set of general principles which could be used to assist courts in exercising their discretion when dealing with such problems as persistent or multiple offenders, or those in breach of existing court orders.
Although Ashworth's suggestion has been backed by a broad coalition of penal reform groups, and also by the Labour Party (1990), it has yet to find favour with the judiciary, and was explicitly rejected by the government (Home Office, 1990a: para. 2.20).
One way of overcoming judicial resistance might be to incorporate a sentencing council as part of the Court of Appeal, and the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders  has recently advocated this as a compromise solution (NACRO, 1999d: 33).
There is an obvious danger that such a body might well adopt an excessively narrow focus by concentrating on such issues as effectiveness and consistency in sentencing, in which case it would simply perpetuate the present disjuncture between sentencing and penal policy.
NACRO's solution to this problem is to confer on the proposed new Council the power to co-opt advisers from other agencies, which would then enable the two sets of policy concerns to be harnessed in tandem.
Given the traditional English attachment to the extravagant version of the judicial independence doctrine, it is perhaps not surprising that even these modest calls for reform should have fallen on deaf ears.
Nevertheless, there are now growing signs that government attitudes are shifting, and the publication in February 1990 of the White Paper Crime, Justice and Protecting the Public (Home Office, 1990a) offered welcome proof that the myth of ‘judicial independence’, at least in its extravagant form, may finally have been shattered.
The 1991 Criminal Justice Act: Just Deserts for Offenders?
The sentencing process in England has been described (Ashworth, 1993a: 450) as a disgrace to the common law tradition.
In 1990 the government finally responded to mounting criticism by publishing a White Paper that contained a comprehensive and far-reaching set of proposals (Home Office, 1990a).
These formed the basis of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 which represents an important and long overdue milestone on the road to reform even though, as we shall see, there is still a considerable way to go.
The reforms are due to become law in October 1992.
Four key themes that were articulated in the White Paper are reflected in Part I of the Act, which deals with sentencing.
The first was a welcome reinterpretation of the doctrine of judicial independence which reasserted government responsibility for formulating sentencing policy while affirming the principle of non-interference in individual cases.
The second theme was the adoption of a ‘just deserts’ approach based on the principle of proportional punishment as the primary aim of sentencing, though this was qualified in respect of certain types of offence by the third theme which was based on the retention of the now-familiar bifurcatory or twin-track approach to sentencing.
The fourth theme was concerned with the means by which these ends should be pursued, and relied on a partnership between the legislature arid the judiciary.
Under the terms of this partnership, Parliament would  confine itself to establishing a framework consisting of general principles, leaving it to the courts themselves to decide how these principles should apply in a given instance, and to the Court of Appeal to develop more detailed guidance where appropriate.
In the Act itself, the principle of proportionality is adopted as the main criterion for deciding on the severity of sentence in relation to both custodial and community penalties.
Thus, sections 2 and 6 respectively state that in each case the sentence should be, commensurate with the seriousness of the offence'.
Moreover, section 29(1) directs that an offence should not be regarded as more serious because of an offender's previous record or failure to respond to previous sentences.
This reflects a clear preference for an offence-based rather than an offender-based tariff and is in line with the proposals contained in the White Paper (Home Office, 1990a: para. 2.19).
Although controversial, and greatly disliked by the judiciary, this is clearly intended to divert petty persistent offenders away from custody by ruling out custodial penalties for such offenders altogether rather than allowing them to ‘progress up the tariff’.
A major exception to the principle of proportionality relates to the sentencing of offenders for violent and sexual offences, in respect of whom courts are empowered to pass longer sentences than are ‘commensurate’ if they consider it necessary ‘to protect the public from serious harm from the offender’(section 2(2) (b)).
But this further twist in the bifurcatory spiral will result in even harsher penalties being imposed on a group of offenders who are already severely dealt with within the existing twin-track system (Wasik and von Hirsch, 1990).
In addition to its obvious implications for the prison numbers crisis, such a strategy again raises the spectre of an incapacitatory penalty being used for a certain group of offenders on the basis of their anticipated dangerousness in the future.
When similar proposals have been made in the past they have been greeted with well-founded objections on both moral and empirical grounds, given the known inaccuracy of existing predic-tion techniques (see Bottoms, 1977; Radzinowicz and Hood, 1979; Bottoms and Brownsword, 1993).
The provision also seriously dents government claims of theoretical coherence for the overall ‘just deserts’ package.
The Act also tries to encourage sentencers to pass fewer custodial sentences by on the one hand extending to adult offenders the kind of statutory criteria that have been used with some success in the past on younger age groups (see Chapter 9); and on the other hand by strengthening community penalties in the hope of increasing their appeal to sentencers.
We refer to this latter approach as  ‘punitive bifurcation’, and will have more to say about the details of the policy in Chapter 7.
The statutory criteria (in section 1) state that a custodial sentence must not be passed unless either (a) the current offence is ‘so serious that only such a sentence can be justified for the offence’ or (b), in the case of violent or sexual offences only, only a custodial sentence ‘would be adequate to protect the public from serious harm’.
As for the effects of the Act, an overall assessment of its impact on the use of custody will have to wait until Chapter 10 because of the need to deal also with the provisions relating to community penalties and parole.
In the meantime, we will conclude by drawing attention to a number of serious weaknesses in the strategy on which it is based.
Firstly, although the attempt to establish a coherent set of sentencing principles is commendable, the proportionality principle is seriously compromised by the exceptions relating to violent or sexual offenders.
Secondly, the attempt to limit the use of custody by means of statutory criteria still leaves considerable discretion in the hands of sentencers themselves.
Thirdly, the criteria themselves do nothing to reduce the lengths of any custodial sentences that are imposed, in spite of the exhortation to make them commensurate with the seriousness of the offence.
This is a serious omission, given the importance of sentence lengths in determining the overall size of the prison population.
And finally, the strategy is based on an assumption that the Court of Appeal is capable of delivering appropriate detailed guidance to supplement the general provisions contained in the Act.
This is an assumption that we believe to be fatally flawed, for the reasons we have outlined earlier.
We therefore take the view that the 1991 reforms represent an inadequate response to the current penal crisis, which is unlikely to be resolved unless further steps are taken to tackle the continuing problem of excessively wide judicial discretion.