

Editorial
Introduction
Who controls health care?
This issue of the Community Development Journal draws together articles about health and health care around the central theme of control.
The questions which seemed important to us as we compiled this special issue included the following:— who controls the health agenda of individuals, of communities and of countries?
How is health policy decided, what forms do health services take and how do they relate to people's wishes and needs?
What are the main obstacles in the way of people taking more control over their own health and health care and have we examples of this struggle from which we can all learn?
The perspectives of the different authors obviously vary.
Some have a macro-perspective: the national-international dimension of control over health care.
Julie Cliff asks questions about Mozambique (such as, has donor-dependence meant donor control?) which have relevance in many other settings.
Marie McCusker's view of the Philippines and Victor Amaya and Maria Black's insights from El Salvador show the centrality of health in people's struggle for a better collective and individual future.
Other authors give a micro perspective, from the community level; Hester van der Walt and Janet Pelly give examples of efforts to allow given populations some measure of control over local health services.
Cohen and Uphoff (1) have shown that genuine participation happens only when there is involvement in decision-making and evaluation; at a time when we often encounter a definite cynicism in many quarters concerning the whole matter of community involvement in health such examples are inspiring.
Equally heartening is the account of Cathy McCormack which combines the micro and personal with the wider, macro-issues of health and politics in Glasgow, Scotland, and in Nicaragua.
Many writers in this issue and many community health workers in general would readily admit the importance of the political setting of health care and the importance of the political will of states to encourage/allow their citizens some measure of control over their health, another constant factor in this question of control.
However, one of the most pervasive influences in this matter, in whatever country we care to think of, is the medical model of health (2).
If we speak of control, we are speaking of empowerment, a now much abused word, but one which still conveys the sense of movement from situations of experienced powerlessness, both individual and collective, to one where people acquire some measure of determination in the course  of events and policies.
Nina Wallerstein's article explores these issues further in their theoretical and practical dimensions.
There can be no empowerment, no control, unless the situation of non-empowerment and lack of control is properly understood and confronted.
The political dimension of control over health and health care is inescapable.
But just as powerful and often linked to it is the matter of medical dominance.
In Paulo Freire's terms, this medical dominance operates as a form of ‘cultural invasion’(3).
By this is meant that the invaders penetrate the cultural context of another group, whose wisdom, understanding and potential get ignored, as they impose their own view of the world upon the invaded and inhibit the expression of their creativity.
This domination can be expressed by the way in which power, technology and ideology come together to produce forms of knowledge that function actively to silence people.
There are several examples of this process in this Special Issue as well as examples of people's resistance to it.
Throughout the world we can see how the engineering, interventionist model of Western medicine has had a major influence on definitions and explanations about health, as well as on the organisation of health services and the utilisation of resources.
The influence remains dominant even when it becomes clear that the ill-health of many people has often more to do with the context of their lives and factors such as poverty, lack of access to land and food security, sanitation and employment.
The lessons of the Public Health era often seem forgotten in the West and are not integrated into the medico-technical intervention model which has been ‘exported’ to other countries.
These dominant ideas become reflected in the concrete features of the social structure, giving them legitimacy and reproducing them.
So, for example, in the West the visible signs of our health services are ‘high tech’ modern hospitals, specialised equipment and hospital doctors  glamorised in TV series, rather than sewerage systems and rubbish collectors.
Doctors are rewarded with high income and social status.
Sophisticated equipment, white coats and medical jargon serve to make most lay people feel ignorant and less important.
In this area, as in so many others, power is generally invested in men.
In the U.K., for example, four fifths of health service employees are women but over 90% of its top decision makers are men.
If we are looking at power and powerlessness in the health services the issue of gender is clearly one which has to be addressed.
In non-western countries the model of health care which has been imported and which is still often considered to be optimal is one based on the same medical model.
The contradictions which this model engenders are somehow even more glaringly obvious in the context of diseases of poverty, with the vicious circle of malnutrition and infectious, though preventable, diseases (2).
Here we see the links between certain political positions which are not concerned with such matters as the social causes of ill-health and the medical  model.
The dominant medical perception becomes ‘official knowledge’; it tends to ignore the complex interaction between mind and body and the social and economic realities of people's lives and environment.
It tends to medicalise and individualise social and economic problems so that the stress of the effects of poor housing, for example, is treated as an individual depressive illness — to be treated with psychotropic drugs.
Oral rehydration therapy (ORT) is hailed as the answer to diarrhoeal disease: a ‘solution’ which helps take attention away from such causes as poverty, malnutrition and lack of clean water supplies.
If people's everyday reality does not fit with the official version this can have the profoundly negative effect of devaluing individual, community or cultural perceptions and engendering a sense of powerlessness.
The oppressed begin to take on the view of the oppressor and in our example above, would begin to feel that their depression is a personal failure.
In this issue, Cathy McCormack shares with us her personal perspectives on this process and how it infiltrates many levels.
We feel it is particularly important to publish this article since it represents a community perspective, in this case the writer's experience of the struggle for health in a housing estate in Glasgow, Scotland, as the backdrop to her experience of the struggle for health in Nicaragua.
The struggle against the powerlessness encouraged by the medical model, especially in certain political settings, has been at the core of many liberation movements and this struggle has been especially powerful within women's liberation movements.
Women have been at the forefront of many community health initiatives, reclaiming knowledge of and control over their own bodies; redefining their own experience of health and illness; rejecting inappropriate high-tech birthing methods; questioning the over-prescribing of drugs; revitalising the role of traditional medicine.
In their article in this issue, Maria Black and Victor Amaya describe the importance of reclaiming traditional medical knowledge as a means of countering the dominant ideology.
Linked to this issue of medical dominance is the role played in health care by market economics, amplified since the break-up of the U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe.
Increasingly, economic issues take greater and greater precedence over social concerns and the responsibility for welfare is being removed from state control.
This is having enormous repercussions on the health of people.
Health might be seen as a public good, but illness is now a market opportunity.
Multi-national pharmaceutical companies, already powerful in the provision of the tools of the medical model, are presented with a golden opportunity by the development of a single European market.
The U.K., Germany and France have three of the top five pharmaceutical companies in the world and Europe supplies 25% of the world's sales of pharmaceutical products.
This industry has been spending a great deal of money lobbying intensively in Brussels and Strasbourg to reduce restrictions of their trade.
The implications for people's health are being overlooked in this struggle for profit (4).
It is encouraging that the popular health movements such as the Central American one highlighted in this issue have sometimes provided a community base for a critical appraisal of the pharmaceutical companies efforts to control health care.
Market forces are pushing their way into the whole arena of debt servicing and conditions of grant aid so that the international rhetoric is moving away from comprehensive Primary Health Care to ‘cost recovery’.
Health is seen as a non-productive sector and privatised health services are being encouraged.
In this rather gloomy context, has the community development approach anything to offer?
Community development and health
Many health workers, trained in some aspects of the medical model are unaware of the community development (CD) approach to health services.
Yet the theory and practice of community development can offer some hope in the matter of the control of health care.
Community development workers, on the other hand, have been interested in health matters for a long time.
This is because health and the quality and availability of health care often become the focus of community struggle.
Community development theory and practice offer special challenges to all health workers but also a new way to go about doing health-related work with people.
Health and health care and community development
Community development philosophy is based on the conviction that true human collective progress comes about when the felt needs of communities are addressed and when people themselves are involved in taking action to meet these needs.
Health needs and health care provision are fundamental matters in all societies and an interest in community needs often uncovers some health issues.
It is often the CD worker who elicits a response by being involved in some form of needs assessment and the partnership between community and professional is formed in the process.
As for the question, what do we mean by health?— for the purpose of this issue we are quite happy to accept the definition proposed in the 1940s by WHO: the total physical, psychological and social well-being of individuals and communities.
As a definition, this has its flaws but it can still help us understand better what health care should be about and enables us to work at improving health care provision.
When the CD process is encouraged in almost any society, some aspect of health thus broadly defined is often on the agenda.
Community development and health care: the challenge
The process of CD encounters particular problems in the context of health care.
Community development has to do with communities assuming greater  control over their own lives and with people, both individually and collectively taking up an increased decision-making role in social life.
This suggests programmes in which there is a genuine recognition of the decision-making role of individuals and communities in the process.
Professionals, in the CD approach, learn to work with and not just on behalf of individuals and communities.
Sometimes this way of working is just what health workers have been looking for, but it has to be acknowledged that such an approach does not fit easily with the conventional mode of western medicine and what we have described as the medical model.
Health workers are generally trained in the mould of technical solutions to be provided by professionals, in a sense just the opposite of the CD approach.
In this issue, Ruby Johnston tells us of the experience of a group of nurses in Ireland who have had to adapt to the challenge of this new way of working with communities.
Conventional health care casts the health professional in a relationship with the community which sees the health worker as being active and the community, the ‘patient’, as passive.
Often ‘community health’, ‘public health’ or ‘community health medicine’,(as it has recently decided to be called), deals with the community in the above manner, that of a doctor dealing with an individual: the doctor examines and prescribes, the patient listens and obeys.
‘Patient compliance’ is the appropriate response.
Medical training focuses on disease, its detection and treatment.
This is clearly a crucial element in the battery of skills which a health system needs and in some areas like surgery and acute care there is less immediate possibility of a CD approach to health.
But as has been said, both in western and non-western societies, this engineering interventionist model is very often inappropriate.
In many situations there would seem to be an obvious need for a CD approach to health care, professionals and communities working together to increase communities' hold over a precarious existence, tackling causes rather than symptoms.
But the model in place, the one which influences the way the health profession thinks and acts, is the engineering biomedical model in which the doctor knows what the problem is as well as the solution; the focus of attention and what money there is becomes a technical intervention directed at symptoms and treatment.
There is an inbuilt mis-fit between the CD approach to health and the conventional medical model.
In this issue we are not challenging the value of medical expertise but rather its dominance in relation to health sciences, resources and health knowledge.
One of our aims is to highlight the inevitable tensions which arise in all societies when a community development approach is adopted in health care matters.
Understanding what the problem is can help us move forward and contribute to the emergence of a new model of health care.
We believe the principles and experiences of the community development process has much to contribute to such a new model.
Moreover, the comprehensive Primary Health Care (PHC) movement and the Community Health  movement have an inbuilt affinity to the CD approach, an affinity which needs to be acknowledged and promoted.
Primary Health Care, understood as an approach to health care going beyond the medical model to include the promotive, rehabilitative and educational dimensions of health care in addition to curative/treatment dimensions, came on to the international stage in 1978 at the conference of Alma Ata.
Many health policies in Third World countries are based on at least the vocabulary of this approach though the political climate does not always encourage such radical rethinking of health care nor does the training of most health workers prepare them to work in the new ways implied in the PHC philosophy.
There is no doubt that Alma Ata presented a case for strong or comprehensive Primary Health Care (5).
Its principles: participation, equity and intersectoral collaboration may seem new to many health workers but they are very familiar to people formed in the community development approach.
The community health movement in western countries presents a similar challenge to the medical dominance we have described.
The movement takes different forms across the world but its common understanding is built upon a social model of health (6).
It sees health as a collective, community issue and is concerned not only with treatment and cure but with prevention, rehabilitation and education for health.
In this perspective, people's control over their health and their health services is a democratic right.
Again, the links with the Alma Ata Declaration of 1978 are obvious: the three pillars of PHC, people's participation and intersectoral collaboration are all, in one form or another, preoccupations of the community health movement.
In addition, the community health movement adheres to the principles of community development, especially in its emphasis on people's rights and the need for people to assume control over their own lives.
We are aware of the enormous scope of some of the questions raised in this issue and we cannot claim to address them all adequately.
What we have hoped to do is to be part of an ongoing dialogue between community development practice and the world of health care.
(7)
From the fourth to the third world — A common vision of health
Introduction
I never really appreciated the full meaning of the word ‘vision’, until the day that I had felt so powerless to change the cruel reality facing my children and people in my community in Glasgow, that I started to wish with all my heart that I could go to sleep and never wake up again.
Fortunately, my spirit was less of a coward than me and quite simply refused to roll over and play dead.
Instead it switched a light on inside my head that enabled me to see things, which at the time, were away beyond my full understanding.
I also saw a vision of a ‘better’ world and realised that my duty as a mother was no longer in the kitchen, but in that world.
I realised that men in politics had dominated world attitudes for long enough and although they claimed to be experts on everything, my experience showed that they understood very little.
Nor did they seem to care very much about women and children or understand our fragile relationships with nature.
That was in 1985.
Since then our community has developed and changed so much.
Last year saw the completion of the first ever tenant-led £1.3 million ‘Passive Solar Energy Demonstration Project’.
Apart from making the links between our damp housing and the destruction of the rainforest, I started to see that our own society could be transformed if we in Britain were able to adopt the revolutionary popular health care system developed in the Third World.
A system which has the intelligence to acknowledge that people are more than just a bag of bones dressed up in a birthday suit and that ill-health is not only caused by biological factors, but social, political, economic and environmental ones as well.
I hope by sharing the struggle and vision of the people in both ‘worlds’, that more people will be inspired to ‘blow the trumpet’ which will one day sound the tune for the march of humanity into progress.
My own community
Greater Easterhouse is Glasgow's largest public postwar peripheral housing scheme.
In the 1970s it was also the biggest in Europe with a population of 70,000.
This giant scheme, like the others, was erected in haste, ironically to accommodate the massive slum clearance of the inner city in order to  address Glasgow's appalling health record.
At the time the government stated that these new housing schemes were needed to bring ‘good health’ to the people in Scotland.
Forty years later, the only families that seem to be really flourishing are the many varieties of fungus (a mould that grows in damp conditions).
Scotland always had a passion for building three and four story high tenement buildings.
Glasgow is no exception, except, unlike other cities, once they started building these concrete jungles they forgot to stop.
As a result the Greater Easterhouse scheme is made up of 15 individual communities.
Although the housing scheme is the size of a town, the working class people who were placed in them were never afforded the amenities or investment of a town and from the beginning until present, have always had to fight for decent schools, transport, shops, housing, play, entertainment and recreation facilities, all the basic infrastructure needed to build a community and which the people in the inner city and middle class parts of the city take for granted.
A combination of District and Regional Council's policies, industrial decline, and the embracing of popular capitalism pursued by central government since their election in 1979, has ensured that the schemes in Glasgow have the highest levels of multiple deprivation of any other city in the UK and has created what is commonly referred to as the Fourth World.
Like the oppressed people in the working class communities throughout Britain, the people in my community suffer the same pain and the same negative imagery as our counterparts in the Third World.
An image created by an unfriendly media and reinforced by the ignorance of the people who don't live in them.
The media make their fortune highlighting our problems and exploiting our pain with their telephoto lenses, but the images I have captured with my spirit can neither be bought or sold, for they are priceless and money cannot cure what other people's faith and greed for money has caused.
Anyhow, I'm not a film director, I'm just a mother and a very concerned member of the world in which my three children are forced to live and grow up in.
Like most people, I was brought up in the belief that a nightmare was something bad that happened while you were asleep.
I want to write about the nightmare that we all have to confront every morning when we awake.
The struggle for health
My nightmare began after the birth of my children.
Only a mother can appreciate the joy of giving life or the inner torment when that life is under threat.
When they were born, my only thought for their future was for them to be happy and healthy.
The anti-natal care I received under the National Health Service (NHS) obviously paid off because all my children were over  8 lbs and bouncing with health.
Once I brought them home to our flat, they soon lost their bounce and the doctor became a regular visitor.
Although I had always lived in a freezing cold damp house and spent a lot of my own childhood in hospital and even remember my own mum referring to our flats as pneumonia houses, in my ignorance I had never made the connection between our living conditions, ill health and the social and environmental climate.
I only started to make the links when the dampness started to affect my mental health.
I became really depressed because no matter how much I loved my children or tried to take care of them, I could neither keep the doctor at bay or the fungus that was destroying everything that it came into contact with.
While most people might be familiar with throwing out mouldy bread and mouldy cheese, like my friends all around me, I was continually having to throw out mouldy furniture, clothes and toys and found myself having to choose between feeding my hungry children or hungry fuel meters which kept demanding more and more money.
The insanity of my reality made me feel stupid and powerless.
I had brought three beautiful children into this world without realising just how little control I would have over the quality of their lives.
I had the sense to know that my children couldn't be happy unless they had a happy mother, and so I consulted my doctor.
That is when I realised that the ‘world’ really had taken leave of its senses.
My doctor offered me a course of anti-depressant tablets and by this time I felt my children were becoming immune to antibiotics.
It occurred to me that my doctor was only employed to treat the symptoms of our health problems in the same way as our landlord was only treating the symptoms of the dampness.
I told him this and asked him for a prescription for a warm, dry home.
He laughed and said it was beyond his remit and that it would be a long time before public health became a genuine national concept.
I refused the tablets.
I realised that it was time to take back control over my children's lives and I joined the city wide anti-dampness campaign instead.
Easthall Residents' Association (ERA) has been in existence for 20 years and has been involved in numerous issues affecting the community.
At their Annual General Meeting, angry tenants put the issue of damp housing fully at the top of the agenda, and a ‘dampness task force’ was established.
At that time, the target of the campaign was the Glasgow District Council who were responsible as our landlord for keeping our flats in good repair.
The problem, however, was that they kept blaming the tenants'’ lifestyle’for the dampness, refused to accept responsibility and spent unknown amounts of money treating the symptoms by using chemical washes to try and kill the fungus.
The tenants, on the other hand, had long since realised that if they couldn't boil a kettle or breathe and do all the things normal families do  without causing condensation dampness, then there must be something wrong with the houses, not with the people who live in them.
However, no-one would listen to us and the Dampness Group realised that their first task was to get evidence to prove their common sense approach.
We pursued a whole range of initiatives and research and enlisted the help of other agencies and professionals who became our allies and were able to reveal what must surely be one of the biggest scandals of our time.
Easthall, where most of the technical in-depth analyses took place, has a population of approximately 5,000 and a housing stock of 1,000 three apartment flats.
Our nightmare is only the tip of the iceberg for our research showed that an estimated quarter of a million people in Glasgow (84,000 homes) and a very conservative estimate of 10 million people nationwide, share our struggle against damp housing.
The evidence that we accumulated proved our common sense approach and revealed the following:
Blame
It was not poor people who were to blame for the dampness but poor housing that was making the people poor.
Bad design
The reason why our homes were so cold was that the people who designed them never took our severe winter climate into consideration.
Because they were never insulated, they could never keep the heat in nor the cold out and our bedrooms were sometimes colder than outside.
They were neither wind nor water tight.
Because the internal fabric and walls of the flats always remained cold, it meant that when any warm moist air was produced when people breathed or boiled a kettle, the steam condensed on the cold surfaces which was the ideal breeding conditions for the fungus.
Cost
Energy audits showed that in winter, people would have to spend £60 per week to achieve the recommended healthy heat levels and to avoid the risk of condensation dampness.
People were in fact paying, on average, £20 per week.
The poorest families who spent more time at home, like the unemployed, were having anything up to £35 per week from their Social Security Benefits deducted and paid direct to the fuel companies to cover fuel debts.
It was estimated that families in Easthall were paying £1 million between them each year heating the sky above Glasgow because as soon as they turned on the heat, it went straight out their windows and walls.
None of the houses had central heating.
Health
Most families, especially the young and old, were always at risk from hypothermia in the winter.
Many families expressed their concern about the repeated illness among children and the increasing number of children with asthma and who were having to use inhalers.
Mothers complained that their children were at risk from other serious diseases because they were missing  out on vaccinations because of repeated colds.
Older children were losing too much time off school.
Their educational attainment was also being affected because their rooms were too cold to study in.
Privacy
Because families could only heat one room, many were forced to all eat, sleep and virtually live in the sitting room which was meant for relaxation.
Being confined to the one living space meant an increase in hyperactivity and breakdown in family relationships.
There was no sound insulation between flats, a lack of privacy and stress between neighbours.
ERA presented all this evidence to Glasgow District Council who finally admitted that there was a problem with the housing stock but said they had not got the money to put things right.
When it was revealed once again that Glasgow had an appalling health record and had one of the highest premature death rates in Western Europe and was nominated heart disease capital of the world, it came as no surprise to us whatsoever.
What did surprise us was that the blame was put on our diet and in particular our greasy fish suppers and general lifestyle.
Not content to blame us for our appalling living conditions and poverty, officials and experts seemed determined to persecute us as well.
And they did.
Glasgow District Council, the Scottish Office, Greater Glasgow Health Board and the Central Government Health Brigade launched their ‘let's all go out jogging, stop smoking and eat brown bread’ health promotion campaigns.
It occurred to us that either the gap between the rich and the poor had become much wider than anyone had ever imagined and that these people had not a clue about our reality or else their campaigns were a deliberate conspiracy to cover up the real cause of our appalling health record.
One thing we did know for sure was that it was not keep-fit exercises that we needed but homes that were ‘fit’ to live in and incomes or benefits that prevented us from having to choose between dying from hypothermia or malnutrition!
We were also convinced that unless we could get the politicians and so called‘medical experts’ to start exercising their minds, then the people in communities like ours would continue to die before their time and our children would be damaged before they even got a chance to live.
In our own ignorance all we thought we had to do was to educate these people so ERA also established a ‘health task force’.
The health group started to challenge leading politicians from all the political parties and so called experts in the medical field, and it was one of the most frightening experiences of my life.
That is when we realised that the materialistic gap between the rich and poor was indeed nothing compared to the wide gulf in understanding, and that the understanding of health problems in this country would take a long painstaking process of re-accumulating the evidence.
Most importantly, we began to realise that an expert was someone who understood what they were talking about, not  someone who had become an expert in regurgitating things that other people had taught them.
These people only understood one thing and that was individualism and by telling people to jog and eat brown bread, they defined health as an individual problem for which they could offer only individual solutions.
Our community in action
Breaking down the barriers to change
The turning point in our campaign came in 1987 when the Easthall Residents Association (ERA) and our allies worked together on two unique initiatives — the Heatfest Housing Project and ‘Housing makes you Sick’— the largest fully independent survey into housing and health ever carried out in Britain.
Apart from ERA's determination to find and fund a long term solution to the dampness problem and to prove that their living conditions were more suited to the health of the fungus families than human families, they were equally determined to get Public Health on the political agenda and to dispel the myth that smoking, diet and lack of exercise were solely responsible for Glasgow's award winning heart disease record.
The important feature of both initiatives was that people who normally work independently from each other and who shared a common vision and interest, were brought together also to share and benefit from each other 's expertise.
Heatfest
In 1984, ERA became members of the Technical Services Agency (TSA), a user-controlled community technical aid centre who carried out the in-depth survey of our flats and who issued us with a long detailed report.
TSA had strong academic links, in particular with the Scottish Solar Energy Group and together we organised a three day ideas competition in Easthall in January 1987 called ‘Heatfest’.
The event attracted people from all over the UK.
Those who took part ranged from both public and private sector architects, quantity surveyors, engineers, housing managers, university professors and lecturers, students, energy conservationists and representatives from tenants groups from the West of Scotland.
The housing problems detailed in the TSA report and potential solutions were discussed on the first day.
Day Two saw 7 multi-disciplinary teams in action headed by the tenants with the dampness group on standby to offer advice and practical assistance.
On the third day tenant reps on each team gave a full presentation of their team's proposed solution.
Each entry was scrutinised over the following eight weeks both by the dampness group and a panel of academic experts — who unknowingly had chosen the same winners.
A recall conference was held and the 4 award winners received a total of £1000 prize money which was distributed among the respective tenant groups.
Helen Martin, our chairperson said, ‘The Heatfest weekend was so important to us as tenants because for the very first time, the people who live in the damp houses got the opportunity to sit round the table with the people who in the past were responsible for creating the kinds of conditions  that we are now forced to live in and we could say, hey look!
We are not daft, we know how we want to live, we only needed an opportunity like this to get our ideas and solutions on the drawing board in a way that enabled these people to understand that we have our own form of expertise.’
Together we spent many painstaking months refining the best features from all the entries into one package.
When we were satisfied with every detail of our design, ERA made an application to the Commission of European Communities (E.C.) Energy Directorate for 30% of the funding to put our estimated £1.3 million, Easthall Passive Solar Energy Demonstration Project into practice.
Although Glasgow District Council (GDC) supported Heatfest, they made it clear that they had not the resources to implement any radical outcome.
Undeterred, the ERA spent many months in courtship, trying to persuade them to invest the £750,000 needed.
We also courted the private sector for £370,000.
We used numerous tactics trying to engage their support and tried to enlist the help of the Prime Minister, the Royal Family, the Scottish Office and as Helen Martin said ‘If we had known the address of the man up above (God) we would have wrote to him as well.’
Unfortunately the Glasgow District Council had other priorities on their mind.
After all, they were about to host the 1990 European City of Culture, an award which the tenants in Glasgow felt they richly deserved.
The only problem was that we were not trying to promote it.
We were determined to rid Glasgow of the ‘culture’(mould and dampness) they had landed us with all those years before.
In December 1989, we received word from the European Commission that our application had been successful and we were the first tenants group to be awarded £400,000 provided we secured the moral and financial support from our landlord — Glasgow District Council.
Our final tactic was to hold our own communities' conference to engage the support of active tenants groups and at the end of the day, they were the real winners.
They put pressure on their own elected councillors all over Glasgow to support our housing project and just before our deadline was reached, GDC coughed up all the remaining monies.
The Scottish Office allowed them an additional borrowing consent of £750,000 and £370,000 came from their existing financial resources.
A Management Committee consisting of ERA, GDC, our contract architects, and TSA was established to run the project and this part of the project highlighted that ‘genuine partnerships’ are possible when the determination to succeed is there.
Tenants have always known this, the Council had still to learn it.
The flats were super-insulated, central heating was installed and conservatory extensions, buffering the kitchens and bathrooms, providing desperately needed clothes drying space.
Solar panels on the roof heat the stairwell and pre-heat the cold water in the tanks which are situated in the lofts.
The  verandas were glazed in, giving extra insulation and functioning as a reservoir of heated air for ventilation into the bedrooms.
The project was completed in 1992.
Already the tenants here have seen their fuel bills reduced to about £7.00 per week for whole house heating and can now grow fruit instead of mushrooms and other varieties of fungus!
The benefits however extend further, as the tenants are able to afford a decent diet and the landlord will save on maintenance repairs and on condensation claims.
The tenants are a lot happier and healthier.
One teenage tenant who was a chronic asthmatic and attended hospital three times a week, has never needed hospital treatment for her asthma since moving back into her Heatfest home.
In three short months she didn't need the medication she had been dependent on for years.
Her mother claims she no longer needs treatment for her arthritis.
Saving energy by using a clean energy source, the ‘Heatfest solution’ has even wider local and global environmental implications.
The re-furbished flats were more than contributing their share of reducing the UK target of 20% reduction in CO 2 emissions — 15 years ahead of schedule!
Also we have shown that if energy conservation becomes a reality in Britain, £2 billion yearly nationwide could be saved by the domestic consumer, which would regenerate the local economies instead of heating the sky above our great cities and towns.
Health and housing
Preventive health measures which tackle the cause of why people are becoming sick in the first place could save vast sums of public money which are being wasted by the National Health Service treating the symptoms.
Solar so good!
But we wanted to explore the causes of ill health further.
The health group took part in a nationwide survey into housing and health and started to investigate the research that had already been carried out into heart disease.
From our own experience, we knew that it was not our fried food that was the problem but our own hearts that were being constantly ‘fried’ due to the stress of our living conditions and the pressure of our reality.
Even as I write, my heart is being ‘roasted’ because of the pounding music beat coming down from the flat above me.
I asked my neighbour to turn down her records as I found it impossible to concentrate and she said the only way she could cope with the stress of her reality was to blast her music.
Both of us nearly ended up blasting each other but came to a reasonable compromise instead — which is the true story of our lives.
We had observed that older people in the area seemed to die like flies in the winter from heart attacks and cold-related illnesses and we were confident that it was the inside of our houses that were killing them, not the outside.
During our research we found an article written by a doctor (Lloyd, 1986) who had been researching heart disease for ten years and in the particular the role of cold in Ischaemic Heart Disease (IHD).
Dr. Evan Lloyd had reached the conclusion that there was a link between the high incidence of heart disease in the west of Scotland and ‘environmental cold stress’.
We arranged to meet and swap notes.
He was looking at outdoor cold stress and we were able to tell him about the extent of the particular housing problem in Scotland and how people could only afford to heat one room.
As well as being subjected to extreme temperature changes outside, having to constantly leave a warm room to either make a cup of tea or go to the toilet, for example, meant that they were doubly exposed to cold stress as well as to daily stress.
We heard that if your body is exposed to constant rapid temperature changes, its mechanisms become stressed and this creates all sorts of problems which can result in breakdown.
It's the equivalent to someone being put into constant hot and cold baths.
His review of world wide research into heart disease concluded, ‘The public health measures of improving domestic housing and the working environment may produce a greater impact on the incidence of IHD than adjustment of diet, smoking and exercise.
In future, cold should be seriously investigated as a risk factor for IHD despite the implications, including financial, for housing policy.’
(Lloyd, 1991)
The health survey we took part in was the largest of its kind ever undertaken in Britain.
Like Heatfest the survey was also unique because it brought together active tenants groups in both Glasgow, Edinburgh and London and a range of professionals — from Edinburgh University, Strathclyde University and the Glasgow Community Health Resource Unit.
(Martin et al , 1987) It also confirmed what we already knew — that no amount of keep-fit exercises and high fibre would improve our health as long as we lived in damp housing conditions and a polluting environment.
The link with the third world
In July last year I was sponsored by a number of organisations to go on a Health Study Tour of Nicaragua to witness first hand their popular, positive health initiatives.
It was the most inspiring experience of my life and the visit provided food for my hungry spirit which by then was slowly dying from malnutrition.
It was amazing to have to go to the other side of the world to hear people talking the same language.
That it was not enough to have a health care system that treated the symptoms, it had to tackle the root cause of the problem.
The grassroots movement (Movimiento Communal) saw participation by the people as essential to the health of that community.
They look  upon people as an important resource so they actively involved the children in thinking about the future whereas children are not on the agenda in Britain.
Their attitude to people with mental health problems or drug problems are similarly positive.
The popular health movement also looks at health in a holistic way — the physical, mental and spiritual aspects.
Although I don't speak Spanish, the pain of poverty has its own language.
I nearly died laughing when Alfonso, a community leader from one of the barrios was describing how his community is regarded as the lowest of the low, and the people often referred to as ‘the underclass’.
He laughed back when I told him that I came from a poor barrio in Britain and that we were no longer referred to as people either.
We hugged each other before leaving; like all the other real, live people I met, unashamed to embrace the common spirit of humanity.
Empowerment and health: The theory and practice of community change
Introduction
In the past few years, the terms ‘empowerment’ or ‘community empowerment’have captured the imagination of people in public health, community planning, and community development.
The phrase ‘community participation’ has been used for a much longer time.
The World Health Organization at the Alma Ata Conference in 1978 set forth the importance of community participation in primary health care.
Subsequent WHO initiatives have continued to extol the benefits of community participation and often, community empowerment, including the Ottawa Charter on Health Promotion and the Healthy Cities Project, which has spawned involvement of over 400 cities since 1987 (Tsouros, 1991).
A recent WHO position paper on health education directly linked community participation to empowerment as a means of promoting healthier individuals and environments (WHO Position Paper, 1991).
Despite this increased attention to empowerment, there is unfortunately great disparity in the prevailing definitions, and an equal lack of clarity on how to measure its impact on a population's health.
This article will present a definition appropriate for community development, review the public health and social science literature that suggests the health-enhancing capability of empowerment, and provide an overview of empowerment education theory from Brazilian educator Paulo Freire.
A case study of an adolescent health promotion program will illustrate how empowerment education theory can be applied in practice to program development.
In public health, empowerment has been traditionally defined by its opposite, as powerlessness.
In a consensus of the literature, powerlessness has been acknowledged as having both subjective and objective dimensions.
Subjectively, people may learn helplessness (Maier and Seligman, 1976); have an external locus of control (Rotter, 1971); or feel alienated from the world in which they live (Seeman, 1959).
Objectively, people may lack economic and political power, and live in conditions of poverty and resource privation which they then internalize as feeling powerless (Gaventa, 1980; Albee, 1981).
The definition of empowerment most commonly cited, however, has  focused on changing only the subjective nature of powerlessness, with individuals treated as separate from their social context.
Many have adopted the empowerment rhetoric to promote a conservative agenda of blaming individuals for not having the skills or motivation to rise up out of powerlessness (Ryan, 1976).
Individual empowerment programs have meant promoting self-esteem, job competencies, or literacy, rather than changing the environmental conditions which contribute to not having power.
A much broader definition of empowerment proposes that people gain control in their own lives in the context of participating with others to change their social and political realities (Rappaport, 1987; Zimmerman and Rappaport, 1988).
It involves change on the individual and the social setting level, whether an organization, local community, or national policy.
This broader definition of community empowerment has been referred to as communities having equity and capacity to solve problems (Naparstek et al , 1982); having abilities to identify their own problems and solutions (Braithwaite and Lythcott, 1989); having increased participation in community activities (Chavis and Wandersman, 1990); and enabling individuals and communities to increase control over the determinants of health (Health Promotion, 1986).
In sum, community empowerment, therefore, becomes a social action process that promotes participation of people, who are in positions of perceived and actual powerlessness, towards goals of increased individual and community decision-making and control, equity of resources, and improved quality of life (Wallerstein, 1992).
Powerlessness, empowerment and health
Many research literatures have uncovered the relationship between powerlessness and health; and conversely, of the role of empowerment in health-enhancement.
Researchers have documented that people in lower socioeconomic positions have worse morbidity and mortality indicators than people of higher socio-economic status (Antonovsky, 1967).
Until recently, common explanations included unsanitary environments; overcrowding, malnutrition, less education, unhealthy  behaviours , worksite hazards, or other specific variables.
A current research trend, however, is pursuing a unifying concept of susceptibility of disease from powerlessness, that is, having a ‘lack of control over one's destiny’(Syme, 1988; Haan et al , 1989).
Powerlessness as a broad-based variable of disease risk is supported by research in poverty versus non-poverty areas (Haan et al , 1987); by occupational setting studies where people have worse heart disease rates if they are lower in the hierarchy (Rose and Marmot, 1981), or have high work demands in combination with low levels of decision-making control (Karasek and Theorell, 1990); and by the stress literature which indicates an association between chronic stress and various physical, behavioural , and psychological health problems (Kasl and Cooper, 1987).
Research into the various literatures that define empowerment has also begun to identify ‘control over destiny’ as a broad-based variable that may enhance health.
These literatures divide into studies of individual psychosocial variables and the community variables of social networks, community competence, and community participation in organizing.
From an individual perspective, field research has documented better physical and  behavioural health outcomes from increasing participation and control in one's life (Rodin, 1986); and from increasing specific self-efficacies to adopt healthier  behaviours (O'Leary, 1985).
Research into community variables is multi-faceted.
Evaluations of community interventions to strengthen social networks have shown health impacts through various mechanisms: enhanced lay helper capabilities, strengthened community-decision-making, increased participation in health activities, and activated social support (Israel, 1985; Pilisuk et al , 1982; Cohen and Syme, 1985).
Community psychology research into neighborhood organizing has shown the relationship between participation and leadership development with psychological empowerment.
Psychological empowerment is broader than a pure intrapsychic variable because it measures individual change within one's social setting, such as one's belief in one's ability to act for community change, and one's belief in the value of group action (Chavis and Wandersman, 1990; Zimmerman, 1990).
Community competence has been proposed as an outcome of community social network and community participation interventions.
Defined twenty years ago as a community's ability to collaborate effectively in identifying problems and finding solutions, community competence has recently been associated with improved health outcomes (Eng, 1989).
Community organizers have long espoused the health benefits of neighborhood organizing, such as structural improvements in the environment, economic development, or preventing health-damaging activities, such as toxic waste dumps in residential areas.
Community organizing indirectly produces positive health impacts, through strengthening social networks, community participation, psychological empowerment, and community competence.
Ultimately, the literature on community interventions and organizing suggests that having control is larger than an individual phenomenon, but includes an interaction with life's social and political systems.
In sum, a working hypothesis is that powerlessness, or ‘lack of control over destiny’, produces a susceptibility to ill-health for people who live in chronically marginalized and demanding situations.
When people have enough resources in their lives — psychological, financial, or decision-making power — they can cope with these demands and may not suffer ill-health effects.
For most people in the developing world, however, or for those who live in poverty or are low in the hierarchy in the developed world, their chronic stress of powerlessness exceeds their resources and their ability to exert control.
Empowerment as a social action process therefore becomes the strategy that addresses this lack of control through enhancing participation in community actions, reinforcing sense of community and social networks, promoting a belief in people that they can control their worlds and leading to actual socio-environmental changes.
Empowerment as an outcome contains dimensions that are both psychological (belief and motivation in one's ability to act collectively) and community (increases in local action and transformed conditions).
While this article does not cover research issues, it becomes obvious from this brief literature review that evaluations of empowerment interventions require study of a multiplicity of individual and community variables, and of both the processes and outcomes of change (Wallerstein, 1992).
With the recognition of the importance of powerlessness and empowerment in health, practitioners involved in community development should well consider adopting empowerment education approaches to address the conditions that create ill-health.
Empowerment education applied in practice
Much of the theoretical underpinnings of empowerment or popular education are based on the ideas of Brazilian educator, Paulo Freire.
Freire originally developed his ideas through highly successful literacy programs for slumdwellers in Brazil.
Choosing emotionally and socially charged (’ generative’) words and pictures of students' problems, he generated discussion on how to improve their lives.
In six weeks, people gained the literacy skills to vote and participate in the political process (Freire, 1973).
In the last three decades, Freire's educational ideas have been a catalyst for worldwide programs in literacy (Fiore and Elsasser, 1982); English as a Second Language (Auerbach and Wallerstein, 1987); health education (Minkler, 1985; Werner and Bower, 1982); youth programs (Alschuler, 1980); workplace health and safety (Wallerstein and Weinger, 1992); college courses (Shor, 1987); and community development (Hope and Timmel, 1984; Barndt, 1989; Arnold et al , n.d., Freire and Horton, 1990).
Briefly, empowerment education involves people in group efforts to identify their own problems, critically to analyze the cultural and socioeconomic roots of the problems, and to develop strategies to effect positive changes in their lives and in their communities.
Freire's central premise is that education is not neutral.
In class or community settings, people bring with them their life pressures and future expectations.
About this context, Freire asks: who does education serve and for what purpose?
Does education prepare people to be objects of learning and to accept their place within the status quo , or does it encourage people to question the critical issues of the day and challenge forces that keep them passive?
To Freire, the purpose of education should be human liberation, which  means people are subjects of their own learning, not empty vessels filled by teachers' knowledge.
To promote the learner as subject, Freire proposes a dialogue approach in which everyone participates as co-learners to understand and create a jointly constructed reality.
The goal of group dialogue is critical thinking or posing problems in such a way as to uncover root causes of one's place in society — the socio-economic, political, cultural, and historical context of personal lives.
But critical thinking continues beyond perception — towards the actions that people can take to gain control over their lives.
True knowledge evolves from the interaction of reflection and action (or praxis ) to transform the social conditions.
To transform empowerment education theory into program development, Freire offers a three-stage method.
The first step is listening for the key issues and emotional concerns of community people.
These underlying issues can be thought of as ‘hidden voices’, which can block learning, or, if they become a central focus, can unleash learning and motivation to change.
The second step is promoting participatory dialogue about these concerns.
The third step is taking action about the concerns that are discussed.
This final step is not an end-point, but only part of the continuous cycle of action and reflection.
After one action, students return to dialogue to reflect on their successes and failures, to re-listen for the key issues raised by the action, and to strategize new directions for actions.
Listening is key for several reasons.
First, it enables the professional to solicit the hidden voices: the motivations and barriers to the learning process and to becoming involved in community change.
Secondly, it enables community people to participate in the beginning of creating the program or plan of action.
Thirdly, listening builds genuine partnership and relationships between professionals and community people.
Once the hidden voices and key issues are uncovered, Freire proposes creating discussion objects called ‘codes’(from the Portuguese codificacao ) or ‘triggers’ because their purpose is to trigger dialogue.
A trigger is a concrete physical representation of an identified issue in any form: a role-play, story, slide or series of slides, short video (preferably 5–10 minutes), photograph, song, rap, etc.
Each trigger re-presents the participants' reality back to them and allows for people to project their emotional and social responses in a focused fashion.
Triggers are more than teaching aids about information.
Their purpose is to generate critical thinking and actions about problems central to people's lives.
To understand this process further, the following case study will illustrate the dialogue and action process.
Alcohol and Substance Abuse Prevention program
An example of a community health program that has adapted Freire's philosophy and methodology is an adolescent Alcohol and Substance Abuse Prevention program (ASAP), alternatively called the Adolescent Social Action Program (Wallerstein and Bernstein, 1988).
The ASAP program  aims to reduce excess morbidity and mortality among middle and high school students from high-risk low-income multi-ethnic communities.
Sponsored since 1982 by the University of New Mexico School of Medicine, ASAP seeks to empower youth to make healthier choices in their own lives; and, as community members, to play an active political role in their communities and society.
ASAP brings in small groups of teenage volunteer students from communities throughout New Mexico to talk with patients and families in the several hospitals, and with residents in county detention centers who have suffered the consequences of alcohol and drug abuse, interpersonal violence, or unprotected sexuality.
ASAP emphasizes Freirian principles of experiential learning, dialogue, sharing their own lives, empathy, critical thinking and social action.
The groups are facilitated by University medical, nursing, education, and counselling students who help direct the interviews and lead youth through a defined curriculum.
The curriculum is based on several models of adolescent health promotion and the protection-motivation theory of  behaviour change (Rogers, 1983).
This theory states that motivation comes from a combination of personalizing the consequences of unhealthy  behaviours and developing the self-efficacies or coping skills to change one's  behaviour .
During their visits to the hospital and jail, the youth receive training in coping skills, communication and decision-making, peer teaching techniques, and analysis of media and social policies that influence consumption, such as New Mexico's drive-up liquor windows.
By adopting the Freirian perspective, ASAP distinguishes itself from ‘Scared Straight’ programs.
Although initially the hospital and jail environment may be frightening or cause anxiety, the emphasis on dialogue shifts the focus to the youth's feelings, their world view, and their solutions to the problems they face in their communities.
The coping skills curriculum linked with additional training, in peer education techniques back at their school sites, assists the youth in becoming leaders in their schools and communities.
The action stage of ASAP has included many student projects, such as peer teaching with lower grade students, developing videos on their own communities, writing a rap song to play on a local radio station, or testifying at tribal council meetings.
An important link between the ASAP hospital/jail experience, community outreach and youth empowerment are the discussion triggers and the problem-posing dialogue methodology.
In the hospital, the patients and their life stories become the triggers for students to talk about their own lives.
Outside the hospital, ASAP students lead peer discussions through several short video triggers developed by ASAP, or they create their own trigger role-plays about their own lives or about the stories they've heard in the hospital and jail.
One short video trigger, filmed and edited by a few ASAP high school students, is an exploration about their own  neighbourhood , a low-income  primarily Hispanic area with a high incidence of drug and alcohol abuse.
From interviews with a liquor store owner, police paramedics, a car club store owner, and ex-addicts, they construct a view of the problems and potentials of their community.
Despite the problems they illustrate, they emerge with new feelings of community respect and call the film,South Valley Pride .
ASAP uses this video to trigger dialogue on other students'  neighbourhoods , to break down stereotypes, and to excite more students to conduct research on their communities.
Although this trigger, like other triggers, presents open-ended problematic situations, critical thinking does not occur spontaneously.
The facilitators of the adolescent groups provide group leadership by using an inductive questioning strategy that moves discussion from the concrete and personal level to the social analysis and action stage.
The youth are also taught this questioning strategy when they become peer educators.
The inductive questioning steps can best be remembered through the acronym SHOWED (Shaffer, 1983).
Step one and two elicit a concrete description of the trigger.
In step one, the facilitator asks, what do you See in this dialogue?
What is each person saying?
The second series of questions focuses on what's really Happening here as the problem.
What are the problems as you see them in this  neighbourhood ?
In step three, the facilitator asks people to personalize the trigger, to see how the problem relates to Our lives.
Is this a realistic situation?
Do you know people who are similar to the people in this trigger?
How is your experience different?
How do you feel about the neighborhood in the video?
How do you feel about your own neighborhood?
In step four, the facilitator deepens the dialogue to an analytic level, asking Why there is a problem.
What are the cultural or historical forces that contribute to these problems?
For example, what is the role of advertising in  targeting minorities and youth in the South Valley?
The next two steps are the goal of the problem-posing process as they take the group towards actions.
Now that the group has come to a better understanding about some aspect of these problems, how can they feel Empowered to act for change?
What can they Do to solve the problems or choose strategies for action?
What steps would you take in your own community to begin a process of change?
The SHOWED acronym is one tool to promote a Freirian process of genuine listening and action.
Although the steps are useful, true dialogue is not linear, but moves back and forth between steps, as participants place their personal experience into the social reality.
As seen through the dialogue questions, action emerges as the goal of critical thinking.
Because of the possible multiplicity of targets for change, it is deceptive to consider this process problem- solving .
As community organizers know, change best occurs when people choose short-term winnable goals which build their belief they can make a difference and which can alter the balance of power,(i.e. after this action, the youth  group becomes a recognized force in the community).
As people evaluate and celebrate the successes of their actions, they will identify what they've gained and what they have been unable to attain through the particular action.
Instead of becoming frustrated with the futility in solving the problem, the celebration of success combined with the reflection on limitations nourishes people to choose the next action that may bring them closer to real community change.
The process of empowerment therefore is called problem- posing , rather than problem-solving, recognizing the complexity and long-term nature of individual and community change.
In sum, a Freirian-inspired community education or development program would incorporate a philosophy of personal and social transformation with people who often experience societal inequalities, cultural conflicts, or powerlessness.
The educational problem-posing approach with triggers and dialogue helps people move beyond barriers to learning and involves them in a group process to change their lives as learners and as emerging teachers in their communities.
As people identify their own problems collaboratively and begin to analyze the conditions that contribute to the problems, they can develop strategies that are appropriate for their own culture, time, and place.
Empowerment education for change — personal, educational or socio-economic — is an ongoing process that demands time and continued commitment.
We must be ‘patiently impatient’, Paulo Freire tells us, as we painstakingly move towards better quality of life and justice in our communities.
Although change may evolve slowly, problem-posing can be a nurturing process with people exploring visions and building community together as they work on problems.
Tradition for revolution: Traditional medicine in El Salvador
Introduction
Two different health structures have developed in El Salvador: the ‘official’ state and private health systems on the one hand, and the ‘popular’health system set up by the popular organizations and the guerrilla movement of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN).
Thus in the health field, as on the politico-military level, there is a situation of ‘dual power’, with different systems and conceptions of health confronting, interacting and affecting each other in complex ways.
In this article we will discuss why traditional medicine has played a crucial role in the popular system and examine some of the problems and contradictions communities and health workers have faced in using traditional medicine to revolutionize the health process.
Changing health: Prerequisites
The popular health system is based on several fundamental assumptions.
First of all, health and health care are seen as political, social and ideological issues which cannot be understood or tackled in isolation on a medical or technical basis.
Secondly, the social relations under which medicine is practised, rather than the content or type of medicine, are seen as paramount.
The FMLN has argued that, no matter what type of medicine one practises, if health knowledge, skills and resources are sold on the market as commodities this will necessarily limit access to health care, fragment and distort the nature of the health process, constrain the relation between health workers and users, and undermine people's control over their health.
Thirdly, health is considered central to the process of community organization and empowerment, and cannot be ignored or postponed until more general political and social changes have taken place.
On a par with their conception of social revolution, the FMLN sees taking power in health as a complex process where organized communities rather than individuals are the most important agents of change and empowerment.
Since the early 1970s, health has been a focus of struggle for the poor, marginalized communities in the cities and the peasant organizations in the countryside, as well as for the student movement at the National University and the Medical School.
The popular health system was one of the first organized by the popular movement and the revolutionary groups that formed the FMLN in 1980.
As the FMLN opened up war fronts and established itself in several areas of the country, many medical students and health workers joined the liberation army and worked with the communities to set up their own alternative health system.
From its inception, traditional medicine came to form an integral part of the popular health system, while in the ‘official’ system it was either ignored and ridiculed or was incorporated and exploited for profit.
Traditional medicine in El Salvador
Traditional medicine in El Salvador and Central America is a syncretization of indigenous medico-religious cultures and medical conceptions, both popular and academic, brought by the European invaders.
By the time of the Spanish conquest, the indigenous people of Central America had already a well-developed conception of health and disease.
They had considerable physiological and anatomical knowledge, detailed knowledge of thousands of medicinal plants, and wide-ranging curative and preventative skills.
Indeed, many of the indigenous plants and remedies, such as quinine, which were brought back to Europe by the conquistadores , contributed to the fundamental changes taking place in European medicine at the time.
In traditional medicine, health is seen as essentially a matter of maintaining a balance within an individual as well as between the individual, the community and the environment.
Two of the main factors that need to be kept in equilibrium are heat and cold and most illnesses and diseases are seen as the product of excessive heat or cold.
So, for instance, many kinds of diarrhoea are classified as hot, while respiratory infections are often treated as cold.
The hot/cold opposition is also used to classify foods, plants, remedies and even pharmaceutical drugs which are not only widely available in most Central American street markets but are also used by some traditional healers and midwives.
Additional notions derived from ‘western’, or rather ‘northern’ medicine have been grafted onto the original syncretization, partly because of the relentless propaganda war waged by the pharmaceutical companies and partly through vaccination campaigns and health promotion programmes.
Out of all these elements have emerged quite distinct conceptions of the health process, detailed descriptions of illnesses and diseases, and a remarkable array of therapeutic methods, remedies, and magico-religious rituals.
Prevention also plays a central role in traditional medicine with many different practices and prohibitions being part of people's daily life.
For most people in El Salvador, especially the poor majority, traditional  medicine offers a powerful, all-embracing and often effective medical and cultural framework to understand their health and seek appropriate care.
Most traditional healers are far more accessible — financially, geographically and culturally — than the health workers or medical practitioner in state clinics or private surgeries.
There are traditional healers and midwives in every village, city and region of El Salvador.
Most of them are poor people who give their services to their neighbours and communities for little or no charge.
Unlike many medical professionals, they share the ideological and social world of the people they treat.
They speak the same language and can relate to the people who consult them in a more personal, less clinical and intimidating fashion.
Most traditional midwives, for instance, already know the women they care for during and after pregnancy.
They look after the pregnant woman rather than‘the pregnancy’ and are a source of practical and emotional support as well as health care to the woman and her baby.
Any genuinely popular and empowering health system could not, therefore, ignore or bypass traditional medicine.
FMLN health workers and doctors insist that any health system which does not take as its starting point the ideological world of the patient would in fact be ‘unscientific’ since it would be, at worst, simply a system for diagnosing  diseases  , or, at best , a system of treating diseases but not a system for treating people .
The people's remedy
In traditional medicine there are often quite sophisticated systems of description of related symptoms or different stages of a disease.
In Central America, for instance, there are over twenty different words for diarrhoea, one of the most common forms of ill-health among the poor.
Most people, however, would feel too intimidated to describe their symptoms in those terms to what they perceive as distant and dismissive professionals in the ‘official’ system.
Patients are therefore not able to participate in their own diagnosis and treatment, and a valuable source of information about their condition is lost.
The way patients and their communities describe the symptoms also determines the type of help they will seek.
If diarrhoea is described in some particular terms rather than others (e.g. if it described as empacho ) the patient is more likely to consult a traditional practitioner than to go to a health clinic.
In the popular health system the community, the traditional healer and any other health worker involved with the community can be brought together to identify the reasons for these treatment choices and encourage people to compare experiences and outcomes.
In many cases the traditional healers and midwives are already part of the primary health care structure of the village or community and have received additional training so that the most positive aspects of traditional and non-traditional medicine can be combined in ways that are acceptable to the community.
For instance, after extensive consultation with the community, health workers found a way of overcoming people's reluctance to use rehydration salts.
People were far more willing to use them if they were diluted in a traditional herbal infusion like chamomile.
This led to the discovery that combining the salts  with the chamomile infusion gave even better results.
The chamomile was found to have antiviral properties that aid recovery from the viral infections that are a common cause of the diarrhoea which, in turn, causes the dehydration.
Chamomile also helps to regenerate the damaged intestinal epithelium.
Similarly, if a child with bacterial diarrhoea is taken to a health clinic and prescribed a necessary course of antibiotics, the mother might be unwilling to give them to the child if her hot/cold classification of the antibiotics conflicts with her classification of the type of diarrhoea.
If she does not feel confident that she will be listened to and her views taken into account, she will not express her reservations and probably not administer the antibiotics.
A system that does not take these factors into account puts the child's life at risk: it is the system and not the mother that is at fault.
In the popular health system, on the other hand, the primary health care workers (brigadistas ) anticipate some of these issues and enter into a dialogue both with the mother and the community as a whole.
In serious cases such as this, the structures of popular power like the village or community assembly would be turned into a forum for medical discussion — a sort of popular medical audit.
This process of reclaiming, revaluing and sometimes challenging traditional conceptions is extremely complex.
The problem of pesticide poisoning provides a relevant example.
The excessive and unrestricted use of pesticides has resulted in a worrying number of cases of acute and chronic pesticide poisoning among Central American peasants.
The dominance of the agro-export business and the patterns of land ownership are primarily to blame for this and for the abandonment of traditional, more ecologically sound, forms of cultivation and pest control.
To try and reduce the long-term effects in a region which is already an ecological disaster, peasant organizations and popular movements have encouraged small farmers and farming co-operatives to rediscover and reapply some of the traditional knowledge of their Indian ancestors.
At the same time, through a process of collective discussion and education, peasant communities are being taught how to prevent the worst effects of pesticide on themselves and their families, and to identify and immediately treat the symptoms of poisoning.
The communities can deal with these health procedures themselves and no doctor or more specialised health personnel is needed.
However, people often object to having to take a bath after using pesticides because this conflicts with their traditional notion of hot and cold.
They see the practice of taking a bath, which is cold, after being hot and sweaty from work, as being harmful.
So, on the one hand, people are encouraged to reclaim traditional practices while at the same time they must come to terms with the abandonment of other, often related, traditional conceptions.
At the beginning of the popular health system many people had an ambivalent attitude to traditional herbal remedies.
For the first time, their health needs were being addressed and, understandably, they wanted the best possible care and treatment for themselves and their communities.
Although they often used traditional remedies, they also associated them with their own poverty and neglect.
People felt cheated: they were encouraged to use locally available plants for many common complaints instead of being given more expensive, and therefore more desirable, pharmaceutical drugs.
Gradually, though, through a process of collective organization, discussion and experimentation, herbal remedies came to be accepted.
Nowadays many communities have a medicinal herb garden and regularly allocate part of their land to medicinal crops as well as crops like soya beans which have particular nutritional, and thus preventative, value.
Although a lot of research into medicinal plants and traditional remedies has now been carried out, people are still a major source of knowledge.
Doctors and other health workers, who went to work in the zones controlled by the FMLN during the civil war, learnt very effective forms of treatment from the peasants they worked with.
For instance, they discovered how useful honey was in the treatment of wounds and it was thanks to people's participation that the best ways of applying it to particular kinds of wounds were developed.
It is essential, though, that the knowledge and skills people have are not taken from them, repackaged and sold to them at exorbitant prices.
The multinational drug companies are often exploiting that knowledge in their constant search for new and more profitable drugs.
They too have taken an interest in the ideological and cultural world of the communities but only to facilitate and improve their marketing of so-called popular drugs like aspirin and alkaseltzer.
Andrew's salts, for instance, are marketed as ‘refreshing your liver’, using the hot/cold opposition of traditional medicine.
The changes in health that have taken place in El Salvador have inevitably been uneven, fraught with difficulties and contradictions.
But the popular health system has provided a framework for addressing people's health needs and finding solutions that validate and reaffirm their contribution to the health process.
As one peasant from a resettled community said, ‘it makes you proud of who you are and keeps you changing’.
This deep-rooted process of change can now be brought to bear on the ‘official’ health system as the signing of the peace agreements between the government and the FMLN has ushered in a period of more open political struggle and has created new political spaces.
The FMLN and the popular movement are already making plans and organizing to set these changes in motion.
Donor-dependence or donor control?:
The case of Mozambique
Introduction
At the beginning of the 1980s, Mozambique had a National Health Service (NHS) that was successfully implementing a primary health care (PHC) philosophy.
The health services were expanding and health workers' morale was high (Hanlon, 1984).
Ten years later, the picture is not so bright.
South African destabilization has succeeded in many of its aims; the rebel movement, RENAMO, has destroyed or forced the closure of approximately fifty percent of the PHC network.
A deepening economic crisis and an economic structural adjustment programme have reduced the resources available to the NHS.
Low morale among poorly paid health workers has led to strikes and lessened the quality of care.
The recent legalization of private medicine will probably further weaken the NHS.
Mozambique may be exceptional owing to the extent of South African destabilization.
Most African countries have, however, suffered economic crises and carried out economic structural adjustment in the 1980s.
Few have been spared war or AIDS.
In the 1980s, the international rhetoric in health changed from emphasis on PHC to cost recovery.
Donor economic power increased, as state health budgets decreased.
Calls for privatization and a reduced role for the state became the aid establishment's ‘new conditionality’.
This establishment regarded health and education as non-productive sectors, of concern in controlling government spending (SCF, 1991; Disch, 1992).
In Mozambique, external donor funding of the NHS has increased.
Have donors strengthened or weakened the NHS?
Have they used their economic clout to exert control?
I will look at donor financing of the NHS and its impact, with a focus on drugs and technical assistance.
Then I will discuss the role of NGOs and finally, perspectives for the 1990s.
These issues may seem remote from questions of community development.
An efficient NHS providing basic health care to the poor is, however, necessary for community development.
Also, the lack of continuity of a donor-driven health service confuses both PHC workers and the communities they serve.
NHS financing
In the first five years of the 1980s, government recurrent expenditure on health, at constant prices, almost halved.
Since 1985, expenditure has slightly increased.
Still, by the end of the decade, state per capita expenditure was half the value of 1980 (Noormahomed et al , 1990).
As government spending fell, the donors stepped in.
Estimating the real value of donations is difficult; Ministry of Health (MOH) estimates often differ from donors.
The MOH estimates that donor spending on recurrent costs rose from five to twenty four million dollars (nine to fifty seven percent of the total) between 1983 and 1989 (Ibid .).
Most aid to the NHS comes from governments; in 1989, they promised forty five million US dollars.
Next came the multilateral organizations, with twelve million, followed by the non-governmental organizations (NGOs) with 1.5 million (Tomo et al , 1990).
A few government and multilateral agencies have given most aid.
In recent years, the main agencies have changed.
From 1989 to 1991, Italy and the USSR decreased their contributions; their joint share fell from a half to less than a quarter.
The International Development Association, the EEC, and Denmark entered.
They now account for another quarter.
Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland continue to provide about twenty five to thirty percent.
From 1993 on, aid will be spread over more donors, as large projects with FINNIDA, DANIDA, USAID, and the African Development Bank come on line (’ External Support’, 1991).
In 1989, the MOH estimated that donor support went to technical assistance (41%), drugs and other medical consumables (38%), capital expenditure (12%), and local consumables (9%).
Owing to insecurity in rural areas, most aid goes to urban areas; probably less than thirty percent directly benefits the primary and secondary levels (Ibid .).
Project aid is commonest; by 1989, donors were funding 116 separate projects.
In the 1990s, more large projects are planned.
They included a 9.6 million dollar World Bank health and nutrition project, a 5.6 million dollar essential drugs project, and a 4.8 million dollar AIDS and sexually transmitted disease control programme (Ibid .).
Impact of aid on the NHS
Aid has been necessary to sustain the NHS.
Donors now have economic control; they will always be tempted to use the power that this control brings.
The larger donors will use their leverage to influence policy; an NGO official in a district may lord it over his Mozambican counterparts.
Ironically, donors are advising the MOH about the necessity for good planning and management, although simultaneously making both tasks more difficult.
The presence of so many donors has added an enormous administrative workload to an already struggling MOH.
Many officials now spend most of their working hours entertaining visiting delegations, meeting donors, and preparing project documents.
Financial planning is almost impossible, as the MOH does not know the true extent of donor contributions.
Most project aid is short-term, preventing long-term planning.
The MOH has also lost control of financial administration, as donors now procure and provide many goods and services.
Few are willing to transfer funds and give management responsibility to the MOH (Ibid .).
The already weak accounting department has to produce accounts for a multitude of projects, often with different systems.
The tying of aid for imports has seriously weakened the policy of standardizing equipment.
Some aid actually costs the MOH money.
Still too frequently, the MOH has to pay customs, storage, and transport costs for unwanted material that donors have sent without prior warning.
Some donors have chosen to set up parallel offices to run their own projects, as they regard MOH departments as weak and inefficient.
They recruit highly-paid expatriates and Mozambicans; the latter earn up to twenty five times the salary of their colleagues in government service.
There is no skills transfer and the offices close when the project ends.
The MOH remains weak and inefficient (Tomo et al, op. cit .).
Projects are often unsustainable, as the MOH has to finance the recurrent costs of activities set up by the project after the donor leaves.
With dependence has come lack of dependability.
A change of government or policy sometimes causes cancellation of funds.
In 1990, for example, pull-out of a bilateral donor caused a funding shortfall of an important multilateral programme.
Donor fashions are constantly changing, especially as many seek quick technical fixes.
Such fixes are unlikely to succeed.
As Green has remarked; ‘there are no magical silver bullet solutions except wrong ones’(Green, n.d.).
To raise more funds, donors have to keep on inventing new ideas.
Already, support for vertical programmes is waning, as the programmes are unsustainable without continued massive donor support (SCF,op. cit .).
These changes in fashion lead in turn to discontinuous non-cumulative changes in the MOH and damage institutional and capacity building.
Some donors have explicit philosophies that they seek to see adopted as policy.
UNICEF has advocated selective interventions such as growth monitoring and oral rehydration.
USAID is sponsoring a policy study on expanding health services outside the public sector.
Drug supplies
Donors are now footing most of the drug bill.
Before 1983, their contribution was small.
In 1983–85, donors gave around one million dollars annually; in 1986, the amount increased suddenly to around nine million dollars.
From 1985 to 1989, the state contribution to drug imports fell from eighty six to twelve percent.
At constant prices, the real value of government drug imports in 1989 was only  the value in 1980 (Noormahomed et al, op. cit .).
Donor support in drug supply has had a patchy record.
Initially, about one third were products not in the National Formulary.
When a donor-funded Essential Drugs Programme began to supply the primary level with kits, WHO specifically recommended that: ‘Mozambique should be supplied exclusively through UNIPAC and should not canvas suppliers independently’(Cliff et al , 1986).
The countries that give most to drug import support tie purchase to their own country.
Thus, the state drug importing firm cannot open international tenders and choose the best offer (Tomo et al, op. cit ).
The UNICEF kits contained drugs manufactured in the country of the major programme donor.
The kit system worked well until 1990, when the donor country suddenly and unexpectedly decided to reduce funding.
Still, in 1992, at the primary level, drug supply is erratic; kits arrive irregularly and a parallel classical system provides supplementary supplies.
USAID, now a major donor of drug supplies, is sponsoring a policy study to explore the potential involvement of private organizations in the pharmaceutical sector.
Technical assistance
Foreign technical assistance has also been important.
At independence in 1975, only about eighty doctors remained in the country.
There was a shortage of trained health workers in all categories.
Faced with this shortage, the MOH recruited staff from diverse sources.
The first came from Tanzania, Zambia, and Guinea Conakry.
The MOH employed other personnel directly through individual contracts.
The socialist countries also contributed, often with lines of credit (USSR) or at low cost (Cuba).
From 1986 to 1989, the USSR, GDR, Cuba, Vietnam, and China gave about thirty percent of bilateral technical assistance (Ibid .).
The collapse of socialist governments in the USSR and GDR has led to withdrawal of their technical support.
In recent years, Western governments have increased their technical assistance through NGOs.
Thus, from 1986 to 1989, the number of NGO-supported health workers rose from sixty four to 163 (twelve and twenty six percent of the total)(Ibid .).
In 1989, the MOH estimated that donors spent 11.6 million dollars to fund around 500 expatriate health workers.
The MOH payroll for around 16,000 workers was 8.8 million dollars (Noormahomed et al, op. cit ).
With the collapse of socialist country support and lack of donor support for individual contracts, a change-over to project-linked technical assistance is probable.
The estimated additional cost is at least five million dollars annually (Tomo et al, op. cit .).
Of the foreign technical personnel, about fifty percent are doctors.
Output of Mozambican doctors has been low; about seventy five percent of doctors are expatriates.
The heavy dependence on foreign technical assistance has had many disadvantages.
For example, doctors come from many different schools; they are sometimes unwilling to use Mozambican treatment norms or adhere to essential drug lists.
Relations between expatriates and Mozambicans are sometimes uneasy.
The expatriate's role is often poorly defined; instead of genuine capacity building, expatriates simply plug gaps.
The severe shortage of qualified Mozambican personnel makes finding a counterpart difficult.
Tensions often exist when the expatriate has two bosses — the MOH and his agency.
When conflicts arise, the agency is likely to prevail.
Some agencies physically base their staff in the agency office, clearly emphasizing where loyalty lies.
Expatriates are usually on short contracts and expect to achieve a lot quickly.
They sometimes get impatient with their counterpart, who necessarily has a longer term perspective and cannot work fulltime because of a low salary.
Current Mozambican salaries are equivalent to 45 US $/month; for a nurse and 300 US $/month; for a doctor.
Supplementary income generating activities include clinical work and consultancies for donor agencies.
Many agencies are helping to keep health personnel at their jobs by providing perks, such as cars, out-of-country work trips, and per diems for seminars.
These perks, however, often divert health officials from their main task of running the NHS.
They are also often used to peddle influence.
Low salaries have also led to a brain drain from the MOH to donor organizations.
These problems are not unique to Mozambique or to health.
As Green points out, in sub-Saharan Africa, technical assistance seems to have been the only real growth area in aid over the past half decade.
In several countries, technical assistance salaries now exceed national public service pay-rolls.
For Mozambique, he suggests that donors redirect ten-fifteen percent of the 200–300 million dollars they spend annually on salaries for their own personnel to pay Mozambican public service salaries.
Public service capacity would improve and the need for expatriates would decrease by more than ten percent (Green, n.d., 1992).
Finally, the increase in projects has produced a constant stream of highly-paid expatriate consultants.
Consultancies are often uncoordinated and repetitive.
For the MOH personnel providing the information, they are often a waste of time.
The reports mostly provide information for the donors; many are in English (the national language of Mozambique is Portuguese).
The role of NGOs
Foreign NGOs
The 1980s trend away from supporting governments led many countries to channel their aid through NGOs.
In 1992, at least thirty eight foreign  NGOs were working in health.
The NGOs have diverse philosophies.
Some have a clearly-defined policy of supporting the NHS.
Others expect to take control of a district and set up parallel administrative and logistic structures.
They often have their own norms and do not wish to carry out MOH policies.
At local level, control exerted by NGOs varies widely, depending on their philosophy, their economic clout, and individual personalities.
NGOs are powerful, yet their staff are often young and inexperienced.
Power can easily go their head.
In just one example of many possible, an NGO project leader banned a MOH nutritionist from entering ‘his’ district (Hanlon, 1991).
Hanlon (Ibid .)
in his recent book on aid in Mozambique, also gives the example of the flying doctors who place expatriate doctors in districts.
These NGOs have played a valuable and necessary role in supplying and staffing insecure districts.
Their parallel logistic system, however, inevitably leads to tensions.
For example, when a Mozambican and expatriate doctor are working in the same hospital, the expatriate may have access to more drugs.
The service is expensive; estimates are that the Medecins Sans Frontieres are spending over six million dollars a year to support 20–30 districts (’ External Support’, 1991).
NGOs have also caused a brain drain from the NHS by recruiting skilled Mozambicans and paying them high salaries.
Local NGOs
Many donors provide financial incentives to local NGOs.
For conservatives, this policy is part of a trend to encourage private initiatives and voluntary organizations to take over the traditional government role in the health services (SCF,op. cit .).
Progressives wish to support community-based organizations rather than corrupt governments.
Mozambique has recently become a multi-party state.
Many new parties and NGOs are springing up in what many observers see as the first steps toward development of a healthy civil society.
Although positive, these first steps have been largely donor-driven.
The easy availability of funds has led many Mozambican officials to view the formation of NGOs as a way to tap donor money.
Local NGOs thus divert resources and personnel out of the public health services.
The weakened NHS becomes harder to support, increasing the pressure to channel money into NGOs.
Most local NGOs are dependent on donor funds; their sustainability without such funds is doubtful.
Creating NGOs from the top-down is unlikely to produce either true community-based NGOs or a healthy civil society.
Although local NGOs provide a useful complementary service to the NHS, it will be necessarily piecemeal.
For the poor, an efficient NHS with a wide coverage remains essential.
Strengthening the existing NHS remains the highest priority for funding.
Perspectives for the 1990s
Possibly, the 1990s offer some hope for Mozambique.
If peace is restored, the NHS will be able to operate without the constant threat of violence.
Prospects for peace, however, depend on the uncertain progress of South Africa to a post-apartheid society.
Even with peace, the NHS will face great difficulties.
It will have to serve more people scattered over a larger area.
Closed health posts will need to be reopened.
An increase in AIDS cases will strain both preventive and curative services.
As no major salary increases for personnel are likely, they will remain demoralized and increasingly tempted by the recently introduced private practice.
Donor dependence will continue; projections for the early 1990s show donors financing 85–90% of planned expenditure (’ External Support’, 1991).
Will donors be prepared to provide the extra funds needed for reconstruction or even to continue funding at current levels?
With Western priorities shifting to more strategic countries in the Commonwealth of Independent States and Eastern Europe, African countries will probably suffer a cut in funds.
An obvious source for Mozambique is South African reparation; a post-apartheid South Africa will, however, probably have neither the funds nor necessarily the political will to pay.
Aid to health is likely to remain a low priority, although institutions such as the World Bank are now recognizing the social cost of their policies.
In Mozambique, the economic rehabilitation plan (acronym PRE) has now become the social and economic rehabilitation plan (PRES).
The donors may press for further policy changes, such as increased cost recovery and further privatization.
Equitable implementation of cost recovery is difficult in Mozambique; with the most rigorous of definitions, the estimated absolute poverty level is fifty to sixty percent (Government of Mozambique, 1990).
A possible target for privatization is the state medical imports agency.
Will aid become more efficient?
Some lessons seem to have been learnt from the failures of the 1980s.
For example, FINNIDA and DANIDA have long-term projects to give substantial support to provincial health services.
A pilot project in Zambezia province aims to decentralize and integrate management of donor and provincial funds.
In conclusion, the donors have had a profound impact on the Mozambican NHS.
The MOH has changed policies to adapt to donor demands and foreign NGOs now control many districts.
Perhaps more striking has been the disruptive impact on the NHS of many uncoordinated and poorly-managed projects.
The Philippine experience — Building a health movement
Introduction
The following are my reflections on what I saw during my time in the Philippines of the efforts to build a Philippine health movement.
This movement as part of the popular movement is working for a just and democratic society free from foreign intervention where the rhetoric of ‘health for all’ will be a reality — health as a right for all Filipinos.
Goals espoused by WHO/HFA may have numbed our consciousness but for many health workers in the Philippines, despite the change in government, a health initiative becomes the front line in a struggle some do not survive.
I am wary of being too emotive in this paper but also concerned to do justice to the seriousness of the struggle for health that people and their movements are undertaking in many parts of the world, including the Philippines.
Health after all is not some technological goal — it is a human condition.
In the Philippines the struggle for health is very clearly the struggle for a humane social, economic and political order.
I do not speak for the Philippine health movement, rather these are my attempts to understand how both small-scale local initiatives and a national effort can alter the historical process which to date has left the majority of the 60 million Filipino people living in dire poverty in a land of plenty.
I hope that the paper will contribute to the debate about the nature and form of organizing for health in other countries.
The paper will be in two sections: the first will look at the effort to raise popular awareness of the root cause of ill health and to work towards an alternative health system.
The second will consider the work being done to mobilize the concern and commitment of individuals working in all aspects of health care to ensure that they were genuinely working for the health of the people.
Raising the popular awareness about health
In March 1984, having completed an MSc in Community Health, I went to the Philippines to work as a health researcher with a community-based health project.
By 1984 the popular movement against the excesses and injustices of the Marcos regime was well-developed.
Legal mass organizations of workers, peasants, the urban poor and women had grown in strength as had organizations for people working in particular types of work — teachers, lawyers and health workers.
Many of these organizations, termed sectoral organizations, joined alliances that were local, regional and national in character.
In addition the armed revolutionary movement was said to control or influence twenty per cent of the country's villages.
The basic platform of the popular movement is for a just, democratic and sovereign Philippines i.e. free from foreign, particularly US, intervention.
While sectoral organizations have a critique of the society relating to the experiences and fields of interest of their membership the popular movement unifies around political, social and economic issues which are key to the crisis facing Philippine society.
High on their list are the need for a genuine and popular democracy; the removal of the US bases; an easing of the foreign debt burden; genuine land reform; environmental protection and industrialization that benefits Filipinos rather than foreign corporations.
What had all this to do with the community based health project.
(CBHP) I was going to work for?
CBHPs are non-government initiatives.
They and the popular movement have their roots in both the growth of nationalist fervour in the late 1960s and early 1970s, which parallelled the growth of anti-colonial and ‘Third World’ nationalist movements elsewhere, and in the call from the leadership of the Catholic church during the same period for ‘a preferential option for the poor’which gave a new focus to the efforts of church organizations in this predominantly Catholic country.
Approaches to health work in the Philippines have since the early 1970s paralleled the history of internationally-recognized development models.
They moved from the welfare approach i.e. ‘bringing the wonders of modern medical science to the people’ through a technological approach, part of which was the training of paramedics to resolve the problem of a shortage of health personnel.
By the late 1970s CBHPs had already adopted a structural approach that recognized that the health situation in the country reflected its social, economic and political situation and the need for empowerment to challenge these structures.
CBHPs grew in an era of popular organizing by both church and secular organizations which in adopting a structural or liberational approach were clearly anti-government in character.
(Unfortunately as later developments showed this was often falsely simplified to an anti-Marcos stance.)
It was within organized communities that these programmes worked on the understanding that to take collective action to improve health a community needs to be organized.
Health is seldom the primary concern of a community though primary concerns, for example, land rights, agricultural production and marketing etc. have a bearing on health.
At the grassroots, health initiatives and programmes are seen as ways to strengthen organizations rather than reasons for building them.
CBHPs aim to help build self-reliant communities in health, defining a truly self-reliant community as one that is ‘built on the peoples’ capacity to take care of themselves by tapping and developing local and external human and material resources’.
The training of individuals selected by the community in health, teaching and organizing skills contributes to achieving this goal.
CBHPs also hold that ‘every citizen is entitled to effective and accessible health services…at all times and at any given stage of the peoples’ development but recognize that they cannot provide these services.
By lobbying local health officials and encouraging private institutions to reduce costs for patients with limited capacity to pay, CBHPs not only help people have access to the care they need but also make health professionals more aware of and responsive to the real needs of the poor.
Today CBHPs work with marginalized communities in over half the country's 73 provinces.
They form a national network and it is from their conference statement that I took the above quotations.
At regular meetings at regional and national levels they review their experiences and assess their current position in relation to their overall objectives, strategies and methods of work and if necessary restate these.
Growth in the women's movement and in a concern for the environment are currently having an impact on the philosophy and practices of CBHP.
Whilst CBHPs (the projects providing co-ordinating staff) are externally funded, most community effort is self-reliant which shows a powerful commitment considering that the majority of people live below the poverty level.
This distinction between the effort of the CBHPs and the effort of communities is a useful one in that CBHPs cannot take upon themselves the role of providing what a national government cannot or will not provide.
Community health workers organizations do exist and participate in campaigns locally on issues that affect health, e.g. services available at local clinics or petrol price rises which affect food prices.
Health workers also participate in their community or peasant organization or trade union.
They are primarily of their community.
In one sense CBHPs are not about building a grass roots community health movement but more about broadening the popular understanding of the root causes of ill health.
In addition they participate in debate with primary organizations of community workers, peasants, urban poor, youth and women about what makes health public policy.
They are also helping to developing models for an alternative health system.
All aspects of this alternative are being examined, ranging from training content and method for workers, relationships between professionals and communities, the process of identifying health needs and of managing and evaluating programmes and organizational forms and processes.
The phrase commonly used as a criteria for judging developments is ‘are they pro-people’, the aim being to build a health system in which people really matter.
Working in health — working for health?
In the Philippines the popular movement attracts many of the most exploited and oppressed who join together naturally in their community: peasant, worker, urban poor and women's organizations.
It also attracts many from the middle or professional classes who have a commitment to social and economic justice.
This includes doctors, nurses, students, and hospital workers from both private and government institutions as well as staff from non-government initiatives such as CBHPs.
This then is the progressive health sector.
There is within the health sector and the popular movement as a whole a conscious and structured effort to involve as many as possible in the movement for change.
Based on an analysis of the causes of the health crisis the progressive health sector has mounted a response.
This can be seen in both the number of institutions, organizations and campaigns that have been established but also in the wide range of activities undertaken, including research and information work, programme and service development, organization and union building, campaign and lobby work and solidarity networking.
Within the sectors there is always a keeping to the fore the awareness that long-lasting solutions to the country's health problems rest on the economic, political and cultural transformations of people's day to day lives.
To this end alliances are made with other sectors at all levels, local, regional and national.
For many the initial reason for entering a progressive health organization is to fight for their own rights and welfare.
Professional staff and institutional workers are exploited whether in government or private institutions.
For others it follows ‘exposure’ or a facilitated visit to an urban poor or rural community.
As Philippine medical education is mainly private, most medical and paramedical students come from wealthy families and have little experience of the plight of the majority.
Those less wealthy are forced to see their training as a means of gaining work abroad, so as to repay education loans or to pay for the schooling of a younger member of the family.
Medical and paramedical education in fact is primarily geared to producing health professionals for the western market.
Over 60 per cent of nurses trained in the Philippines work abroad.
Even those with the commitment to remain in the country have difficulties in adjusting to the nature of the work dictated by prevailing health patterns.
A variety of organizations have grown within the health sector that relate to both the struggles of its members and to the broader national struggle.
Thus within hospitals the Alliance of Health Workers (AHW) has formed which as a union allies itself with the progressive national union federation.
There is also an organization which deals with health and safety issues, especially in multi-national companies.
The Philippine Youth Health Programme works in medical and nursing  schools to organize ‘exposure’ programmes and tap the commitment of students for services in poor communities.
As a result of seeing the reality of the lives of the poor many of these student then join progressive student health unions such as the Philippine Nurses Student Association or Philippine Medical Student Association.
Other projects seek to involve health professionals, from both private and government institutions, in humanitarian work and in organizations that seriously examine the nature and roots of the health crisis.
Other health sector workers are involved through programmes such as CBHP or Medical Action Group (MAG) in providing skills training and services.
MAG works with political detainees and with the victims of torture or displacement.
Still others are active in campaigning or lobby groups such as the Philippine Drug Action Network (PDAN) which campaigned for a national drug policy and BUKAS which seeks to develop recommendations on public health policy.
These last two organizations are alliances of many of the organizations previously mentioned though they also tap new members.
The Health Alliance for Democracy (HEAD) openly questions the implications of national issues such as land reform and the presence of the US bases and their nuclear weapons for the health of Filipinos.
These they see as legitimate concerns for those working in health.
Many of the above organizations are affiliated to HEAD which was the most vocal health sector organization in the anti-dictatorship struggle.
Members of HEAD were killed by the military during the Marcos years indicating clearly that HEAD was seen to be challenging what was an intolerable situation.
Despite these losses the organization did not cease to function and today remains the most comprehensive voice of protest within the health sector against what ails Philippine society.
It is clear that these organizations have different points of unity depending on the concerns of their members.
Rights and welfare work, humanitarian aid, human rights campaigns, single issue campaigns and broader campaigns that challenge the democratic form and process are all part of the work of the progressive health sector.
All however see the link between the local health situation and the plight of health workers and the national and international situation.
None of this, as you may imagine, happens by chance.
Like other sections of the popular movement the health sector has been years in the growing and in establishing work practice and vital organizations.
What for me was most crucial in this process was a clear analysis of the health and national economic and political situation; a strategy for addressing it which identifies both the major challenges and the spaces in which you can currently work for change; commitment to mobilize as many as possible behind this strategy; and whilst focusing on the local situation, not to neglect the national and international situation.
Philippines: facts and figures
History 
1521–1898 Colony of Spain
1898–1940 Colony of the United States
1941–1945 Occupied by Japan
1946 Philippine Republic declared
1966–1986 Ferdinand Marcos President
General 
An archipelago of approximately 7,100 islands
Population: 60.1 million (40% are under 15 years of age)
Religions: 85% Catholic, 9% Protestant, 5% Muslim
Foreign Debt US$ 27.2 billion (1989)
23 US military installations with 15,000 permanent and 15,000 temporary US military personnel.
Health 
Population growth rate 2.4–2.8% p.a.
Life expectancy (1987) Male 61.9 yrs Female 65.5 yrs
Infant Mortality Rate (1986) 36.3 per 1000 live births.
This is an underestimate and masks great regional differences.
Communicable diseases in top ten causes of death (1984–86 av.)
Pneumonia (1)
Tuberculosis (3)
Diarrhoea (6)
Measles (8)
70% of pre-school children are underweight for age and death from avitaminosis and other nutritional deficiencies ranks number 9
AIDs (July 1989); 106 HIV seropositive individuals mainly living in the locality of the US Bases and 25 cases of AIDS.
Government budget 1989:
Debt servicing 44.1%
Military 5.6%
Health 3.1%
Multi-national companies take 80% share of the income from drug sales in the Philippines
I saw that you must not only address the real needs of people but need  to be genuinely open to new approaches and styles of work if you are ever going to make the rhetoric of involving communities in the planning and assessment of programmes a reality, or ensure active participation in health sector organizations.
One might suggest that the vibrancy in the Philippine  health movement is a measure of the critical nature of the struggle but I could argue that it is a product of the manner in which the struggle is being waged.
Another important aspect for me was to recognize that the health sector needed to be allied with the most significant political forces working for the kind of changes that would help ensure healthy public policy.
Also of crucial importance is the work to change attitudes especially among professionals.
Moving from a position of medical elitism, many health workers develop a growing respect for people's rights and capacities with regard to health and also a recognition that, though health workers have a part to play, the mass organizations of the people are, at this stage of Philippine history, the main contenders in the struggle for a healthy society.
What I have said above relates to my experiences with the Philippine health sector between March 1984 and December 1987.
There will of course have been new developments but I am confident that little will have changed in the fundamental agenda of those truly concerned about the health of their nation.
In writing this I am acutely aware that the energy of commitment fuelled by the gravity of the situation in the Philippines has once more taken a hold of me.
I hope this has not inhibited me from sharing some of their struggle.
As I sit at this word processor, the chips of which may have been assembled by a young woman in the Philippines for a pittance a day and for such long hours that her eyes will be damaged in a tax haven created specially for foreign companies, I am acutely aware of the link between the health of the people of the Philippines and my life here in Britain.
My Philippine experience leads me to ask about health in the UK: what is a correct analysis of the current situation?
What are the most crucial battles to be fought?
What is the basis of unity of many of the alliances formed?
Are the membership aware of this and actively committed to the goals of the alliance?
What in our political and cultural traditions prevent us from having a ‘pro-people’ health service — and society for that matter?
What are the ‘new forces in health’ that can bring about change?
Though the task of both understanding the situation and working for change may seem daunting, my experience of the Philippine health movement leaves me reassured.
There is after all no right answer.
Like peoples everywhere we are making history.
Being part of a movement, collectively analysing, planning, working and reviewing the plan gives confidence that the outcome could represent the best alternative as viewed by the majority.
Learning to work with people
An experience of health workers in Ireland
Introduction
The Community Mothers Programme was initiated by the Eastern Health Board (EHB) Republic of Ireland, in 1983 and had its origins in the Early Childhood Development project 1980–1983.
This was funded by the Van Leer Foundation in the Hague and carried out under the aegis of the Child Development Unit in Bristol University.
The aim of the programme is to develop the skills of parents of babies and young children and build up their self-esteem by:
a
helping parents to develop their own potential rather than by giving advice and directions;
b
using a behavioural approach in which parents carried out agreed tasks; and
c
using illustrated cartoon sequences to show alternative ways of dealing with various child-rearing problems.
The programme model is one of parent capacitation and empowerment so that parents learn to cope with child-rearing, finding their own solutions rather than increasing their dependence on professionals.
The Community Mothers initiative was developed in the Eastern Health Board because Public Health Nurses were not in a position to expand the work due to the demands of their caseloads.
The implications for the traditional role of a Public Health Nurse
In order to facilitate the development of the programme a Public Health Nurse was assigned full-time in each designated area and became the Family Development Nurse (FDN) for that area, her role being one of facilitator, monitor, guide motivator, communicator and resource person for Community Mothers.
Community Mothers are experienced mothers who are recruited in the areas and trained to give support and encouragement to parents of first babies in their own local communities with emphasis on child-rearing, health care, nutritional improvement and overall development.
The Community Mothers participate as volunteers and are paid nominal  expenses for each visit, visiting between five and fifteen families by appointment each month.
The visit takes approximately one hour.
The Family Development Nurse is available to the Community Mother at any time to discuss any problems or developments in relation to the programme and has a routine individual session each month where the visits are discussed and supplies re-ordered and there are group meetings on a two-monthly basis.
Each Family Development Nurse is responsible for the on-going support of 15–20 Community Mothers in her area.
The change and extension of role in Public Health Nursing from deliverer of care, and giver of advice and direction is in line with the aims and philosophy of ‘Health for All by the year 2000’ and aims to facilitate the transition from institutional care to community care with the emphasis on self-care, based on concepts of partnership and empowerment, promoting participation of clients and individual and community self-reliance.
This is part of a wider public policy in relation to health care, where Primary Health Care is being seen as the central component of the Health Care System and an accepted general principle that Health problems be dealt with at the lowest level of complexity, and acknowledges that a well-informed, well-motivated participating community is necessary for the achievement of health targets.
The then Director General of World Health Organisation, Dr. H. Mahler in 1985 encouraged nurses to ‘lead the way’ in Health for All and envisaged nurses becoming resources for people rather than for physicians, developing their role as health promoters.
Even though the need for change has been clearly stated and the encouragement to change comes from the highest political levels, the systems through which health care are delivered are traditional and conservative and may not support an individual through changing policies and roles.
In exploring new ways of working with people in order to achieve particular aims, individuals need information on aims, targets and policies.
There needs to be a willingness on the part of the professionals to change and an  openness to identifying success and failure, trying new and innovative approaches, while keeping the goal, the cost and the time targets in mind.
Public Health Nursing is still to a large extent task-oriented and the findings in a survey of the work load of the Public Health Nurse in Ireland in 1986 showed that only a small percentage of time (0.2%) was spent directly on health education, although it is acknowledged that health promotion is a component of tasks and policy in all aspects of their role.
Part of the reporting and accountability process is filling in a monthly time sheet which reinforces the emphasis on tasks.
Leaving this setting and changing to a role where qualitative evaluation is more relevant and personal effectiveness in bringing about the desired changes can be more easily assessed can be stressful.
Stating at the end of the month or year that a set number of child welfare visits were achieved seems less exposing of one's abilities than filling in a form stating what percentage of parents who received  programme  visits are reading to their babies, playing games with them and what nutritional and health targets have been met.
All this represents a move from a reactive approach for the nurse involving tradition, routine, and medical direction to one where her actions are founded on her understanding and judgement and are directed towards the achievement of a previously defined goal.
This leads to a more autonomous role for the Family Development Nurse and a greater input into decision and policy-making.
A World Health Organisation document ‘European paper on nursing’ states that ‘limiting the choices open to people and nurses or the development of their competence in decision-making obstructs the achievement of Health for All ’.
The changed role of the nurse from being carer, provider and giver of advice and direction is also new for Community Mothers and clients who expect nurses to operate from their traditional professional role and to have all the answers, and deal with all the problems.
So while changing herself, the Family Development Nurse has to facilitate this change at community level in order that the expertise and knowledge of parents can be recognised and used in a wider context in the community and in equal partnership with the professional.
The ease with which this change takes place is probably helped by the acceptability which the Public Health Nurse (PHN) enjoys in the community, being well known from the diversity of her role in child welfare visiting, home nursing, clinic, and school nurse.
The main motivating force, however, is the Community Mother's own desire to give support and to help her own community with the knowledge and experience she has gained through her child-rearing.
The programme is structured in such a way that on-going evaluation is simple and results can be reflected on from time to time by the Family Development Nurse and Community Mother so that the monthly visit to the family which is the main focus of the programme for achieving goals can be adapted to each family's level and the issues that are discussed are relevant, nonjudgemental, and supportive of the parents' own ideas and recognises the parents' desire to do what is best for their children.
The existing professional service is not replaced by the programme but it probably enhances the uptake of services such as immunisation clinics and parenting classes, as well as helping parents to recognise their own expertise in discussion with professionals.
A number of Community Mothers and parents have become more involved in community activities such as mother and toddler groups and Adult Education programmes involving literacy and personal development as a result of their contact with the Community Mothers programme, so that once the process of change and empowerment has begun for them it develops a momentum in other directions.
In this way the programme has been a catalyst for change in the various local communities, bringing about personal development and the widening of skills at family and community level, both for Community Mothers and the parents they visit.
To participate in this change, the need for support and information had to be recognised firstly within the group of nurses involved who, as the key health care workers, were agents for change.
Support from within the group was also vital, particularly in the early days when alienation from the main group of Public Health Nurses was inevitable due to the difference in focus involved in getting the job done.
Team-building skills exercises proved to be very valuable, as was networking, and the support of the co-ordinator.
Support from further afield within the health service for individual Family Development Nurses has varied from facilitation, tentatively supporting, to critical, though as results gradually become more evident, support is more forthcoming.
The need to extend one's knowledge of primary health care and the need for knowledge of research results on the impact of community-based health care projects, was a sound motivating force for Family Development Nurses and the majority have taken part in various courses and research projects.
This has brought about a sharing of information which has allowed a confidence to develop in relation to the long-term outcomes of this way of working with people to achieve particular aims.
Initially the programme operated as a project and was evaluated in relation to its specific aims and documented in relation to some of its wider effects and implications.
It was then adopted into the health services at community care level and now operates as a part of the services.
These services are still delivered through the traditional hierarchical structures with decisions being ‘handed down’ and information from the ground level taking a long time to reach and influence the making of decisions and policy.
As Family Development Nurses, we are still working within a system which is based on uniform structures and procedures which may not allow for the flexibility of approach, or the necessary degree of autonomy which is needed, to be always relevant to the needs of each individual or family.
Conclusion
Implementing a primary health care programme in a developed country with an established tradition of health care requires a flexibility within the structures, an openness to change and a need to examine the structures within which a primary health care programme can be fully implemented.
Familiarisation of all health care workers with changes in policy and the background of research and development and aims of policy would eliminate some of the frustrations and create a more supportive environment for Health Care Workers who are involved in implementing new policies acknowledging the need for change to meet the new challenges.
The community-based approach has proved more effective in achieving change where this is indicated and is likely to be a more useful model for empowerment and self-care than the traditional type of health care approach.
Taking part in the programme has been like an exciting adventure, discovering the hidden strengths of a community in its parents, and the willingness of Community Mothers to contribute to growth and development within their communities.
The links that have developed in networking with the many voluntary groups that operate in the areas and the recognition of the individuals right to self-esteem and to develop an expertise in relation to living and functioning in their many roles, has changed my way of working with people — probably forever.
Further development of the programme and of the role of the Community Mother is possible, though within the present structures there is a danger that it could become a mere extension of the health services, with the Community Mother as a low-waged employee, losing voluntary status, altering motivation and reducing their effectiveness as change agents, becoming as Gill Walt concludes about Community Health Workers in many countries, ‘just another pair of hands’ rather than the change agents they were claimed to be.
The education and training of Health Care workers should include at least the possibility of working in partnership with people rather than for people, so that the experience of unlearning, deroling and relearning through which the family development nurses had to go in order to work effectively in this way with people, can be avoided.
A healthy future in village hands
In the Third World's most isolated region — the South Pacific — an innovative organisation is tackling serious health problems with a simple outreach programme…and getting extraordinary results.
The Solomon Islands Development Trust (SIDT) is an independent, indigenous organisation which has attracted world-wide interest throughout the last decade by turning conventional development on its head with a simple premise; that the villager is the nation's most valuable resource.
This makes good sense considering that 85% of the Solomon's 331,000 people live in almost 6,000 villages scattered over more than 100 islands and 60,000 sq.
kms of Pacific Ocean.
These villages lie way beyond the reach of limited government services, which were shown to be in crisis last year when the island group was added to the United Nations' list of Least Developed Countries (LDCs).
From SIDT's standpoint, official indicators do not count for much.
Its 11-year success story is based on ‘people before profit’, and reclaiming knowledge as the most powerful development tool of all.
SIDT's 75 four-member mobile teams put this philosophy into action throughout the year  with village-level workshops in all seven regions.
In just over a decade, their ambitious goal to reach every village in the islands is close to being realised with more than 4,300 workshops covering a wide range of development issues.
Mobile teams are central to SIDT's outreach programme, but are not ‘city cousins’ preaching a party line.
They are young people from each area who speak in the local language about important development issues, facilitate discussions and encourage villagers to come to their own conclusions through a series of interactive exercises.
1993 marks the start of an ambitious new preventative health care programme which aims to stem the spread of malaria and AIDS, and SIDT is pinning its hopes for a healthy future on the villagers, whose only option is preventative health care.
Martina Ului, SIDT's Women's Programme Director, draws links between the Solomon Islands and the experience of other Third World countries
Villagers have fallen into the role of waiting for the nurse to cure their sicknesses, the agricultural extension worker to apply the latest gardening technique and government officers to inform them on political developments.
SIDT aims to reclaim the wealth of traditional wisdom which villagers have been encouraged to forget.
SIDT's initial start-up funding and training support came from the Foundation for the Peoples of the South Pacific (FSP) and for the last four  years, the UK Foundation (FSP/UK), based in Edinburgh, has been raising money for SIDT throughout Europe.
Today, FSP/UK, an independent member of a network which includes six South Pacific countries, Australia, Canada and the United States, is committed to finding funds for the Malaria/AIDS programme.
The programme will be based on two-day village workshops, which are initiated with an invitation by the community to SIDT's local Field Officer.
Once the mobile team is put in contact with the village elders and a date agreed, the village is informed and encouraged to put a priority on attending.
Like all other SIDT workshops, design will be based on SIDT's range of interactive exercises, including the Development Wheel, Village Quality of Life Index and Past Now Future.
These exercises have met with acclaim worldwide for their ability to help villagers look at their lives critically and constructively with minimal input from the workshop leader.
The Development Wheel is a circular chart divided into three sections; personal well-being, communal well-being and material well-being.
Responses to each category — which individuals shade to the extent they see a factor, such as clean water, sanitation, good food, existing — enable them to understand what areas of life are healthy and which are causing  health problems.
If one section is more balanced than another, the wheel becomes unbalanced and cannot turn effectively.
The Past Now Future exercise assists villagers to look more deeply into the problems they are facing and asks them, as a group, to look along the  three time frames at ten agreed areas.
Each area is reviewed separately for the period when the adults were children, life today and how that same area of life will be when the children of the village become adults.
By shading in charts, the villagers visually appreciate which areas of life seem to be growing well and which are already becoming problematic or will become difficult in the near future.
Like the Development Wheel and Village Quality of Life Index, Past Now Future summarises the village's discussion, taking each person outside his or her immediate situation to consider the history of the village in a development context.
These methods eliminate the need for lecturing, as direct participation enables the villagers to focus debate and come to their own conclusions.
The day usually ends with practical work which, in the case of malaria, may be a survey of the areas where mosquitoes are found and deciding on action, for example, drainage and grass-brushing.
The second day is a review, where the group decides whether the problem is a result of manageable causes, such as lack of information or the way village work is organised.
The mobile teams often help establish a village health committee, which will continue the information drive through the distribution of KOMIKs, a comic-strip devised and produced by SIDT.
KOMIKs were developed as a result of the work of SIDT's SEI! theatre group, which performs theme-based dramatisations of issues being discussed in workshops.
To date, over 50,000 KOMIKs, written in Pidgin English, have been distributed, helping to reinforce understanding of health issues, village health practices and local mobilisation.
The work of the mobile teams is purely facilitation and although local health workers are kept informed of the team's work, the village takes responsibility for the next step.
Luckily, basic preventative measures and healthy lifestyles are within the reach of even the most impoverished Solomon Islander who, in the case of malaria, can greatly reduce chances of possible infection with a combination of fixing drainage, making or buying mosquito nets and learning more about how the disease works.
The AIDS/Malaria Preventative Care Campaign will run from 1993 till the end of 1994 and is the theme of SIDT's next LINK, a bi-monthly magazine which provides an alternative view on important development issues.
The interface between the health centre and the community
Introduction
The legacy of apartheid has left scars on the fabric of the South African society and these are particularly evident in its unequal and fragmented health services.
During the years of anti-apartheid struggle, donor funded non-governmental organisations (NGOs) have tried to provide health services which are accountable to oppressed communities and responsive to people's basic primary health care needs in the most deprived areas.
Now that South Africa has entered a stage of transition to a political democracy, these NGO health services remain isolated pockets, but some of them are looked upon as possible models for health care in a future dispensation.
But how different and progressive are these NGO-managed health centres?
To what extent are their services community responsive and user friendly?
This article tells the story of a community health centre which is committed to the principle of self-evaluation by its own staff and by village health workers who are seen as the interface between the health centre and the community.
Context
The Ithusheng Community Association was founded more than 10 years ago by well-known South African physician and political activist Dr Mamphela Ramphele, when she was banished to the rural village of Lenyenye in one of the so-called black homelands in the North Eastern Transvaal.
From the outset the association adopted a holistic approach to health and development, the programme that they established included child care facilities, nutrition programmes, income-generating cooperatives, literacy and education programmes and a health centre which provides both curative and preventive and promotive care.
The health centre is staffed by Ms Mankuba Ramalepe, a nurse practitioner and a small number of nurses.
A number of village health workers (VHWs) link villages scattered over a 30 mile radius to the health centre.
The village health workers are recruited from the community and trained by the health centre staff.
They are mostly women with little formal education who render basic primary health care to people in their villages.
Self-evaluation
We have been involved at Ithusheng as consultants over the last three years.
Our main concern has been to promote the concept of self-evaluation as a tool for management and improvement of services.
During our first visit in October 1990, health centre staff and VHWs identified and evaluated their priority goals.
A nine step self-evaluation model was developed and implemented (Van der Walt et al , 1990).
As a result of the first evaluation special attention was given to the development of more participatory methods of health education.
It was also decided to involve the VHWs more directly in the health centre.
Nine months later, in July 1991, we facilitated a second self-evaluation process during which VHWs had the opportunity to evaluate the newly-developed health education programme at the well baby clinic of the health centre.
It was a qualitative evaluation and its main focus was to assess the quality of communication between staff and parents at the health centre.
VHWs were trained to observe interactions in the different rooms of the health centre.
They focused on two questions: ‘What works well?’ and ‘What needs improvement?’
Another group of VHWs had to act as ‘friends’ to mothers.
Each VHW accompanied a mother on her journey through the health centre in order to feel how the mother experienced the activities at the centre.
Just before the mother left the centre the VHW asked her how she felt about the visit.
All answers had to be remembered in the mothers' own words.
After their observations the VHWs worked in small groups to collate their observations and findings.
Then followed a report back session to the clinic staff.
One of the mothers had said ‘I felt happy because today is my first visit to this clinic.
I have seen that you care very much for us….’
There were many practical recommendations on how the service could be improved.
For instance, there was poor communication with mothers in the weighing room because the nurses were so occupied with the recording of weights that they took no time to explain these to the mothers.
As a result of this observation, the clinic manager decided to train VHWs to weigh children, to interpret the chart and to teach mothers about the charts (Van der Walt et al , 1991).
Discussion
Health centres are extremely hierarchical in nature.
This heritage comes from a colonial model of top-down health care where the doctor, the matron and the administrator head three parallel hierarchies staffed by ranks of nurses and clerks.
Patients are at the bottom of the pecking order and have very little say in the running of services.
In South Africa, some NGO's have attempted to build community responsiveness, if not accountability into their services.
In a society where community factions are at war with  each other this process is extremely complex and riddled with failed attempts.
It remains difficult for health professionals (even within NGOs) to be open to criticism from members of the public.
At Ithusheng, ‘lay health workers’ have shown that they are capable of evaluating the work of health professionals sensitively and competently.
VHWs experienced the process as empowering.
‘We now know how to observe.
We could even observe other clinics to see how they work.’
When given the scope and the opportunity, VHWs, as elected representatives of their villages, could make a contribution to the way in which the health centre is managed.
From Our Correspondent
Primary health care implementation: experiences from South Africa
ABSTRACT This paper has two main purposes.
The first is to try and bring out some perceptions of the problems of Primary Health Care implementation in South Africa and, in particular, the Apartheid System's impact on implementation.
The second is, in view of the current and apparent future changes in the country, to assess whether insights from other countries in the neighbourhood could offer any lessons.
It is hoped that the analysis and insights from these other countries (viz. Lesotho, Zimbabwe, Botswana and Nigeria) may serve to stimulate introspection from PHC enthusiasts from within South Africa, including the staff of the Health Services Development Unit (HSDU) which has been my source of inspiration.
Most of my PHC experience has been gained through HSDU.
This paper intends to kindle the light that may release the energies for directing the focus towards finding a downright practical way of influencing effectiveness and offer real hope for New South Africa (NSA).
The Hlatlolanang Health And Nutrition Education Centre will serve as a base from which learnings and insights from other countries can be experimented.
Introduction
Primary Health Care (PHC) in South Africa (SA) has proven difficult to implement.
Systems have been developed along racial and ethnic lines.
This has resulted in different messages about the same issue being given to clients of the health services, e.g. ORS: in Kangwane Banstustan they teach mothers to use one litre of water, six teaspoons of sugar and one teaspoon of salt to prepare the Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) whilst their neighbours, Gazankulu and Lebowa have different methods.
The communities served however would use whatever health service facility is geographically nearer to them as long as the law permits.
As a result the poor community members get confused.
The same problem has also resulted from the use of different types of Road to Health (RTH) cards and immunisation schedules.
The roots for this were laid in colonial times and have become entrenched in  the Apartheid SA where one's race, class and place of residence are major determinants of the health care that one receives.
This, compounded by socio-economic differences, results in poorer health status for Black and rural South Africans.
Management problems due to Bantustan system
Because of the scattered patches of land with unclearly defined borders of the Bantustans, it is difficult to implement PHC effectively (see Map 1).
For instance, the community nearest to Tintswalo Hospital in Acornhoek (a Gazankulu Bantustan Hospital) falls under the jurisdiction of the Lebowa Bantustan Authority.
All government workers from the hospital need permission from the Public Service Commission (PSC) to do any follow-up work in the neighbouring village of Lebowa.
The PSC in Gazankulu also needs to negotiate with the Lebowa authorities and information has to be disseminated right up to the village authority level — the chiefs and their councils.
Health data that gets collected from the health facility using the existing system of selecting the health facilities ‘own ethnic group’ becomes totally unreliable and inadequate for budget proposals and programme planning.
There is no system of health care delivery that has not been adversely affected by this fragmentation of people and their services.
A lot of resources have been wasted.
I hope however, that as SA moves into a new era, these problems will be analysed and taken into consideration when restructuring especially because the SA National Director of Health Services, Dr Coen Slabbert, also acknowledged fragmentation as a major obstacle to PHC implementation.
Changing circumstances
Given the rapidly changing circumstances in which my organisation, the Health Services Development Unit (HSDU) works, planning anything is a very challenging exercise.
Nonetheless, motivated by the strong signs of change towards a more democratic and hopefully ultimately peaceful New South Africa it is advisable to have some plan for the future.
The danger in the present situation should be given full recognition because of the so-called Black-on-Black violence and the hardened attitudes of extreme rightwingers who seem to use the American Ku Klux Klan strategies to terrorise people.
However, this recognition is not in order to freeze into cynical inaction, in the words of John Huddleston, but rather to ensure that our thinking about the future is practical and down-to-earth as well as visionary (Huddleston, 1991).
The Health Services Development Unit
So that the reader may appreciate the real motivation behind this exercise, it is necessary to give background information on HSDU, which serves as a valuable source of most of my experience.
Background
i
South Africa is a sub-tropical country forming the apex of the African Countries.
It enjoys a wealth of mineral resources, lots of sunshine, beautiful mountains, forests, rivers and is bordered by the sea on all sides except the North.
SA's neighbouring countries are Namibia and Botswana on the west, Zimbabwe to the north and Mozambique in the East.
Lesotho is completely immersed within SA (see Map 1).
ii
The population, which was estimated at 36 million in 1990 consist of people from a wide range of different nationalities (by origin).
These were classified under the recently repealed Population Registration Act as:
1
Whites (European origin)
2
Coloureds (Mixed ancestry)
3
Asians (Asian origin)
4
Blacks (African origin)
iii
Under government legislation, Blacks were resettled from the early 1960s to what were designated Bantustans or ‘homelands’ according to ethnic groupings.
There are 10 (ten) such Bantustans in South Africa.
(see Table 1).
HSDU operates from one of these Bantustans , called Gazankulu, the Sotho and Shangaan-speaking people.
What is HSDU?
The Health Services Development Unit is a non-governmental organisation under the auspices of the University of Witwatersrand (Wits) Medical School, Johannesburg.
It serves as the rural outreach programme for the  Community Health Department and operates from within the premises of Tintswalo Hospital in the N.E. Transvaal.
HSDU will hereafter be referred to as ‘the Unit’.
The Unit was established in 1982 with a primary aim of experimenting with Primary Health Care, using strategies around:
appropriate health manpower development;
appropriate health service development; and
village development.
It has continued to grow and expand and has since established itself as a permanent base for experimentation with education in health based on Primary Health Care principles.
Figure 1 shows the Units' administrative structure.
Members of the Board of Management are appointed according to their relevance to the programme.
Rationale behind the pattern of expansion
The core programme of the Unit is the PHC Nurse Training Programme (TP)— as reflected in Fig. 1.
PHCNs are State Registered Nurses/Midwives who undertake a 1-year post-basic PHC training course after a minimum of eighteen months experience in community health.
Their core skill is clinical.
The rationable behind the development shown in Fig. 1 is that if PHCNs are to be agents of change, then they need appropriately-trained trainers to facilitate their skills development irrespective of whether they are doctors, nurses or professors.
Hence the establishment of TTP.
The same logic has been used with the rest.
Collaboration with Bantustan Health Authorities
Within the Unit at Tintswalo, the activities are run in collaboration with the Gazankulu Bantustan Health Authority.
In reality HSDU are guests to the ‘government’ of Gazankulu.
Conclusion
The history of the Unit's development has been outlined within the context of SA separate development system.
The Bantustan System has also been briefly outlined.
It will be appreciated therefore that:
Ultimately, the pattern of management applied depends on the history, culture, and social values of a country.
It also depends, inevitably, on the structure of authority (i.e. centralised, federal, decentralized) of each country's government.
(Kleczkowski,et al 1984, p. 26).
Now I would like to discuss perceptions drawn from observations made on Primary Health Care in South Africa.
Perceptions
What is Primary Health Care?
Developments studied in countries like Tanzania and China preceded the Alma Ata Declaration of the World Health Organisation (WHO) in 1978.
The conference in Alma Ata raised the level of PHC ‘fever’.
PHC is an approach to health and health care that was formulated then.
The Declaration states that the attainment of the highest possible level of health is the most important social goal.
To achieve this, countries must address socio-economic conditions.
Only by improving social and economic conditions can good health be achieved (WHO, 1978).
The principles of PHC
The PHC approach proposed at Alma Ata was set up with five principles in mind:
Equitable distribution of health care resources and adequate quality care for all.
Active community participation in decision-making.
A focus on preventive and promotive health services.
The use of appropriate (but not necessary low cost) technology, and
Addressing of socio-economic inequalities and the use of multisectoral approach (McKenzie, et al 1989).
These are the principles that influenced the Unit's philosophy and practice since its establishment.
Government PHC services
Let us look briefly at how government PHC services in South Africa match up to the principles mentioned above.
Equitable distribution of resources .
Only 12% of the health budget goes to the Bantustans, i.e. the rural areas where 40% of the population live.
As a consequence, people have to travel long distances in search of health care.
Does this mean ‘accessible’?
Preventive and promotive health services .
Development of any successful national campaign has failed, e.g. the use of ORS to prevent deaths from diarrhoea — the biggest killer of children in the developing world.
The national immunization campaign failed to achieve any commendable coverage because of the fragmentation of health services as a result of the Buntustan system.
In the Mhala District of Gazankulu where HSDU is, the coverage after the campaign in May 1990 was only 36% (Collinson Mark, 1990).
The use of the RTH (Road to Health) card also failed because there are far too many different types of cards for the different ethnic groups, e.g. the Venda/Gazankulu Lebowa/Kangwane.
RTH cards are different and yet the populations serviced overlap and use whatever service is geographically nearer.
Active community participation .
In the absence of broader political democracy, active community participation gets suppressed and distorted.
Common errors arise from authoritarian implementation.
Between 1982 and 1983, community members built impressions of toilets — superstructures with no holes inside so that community participation ‘pushers’ could see that the toilets are there (Buch et al 1984).
The use of appropriate technology .
Good technology has gained a bad name.
Whatever was tried did not succeed — ORS, litre method vs cup method.
Studies conducted by PHC Nursing (PHCN) students between 1987 and 1988 showed that villagers did not believe in ORS but would carry  the solution in the litre bottle to the clinic to ‘show’ the nurse otherwise she would not give her child muti (medicine).
Another one revealed that the villagers who did not have litre bottles in their homes also did not have the ingredients for preparation.
The deposit on an empty litre bottle is 50 cents.
How can a poor mother keep the bottle (waiting for the unknown diarrhoea episode) when she can get cabbage or tomatoes with that money?
Redressing socio-economic inequalities using multisectoral approach .
PHC calls for a ‘fundamental redistribution of wealth’ and a ‘focus on the needs of the poor’but gross inequalities continue to exist in South Africa.
Poverty and suffering has reached such levels in rural areas that the trend from mothers now is to commit suicide.
A woman with eight children committed suicide in 1989 in Athol village where HSDU has a project.
This depressive and frustrating picture is beginning to change.
It is encouraging to learn about the intentions of the Department of Health in Pretoria recently as stated by Dr Coen Slabbert, Director of Health Services (South Africa) in August 1991 at a conference in Johannesburg.
They include better co-ordination of the budgets to ensure appropriate priority determination of National PHC and manpower plans.
How the insights of people who work at the level of the ‘real’ people will be used is, however still a concern.
Also, the health budget has been increased from 6% to 11% with the hope of distributing more to ‘deserving areas’.
Experiences drawn from the Continuing Learning and Support Programme (CLP)
Training
PHCNs around the country generally undergo a one-year training course (Clinical Nursing Science, Health Assessment, Treatment and Care) and then return to their home hospitals where they work in clinics or hospital out-patients departments.
Over the years, a number of problems have emerged.
Four of these problems need to be highlighted.
Working condition in the clinic
The major points that emerge from the various observations can be summarised as:
inadequate infrastructure and resources, e.g. inadequate and deteriorating buildings; drug shortage and poor supplies;
inadequate staffing and consequently long hours of working;
poorly trained staff;
isolation, poor communication and referral systems; and
fragmentation of communities and of health services.
All of these make the work of the PHCN exceedingly difficult especially in relation to delivering comprehensive PHC.
Deterioration of skills
Experience has shown that it is not enough to train PHCNs for a year and then send to isolated rural clinics.
Obviously their skills (especially clinical) will deteriorate over time.
This has also been confirmed during seminars we have conducted.
PHCNs in their role of providing clinical care at the clinics need to be  clinically competent.
Before concentrating on the important preventive and promotive aspects of PHC, PHCNs must be able to deliver good curative care or else their credibility will be in doubt.
There are a number of ways of overcoming this problem of deteriorating skills.
i
PHCNs need to be equipped during their initial training with the ability and the desire to continue learning.
ii
Structures also need to be set up to facilitate their continued learning.
Relationship to doctors
In South Africa, PHCNs as a new cadre of workers face difficulties in creating a niche for themselves.
They are often seen as ‘mini’ doctors or as threats to doctors.
In fact they are neither.
Their skills in running clinics and providing comprehensive PHC is far broader than just ‘mini’ doctors.
Very few doctors, if any, wish to work in rural clinics, anyway.
Doctors need to recognise PHCNs as valuable additions to the health team and to aid in upgrading their clinical skills.
Indeed, some of the doctors have recognised their value to the extend that they have created problems of rejection by fellow nursing colleagues.
These doctors tend to look upon the PHCNs as people they could consult with and give a cold shoulder to the rest of the nurses.
Thus, the relationship between doctors, PHCNs and other nurses needs to be continually evaluated.
Relationship to nurses
The value of trained PHCNs is recognised and greatly acknowledged in some areas of South Africa.
In yet other areas, whilst their skills are recognised they are not always acknowledged.
Yet in some areas still, their skills are not appreciated; they can be seen as trouble-makers who regard doctor as fellow colleagues instead of seeing them as bosses who are there to give orders.
They are, at times, not appropriately utilized and promotion in certain areas is retarded.
On the one hand PHCNs should not adopt a superior attitude and thus alienate other nurses.
These issues should be discussed during their training.
On the other hand PHCNs need to be encouraged and used effectively.
Finally their need for continued learning need to be acknowledged and provided for.
In the light of the above problems of attitudinal and technical support in the environment where the most highly trained member of the health team is rejected by colleagues but appreciated very much by the community members (Robertson, 1988), would it be realistic for her/him to support  and supervise another category of health worker based in the community (VHW/TBA)?
I believe that if clinic services are backed up by appropriate systems to support, initiatives of PHC implementation based in the community may register measurable impacts even within the constraints of a declining economy.
We have an advantage in that we can learn from other countries.
Problems and lessons for a new South Africa based on experiences from other African countries
Accessibility of communities/health services
We have noted just how difficult it is to implement PHC effectively because of administrative inaccessibility of the relevant populations whilst geographically the communities using the health facility may be very close.
We only have to look at Tintswalo Hospital (Gazankulu) and more than three surrounding villages that fall under the jurisdiction of Lebowa Authority for evidence of this inaccessibility.
The same goes for St Rita's Hospital of Lebowa with the surrounding villages of Kwandebele.
Lesotho, as an effort to strengthen health management in the country has divided the region into manageable Health Service Areas (HSA).
Each HSA has a hospital and some clinics (others also have health centres depending on the size of the population) around it, which services the catchment area that is geographically nearer to it than the other health services.
There are seven private hospitals in Lesotho belonging to different organisations/churches.
These also fall under the same HSA system and serve as referral hospitals for the defined area.
The DMO at each hospital, private or government, is responsible for the defined area.
A similar system exists in Malawi.
Though the country is still struggling with major economic constraints there is some evidence of improved efficiency in health care delivery since its  establishment in 1986.
Immunisation coverage has increased and admissions due to diarrhoeal diseases have decreased (UNICEF 1988).
It would be helpful to consider what Dr Slabbert said at the conference in Johannesburg on August 2, 1991, namely that the Department of National Health has the capacity to deal with major health problems.
It was in the process of being restructured.
Dr Slabbert drew ten points on the direction that the Department of National Health is focusing on.
These are listed below as:
a
The National Health Policy Act: to be implemented by all role players in health.
However, fragmentation was still a problem (a result of the separate development system.
The constitution still stands and nothing can be done until it is changed.
In this constitution, there are 14 departments of health).
b
The formula for funding:
will use the health status; and
the population served when focusing on basic resources.
(Note that this requires a very good and efficient health information system)
c
A model for administration will be set up.
d
Provision of funds for PHC.
e
Access to all health services as opposed to segregated health services as is still the case.
f
Formulation of a framework for privatisation-deregulation, discussing national scheme for financing health services.
g
Development of indicators for evaluation.
h
Community-based training.
i
Devolution of all PHC services to local authorities.
j
Research.
He further indicated how the Department hopes to go about restructuring.
Relevant points to consider are that:
11.2% of State Budget is allocated to health care;
54% of resources are spent on private sector;
South Africa is 28th in the World GDP table according to WHO;
56% of doctors are in private practice;
63% G.P. specialists are in private practice;
there are 59,000 state registered nurses, and 60,000 enrolled nurses;
there was a lack of PHC nurses;
there are 1.9 beds/1000 whereas the norm is 3/1000;
there are 120,600 clinics;
the sum of R200,000,000 (40,000,000.
Pounds) has been budgeted to subsidize local authorities; and
there are 14 nursing departments in the universities.
The focus on fragmentation as a problem suggested that it will be focused on in some detail.
Human Resources Development in Health
The Primary Health Care/Family Nurse Practitioners/Medical Assistants .
The PHCN is the latest established and recognised cadre of health worker in SA.
It is almost ten years since they have been in existence.
However the problems they are confronted with suppress their capability to be effective to a significant degree.
There are already about 20 PHCN training schools in SA and most people acknowledge that this is an essential addition to the health service.
The problem lies with lack of appropriate systems of support that will include all relevant role players in health promotion.
At present, the regional and district health authorities do not know what package of skills the PHCN goes into the community with.
As a result their supervisors feel threatened and do not know what new skills to supervise them on.
The Family Nurse Practitioner (FNP) programme has been suspended in Botswana, and in Lesotho it was threatened.
The FNP is synonymous to PHCN.
The District Management Improvement (DMI) programme established in 1986 in Lesotho (and 1988 in Botswana) actually managed to revive this programme and the value of FNPs in PHC is only beginning to be realised.
The value of Medical Assistants (MAs) in other African countries like Tanzania and Ghana has been acknowledged.
In Nigeria they are called Medical Extension Officers as they feel that they are not assistants as such but great contributors to health care.
The Village Health Worker (VHW) /Community Health Worker (CHW) Family Welfare Educator (FWE).
The evaluation of CHW programmes in many countries suggest that there are a lot of problems in this area which are compounded by the socio-economic conditions in our countries.
There are doubts now as to whether these should be continued.
This area is very sensitive.
The FWEs in Botswana got distracted from their goal as the programme developed and attracted the desires of the local authorities.
(Walt, 1988) They ended up being ‘just another pair of hands’ to the nursing services, distributing contraceptives and following up defaulters for tuberculosis and family planning.
Once they become salaried members of a government's service, more problems arose from the economic point of view.
They would automatically be included in the conditions of service including wearing of uniforms and opportunities for promotion.
How we develop and support the village-based systems is an issue to look into critically.
I have cited but one country, but there are many other examples.
As SA moves towards becoming part of the bigger globe, we need to pause and reflect — learn from experiences of other countries.
Health management Information System (HIS).
For decades our programmes have not shown any effect because of faulty ways of collecting information.
In some countries HIS have been developed as part of strengthening health management (SHM) moves.
This is an essential system for any type of service but is even more important in PHC for facilitating equitable resource distribution.
In Zimbabwe, a good HIS has contributed to the establishment of training needs for relevant personnel and to the ability to set up priorities in implementation.
The Department of National Health intends allocating resources according to needs — health status and population size.
It is very important that we look at this as soon as possible.
Insights for a new South Africa
The impression about the DMI programme, the rethinking about the CWH concept, and the Botswana experience, the PHCN, FNP or Medical Assistant programme in all the countries demand that our planning of PHC programmes be very cautious, monitoring be vigorous, and evaluation critical and regular.
We have great opportunities to use these insights from  other countries to our benefit.
I hope the political will may be mobilized ultimately.
Zimbabwe's merger of roles of people working at village level sounds ideal for avoiding confusion and duplication in the villages.
Nigeria seems to warn us that where the political climate is uncertain, we need to be very flexible and cautious with our implementation strategies.
The detention of COWAN's president serves as a lesson especially because we had similar experiences with Brooklyn Village in Acornhoek, between 1989 and 1990.
Conclusion
In this paper, PHC implementation in the Apartheid South Africa has been analysed.
The problem of fragmentation continues to hinder progress in most development work in the bantustans .
This is attributed to the ‘own affairs’ constitution of the government which still stands even today.
The ethnic borders remain a major constraint and not until they have been done away with can we be effective.
The question of equity can be better addressed in the absence of administrative border constraints.
Duplication will be minimized and resources more cost-effectively utilized.
It is hoped that insights from other countries can offer lessons for a New South Africa.
The Hlatlolanang Health & Social Service Centre in Sekhukhuneland will serve as a base from which these learnings can be experimented.
This Hlalolanang initiative will be described in a later publication.
In the meantime, the country is definitely changing: there is no time to lose and the stage is set.
News
Health Magazines
Information and articles in recent issues of international health magazines of relevance to community workers and community workers include the following:
Action on Health Information
Implementing a useful health information system is one of the most difficult aspects of managing primary health care.
The aims and scope of such information systems are changing and so are the methods being used.
In this issue of Health Action we highlight some of the challenges that arise in the collection and use of information and some of the experiences of people who are trying to meet those challenges.
Most health information systems were originally designed to support decision-making at national level.
Now systems are being refocused and designed to support decision-making and activities at all levels of the district health system, including the community level.
We often justify the fact that routinely-collected information is seldom used by saying that  it is unreliable.
At present, many health workers do not make use of the information that can take up to 60 per cent of their time to record on forms and in registers.
But if we improve our system, we can use it.
One important principle is that information is only valuable if it is used to inform decisions and actions that positively influence health.
The importance of information is the use we make of it.
‘Does data mean decision?’ on pages 6 and 7 is an example from Tanzania, where managers collected information and then checked how it was being used to make decisions.
Many health workers have not been well prepared to use information during their basic training, and others have lost those skills through lack of practice.
Primary health care managers have the task of ensuring that their health information systems produce relevant information.
This often involves in-service training for workers so that they can acquire the skills necessary to collect and use information well.
‘Making information work’ on page 10 tells of a success story in disease surveillance in two districts in India: the key seems to be the feedback of collected information to workers.
Other districts in India are adopting the approach and there are surely lessons for a wider audience.
New approaches
Complementary methods of gathering information — small surveys, intermittent data collection and informal investigations — are being introduced and examples of these new approaches are included in this issue.
The emphasis on health, as well as disease, leads primary health care managers to liaise with other sectors whose work influences health and to ensure community involvement in the collection and use of data.
This participation is demonstrated in several articles, including ‘Combating inequality’ on page 11, which describes how the involvement of local communities in community mapping in the West Bank and Gaza Strip has been an essential part of the process.
‘A system for learning’ on pages 4 and 5 looks at how a participatory method of information collection is working for a rural water and sanitation hygiene education programme in Ecuador.
And ‘A picture of health’ on page 9 describes census mapping in India and body mapping in Zimbabwe.
The methods we have covered do not represent all of those now being used, but they open up the possibilities of new approaches, some of which should become common tools of primary health care in the decade ahead.
Innovations in this area could lead to a positive flow of information from developing countries to the North.
In their efforts to make their health systems more responsive to the needs of their populations, health information systems in the North have much to learn from systems being developed in Asia, Latin America and Africa.
What information is needed?
Managers need information on population size and characteristics, vital statistics, finances, personnel and facilities.
They also need information on disadvantaged groups, and, therefore, on socio-economic status, on the work of other sectors that contribute to health and on structures that promote community involvement.
Although it may not always be possible or necessary to quantify these factors, information can and should be collected about all of them.
Much of this information can be acquired by health workers, supervisors and managers in their work.
Extracted from Action on Health Information , Special Issue of Health Action , available from AHRTAG,.
Health Action also includes details of useful resources including publications and training courses.
Aids Action
This is the international newsletter on AIDS prevention and control, published worldwide by AHRTAG in five language editions.
Issue 19 (December 1992) includes articles on Training, Working with Community Leaders, Infection Prevention for Carers as well as a Resources Guide.
English language edition available from the AHRTAG address above.
World Health
The magazine of the World Health Organisation, appearing bimonthly.
Recent issues include special issues on Water and on Nursing Care .
Each  issue contains a series of relevant articles from all parts of the world.
Details from World Health Magazine, WHO,.
PLAN expands its operations in Africa
PLAN International, a long-term development organisation which spent over £90 million on integrated projects in the developing world last year, is expanding its operations into Uganda, Tanzania and Ghana in 1993, bringing PLAN's programme countries to a total of 28.
PLAN has agreed with the Ugandan Government to begin its operations in the Luwero district, an area which was particularly devastated by the civil war which ended in 1986.
Wendy Crane, PLAN's Area Manager, commented: ‘While the area is fertile and receives plentiful rain, the infrastructure is almost completely destroyed, social services minimal, and economic opportunities lacking.
A condition heavily testing the social fabric in this area is the impact of AIDS; more than half of the children between 0–13 years have lost both their parents and are in need of assistance.
PLAN will be supporting the government's policy to integrate these children into existing family units rather than absorb them into separate institutions.’
Although many countries satisfy PLAN's  eligibility criteria, Tanzania ranks extremely high in terms of having one of the lowest per capita GNPs, low life expectancy, low primary school enrollment rates.
PLAN has now selected two urban slum areas in Dar es Salaam as the initial programme sites.
Needs cut across all sectors.
Basic services such as water supply, sanitation, waste disposal, transport, housing, health facilities, schools and economic opportunities are all seriously lacking.
Determining priorities among these needs will be left to the local target population.
In Ghana 46% of the population are under sixteen years of age which brings with it associated social problems.
PLAN in conjunction with other NGOs is hoping to work with the large number of street children in Accra.
In addition, PLAN is opening more field offices in Nepal, Zimbabwe, and the Dominican Republic, to extend its work in those countries.
PLAN now supports more than 2,000 integrated development projects in over 90 field offices in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Far East and the Caribbean.
Several of the projects are joint-funded by the Overseas Development Administration.
For further details, contact: Karen Garvin, PLAN International,
Nicaragua Health Fund
As part of Central America Week which started on 21 March, the Nicaragua Health Fund invited Enriqueta Ramirez to share her experience of community-based health education work with people in the U.K. She toured England and Scotland, meeting health activists to discuss community  care and the problems of underfunding and commercialisation of Nicaragua's health service.
Born in the Dominican Republic, Enriqueta left for Nicaragua in 1980 with a group of women inspired by the revolutionary programme of the Sandinistas.
They joined the National Literacy Campaign, an enormously successful initiative, which achieved a dramatic increase in literacy rates.
During the Contra war, Enriqueta ran literacy classes in some of the most conflict-torn areas of the country.
In 1986, she moved to Matagalpa, and helped to set up projects with women whose menfolk were killed in the war.
She went on to found Grupo Venancia, which aims to raise awareness about gender inequalities through workshops in health, education and the environment.
Embarking on innovative work exploring the relationship between the abuse of the earth and the oppression of women, the project has initiated a reafforestation programme in Waslala, a small town in Northern Nicaragua.
Living in an area subject to continuing violence and disruption involving bands of discontented former Contras, Enriqueta comes with first hand knowledge of post-war Nicaragua.
Working with the Church and the community, she has been involved in reconciliation work aiming to address the trauma of conflict and poverty.
The Nicaragua Health Fund and Central America Human Rights Committee have joined forces to send a study tour to Nicaragua and Guatemala in August 1993.
Spending ten days in each country participants will have the opportunity to learn about community based health initiatives in Central America.
The tour presents a unique opportunity to meet those involved in primary and preventative health care, community development and popular education in two very different Central American countries.
Nicaragua's health system was once described by the World Health Organisation as a ‘model organisation in Latin America’, but it is now suffering the effects of austerity measures imposed by the country's government.
Hospitals, clinics and Health Posts are underfunded and are struggling to meet the needs of ordinary people.
The spirit of resistance remains strong and community activists, nongovernmental organisations and health unions are fighting to defend Nicaragua's achievements in health.
In Guatemala, grass roots organisations are battling against the highest rates of infant mortality, malnutrition and illiteracy in Central America.
UNICEF figures show that 66 percent of the population have no access to health care.
A key element of the work of community health workers centres around educational and organisational activities as to the causes of ill-health.
This is seen as threatening in a country where repression and war are every day facts of life and their work is often dangerous.
For further details : contact Hazel Plunkett at NHF or Sarah Penny at CAHRC,.
The Nicaragua Health Fund Newsletter is available from the same address.
European Colloquy on Gypsies in the Locality
Mayors, local and regional administrators, representatives of gypsy associations, directors of cultural institutions and researchers from western, central and eastern Europe — 110 people in all — attended the European Colloquy on Gypsies in the Locality, organised in Liptovský-Mikuláš (Czechoslovakia) from 15 to 17 October 1992 by the CLRAE, in cooperation with the town of Liptovský-Mikuláš.
The participants discussed the extremely difficult situation of Rom/gypsies in Europe and what might be done to improve it.
They unanimously agreed that the scale and gravity of the situation calls for new and innovating policies.
The conclusions of the colloquy express the need for a greatly reinforced gypsy participation, reciprocal information between localities through exchanges and contacts, and general information aimed at correcting misconceived notions about Rom/gypsies and ‘decrystallising’ stereotypes.
The importance of local and regional authorities as privileged partners was emphasised, and consultation between Rom/gypsies and these authorities considered essential for better communication and relations between communities.
The participants asked the CLRAE to:
create a network of towns chosen from those most concerned by the hosting of gypsy communities;
publish a series of case studies culled from among the members of the network;
adapt and reactivate Resolution 125 (1981) of the CLRAE on the role and responsibility of local and regional authorities in regard to the cultural and social problems of populations of nomadic origin.
The participants expressed the wish that this action be carried out in cooperation with other Council of Europe bodies, such as the Council for Cultural Co-operation, the European Committee on Migration, the Directorate of Human Rights and the Parliamentary Assembly.
For further information, contact : CLRAE, Secretariat, Conseil de l'Europe,.
Action on Urban Programme
A coalition of national and regional bodies servicing networks of community and voluntary sector groups has been formed to respond to the phasing out of the Urban Programme.
At present the coalition includes Association of Community Technical Aid Centres, British Association of Settlements and Social Action Centres, Community Development Foundation, Community Enterprise U.K., Community Matters, Standing Conference for Community Development, London Voluntary Services Council, National Association of Councils for Voluntary Service, National Council for Voluntary Organisations and Sia.
The coalition has condemned the last minute scrapping of UP and has called for the cuts to be reversed for 1993–94.
Furthermore, a meeting is being sought with Michael Howard, Secretary of State for the Environment, to discuss the impacts to local communities and to raise longer term issues about urban regeneration policy.
In the meantime voluntary organisations and community groups are urged to work together locally and regionally to coordinate information gathering and analysis through existing networks and development agencies (e.g. CVSs, NCVO, associations, federations, church bodies or other).
Please send any information to NCVO for circulation to the coalition members for wider dissemination.
Action points for the campaign include the following:
Identify UP projects that will end as of 1993–94 and any planned projects which may not now go ahead.
Identify any joint or linked funding arrangements that will be adversely affected by the cuts (e.g. ESF, private sector, or partnership projects).
Contact your local authority to determine what their plans are and press for a coherent strategy that includes maintaining community and voluntary sector initiatives.
Discuss the importance of the UP to urban and inner cities community development initiatives with your MP and any other MP or Peer that you may have contact with and ask them to raise these issues with government.
Write letters and articles to the media to raise the profile of particular kinds of projects that will be affected by the cuts.
Key trends in communities and community development
A recent report from CDF examines the major national issues which have affected community activity in the U.K. in 1992.
Key points are:
The report considers key national issues under the headings of community regeneration and social and community care.
A local perspective is provided in the regional reports.
There is increased acceptance of the ‘community sector’ yet the size of the sector is still unknown.
Being uncounted, the value of unpaid work in society cannot be estimated.
This marginalises community activity and leaves the ‘professionalised’ voluntary sector to monopolise available resources.
The most serious impact on the community sector has been cuts in local authority spending — the largest source of revenue for most local organisations.
Priority to front-line services may mean the ending of support for community groups in some areas.
Furthermore, the move to tight service contracts rather than more flexible core funding grants will impinge on the security and flexibility of small local organisations.
The community sector, like the private sector, requires stable conditions to work effectively.
There have been many recent changes in government intervention programmes causing damaging uncertainty.
More comprehensive programmes, flexibly organised and stable from year to year, are required.
The intrinsic relationship between the local sector and its communities, its flexibility and ability to respond quickly to encompass new needs, makes the sector even more vital in times of recession.
In addition, because the greater part of resources available to the sector is the freely given time of local people, it is better suited to survival than many larger organisations which are more dependent on cash funding.
The current local government system is highly centralised and unsuited to the wider distribution of power featured in the Maastricht Treaty.
The Local Government Commission is working to consider appropriate new structures in consultation with local communities.
It has, however, yet to establish its credentials in understanding the views and conflicting perspectives of local communities.
National policies on communities and the voluntary sector recognise the contribution of small, local organisations although a more widespread and sophisticated understanding is still required.
Expansion of the Citizen's Charter still concentrates on individual consumers rather than the potential of user groups.
Other measures show little commitment by government but provide opportunities for flexible provision by the community sector.
Legislation such as the Charities Act 1992 provides a welcome focus on the achievements of the voluntary and community sectors.
This must be matched by greater resources for research and development in this area.
The Urban Programme was ended and the third round of City Challenge was frozen.
It remains to be seen whether it will prove to have been a short lived experiment or the basis for UK urban policy.
Assessment shows that the rhetoric of community involvement did not stand up to examination in the way that bids were compiled.
There was also no correlation between those bids which showed best practice and those which were successful.
Housing Corporation strategy now sets performance indicators relating to participation.
This provides a major impetus for the involvement of tenants in the management of their homes.
However, the removal of housing management from local government may risk destroying a principal interface between local government and much of the public.
Communities which suffer most from crime are often the most disadvantaged in the first place.
No one group can deal with the issue alone — a community development approach is required to bring together communities and other agencies, including the police.
Two important initiatives in community economic development have been the National Association of Development Trusts for England and  Wales and also an investigation into the strategic needs of community enterprises called Investing in Community Enterprise.
Professionals in fields as diverse as housing, economic development, planning and crime prevention across the voluntary, public and commercial sectors are training in ‘community practice’.
One in five people in Britain are involved in an environmental organisation.
A number of initiatives have been undertaken to raise local awareness about environmental issues.
As a result many new community organisations are expected to be established.
The opening of the Prince of Wales Institute for Architecture adds weight to the need for community involvement in urban design and to resource such involvement.
British transport policy continues to emphasise mobility rather than accessibility.
This removes the emphasis from public transport, the role this plays in employment and the fostering of economic and social development.
Many health education campaigns are still greeted with apathy.
This is because while they may recognise the contribution everyone has to make in improving the nation's health — there is still not a mechanism for involving the different groups, agencies and local communities.
The link between HIV education and communities has strengthened.
Resources, however, have increasingly been directed away from community-based HIV prevention towards mass media campaigning.
There is growing awareness that much existing mainstream provision is irrelevant to black and Asian communities.
The Children Act 1989 and the government's ratification in December 1991 of the UN Convention of the Rights of the Child have major implication for work with children.
The challenge for many agencies is how they can make use of children's knowledge and needs when they plan community resources such as play areas and walkways.
From April 1993 social services and social work departments take responsibility for managing community care.
CDF has identified six key points for a community development approach which has implications for policy formation and the training of social service staff.
Further information from : Iris Steen,.
The Gulbenkian Foundation: Help Needed!
David Thomas is writing an account of the activities of the Gulbenkian Foundation's social welfare programme between 1964 and 1990.
If you received a grant from Gulbenkian or worked with them in any way, then he would be grateful to hear from you.
He would be interested in your views on Gulbenkian's influence, for good or ill, on social welfare in general, and on community development in particular .
Please send any material to David Thomas,.