

February 1992
Escaping liability or a recipe for injustice?
The new offence in the Aggravated Vehicle-Taking Bill 1991–1992 raises familiar issues associated with hastily conceived legislation.
Some deaths, injuries and serious damage have been caused by young people who take other people's cars and drive them at high speed.
The Government wishes to be seen to show special concern about these offences and their victims.
Anyone who might oppose the new legislation can readily be branded as showing indifference towards the dreadful consequences which have sometimes flowed from these offences.
Social crime prevention strategies have been urged, and situational crime prevention (in terms of better vehicle security) has been discussed with car manufacturers.
The focus here, however, will not be on these issues of politics and crime prevention.
Two characteristics of the new offence deserve special attention.
First, the new offence is committed where, during the period when the vehicle was taken, it was driven dangerously, or caused an accident, or caused damage, or sustained damage.
It is the occurrence of any one of those circumstances which makes the difference between the basic summary offence in section 12 of the Theft Act 1968, which carries a maximum of six months, and the new aggravated offence, with maxima of two years or (if death is caused) five years.
Yet no fault element at all in relation to any of the consequences need be proved.
The event which aggravates the offence might have been outside the defendant's control.
Second, the only way of avoiding this presumption of responsibility is for the defendant to prove either (a) that the driving, accident or damage occurred before he took the car, or (b) that he was neither in, on or near the vehicle when that driving, accident or damage occurred.
The Home Secretary's statement when announcing the new Bill was quite blunt about the purpose of structuring the Bill in this way.
It is that a person who takes another's car ‘can escape liability to tougher sentences only if he or she can show, on the balance of probabilities, that either the aggravating event occurred before he or she committed [the basic s. 12 offence], or that he or she was not present at the relevant time.’
So it is a question of not allowing someone who commits a summary offence to ‘escape liability’ for an indictable offence.
This formulation not only deviates from the ‘golden thread’ principle of Woolmington v. 
D.P.P. 
that the burden of proof should be placed on the prosecution.
It evinces such contempt for the principle as to use language which ignores or denies it, and offers no justification for the departure.
In the House of Commons the Government was challenged on these grounds.
The Home Secretary sought to justify placing the burden of disproof on defendants by remarking that it is ‘in common with other statutory defences of this kind’(H.C.
Deb., vol. 200, col. 627; December 9, 1991).
His Minister of State, Mr. Patten, stated that ‘there is no great principle’ of English law that burdens of proof should not be placed on the defence, and he recited examples which are familiar to readers of textbooks on criminal evidence — the Prevention of Corruption Act 1916, etc. (ibid .,
col. 635).
This brings us closer to the heart of the  problem.
The Woolmington principle was phrased as a common law principle, expressly subject to statutory exceptions.
Sadly, that has been treated as an open invitation to create statutory exceptions without the need for special justifications.
Because English law has nowhere declared the principle as a fundamental one, rather than a mere residual one (as in Woolmington ), legislators have felt free to heap burdens on defendants, the Public Order Act 1986 being a prime example in recent times (see [1987]Crim.L.R. 153).
The debate over the Aggravating Vehicle-Taking Bill is different, not only because the Bill presumes a defendant responsible for occurrences if he cannot disprove mere presence, but also because of the reasons which the Minister of State did eventually offer for this legislative formulation.
He stated that it was a response to three problems: identification, intent and witnesses (ibid .,
col. 682).
It is well known that problems of identification are acute throughout the criminal law, and intent is also hard to prove in some cases.
But surely to use these difficulties as a justification for placing the burden of disproof on the defendant is, as Ivan Lawrence M.P.
stated, ‘the stuff of which miscarriages of justice are made’(ibid .,
col. 649).
Will it be any easier for defendants to find witnesses who are prepared to come forward?
Is the potential for misidentification any less when the defence bear the burden of proof?
Do the defence have the resources to make the necessary investigations, in the face of the presumptions embodied in this Bill?
Is it not likely that some people who take cars or ride in taken cars will be convicted of the aggravated offence, and be given harsher penalties, largely as a result of these provisions on proof?
The Government has appointed a Royal Commission on Criminal Justice to examine,inter alia , ‘the effectiveness of the criminal justice system…in securing the conviction of those guilty of criminal offences and the acquittal of those who are innocent.’
Is not the approach to lawmaking found in this Bill a topic fit for the Royal Commission's attention?
The views expressed in the Editorial are those of the Editor unless otherwise indicated.
The views expressed in the material contained in the Review are not necessarily those of the Editor, the Editorial Board, the Publisher, or other Contributors.
Ethic Minorities in the Criminal Justice System
Summary : This article presents a longitudinal study of the treatment in the Criminal Justice System of Blacks, Whites and Asians in a provincial city.
The results are complex, and highlight the problems of interpreting cross sectional studies.
The study also emphasises the importance of attending to areal factors.
A survey examined experiences and attitudes in the more socially deprived areas of the city.
The differences between Blacks and Whites were fewer than have been found in other surveys, though Blacks' attitudes tended to be less favourable.
Asian experiences were significantly different, and Their attitudes were consistently more favourable.
1.
Introduction
There has been some concern, over the last 10 years, about the involvement of the ethnic minorities in Great Britain in the Criminal Justice System.
This has tended to be focussed on Afro-Caribbeans (hereinafter called Blacks) and considerable publicity has been given in the press to their over-representation in the arrest statistics collected by the Metropolitan Police District (M.P.D. i.e. London).
They comprised about 16 per cent.
of those arrested in 1987, whereas in the whole of London Blacks comprised about 5 per cent.
An analysis of early data found that Blacks were over-represented in each main offence group and each age group, whereas Asians (from the Indian sub-continent) were roughly pre-portionately represented.
Crude explanations of this over-representation are that either the police are more readily arresting Blacks than Whites for similar behaviour, or more Blacks are indulging in criminal behaviour than Whites.
However, taken over such a large area, it is undoubtedly the case that Whites have higher socio-economic status than Blacks, and since social deprivation tends to be associated with criminal behaviour it is not surprising to find Blacks are over-represented among those arrested.
A more valid comparison would be  between Black and White arrest rates of those living in the same small areas, because their living circumstances are more likely to be similar, as is their policing.
The second striking feature of published official statistics is the high proportion of black people in prison.
About 8 per cent.
of male prisoners were Black in 1985, increasing to 11 per cent.
in 1990, compared with 1 per cent.
in the population of the United Kingdom.
Once again this cannot be easily interpreted, and the two possible face-value interpretations — that Blacks are being sentenced more harshly than Whites, or the Blacks are more criminal — oversimplify the situation.
Research on this topic has been piecemeal.
There have been few detailed research studies that have examined arrest rates of those living in the same areas or sentencing in both the magistrates' courts and the Crown Court in one study.
One of the difficulties of carrying out research on this topic is the need to follow through cases from arrest onwards, as studies of what happens at one stage in the process may be misleading.
For example Landau and Nathan found, in a study of juveniles in London, that Blacks were more likely than Whites to be prosecuted by the police, rather than cautioned.
However, Farrington and Bennett, in a study in another part of London, did not confirm this result.
This would seem to demonstrate not only that studies in different areas or at different times have produced different results, but that a follow through of the cases prosecuted might have found, for example, that Blacks had a different (possibly higher) rate of ‘not guilty’ pleas, with acquittal rates which might have justified them in not accepting a caution.
There may also have been earlier differences in the decision whether to take ‘no further action’ after arrest, or indeed in the decision by the police to arrest.
Examination of sentencing in either the magistrates' courts or the Crown Court on their own may also be misleading.
Mair, for example, in his study of sentencing in West Yorkshire magistrates' courts found quite small differences between the race groups in sentences, but he did not incorporate committals to the Crown Court for sentence or for trial.
That this is important was shown by one of the authors in two studies analysing sentences in the London courts in 1983.
It emerged that in the magistrates' courts the distribution of sentences did not differ greatly between Blacks and Whites, and this was also the case in the Crown Court.
However, Blacks had significantly higher proportions committed for trial in the Crown Court, where custodial sentences are more likely.
This resulted in Blacks overall receiving proportionately more custodial sentences.
It  appeared, on examining the offences involved, that Blacks had more ‘indictable only’ offences, and also more ‘triable-either-way’offences for which they were committed for trial.
It was not possible to know from the data available whether this was the defendants' choice or magistrates declining to try them.
Three important factors emerged from this discussion, and these gave rise to a research project in which some of these problems were addressed.
In the first place, since little research had taken place outside London, we chose to investigate a provincial city.
Secondly, to try to increase the validity of inter-racial comparison we decided to compare arrest rates of Black, Asian and White males who lived in the same small areas.
Thirdly, to avoid the problems of ‘single stage’ studies, we adopted a processual approach and followed up a sample of those arrested through to final outcome.
There were considerable methodological difficulties, not all of which were overcome.
An aspect we were not able to cover was details of behaviour (of suspect and the police) leading up to the arrest.
We did, however, manage to carry out a certain amount of court observation and also to interview solicitors who dealt with some of the cases.
We were also allowed to observe a juvenile cautioning panel in its decision making, and to interview its members.
Besides this, we carried out a survey of males aged 10–35, among the general population, living in areas where more than 10 per cent.
of the non-whites lived.
The purpose of this was to compare the experience of and attitude to the police of Blacks, Asians and Whites living in roughly the same conditions.
The results will be described only briefly here.
2.
Arrest rates (Leeds study)
The population of Leeds was made up of 3 per cent.
Blacks, 4 per cent.
Asians and 93 per cent.
Whites, at the time of this research (1987).
We confined our arrest data to males aged 10–35, as this would contain the bulk of the offenders.
We found that Blacks were over-represented, although not to the same extent as in London, 6 per cent.
being Black, 3 per cent.
Asian and 91 per cent.
White.
This can also be expressed in terms of arrest rates — the numbers arrested over the six month period per 100 in the resident population.
The rates were Blacks  8.5 per cent., Asians 3.9 per cent .
and Whites 4.7 per cent.
The offences for which people were arrested did not differ greatly.
Blacks and Asians had more offences of violence than Whites, but Whites had more burglary and criminal damage.
We recorded the address of each person arrested over the six month period — a total of over 5,000 people — and, using maps, we ascertained the enumeration district or ward in which the arrestee lived.
Since we wished to compare arrest rates between people living in the same small areas, we needed to obtain population numbers for these areas.
We were able to obtain data from the 1981 census for enumeration districts (average about 150 households).
These enabled us to estimate numbers of resident males aged 11–21 and 22–35.
Where the population was too small to calculate reliable rates, enumeration districts were combined to form larger areas, in some cases whole wards.
The enumeration districts with sufficient non-whites in them for reliable rates were those with 10 per cent.
or more non-whites, so we divided all areas into those with less or more than 10 per cent.
non-white, and called these lighter and darker areas respectively.
The results had several interesting features, as shown in Table 1.
When we looked at the lighter and darker areas separately we found considerable differences.
In the lighter areas (top line, Table 1) we can see that, again, Blacks have the highest arrest rates, and the Asian rate is close to that of Whites.
The darker areas present a different picture.
In the younger group it is the Whites who have a much higher arrest rate than Blacks — 13.3 per cent.
compared with 8.9 per cent., and Asians have the lowest rate at 4.4 per cent .
In the older groups Blacks and Whites have virtually the same rate (4.4 per cent.
and 3.9 per cent.
respectively) with Asians, once again, having the lowest.
Table 2 gives a more detailed analysis, for Blacks and Whites only.
It shows, in the first two columns (younger group) how the Black arrest rates increases steadily as the areas change from over 33 per cent.
non-white to less than 2 per cent.
At the same time the White rate decreases steadily.
Three interesting questions arise: why do Blacks have higher arrest rates in the lighter areas than in the darker areas?
Why do they have higher rates than Whites in these areas?
And why do Whites have higher rates than Blacks especially among the young in the darker areas?
Part of an answer to these may be found in the fact that a personal visit (by the researchers) to the areas where the black arrestees lived revealed that these were pockets of very poor houses in large wards of predominantly good class housing.
It may also be the case that reporting by Blacks of offences against Blacks was lower in the darker areas; or that police are more inclined to ‘cuff’(i.e. not record) Black offences in these areas, in the interests of improving race relations.
The answer to the third question may lie in the socio-economic characteristics of Blacks and Whites living in these areas, which suggest we were not in fact comparing ‘like with like.’
Table 2 shows data for two characteristics — proportions living in privately rented housing and unemployment (1981 data).
The Whites had over a quarter in the darker areas (third and fourth lines of Table 2) in privately rented housing, whereas the Blacks had 10 per cent.
or less.
This suggests the Whites were a more transient, less stable population.
The unemployment rates did not differ significantly in these darker areas, being high for both groups.
It should be noted that the darker areas contained only 6 per cent.
of the white population but between 50 per cent.
and 60 per cent.
of the Blacks and Asians.
3.
Outcome of arrest
It was intended to follow up, through the records, all the Blacks and Asians who had been arrested, and a sample of the Whites.
This material was to have been obtained from files returned to the police after the completion of the case (in the courts, or otherwise).
Unfortunately, in the time period available, there was considerable shortfall due either to delays in the courts or the file having been impossible to trace for some reason.
However, we were able to obtain  details of all Crown Court cases from the Probation Service.
It seems likely that the files of cases which had ‘no further action’ or were cautioned would be returned to the police quickly, so we inferred that those cases not followed-up had been tried in the magistrates' courts.
However, we were not able to know the outcome of those that had been tried (which probably had a high proportion of not guilty pleas, this being the likely explanation for the delayed return of at least some of the files), so our data were, to this extent, incomplete.
We found among juveniles (aged 10–16) that about 8 per cent.
had ‘no further action,’ with no difference between races.
Of the remainder, significantly more Asians were cautioned (72 per cent.
Asians compared with Blacks 31 per cent.
and Whites 41 per cent.)
About half of the Blacks and Whites were tried in the magistrates' courts and one-fifth of the Asians (see Table 3).
In our sample we had details of only eight Blacks, five Asians and 43 Whites sentenced in the magistrates' courts.
As many as a third of these received a custodial sentence, but the numbers were too small to detect differences in sentencing patterns.
Blacks had significantly more tried in the Crown Court (14 per cent.
compared with 7 per cent.
of Asians and Whites).
However, the numbers were small and examination of the data showed that several of the Blacks were arrested on one day (during riots) and at least one was charged with robbery, probably with adults; this one incident could have accounted for the larger percentage of Blacks going to the Crown Court.
For adults the pattern was somewhat different.
Asians had significantly more ‘no further action,’ 15 per cent.
compared with 7 per cent.
Blacks and 9 per cent.
Whites.
Once again, the reason is unclear.
Possibly the Asians had been arrested too readily or the police thought the matter would be dealt with within the Asian community.
However, the proportions cautioned were about the same (at about 6 per cent.)
The most interesting finding was once again that  Blacks had significantly more tried in the Crown Court (39 per cent.
compared with about 30 per cent.
of the other groups.
See Table 3).
We were able to examine the records to explore the reason for this difference.
The proportion of ‘indictable only’ offences was small (about 3 per cent), about the same for each race.
The triable-either way offences were classified as ‘Summary Trial Not Available’— that is, the magistrate thought the case too serious to be dealt with in the lower courts — or ‘Defendant Elects Jury Trial.’
We found for each of the races 75 per cent.
fell into the former category and 25 per cent.
into the latter.
Thus although it is true to say more Blacks chose to be committed to the Crown Court for trial this was certainly not a complete explanation of the difference, as magistrates also committed more cases.
With regard to acquittal rates in the magistrates' courts, our data are too uncertain to draw firm conclusions as they are incomplete.
This is also true to some extent for the Crown Court cases.
The indications are, however, that in both types of court a higher proportion of Blacks pleaded ‘not guilty’ and of these a higher proportion of Blacks were acquitted.
An analysis of sentencing in the magistrates' courts and in the Crown Court (where the data were available) showed that differences between the races in sentencing were not significant.
Details are given in Table 4.
About 5 per cent.
in the magistrates courts received immediate custody, and about 40 per cent.
in the Crown Court.
4.
Observation and interviews
The collection of data from the police files formed an important part of this research, but it was thought that a look at ‘what went on’ behind the statistics might help explain any statistical differences that emerged.
The main difference between the races in the data so far discussed was that in the arrest rates of Blacks and Whites living in the same areas.
As has been mentioned, our limited resources made it impossible to examine the circumstances leading up to the  arrest which might, or might not, explain this finding, and we were also unable to interview the police on this matter.
However, with regard to the follow-up of arrests, one of the research team was able to sit in on a Juvenile Case Referral Panel, which recommended whether juveniles should be cautioned, and another member made observations in the magistrates' courts.
Lastly, interviews were carried out with panel members, and with some of the solicitors who had had black clients, to explore their perceptions.
(a) A Juvenile Case Referral Panel
A Juvenile Case Referral Panel in one police subdivision was observed in its decision making.
One member of the panel of five was black.
In 12 cases of the 23 observed there was clear indications that the child concerned was black, and three were identified as Asian by their names.
But no specific reference was made to the race of the children, nor did it appear to affect deliberations.
Thirty-nine per cent.
of the cases observed received a caution with no significant difference between races.
This appears to be a relatively low figure (The percentage for West Yorkshire was 77 per cent.
in 1987, though our figures, gleaned from police statistics, were much lower, see Table 3).
The members of the panel were interviewed.
There was unanimous agreement that race did not affect the panel's work, ‘even though some thought racial identification would prove useful for monitoring purposes.’
Our observations confirmed this: race did not seem to affect panel decision-making.
(b) Court room observations
A total of 135 cases were observed in the magistrates' courts: 46 Blacks; 7 Asians; and 82 Whites.
The majority of cases were dealt with in a routine, bureaucratic fashion and suffered at least one adjournment.
‘Harsh’ treatment was observed in only a small number of cases (18 per cent.) and was usually attributable to particular benches.
Racial discrimination was not observable, though proportionately slightly more Blacks and Asians were subject to harsh treatment.
This was also true of lenient treatment, which was less common (13 per cent.) and more randomly distributed across benches.
A ‘cocky’ demeanour, one possible explanation for harsher treatment, was only rarely observed, more often with white than black youths.
Our overriding conclusion was that racially discriminatory behaviour was not an obvious or noticeable feature of court-room interactions.
However, we thought bail and custodial remands, of which we observed few, might repay a closer look.
And we stress that the absence of noticeable discriminatory behaviour says nothing about how defendants perceived their treatment.
(c) Interviews with solicitors:
Nine solicitors were interviewed for between 20 and 50 minutes about the treatment of ethnic minority defendants.
Each had some dealings with black clients, though few had a caseload of more than 25 per cent.
black or Asian clients.
Experiences and perceptions of black clients differed, though mention was made of greater intelligence, more alienation, a greater tendency to plead not guilty, and to be ‘excitable’ or ‘cocky’in court.
Asian clients tended to be seen as less criminal, to lack credibility as witnesses, and to be industrious and family-minded.
The police were the agency criticised most in their dealings with black clients, and belief in police harassment was widespread.
Courts were generally regarded as fair, and in some cases as attempting to compensate for racial disadvantage.
However, some thought courts were very variable, and that particular courts were ‘out of touch.’
Mention was made by some of a belief that Blacks get custodial sentences more often.
The efforts of probation and social services were praised, whilst lawyers were not exempted from charges of racial prejudice.
Black and Asian clients were recognised as having special needs, resulting from.
for example, cultural differences.
Overall, though the various criminal justice agencies were seen as differentially culpable with regard to racial discrimination, racially prejudiced attitudes were thought to be widespread.
Sometimes these were regarded as the product of individuals, sometimes of institutions.
5.
Survey
The survey was carried out in Leeds to compare the three race groups — Blacks, Asians and Whites — in their attitudes to the police and their experiences of them.
We wished to compare those living in the same areas (as we did for arrest rates) and decided to exclude areas with less than 10 per cent.
non-whites.
We were thus able to control, to some extent, for socio-economic characteristics of the environment, and for the amount of policing.
The respondents in the survey cannot be regarded as representative of the general population as these areas contained only 58 per cent.
of Blacks and 55 per cent.
of Asians and even less Whites (6 per cent.) in the city.
Besides this we confined our survey to males aged 10–35, the full questionnaire being given to those aged 16–35.
The latter group contained 171 Blacks, 199 Asians and 271 Whites (totalling 641).
Only 225 boys were interviewed and their results, while interesting (and, so far as we know, possibly unique), will be mentioned only briefly.
(a) Attitude to the police
Attitude to the police was explored in several ways, the main measures being called ‘approval,’‘perception’ and ‘co-operation.’
We measured approval by asking respondents to say if they broadly agreed with several general statements about the police (e.g. , police do a good job).
We found Blacks were more disapproving than Whites, who in turn were more disapproving than Asians.
With regard to‘perception’ we asked if the police were thought to indulge in certain types of misconduct, such as using unnecessary violence.
Blacks and Whites were remarkably similar on this item, with Asians having a better perception of the police.
This was also the case when we asked about whether the police discri-minated against certain groups, two-thirds of Blacks and Whites believing this but only about one-third of Asians.
The measure of co-operation was obtained by asking if the respondent would probably report to the police an offence he had witnessed.
In this case Blacks were clearly less co-operative than Asians and Whites, who did not differ significantly.
These results, which show that Blacks and Whites are similar in some aspects of their attitude to the police, tend to differ from those in some other studies (such as the P.S.I.
Survey of Londoners) carried out on samples representative of very large areas, in which Whites will have higher proportions in the higher socio-economic groups than Blacks.
These found, in the main, that Blacks had a consistently more hostile attitude to the police.
Our most striking finding was that Asians differed consistently from Blacks, and this emphasises the need to consider these two racial groups separately.
(We cannot, of course, assume that there was no differences between Asians in different parts of the country — or, indeed, that particular events at any one time do not affect their attitude.)
(b) Experience of the police
We asked respondents whether they had been stopped (on foot or in a vehicle) or had their house searched in the last year, and whether they had been arrested in the last five years (called here, ‘stopped, etc.’)
It emerged that, if anything Whites had had more such experiences than Blacks, and Asians less than both.
Besides this, we asked about contacting the police for help.
Whites had contacted the police more than Blacks, and Asians less than both, Whites tending to be more satisfied with the result.
In relating these results to our measures of attitude to the police we found those who had been stopped etc., had a less favourable attitude to the police on all three measures.
But, besides this we found those who had not been stopped etc. at all still reflected the overall differences between races — Blacks being least favourable, Asians most favourable, with Whites being sometimes closer to Blacks and sometimes closer to Asians.
Other experiences of the police emerged from follow up questions to perception of the police.
For example, a large number (16 per cent. ) thought that the police had used unnecessary violence towards themselves, or that an acquaintance had experienced or witnessed this.
Both the Blacks and the Whites interviewed contained several people who had had some unpleasant experience of the police, though this only occasionally (for the Blacks) included a racial element.
Once again, fewer Asians had had unpleasant experiences.
(c) Other items
We investigated several other topics to see in what ways the race groups differed.
We found that the Blacks had more unemployed than Asians and Whites, and of those who were employed Whites had less in semi- and unskilled jobs.
Whites had significantly more in privately rented accommodation (confirming the census, Table 3) and had over half who had lived in their house less than three years, compared with about a quarter of Blacks and Asians; they also had more than academic qualifications.
This shows that the groups of Blacks and Whites differed in certain important respects.
We attempted to investigate, briefly, some aspect of ‘way of life’ and found Blacks and Whites had, on average, gone out just under three evenings in the previous week and Asians only one and a half times.
We also looked at their transport, destination and time they returned home, which revealed some slight differences.
Only for Whites was if found that those who went out more were likely to have been stopped.
We also talked about experiences of being victims of offences and found Blacks had significantly less, and had reported fewer of these to the police.
(d) The boys
We found that the pattern of boys' attitudes to the police were consistent with those of adults, Blacks and Whites tending to be similar, and Asians slightly more favourable than the others.
In some cases Blacks were less favourable than Whites.
For example, when asked if they would like to be a policeman 47 per cent .
of Blacks said ‘definitely not’ compared with 36 per cent.
of Whites and 23 per cent.
of Asians.
A fairly high proportion, 18 per cent.
(nearly one in five) had been stopped by the police in the street.
It is interesting to speculate whether the boys' attitudes are a result of their own experiences or are simply a reflection of the attitudes of the adults in their household.
6.
Summary and conclusions
(a) Summary
The research that has been carried out in Leeds illustrates the complexity of the data regarding the comparative involvement of Blacks and Whites in the Criminal Justice System.
With Asians the picture in Leeds appears more straightforward: they tended to be less involved at every stage.
(i)
Arrest rates .
The analysis of arrest rates (males aged 11–35) showed that in the whole city, Blacks had higher rates than Whites, but when the areas were grouped into those with less than 10 per cent.
non-white and those with more than 10 per cent.
(lighter and darker areas, respectively), it was found than in the darker areas Whites had higher arrest rates than Blacks.
These areas tended to be socially deprived, with more unemployment, more manual workers, etc.,i.e. those characteristics that tend to be associated with a high offender rate.
However, there were two big differences: Whites had more in privately rented accommodation and had lived there for a shorter time; these areas contained only 6 per cent.
of the White population in the city.
The Black households in these areas (58 per cent.
of those in the city) were evidently a more stable population, although both groups had high unemployment rates.
It is possible the low rates for Blacks were due to under-reporting by black victims of black offenders in these areas, or under-recording by the police.
The absence of these factors might also explain the higher arrest rate of blacks in the lighter areas.
(ii)
Follow-ups .
It appeared that, among the juveniles, Asians had more cautions, and among the adults Asians had more with ‘no further action.’
Apart from this, it was found that sentencing in the magistrates' courts and sentencing in the Crown Court did not differ significantly.
However, more Blacks were tried in the Crown Court where custodial sentences are more likely.
Blacks had more pleading not guilty and more acquitted than Whites.
These results are similar to a finding of M.P.D. statistics of sentencing, 1983.
This study confirms the need to carry out a follow-through of all persons arrested and not look simply at discrete ‘moments’ in the process.
(iii)
The survey .
This was confined to areas where more than half the non-white population lived, and where all the areas had more than 10 per cent.
non-white.
Comparisons between the three race groups were between those living in the same small areas i.e. in roughly the same circumstances, rather than over a whole city or London borough.
This made the differences found more meaningful.
Instead of finding Whites had more favourable attitudes to the police than Blacks, and had been stopped, etc., less (as found in the studies of larger areas), we found that on some measures Whites were similar to Blacks in their attitude and experience, though there was still a tendency for Blacks to be less favourable to the police.
Asians tended to be more favourable on every measure, and to have had less experience of stops, etc.
(b) Conclusions
Our decision to take a more detailed comparative look at the throughput of males from different ethnic backgrounds from arrest to final outcome within a provincial city would appear to be vindicated.
Though it provides no final answers to our starting questions, it demonstrates the difficulties — of methodology and interpretation — involved in comparative work of this sort, and the need for research designs to take these into account.
It also identified certain ‘moments’— decisions about charging and type of trial, for example— which would clearly benefit from closer analysis.
Finally, our research indicates that area of residence needs to be taken into account in comparing the experiences of the police of Blacks and Whites.
Overall differences, which have been found in  other studies, may be partly due to black people tending to live in areas of social deprivation.
Besides this we found that there are important differences between the Black and Asian experience of criminal justice, and that this needs to be taken into account in ethnically-based studies.
Confiscating the Literary Proceeds of Crime
Summary : Should there be specific laws aimed at depriving offender of the proceeds of books about their crimes?
If so, what form should the laws take?
Should the confiscated proceeds be applied to victims?
The problems raised by these questions are discussed by reference to English, American and Australian legislation.
In October 1966 George Blake escaped from Wormwood Scrubs prison after serving nearly five years of a 42 year sentence of imprisonment for spying for the Soviet Union.
Twenty-four years later, Pat Pottle and Michael Randle published a book entitled The Blake Escape: How We Freed George Blake and Why in which they admitted their part in the escape.
For this they received £30,000 from the publishers.
In 1989 they were charged with indictable offences relating to the escape.
In April 1990 a charging order under the Criminal Justice Act 1988 was made over the houses of Pottle and Randle to secure the payment to the Crown of a possible confiscation order under that Act.
An application by the defendants to the High Court in 1990 to discharge the order on the ground that the benefit they obtained from the publication of the book was not a benefit within the meaning of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 was unsuccessful.
In June 1991 they were acquitted on all charges and proceedings under the Criminal Justice Act 1988 were discontinued.
In the early 1970s, in New York city, one David Berkowitz terrorised residents for over a year with random shootings of young women and their friends.
He left notes after the killings signing himself ‘Son-of-Sam,’ so that the killings became known as the ‘Son-of-Sam’murders.
A story about the offender's arrest nearly doubled the daily circulation of the New York Post In response to the public interest in the crimes, a deal was struck in respect to the rights to the story and a book produced.
Berkowitz received $US75 000 for his part in the publication.
The moral revulsion engendered by the perception that the killer had also profited by his crime resulted in hurriedly enacted legislation which was designed to prevent criminals from receiving financial gain from their literary ventures.
By 1988, similar statutes, generally termed ‘anti-profit’ or ‘literary profits laws’, were enacted in 34 of the United States, most of which are modelled on the New York legislation.
In Australia, almost all jurisdictions have enacted legislation which generally allows the confiscation of the proceeds of crime.
Two states, Queensland and South Australia, have provisions in their legislation specifically directed at the confiscation of the literary proceeds of crime or, more generally, of the proceeds of criminal expression and notoriety.
The attempt by the English Crown Prosecution Service to obtain the confiscation of the benefits obtained by Randle and Pottle from the publication of their book raises a number of important questions about the nature, scope and purpose of the legislation which permits such actions.
The form of the legislation
Randle and Pottle were proceeded against under the Criminal Justice Act 1988 which contains no special provisions in relation to literary benefits.
Section 71(4) compendiously provides that ‘a person benefits from an offence if he obtains property as a result of or in connection with its commission and his benefits is the value of the property so obtained.’
The phrase ‘in connection with its commission’ was read by the court as capable of including payments received from the writing of the book, because the writing of the book was connected with the commission of the alleged offences of aiding the escape and conspiring to harbour and assist the escaper.
If this view is correct, then no special provisions are needed to bring literary benefits within the scope of the legislation.
Accordingly, other provisions of the Act relating to the assessment of benefit, charging orders burdens of proof and enforcement are also applicable.
Elsewhere, specific literary confiscation legislation takes a number of forms.
Under New York law, anyone who contracts for the story of a person accused or convicted of a crime must deposit the proceeds of the contract with a Crime Victims Compensation Board.
The board holds the funds in escrow for five years, during which it releases amounts only for attorney's fees, and in some cases, for expenses incurred in earning the literary income.
The major purpose is restitution to the victims of the offender's crime.
The Board is obliged to publicise the escrow account the balance of which is paid to the person if he or she is not convicted or at the end of the five year period.
The Queensland legislation is also contract based and permits a court, on application, to make an order that the defendant forfeit an amount equal to all or part of the proceeds received or to be received by him, or by any other person on his behalf from a contract relating to:
(a)
a depiction of the serious offence or alleged serious offence in a movie, book, newspaper, magazine, radio or television production, or a live entertainment of any kind; or
(b)
an expression of the person's thoughts, opinions or emotions regarding the serious offence or alleged serious offence of which that person has been convicted.
In contrast, the South Australian ‘notoriety for profit’ provisions do not depend upon the existence of a contract and do not provide any mechanism whereby the benefits can be re-directed to the victim of the offender's crime.
The legislation renders liable to forfeiture any benefit derived from the publication of material concerning the circumstances of the offence, from the publication of material concerning the defendant's opinions, exploits or life history (provided that the benefit was attributable in whole or in part to notoriety achieved through commission of the offence) or any benefit obtained by commercial exploitation in any other way of notoriety achieved through commission of the offence.)
Purposes of the legislation
In the United States of America, the anti-profits statutes have been seen as having two major purposes.
The first, and most obvious, is the desire to prevent the unjust enrichment of criminals by prohibiting them from exploiting their  crimes.
The second is linked with the emerging victim compensation trend.
Many United States jurisdictions require the funds due to an accused to be paid to victims, who must be advised by published notices of the availability of the funds.
The South Australian legislature introduced its legislation with the intention of deterring persons from sensationalising criminal activity.
Special confiscation orders are problematic for a number of reasons.
They have been criticised on the grounds that they may deny free speech, suppress significant literature or worthwhile criminological information, impinge upon copyright laws and have negligible effects upon those who actually profit from crime.
In the United States of America, ‘Son-of-Sam’ legislation has been unsuccessfully attacked on constitutional grounds including the vagueness of the terms of the statutes, the absence of procedural due process safeguards and the infringement of the first amendment rights of free speech.
Unjust enrichment
The prevention of unjust enrichment underlies the confiscation legislation both as a moral or ethical justification in itself and as a deterrent to further illegal activity.
The forfeiture of the literary proceeds can be seen as an application of the maxim that an offender should not benefit from his crime, the application of which has, for example, prevented murderers from collecting the proceeds of insurance for the victim's death or from inheriting under a will.
The fundamental question in these cases is whether the taking of a benefit by a person through his or her crime would be unconscionable as representing an unjust enrichment of that person.
It has been argued that the confiscation of literary proceeds is not directly analogous to, for example, killing a person for the life insurance, for the benefit derives directly from the literary activity, and only indirectly from the offence.
‘[T]he constructive trust in the insurance cases acts as a deterrent, discouraging the beneficiary who would be motivated to kill the insured by already in-place financial rewards flowing from the insured's death.
The possibility of a profit from the sale of one's crime story is, however, so speculative that it is unrealistic to suppose that one would be deterred from committing a crime by the constructive trust statute.
Second, in the insurance murder cases, the constructive trust prevents the beneficiary from directly profiting by her unlawful act.
In the crime story cases, however, the criminal technically receives her profits only from entering a lawful contract, and not be committing an unlawful act.’
The distinction between the two concepts, the commission of a crime and the production of a literary work, is a vital one, for although it is clearly desirable to deter crimes, it is not transparently obvious that we should seek to deter the production of literary works, whatever we may think of their intrinsic merits.
The focus upon the offender's unjust enrichment is also questionable for two reasons.
First, it appears that offenders may not in fact be personally enriched.
In many of the reported United States of America cases in which offenders sold or assigned their rights, the proceeds were applied in whole or in part to the payment of legal fees.
Randle and Pottle stated in their book that they were aware of the severe sentences that they might face, but ‘could, however, offset the disaster to some degree by writing up the story; this would help to defray the legal costs and provide some minimal support’ for one of their families.
Secondly, when a book or re-enactment of a crime is produced, the criminal is not the only one to benefit.
The Australian legislation, for example, does not prohibit any third party from profiting from the sale of an offender's story.
Only the offender is deprived of the benefits.
Publishers, ghost writers, journalists and a myriad of others gain, directly or indirectly, from the publication and it:
‘is questionable whether the criminal has any less of a right to derive money from reporting the events of the crime than do newscasters, publishers or litterateurs who also benefit indirectly from the crime.’
The same objections which are made against unjustly enriched offenders may also apply to these third parties.
The question which should be posed is not whether offenders should be permitted to profit from their crimes but whether crime should be profited from by any person.
This alternative formulation would then capture the considerable profits made by writers such as Truman Capote or Norman Mailer, or by ghost writers, script writers or film producers.
One of the major sources of revulsion against offenders who profit from their  crimes may arise from the practice of some sections of the media to pay an offender for the right to an interview or the right to publish her or his story, so-called ‘cheque-book’ journalism.
Sensational news stories are more likely to provoke outrage than academic work or serious social comment.
Lurid press reports often disregard the feelings of victims and ignore the interests of justice in the hope of increasing ratings or circulation.
As one commentator observed:
'…committing a crime does not produce a book, the efforts of the author do.
Similarly, producing a book does not produce royalties, the desire of the buying public does.’
In the same vein Inz notes:
‘The [Son-of-Sam]statute represents a response to the outrage expressed by the public at an offender's ability to profit from his wrong; but what publisher could contract with an offender if he were not certain that the public's response to the offender's story would generate enough profit to make his efforts worthwhile?’
The provisions which permit the confiscation of the literary proceeds of crime may do little to prevent this kind of journalism, which is arguably more repugnant than the profits made by offenders who may merely be pawns in a ratings or circulation war.
Cheque book journalism is a broader and more complex issue than the confiscation of the proceeds of crime and is bound up with the more general question of media reporting of the criminal justice system.
The real concern is that the remedy applied to suppress these practices may do more long-term damage to the rights of authors and publishers than can be justified by any compensation to the victims of crime or assuaging of the moral outrage achieved by the forfeiture of the proceeds of crime.
Victim compensation
Although not a feature of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, a major justification for the introduction of literary forfeiture legislation in the United States of America and Australia was that it would facilitate compensation for victims of crime.
The concern is that while the criminal derives profit from the depiction of the story, the victim remains damaged by the experience.
Whilst in most cases offenders rarely have the funds to provide victim compensation, this legislation is intended to ensure that if money in the form of literary profits is available, it be preserved for the victim.
Almost all jurisdictions now have schemes which provide state funded compensation schemes for victims of crime, although when the ‘Son-of-Sam’ legislation was enacted in New York, victim compensation schemes in many jurisdictions in the United States of America were non-existent or rudimentary.
In contrast to general victim compensation schemes which do not require that any individual be identified as the perpetrator of the offence for which the victim is claiming, ‘Son-of-Sam’ provisions allow the victim to recover from the earnings  of the particular person who was responsible for the damage suffered.
Throughout the United States of America, this method of compensation relies on the victim bringing a civil action against the perpetrator and obtaining an order for damages which can then be recovered from the confiscated funds.
It is questionable, however, whether the provisions actually add to a victim's opportunity for compensation and it has been argued that the procedure differs little from that required for any civil action except that the funds are preserved.
This could be accomplished as well by a civil injunction freezing the moneys potentially subject to a civil judgment as it is by the elaborate statutory forfeiture mechanism.
Technical difficulties aside, it has been argued that these provisions will not make any appreciable difference to the welfare of victims for, except in the most notorious of cases, most authors receive very small amounts indeed from publication.
There has, to date, been no readily available published accounts of the amounts received and disbursed by the various victim compensation boards, but it would be surprising if it amounted to many millions.
In Australia, where the rewards of publishing are even less, windfall gains to victims are highly unlikely.
The focus upon identifiable victims in the United States of America legislation has the potential for producing anomalous results.
A narrow focus upon individual victims who suffer physical or psychological injuries would leave the victim compensation aspects of the legislation with no application to victims of white-collar crimes.
Many convicted white-collar criminals, being more literate, are more likely to write and sell their stories.
Many have already done so.
Recent press reports disclose that Wall Street investment banker Dennis Levine, recently convicted and gaoled for insider trading, has written a book entitled Inside Out: An Insider's Account of Wall Street for which he will receive an undisclosed, but presumably large amount of money.
Although the book will be published in a jurisdiction with literary proceeds legislation, the report indicates that the author may not be deprived of his royalties because of the absence of an identifiable victim.
It has been suggested that in such cases, the offender's benefit should be channelled to a general victim compensation fund.
This would:
‘…subject all white-collar criminals to the same liabilities as the violent criminal offender.
Simply because there is no identifiable victim does not mean that the white-collar criminal is not unjustly enriched by the marketing of her crime story.
The state should be regarded as the victim's proxy….’
Finally, it can be argued that by focussing on pecuniary compensation, other victim issues are ignored by the ‘Son-of-Sam’ model.
The psychological well being of the victims and their ability to put the crime behind them is a very  important part of their needs.
The trauma which might be caused to the victim by the publication of the criminal's story might well outweigh any potential pecuniary receipt.
The legislation in no way addresses the desirability of such publicity, merely its commercial outcome.
Further, the need for many victims to bring a civil action against the perpetrator requires continuing contact with the offender which may extend for years in a protracted case.
The complex problems surrounding the position of the victim in the criminal justice system cannot be solved by the simple confiscation provisions devised by the Son-of-Sam legislation and its progeny.
Freedom of Speech
The issue which has preoccupied commentators in the United States of America is that of the possible infringement of the constitutional right of freedom of speech.
Questions of a possible denial of free speech arise in particular where the ‘expression’ is not a reprehensible exploitation of the defendant's notoriety but is a literary production only loosely related to the defendant's crimes.
It has been argued, generally unsuccessfully, that legislation of this type, by removing the commercial incentive to publish, therefore discourages publication.
It might well be argued that a genuine contributor would be prepared to write or share his or her experiences without monetary reward.
No statute in terms prohibits offenders from telling their story or expressing their feelings.
However, there is no guarantee that only the genuine repentant will produce works of value to the society.
Any law which directly or indirectly discourages the publication of views from within the criminal justice system must be viewed with suspicion.
To make the experiences and history of society's criminals less accessible also gives rise to the risk of further marginalising a section of society already relatively powerless.
In any particular case, a number of good reasons may exist to encourage the publication of the criminal's perspective.
It can provide primary information to the public on such important issues involving the criminal justice system:
‘If the ‘Son-of-Sam’ laws chill speech, the public loses information of great value.
No studies examining the criminal's thought process will appear because the author can write the book only if the criminal co-operates.
Furthermore, the criminal's story could provide insight into the workings of the criminal justice system, media reaction to the crime or the criminal's prior  or subsequent psychiatric treatment.
Chilling speech from the criminal's perspective thus infringes the public's right to hear and to receive important information.’
Further, the writings of convicted offenders may be utilised in crime prevention.
The experiences of older drug addicts, for example, might well be of great influence in the education of young people and in the understanding of drug and other crime cultures.
It is also a part of modern rehabilitation therapy to encourage offenders to express their feelings and experiences regarding their crimes.
It could be argued that in societies where the capitalist ethos is paramount the criminal is no less entitled to gain commercial advantage from his or her lawful activity than any other member of the community and that it should be the market which decides whether or not criminals should profit.
An argument could even be made that a prisoner who emerges from prison with a reasonable sum of money is less likely to recidivate than one who emerges as impecunious as when he or she entered.
At the broadest level it has been contended that stifling the artistic urges of the convicted or incarcerated would have deprived the world of much great literature.
The number of people who have been convicted of an offence and whose life stories were inspirations to others, or who have produced literature in, or after imprisonment is large.)
Whether any of these works would not have been produced under a ‘Son-of-Sam’ regime is debatable, but what is not debatable is that being convicted and imprisoned does not necessarily mean that one has actually committed an offence nor that what that person produces is of no value to society.
Undue breadth
The central provisions of the special confiscation legislation are those which define the relevantly proscribed activities.
They are problematic because of their potential scope and vagueness.
They refer variously to ‘depictions’ or ‘expressions’of the crime.
‘Expression’ is a broad concept which can encompass not only literary or written works but musical compositions, songs, drawings, computer games, autobiographies, poetry and the like.
Because  these concepts are very wide, they have the potential to extend beyond sensational newspaper articles or television specials.
Literary works such as autobiographies, fiction based on fact and academic work may also be covered.
A novel or a film which merely alludes to a crime committed by the author or subject could fall within the scope of ‘Son-of-Sam’ legislation and there will be considerable room for debate as to whether ‘a piece of art, a musical composition, or a poem is an expression of the criminal's thoughts or feelings about his crime.’
It may be invidious to require a court to make such aesthetic judgments.
Writing of similar legislation in the United States of America, Wand asks:
‘One is faced with the difficult task of defining the limits of the phrase ‘the expression of such accused or convicted person's thoughts, feelings, opinions, or emotions regarding such crime.’
Exactly how narrowly or broadly is the phrase ‘regarding such crime’ to be read?
If the accused person recounts his childhood experiences and relates them to his commission of the crime, is the entire discussion ‘regarding such crime’?
If a person writes a book or magazine article denying that he has committed any crime, are his words to be interpreted as his opinion regarding the crime?
If a person criticizes the criminal justice system and uses as an example the handling of his case, are his opinions to be considered opinions ‘regarding such crime’?’
These issues have yet to be resolved in any jurisdictions in which this legislation operates.
Infringement of copyright
In the United States of America the validity of ‘Son-of-Sam’ legislation has been challenged as being contrary to the Constitution and Federal copyright legislation.
The thrust of the criticism in the United States of America is that the legislation removes from the offender the basic property right of owning copyright.
The morality or cultural merit of an artistic work should be irrelevant, it is argued, to the question of whether or not a work deserves copyright protection.
The argument to the contrary holds that the legislation merely removes the proceeds of copyright and not the offender's proprietary interest itself.
Whether the confiscation legislation amounts to the forfeiture of the offender's copyright or merely of the proceeds is not clear but what is clear is that the interplay between the confiscation legislation and the law of copyright requires further examination.
Conclusion
In Australia, the introduction of the literary proceeds legislation was remarkable for the superficiality of the debate which accompanied it.
In England, it  received little, if any, serious attention.
The possible confiscation of Randle and Pottle's royalties highlights an unanticipated or overlooked aspect of English confiscation law.
Debate over the far-reaching consequences of the attempted confiscation action should not die with their acquittal.
The confiscation laws are an expression of the maxim that a person should not profit from his or her own crime.
Coupled with attempts to provide compensation for the victims of crime, they represent an attractive package to a public deeply concerned with crime.
On the other hand, these laws have the potential to suppress worthwhile literary and artistic expression.
An innovative attempt to distinguish between the more objectionable forms of cheque-book journalism and the literature which makes a significant contribution to the culture or contributes to the prevention of crime or the rehabilitation of offenders is being made in Victoria, Australia, where the Crimes (Confiscation of Profits) Amendment Act 1991 (Vic.), although expanding the concept of ‘benefit’ to include the profits of criminal expression, will provide a court with discretion to decide whether or not to treat the profits as a ‘benefit’for the purposes of the Act.
The court will be permitted to have regard to any matters it thinks fit including:
(a)
whether it is not in the public interest to treat them as benefits; and
(b)
whether the depiction or expression has any general social or educational value; and
(c)
the circumstances of the person concerned at the time of publication, production or entertainment; and
(d)
the nature and purposes of the publication, production or entertainment including its use for research, educational or rehabilitation purposes.
The interpretative problems which will arise from open-textured concepts such as‘public interest,’‘social value’ or ‘rehabilitation purposes’are patent.
However, without such provisions we run the risk of indiscriminately suppressing all ‘criminal’ expression.
Before Sam's Son spawns further progeny we need to consider whether criminal authors have themselves become the victims of this new and draconian confiscation legislation.
Some Problems of Contempt
My choice of topic for this evening's lecture gave me some cause for hesitation.
My principal teaching responsibilities lie in the field of criminal evidence and the law of contract.
I have also written quite extensively on product liability and on aspects of consumer law.
All would have provided suitable topics.
In the result I have returned to another of my main interests, contempt of court.
The subject has fascinated me since I first had the privilege of being led into it as a postgraduate student of Professor J. C. Smith in the mid 1960s.
It is also a very English subject (as befits a Professor of English Law) and it is an interest which I share with my distinguished predecessor, Professor Sir Gordon Borrie.
In addition, contempt has the singular advantage of providing moments of light relief within what is essentially a serious framework.
What, then, is the purpose and scope of the law of contempt?
The short answer is the prevention of interference with the administration of justice.
Within this unifying theme contempts have traditionally been categorised according to whether they are criminal or civil in character.
Civil contempt
Although my main concern this evening is with aspects of criminal contempt, I should say that civil contempt is essentially concerned with providing a long-stop to secure the enforcement of such court orders as injunctions.
Usually such injunctions operate in personam against named individuals.
Sometimes, however, they are of a more general application.
Indeed there have been several recent cases (for example, ones involving alleged sexual abuse) in which wide-ranging injunctions have been issued to protect the welfare of children who may otherwise have been exposed to unwelcome publicity.
There are obvious dangers in any such development which may allow the news media to be bound without having had an effective opportunity to argue against the imposition or scope of the injunction.
Counter arguments may not be employed to full effect, and individual injustices (perhaps involving parents who have been subject to wholly baseless accusations) may not be exposed.
More generally, although civil contempt is not properly regarded as a criminal offence.
injunctions of general application have many of the characteristics of quasi-criminal offences tailor-made by individual judges to meet the facts of a particular case.
Their breach  may, after all, lead to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment, the purpose of which is, in the circumstances, plainly punitive, rather than remedial.
Contempt in the Face of a Court
Within the realm of criminal contempt, perhaps the most obvious forms of interference with the administration of justice occur when the contempt is committed in the face of the court itself.
There have been numerous examples of varying degrees of seriousness over the years.
These have ranged from serious assaults to the throwing of objects (including eggs), attempts to relieve the tedium of a pornography trial by releasing nitrous oxide or ‘laughing gas’ into the court of Melford Stevenson J. and demonstrations to promote the cause of the Welsh language.
Although the underlying need for a law of contempt in this area seems to be clear, I have long had doubts about the procedural aspects.
In particular, such contempt may be dealt with without there being any formal institution of proceedings as such and by the judge who has been subject to abuse.
The justification usually advanced is that the facts are rarely in dispute and that the judge who has witnessed the incident is the person best equipped to deal with it.
In relatively recent years the Court of Appeal had emphasised the dangers of ‘instant justice,’ stressing the need for reflection and to consider whether the alleged contemnor would benefit from legal advice.
The United States Supreme Court has gone further, requiring as a matter of due process that a judge who has been vilified should step down — at least where the matter is left until the end of the trial.
This seems to me to be more consistent with the need for justice to be seen to be done — and this both by the alleged contemnor and the more general public.
Contempts Committed out of Court
I shall turn not to contempt committed out of court or to ‘constructive’ contempts as they are sometimes called.
In very broad terms, these may be sub-divided according to whether the interference is with the administration of justice as a general or continuing process or with its administration in a particular case.
Unfortunately, the area is one of considerable complexity.
Before commenting further on this I shall refer briefly to the question of what is a ‘court’ for the purposes of the law of contempt.
One might have been forgiven for believing that the answer was to be determined by the label adopted by Parliament in creating the body in question.
However, this is not so, since in the leading case of Attorney-General v. 
B.B.C. the House of Lords decided that a valuation court was not a court of law, the proceedings of which might be protected from outside influence by the law of contempt.
Conversely, a body may be styled a tribunal and yet be a court for present purposes.
There has long been a consensus that this is true of the Lands Tribunal.
Recently the House of Lords  held that a Mental Health Review Tribunal was also a ‘court’ for the purposes of the law of contempt.
The point had hitherto been unclear.
The Contempt of Court Act 1981 does not help to resolve the general problem since it simply defines a ‘court’ as including ‘tribunal or body exercising the judicial power of the State.’
In principle, one could have expected to see a list of such bodies appended as a Schedule to the Act, but the Lord Chancellor, with all his ‘numerous and talented counsellors’, was unable to cause one to be drawn up.
It has not been done since and the status of such bodies as Social Security Appeal Tribunals remains uncertain as a result.
This seems most unsatisfactory.
Protecting justice as a continuing process
I mentioned earlier that contempt is not solely concerned with protecting the administration of justice in an individual case.
It has a wider role to play.
For this reason it is a contempt to victimise a witness (or a party) even though the proceedings have terminated, for otherwise witnesses etc., would be less willing to come forward in future cases.
The R.S.P.C.A. and the National Union of Mineworkers have both been involved with this form of contempt in recent years.
Much more controversially, it may also be a contempt to ‘scandalise the court’ and thereby undermine public confidence in the integrity of the judiciary.
Although this form of contempt is an easy target for criticism, it has not been used in England for many years.
Nor does it seem to have stifled what is often stringent criticism.
Should it be abolished either because its use is unjustified or because it has fallen into disuse?
I have my doubts on both counts.
For reasons which I do not claim to understand, Australia has seen a number of cases of scandalising the court in recent years.
In one a term of three months' imprisonment was imposed in respect of much publicised suggestions by a trade union official that a particular decision had been reached only because of pressure exerted by a demonstrating rank and file.
I do not think that it is fanciful to suggest that public confidence in the administration of justice is undermined by such assertions from a powerful interest group.
One source of difficulty and confusion which, as we shall see, has survived the statutory reforms associated with the Contempt of Court Act 1981 is that interference with justice as a continuing process may occur through the medium of a particular criminal or civil case.
This was illustrated in the leading common law case of Attorney-General v. 
Times Newspapers Ltd. where the Sunday Times was proposing to publish comment critical of Distillers' attitude to the settlement  of claims in the thalidomide litigation.
The House of Lords upheld the issuing of an injunction on the ground that the publication would have amounted to a contempt.
The contempt lay in the fact that the issues would have been prejudged and improper public pressure would have been exerted on Distillers to cause them to settle.
Interestingly, the gravamen of the offence was not so much the likely effect on Distillers as the perceived effect on the administration of justice generally if such comment were allowed.
Fears were expressed about a slide towards trial by the news media and analogies were drawn with attempts to hold Shylock up to public abuse on the Rialto if he did not discontinue his action.
Both were seen as likely to discourage other litigants from coming forward.
As is well known, the Sunday Times case then went on to the European Court of Human Rights which held that the injunction violated Article 10 of the Convention and its right to freedom of expression.
This eventually led to the establishment of the Phillimore Committee, which issued a fairly modest report in 1974,1R and thence to the Contempt of Court Act 1981.
The Act was intended to bring English law into line with the Convention and to implement the Phillimore Committee proposals.
Problems associated with the 1981 Act
I turn now to some of the problems associated with this Act which was introduced by Lord Hailsham, the Lord Chancellor, as a liberalising measure.
I shall concentrate on its effect on the sub-judice rule.
The Act deals with this in sections 1 to 7 under the heading ‘the strict liability rule.’
The term is chosen to indicate that liability is strict, at least to the extent that proof of intent or recklessness is not required.
By section 2 of the Act the rule is confined to ‘publications’(as defined) which create ‘a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced.’
Hence the concern is with prejudice to particular proceedings and a substantial risk of serious prejudice is needed.
Obvious examples would include a blatant attempt to influence the jury or the publication of potentially inadmissible evidence, for example a confession or past misconduct.
A risk of prejudice which is less than serious is not sufficient.
Section 2(3) confines the scope of the rule to proceedings which were ‘active’ at the time of publication.
This term is comprehensively defined in Schedule 1.
Criminal proceedings do not become active’ until a suspect has either been arrested, or charged or a warrant issued.
It is not enough that he is ‘helping the police with their inquiries,’ nor that an arrest without warrant is imminent — perhaps towards the end of a  siege .
Also, contempt proceedings under the rule require the consent of the Attorney-General, unless the court is acting of its own motion.
What then are the main problems?
I shall refer briefly to three.
The first is the relationship between statutory contempts and the common law sub-judice rule.
Here it might have been wise for Parliament to have set out a comprehensive code staking out the borderline between the demands of a fair trial and those of a free press whenever a contempt was committed through the medium of a particular case.
It did not do so, but — with minimal discussion of the implications — it enacted (in s.6(c)) that nothing in the foregoing sections restricted liability for contempt of court ‘in respect of conduct intended to impede or prejudice the administration of justice.’
Now, the word ‘intended’ is a decidedly slippery one and there is every likelihood that section 6(c) will both introduce uncertainties into the area and be used to sidestep some of the safeguards of the Act.
A controversial example is the liability of the Sunday Times and Independent newspapers in the famous Spycatcher case.
Proceedings between the Attorney-General and the Observer and Guardian newspapers in the matter of confidentiality were not ‘active’ at the time and so a statutory contempt could not be committed.
Yet, referring to section 6(c) of the Act, the Court of Appeal held that, although not bound directly by the injunctions, the newspapers could be in contempt if, in publishing material derived from Peter Wright's manuscript, they intended to interfere with the administration of justice.
The point has since been confirmed by the House of Lords.
It is important to note that the third party's liability does not depend on establishing a breach of the order by the person enjoined.
That would be less controversial, since liability could then be explained in terms of aiding and abetting the breach.
An analogy would be with the familiar general principle of criminal law that a person cannot be guilty as an aider and abettor unless (in technical terms) one can point to a principal offender who has committed the actus reus of an offence.
The Spycatcher principal outflanks this by holding that the ‘third party’ commits a contempt as a principal offender in its own right.
When this will be so is unclear.
Breach of confidence might be seen as a special case since once the subject matter of the confidence is published the position cannot be retrieved.
However, it seems that the principle is not confined to such cases.
For example, Lord Brandon of Oakbrook had this to say:
‘Suppose that there is an action between A and B in which B claims, but A disputes, that B is entitled to demolish A's house and that in that action the court grants A an interlocutory injunction restraining B from demolishing A's house pending the trial of the action.
Suppose further that C, of his own volition and in no way aiding or abetting B, himself demolishes A's house while the action between A and B is still pending.
On those facts C would, in my opinion, be committing a contempt of court, because he would be knowingly impeding or interfering with the administration of justice by the court in the action between A and B.’
On the other hand, his Lordship agreed that C would not commit a contempt by  trespassing on A's land simply because A had obtained an injunction restraining B from doing so.
In between such examples there is considerable scope for doubt as to where the line is to be drawn.
Attorney-General v. 
News Group Newspapers is another controversial case.
The Sun newspaper was offering to fund a private prosecution against a doctor whom it believed to be guilty of raping an eight year old girl.
As part of its campaign against him, it published a grossly prejudicial article under the headline ‘Doc Groped.’
There was no question of this amounting to a statutory contempt as proceedings were not ‘active.’
However, the Divisional Court held that it amounted to a common law contempt in that the Sun had, in spite of its editor's protestations to the contrary, intended to interfere with the administration of justice.
A £75,000 fine was imposed.
Watkins, L.J.
commented:
‘The common law is not a worn-out jurisprudence rendered incapable of further development by the every increasing incursion of Parliamentary legislation.
It is a lively body of law capable of adaption and expansion to meet fresh needs calling for the exertion of the discipline of law.’
His Lordship also indicated that such a common law contempt need not depend on proceedings being ‘imminent.’
Now, I do not seek to defend the conduct of the Sun , but I do think that it is at best messy and may also be dangerous to use the common law to outflank the Act.
Certainly, the decision introduces an element of uncertainty into what is already an area of the law which causes considerable problems for editors and their legal advisors.
Another example is Attorney-General v. 
Hislop where, within the same article,Private Eye was held to have committed both a statutory and a common law contempt in exerting improper pressure on Sonia Sutcliffe to abandon her proceedings.
As to the common law, the Court of Appeal was satisfied that the articles had been published with intent to interfere with the administration of justice.
This case also indicates that one of the main heads of liability in the Sunday Times case, namely improper public pressure on a party to proceedings, has survived the 1981 Act.
It is to be hoped that the other, namely the blanket rule against prejudgments, has not.
Otherwise, it would be very difficult to argue that the Act meets the requirements of the European Convention as interpreted by the European Court.
Prejudgments should stand or fall according to whether they pass the statutory test of section 2(2) by causing a substantial risk of serious prejudice to the proceedings in question.
Of course, many will — especially when they relate to criminal proceedings.
The House of Lords had the opportunity to bury the prejudgment rule in the extraordinary case of Re Lonrho plc..
Although serious doubts were cast on its continued existence, burial has not been unambiguously confirmed 
My second are of concern is the limited scope of the qualification to liability for bona fide discussion of public affairs or other matters of general public interest.
By section 5 of the Act, liability for contempt under the strict liability rule is not to be incurred if the risk of prejudice to the proceedings is merely incidental to such discussion.
Section 5 has been invoked with success on several occasions.
Examples include Attorney-General v. 
English where the background was the highly publicised trial of the paediatrician, Dr. Arthur.
He had been charged with the attempted murder of John Pearson, a Downs Syndrome child.
At the time of Dr. Arthur's trial, a Mrs. Carr, who had been born without arms, was standing as an independent pro-life candidate in a forthcoming by-election.
Writing in the Daily Mail in support of her candidature, Malcolm Muggeridge commented: ‘Today, the chances of such a baby surviving would be very small indeed.
Someone would surely recommend letting her die of starvation, or otherwise disposing of her.’
In subsequent contempt proceedings the House of Lords was satisfied that the article created a substantial if unintended risk of serious prejudice to Dr. Arthur's trial.
However, it fell within the section 5 saving and hence was not a contempt.
Lord Diplock justified this conclusion by saying:
‘Such gagging of bona fide public discussion in the press of controversial matters of general public interest, merely because there are in existence contemporaneous legal proceedings in which some particular instance of those controversial matters may be in issue, is what section 5 of the Contempt of Court Act was in my view intended to prevent.’
Section 5 also assisted Lady Falkender when she was discussing security at Buckingham Palace and the proclivities of Commander Trestrail, the Queen's personal bodyguard, at the time of Michael Fagan's entry into the Queen's bedroom in 1982.
Her article in the Mail on Sunday was seriously prejudicial to the burglary charge but it was not a contempt.
As Lord Lane commented: ‘These were examples par excellence of public affairs or other matters of general public interest.’
The problem with section 5 is that it may be unduly limited in scope through the requirement that the risk of prejudice be ‘merely incidental’ to the discussion.
This seems to imply that the section cannot apply if it is the proceedings themselves which constitute the matter which is of general public interest.
So the legal and moral aspects of not prolonging life could continue to be discussed notwithstanding Dr. Arthur's trial, but the prosecution itself could not be the focal point of the discussion.
Nor could the release of the sex offender, Peter Pickering, in the Mental Health Review Tribunal case which I mentioned earlier.
An alternative approach is to recognise the possibility of a more broadly-based balancing of the competing interests involved.
This was favoured by Lord Denning in the Court of Appeal in the Sunday Times case, but not by the House  of Lords, nor by the Phillimore Committee.
Such an approach has also found favour in Australia, notably in the decision of the High Court in Hinch v. 
Attorney General for Victoria .
The case involved comment in a radio broadcast on the activities of an ex Catholic priest who was the governing director of a Youth Foundation.
The erstwhile priest was currently charged with indecent assault and buggery and he had previous convictions for serious sexual offences.
Hinch had commented: ‘How does a man continue to be able to take children…in his care to youth camps, when he has a…sexual criminal record involving juveniles’?
In the ensuing contempt proceedings the High Court of Australia adopted a broad balancing approach to determine whether the publication of prejudicial material was counterbalanced by the public interest in freedom of expression.
As Toohey, J. emphasised:
‘the notion of public interest has its limitations and in many cases it will not be served by dissemination of information about a person charged with a criminal offence or it must yield to the need to secure a fair trial for such a person.
There is a balance which the court is called upon to strike.
It is not an exercise of discretion; it is an evaluation of competing interests against the background that contempt must be established beyond reasonable doubt.’
On the facts of the case the balance came down in favour of protecting the fair trial.
In indicating a preference for the Australian approach, I am not suggesting that the scales need be evenly balanced.
The test of contempt requires a risk of serious prejudice and I believe that usually the protection of criminal proceedings against such risks should prevail even if this is difficult to reconcile with our obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.
All I am suggesting is that the balancing exercise should be capable of being performed.
I have to say that this is unlikely under section 5 of the 1981 Act, although there remains the fairly remote possibility of it being available in England (as in Australia) at common law.
Section 6(b) of the 1981 Act would then come into play since this makes it clear that the Act does not remove common law defences or qualifications to liability.
This, incidentally, provides a further area of complexity in the relationship between statutory contempt and the common law.
Finally, I shall refer briefly to section 4(2) of the 1981 Act which qualifies the general rule that a fair and accurate report of legal proceedings will not amount to a contempt.
The rule is an important aspect of open justice.
Section 4(2) allows a court to make an order postponing such reporting where this appears necessary in the interest of avoiding a substantial risk of prejudice.
The reason for such a power is that contemporaneous reporting may prejudice either the  proceedings in question (as where the material — although heard in open court — has not been made known to the jury) or some further proceedings which were pending or imminent at the time.
I do not have the time to comment on its use in any detail.
However, it is worth making at least one point.
This is that section 4(2) serves as a useful reminder of the consequences which may follow when an obscure common law power (which seems to have been rarely used) is restated in statutory form.
The result was a veritable plethora of cases in which orders were made all too regularly.
This is something of a paradox when one remembers Lord Hailsham's assurance that the 1981 Act was intended to be a liberalising measure.
A further difficulty lay in the fact that until recently section 4(2) orders were not subject to challenge either by way of appeal or, in the case of those issued by the Crown Court, by judicial review.
Nowadays, there is a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal by virtue of the Criminal Justices Act 1988, s. 159, and it may be exercised by any ‘person aggrieved.’
This locus standi requirement is being interpreted liberally to include the news media.
In general, it seems that the courts have now started to take a more robust approach.
For example, an application for a postponement order was not granted in the Guinness trials in 1990 nor in the Barlow Clowes affair.
More recently, the Court of Appeal set aside an order prohibiting reporting by radio or television of a trial of fraud and corruption charges which was nearing its end at Stafford Crown Court.
The jury had been confined to an hotel overnight and, in the judgment of Lord Lane, C.J., any risk of prejudice was capable of being overcome by denying it access to radio and television.
This seems an appropriate ordering of priorities.
He added: ‘Where such an alternative is reasonably available, it should be used.’
There are other provisions of the 1981 Act which have either created difficulties in practice (as in the case of s.8 which is headed ‘Confidentiality of Jury's Deliberations’) or which have been interpreted restrictively (as in the case of s.10, which is concerned with the protection of journalists' sources of information).
I would be stretching the patience of my audience if I commented on them.
I shall simply say that Lord Hailsham's ‘little ewe lamb’ has not in practice proved to be the liberalising measure which he had hoped.
Case and Comment
ABUSE OF PROCESS
Custody time limit expiring — D released by justices and re-arrested on new charge — whether abuse of process
R. v.
Great Yarmouth Magistrates, ex. p.
Thomas, Davis and Darlington
High Court of Justice Queen's Bench Divisional Court: Watkins L.J.
and Tudor Evans J.: July 29, 1991.
The applicants were remanded in custody charged with the illegal importation of cannabis.
The 70 day time limit had expired, and the prosecutor sought an extension of time, which was refused.
The applicants were released.
Fearful that they would disappear without trace, the prosecutor rearrested them before they could leave the building, and later charged them with possession of cannabis, with intent to supply.
The defence alleged abuse of process.
Held , granting the applications and remitting the case to the magistrates, the essence of the defence case was an allegation that the prosecutor had dishonestly contrived to manipulate the prosecution process so as to avoid the consequences of the legislation which brought the applicants within the custody time limit regulations.
That involved the contention that, in substance, the fresh charges were identical to the first charges.
A single justice had been faced with this very unusual and unpleasant allegation.
He was referred to Wirral JJ. ex. p.
Meikle [1990]Crim.L.R. 801, where it had been made clear that prosecutors are fully entitled to bring any number of offences against a single defendant at different times and so cause to be in existence a number of custody time limits not coinciding wholly with one another.
It was never suggested in Meikle that any one of the prosecutions was brought as a consequences of mala fides by the prosecutor.
Had there been mala fides the court would have had to think of the consequences of that.
Here the justices were confronted with such an allegation.
However, the basis for that was not a matter for the Divisional Court.
It could only be determined by the justices upon whatever evidence was put before it, and the effect of that must then be put into perspective.
The justices must bear in mind that the burden of establishing dishonesty lay fairly and squarely on the defence, and it was a heavy burden.
If they were satisfied that it was truly a consequence of dishonesty which brought about the further charge and there was, in substance, no difference between that and the first charge, plainly there had been an abuse of process.
If the court so concluded, it had no alternative but to  admit the applicants to bail.
Those were, however, all matters for the justices.
It was regrettable that the single justice had been advised that there was no need to pay regard to Meikle .
The allegation of the defence had to be met and properly dealt with, so the matter would be returned to the justices for them to look at the circumstances and come to a proper determination after they had heard further evidence.
Commentary .
The question whether there was ‘dishonesty’ by the prosecution may not be easy for magistrates to determine because it is not clear in what sense that word is used in the present context.
There appears to be no suggestion of lies or deception nor is there any room for the application of the Ghosh test of dishonesty which applies in the law of theft and related offences.
Perhaps the more specific question to be asked is whether the charges of possession with intent were brought solely for the purpose of retaining the applicants in custody.
Would those charges have been brought if there had been no question of the applicants being released?
If they would not, that looks an ‘abuse of process’ in the ordinary meaning of those words.
Charges should be brought because they are charges upon which it is proper that the accused should be tried and, if found guilty, convicted.
The difficulty about regarding this as the whole story, however, is that the court does not seem to have been in doubt that the purpose of the additional charges was to prevent the release of the applicants, but it did not regard this as conclusive.
The nature of an additional element amounting to mala fides or dishonesty seems rather elusive.
In Rotherham JJ. ex. p.
Brough [1991]Crim.L.R. 522 the C.P.S. delayed bringing a charge for a short period so that B was deprived of the possibility of trial in the juvenile court.
The divisional court thought that the conduct of the C.P.S. was ‘incorrect’ but not mala fide — at most, there was a lack of judgment.
To be an abuse of process there had to be ‘some element of bad faith or sharp practice or oppressive or overreaching behaviour or, to use a colloquialism, some form of dirty trick.’
Where the process is used for some purpose other than that for which it is intended, the distinction between an error of judgment and an abuse of process may be rather fine.
[J.C.S.]
Abuse of process — Misuse of Process — failure to make available or reveal to the Defence the existence of unused material — principles to be applied — whether matter for judge
R. v.
Birmingham & Ors
Wood Green Crown Court: His Honour Judge Bromley Q.C.
June 7, 1991.
Seven defendants were charged with violent disorder at or outside a night club and with various assaults on police officers.
Before the jury was sworn the judge was asked to hear evidence from two of the prosecution witnesses on the existence and whereabouts of evidence believed to have been at one time in existence and of relevance to the case and possible use to the Defence.
It emerged that a video camera had been trained on part of the premises of the night club and on an area where an incident preceding the arrival of the police and part of the incident said to be the violent disorder had taken place.
It was established that the camera had been working and a video tape had been made which had been viewed by the police officers in charge of the case.
Its existence had not been revealed to the defence even after specific requests for unused material  and, days before the trial, a specific request from a solicitor for three defendants, for a copy of any video tape.
No attempt had been made to secure the tape and its existence was never revealed to the Crown Prosecution Service.
By the time of the trial the tape had disappeared and there was no prospect of its being found.
The judge attended the scene at the nightclub to view the scene that was revealed by the cameras and the quality and character of the reproduction of a similar tape.
Apart from the pictures from the camera trained on the area of primary interest, others images, were recorded on the same tape and when played displayed on the three other quarters of the video screen contemporaneously, were from cameras situated in other areas of the club and over the entrance door.
Held , the indictment would be marked ‘stayed’ on the ground that the continuation of the case would constitute a misuse of the processes of the court and a fair trial was not possible.
The Judge held that the prosecution had been under a duty to disclose the video whether it had been demanded or not, that the view the camera had was of an area of the club that was relevant to the res gestae , that the tape would have contained matters of relevance to the defendants and that it was wrong for the police officer to have formed the view that it was of no relevance.
That view was itself formed as to the usefulness of the tape to the prosecution.
Apart from containing pictures of part of the scene where it is said the violent disorder had taken place and an incident leading up to the arrival of the police which was held to be part of the res gestae , the tape would have been useful to establish alibis some defendants wished to rely upon in respect of their presence in the club at a relevant time and the timing between significant incidents.
In addition, the ability to recognise and trace witnesses and the conditions under which police witnesses made observations might all have been of assistance to the defendants.
The deprivation of this material from them prejudiced their defence and made a fair trial impossible.
The contention of the prosecution, which was to the effect that, following Heston-Francois [1984]All E.R.
795 the matters that had been canvassed before the Judge should be considered by a jury, was rejected.
The Judge then awarded two thirds of all the costs of the defendants to be paid by the Crown Prosecution Service and as to one third made a Defendant's costs order.
Commentary .
The judge's initial view was that these were matters for the trial but he was persuaded otherwise by the arguments of counsel.
The questions involved did not relate to the guilt or innocence of the defendants but whether they had been wrongfully deprived of material which should have been available to them in preparing for the trial and for use at the trial if relevant.
An interesting feature of the case is the judge's visit to the nightclub for the purpose of ascertaining the possible relevance of the missing tapes.
The defendants were not present but, through their counsel (who were present), agreed to the procedure.
It is for the judge alone to determine facts upon which the admissibility of evidence depends and, similarly, it must be for him to satisfy himself as to matters involved in an application to stay because of abuse or, as the judge preferred, ‘misuse’— of process.
The case for staying was particularly strong in that the tapes may have recorded not merely circumstantial evidence but some of the facts in issue in the case.
The police officer's  initial response in evidence — he was ‘satisfied that it was of no evidential value to our case’— was unfortunate and regarded by the judge as ‘striking,’ notwithstanding his later qualification that it was of no value in any direction.
The fact that evidence does not support the prosecution's case is clearly not a reason for regarding it as irrelevant; and it is difficult to see how any recording of part of the actual event in issue could ever be so regarded.
[J.C.5.]
ASSAULT
Police Act 1964, s.SI (I)— assault on constable in execution of duty — attempt to prevent police from entering house and recapturing mental patient — Mental Health Act 1983, ss.2, 6, 12(2) & 135(3) — whether patient ‘unlawfully at large’— whether constables acting in execution of duty and entitled to use reasonable force to enter house — whether necessary to act in ‘hot pursuit’— PACE: ss.l 7(1) (d) & 117; Mental Health Act 1983, s.137(2)
R. v.
E. D'Souza
R. v.
C. D'Souza
High Court of Justice: Queen's Bench Divisional Court: Nolan L.J.
and Otton J.: July 26, 1991.
The appellants were father and daughter.
The mother of the family ('the patient’) had a history of mental illness.
On October 13, 1988 a social worker who had become concerned about her condition obtained a warrant under section 135 of the Mental Health Act 1983 and attended the patient's home with doctors and police and, following an examination, the patient was admitted to a hospital for 72 hours.
Two medical practitioners, neither of whom previously knew the patient, recommended her detention in hospital because she was said to be a paranoid schizophrenic with signs of aggressive, overactive and irrational behaviour.
Next day the father (the patient's husband) applied for her discharge.
On October 16, 1988, after expiry of the 72-period, the patient discharged herself and went home.
A police officer formed the opinion that she was unlawfully at large and on the same day went to the patient's home with other police and nurses.
The occupants, including the patient's daughter, refused to open the door; entry was gained after a panel in the door was broken and (according to the Crown) the appellants both assaulted the police officers.
They were both charged with assault on a constable in the execution of his duty.
The magistrates convicted them and their appeal to the Crown Court was dismissed.
They appealed by way of case stated, submitting that the patient was not ‘unlawfully at large’ and the police officers were not entitled to use reasonable force to enter the premises and were not acting in the execution of their duty.
Held , dismissing the appeals, one of the medical recommendations for the admission of a patient into hospital had to be made, if practicable, by a practitioner with previous acquaintance with the patient: Mental Health Act 1983, ss.2, 6 and 12–2).
The patient had been removed from her previous general practitioner's list six months previously and was at the material time on no doctor's  list, and the Crown Court had held that it was not practicable for a doctor who had acquaintance with the patient to make the recommendation.
Counsel for the appellants had attacked this finding because the patient had been an outpatient at a different hospital in the past and a practitioner there could have fulfilled this function; and he submitted that in any case it was a duty of the hospital managers to find out if it was practicable to obtain the recommendation of a practitioner who had previous acquaintance with the patient: he relied on the form of the question ‘explain why you could not get a recommendation from a medical practitioner who did know the patient’ on the hospital admission application form.
However it was a question of fact for the Crown Court, which was entitled to find that it was not so practicable.
It therefore followed that the application for admission, made on October 13, 1988, remained in force for 28 days under section 2(4) of the Act and not merely for 72 hours under section 135(3).
Under section 18(1) of the Act a patient who absented himself from hospital without leave could be taken into custody and returned to the hospital; and the police had all their usual powers for the purpose (s.137(2)) including power, under section 17(1) (d) of PACE to enter and search premises for recapturing a person unlawfully at large.
It had been submitted that such recapture was confined to cases of ‘hot pursuit’ and that this criterion was not satisfied in the present case; but in cases involving mental patients the manner of pursuit must be for the discretion of those undertaking it and ‘hot’pursuit might be inappropriate.
(Zander,Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 , 2nd ed. at p.42 considered.)
Further, constables were permitted to use reasonable force if necessary.
(PACE s.117); and the Crown Court was justified in finding that the officers were acting in the execution of their duty and that therefore the offences were made out.
Per curiam .
There had been some criticism of the question and answer made by the social worker in support of the hospital admission application form on the question of practicability of getting the recommendation of a practitioner with previous acquaintance with the patient, and those responsible might wish to consider rewording the form so as to direct the social worker's attention to the question of practicability.
Commentary .
Detained patients absent themselves, or abscond, from hospitals.
It will not be desired to find all people who absent themselves without leave.
Every hospital should have a policy giving a guidance as to what immediate action is to be taken by staff and who to inform and involve when a patient is absent without leave (Mental Health Act Code of Practice , at paras.
21.1 to 21.4).
In some cases it will be desirable to exercise the power available under section 18 to take into custody and return an absconder.
Most obviously, the power will be exercised where the patient is a known danger to the public or is a known suicide risk.
The Memorandum on the Mental Health Act 1983 (1987) issued by the then Department of Health and Social Security states, at paragraph 289, that whilst calling upon the assistance of the police should be kept to a minimum, ‘the police should always be informed at once of the escape or absence without leave of a patient who is considered dangerous or who is subject to restriction on discharge under Part III of the Act.’
In some cases the police need to be informed that a person is absent without leave, although no request is made for their help.
The end result of this case is that the police have a power to enter and search any premises for the purpose of recapturing a person unlawfully at large, provided he or she has  reasonable grounds for believing that the person is on those premises (s. 17(1) (d) & (2) of PACE and that they have the power to use reasonable force in effecting entry and arresting the person sought (s.117 of PACE).
This is an important decision clarifying the extent of the powers available for use as and when appropriate.
It confirms the view taken by Professor Hoggett (Mental Health Law (3rd ed.) at p.118).
The means the Court used to reach that result are open to question.
The easy answer was that a person absent without leave (that is a person who does not have the leave of his or her responsible medical officer within s.17 of the Mental Health Act 1983 to be absent from the hospital) is a person unlawfully at large(as is required for the operation of the entry power in s.17 of PACE).
The Court, however, relied on section 137.
Section 137 has nothing to do with patients absent without leave.
Such patients are not in legal custody by virtue of that section since they are not ‘required or authorised by or by virtue of this Act to be conveyed to any place or to be kept in custody or detained in a place of safety or at any place to which he is taken under section 42(6)….‘
The power of entry and search section 17(1) (d) of PACE can only be exercised if the police are in pursuit of the patient.
It may well be the case that with regard to many people unlawfully at large this should be regarded as ‘hot pursuit,’ but the approach of the Court when faced with a patient absconder allows a choice of methods to be adopted.
A warrant may be obtained under section 135 of the Mental Health Act 1983.
If that is not appropriate in the circumstances, the power of entry without warrant in PACE may be used either ‘to pursue ‘hotly’ or with circumspection until [it is judged]expedient to enter and arrest.’
Since the state of a patient absconding from a hospital may vary in terms both of stability and danger to others or self, the decision of the Court allowing for ‘patience, sensitivity, calmness and tact’ to be used, and recognising that the ‘manner in which a pursuit is effected must be a matter for the discretion and judgment of those handling the situation’is welcome.
Mental health professionals will need to take note of the view of the Court that it is important to explain why a doctor who already knows the patient does not provide one of the medical recommendations upon which a section 2 admission (and also a s.3 admission) may be founded.
The Court assumes that failure to explain why it was not practicable to obtain a report from such a doctor will make the admission unlawful, and the same point is made by Professor Hoggett (Mental Health Law (3rd ed.) at pp.102–103), who also stresses that the administrative arrangements for medical cover does not necessarily make it impracticable to obtain a recommendation from a doctor who knows the prospective patient.
No doubt both the Department of Health and the Mental Health Act Commission will take notice of the Court's opinion that the form for application for admission under section 2 ‘does not direct the social worker's attention to the desirability of obtaining a recommendation from a doctor who does know the past history, diagnosis and treatment of the patient and why it has not been practicable to do so.’
BAIL
Bail Act 1976, s.3(6A) — defendant accused of murder — condition on grant of bail of examination by medical practitioners — disclosure of reports
R. v.
Central Criminal Court, ex p.
Porter
Queen's Bench Divisional Court: Watkins L.J., Rose and Pill JJ.: August 7, 1991.
The applicant was charged with murder.
He was granted bail by magistrates on his committal for trial.
A number of conditions were imposed but there was  no condition in relation to medical examinations.
The applicant received a letter from a consultant forensic psychiatrist asked by the prosecution to prepare a psychiatric report; the doctor indicated that he would be considering all possible defences.
Counsel for the applicant advised that the examination be limited to the issue of the applicant's fitness to plead and that the defence should instruct their own forensic psychiatrist to report on other possible defences.
The prosecution asked that the case be listed.
The judge directed that the applicant submit to a full medical examination by the consultant forensic psychiatrist instructed by the Crown Prosecution Service and make himself available for examination by a second medical practitioner.
The judge further ordered that the doctors were to be regarded as independent and to furnish copies of their reports to both Crown and defence.
The applicant had objected to the disclosure of the report to the Crown.
He sought judicial review.
Held , allowing the application.
(1) The judge's order was a nullity.
The Court had heard argument as to whether the order was subject to judicial review in the light of the terms of section 29(3) of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
A more fundamental question arose — whether the judge was granting bail which was a necessary prerequisite for the exercise of the duty imposed by section 3(6A) of the Bail Act 1976.
The magistrates had purported to grant bail without imposing the condition required by section 3(6A).
That decision was therefore flawed and the applicant was prima facie unlawfully at large.
The judge was purporting to vary the conditions of bail to comply with section 3(6A).
The power to impose a condition requiring a person accused of murder to undergo a medical examination under section 3(6A) arose when granting bail.
The appellant had not been required to surrender to the Central Criminal Court and the question of granting bail did not arise.
The judge's order was a nullity and no effective variation was made of the earlier flawed order of the justices.
The prosecution should have applied to a judge of the Central Criminal Court to revoke bail and then if bail was granted again, to impose the condition of medical examination required by the statute.
(2) The question of whether a medical report obtained pursuant to section 3(6A) should be disclosed to the Crown was essentially one within the discretion of the trial judge when he has seen the report, or exceptionally, within the discretion of such other judge who has had to conduct any pre-trial review.
EVIDENCE
Confession evidence — unreliable — PACE s.78 not confined to police misconduct — construe widely
R. v Brine
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Russell I.
J., Waterhouse and Kennedy JJ.: August 23, 1991.
B, who suffered from stress, was accused of indecent assault of a child.
He was arrested at 6 a.m. and detained at a police station until his interview began after noon.
It lasted over five hours, and his solicitor was present.
No admissions were made.
After the solicitor had left.
B made admissions, and he was interviewed further.
The total interview time was over eight hours.
He signed the admissions.
There had been breaches of the Code by insufficient breaks in the interrogation and insufficient meals provided.
None of the breaches were attributed to any malice in the police.
His counsel sought to have the admissions excluded under PACE., ss.76(2) (b), and 78.
Evidence of a psychologist was heard on the voir dire , the essence of whose testimony was that when B had made the admissions he had been suffering from a relatively mild form of paranoid psychosis, the effect of which was that, under the stress of questioning, he would have felt very threatened, been likely to tell lies, and to make untrue admissions.
He opined that B's confession was unreliable; no rebuttal medical evidence was called by the Crown.
The judge observed that the sections were there to prevent possible misconduct by the police, and that there was no provision in PACE or the Code for the doctor's evidence.
Held , allowing the appeal, the judge seemed to have taken the view that both sections 76 and 78 concerned misconduct by the police.
Section 76(2) was primarily concerned with such misconduct, but section 78 embraced circumstances which might or might not involve improper conduct on the part of the police.
Its terms were very wide and should be so construed.
The judge had taken the view that, because of the absence of any improper conduct causative of B making his admission and because his psychotic state was not known to the police, section 76(2) had no part to play.
There were apparently conflicting decisions of the Court as to the parameters of section 76(2) which it was not necessary to resolve, if they existed.
The case really turned on section 78, as to which the judge had said ‘whilst accepting the impressive evidence of the doctor, I do not think I would be justified in excluding this confession,’ adding ‘I do not think that section 78 really is aimed at, in truth, the circumstances here appertaining.’
That was not a proper construction of section 78, which was drawn so as to embrace precisely the situation of this case amongst many others that might arise in individual cases.
The decision whether to admit or exclude evidence lay with the court of trial.
The judge had to take the decision at the conclusion of the voir dire , and the judge had erred in taking the view that section 78 was concerned exclusively with misconduct by the police.
Once he had taken that view he abdicated, albeit unconsciously, his responsibility to rule on the submissions made.
He therefore failed to exercise at all the statutory discretion.
Because the jury heard evidence that the judge himself had regarded as impressive to the effect that the confession was unreliable the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.
Once the judge had concluded that the psychologist's evidence was so compelling that he felt constrained to accept it, if he had applied his mind to a proper construction of section 78 the evidence would never have gone to the jury.
Commentary .
There is nothing on the face of section 76(2) (b) to indicate that it is exclusively concerned with confessions obtained by police misconduct.
On the contrary, the Court of Appeal announced early in the history of the interpretation of the section that  it was ‘abundantly clear’ that a confession may be excluded under the subsection where there is no suspicion of impropriety:Fulling [1987]Q.B.
426.
In the first instance decision of Harvey [1988]Crim.L.R. 241, a confession of murder made by a psychopathically disordered woman was, it is submitted, rightly excluded when it became apparent that she might have been motivated by a childlike desire to protect her lover, whom she had over-heard confessing to the same offence.
To trigger section 76(2) (b), however, it must be the case that there something was ‘said or done’ which was likely to render a confession unreliable, and it has been held that this means something said or done to D, as distinct from some words or conduct of D himself (Goldenberg (1988) 88 Cr.App.R. 285).
A predisposition to stress such as that apparently suffered by the accused in the present case might fall foul of this restriction and it may have been for this reason that the Court of Appeal preferred to regard the case as one which might have been disposed of under section 78 had not the trial judge wrongly taken the view that that section also requires some misconduct on the part of the police.
[D.J.B. ]
C informed of rights — said he did not have or want a solicitor — did not know that solicitor instructed by his family had enquired about him — whether subsequent confession should be excluded under PACE, s. 78
R. v.
Chahal
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Lord Lane C.J., Roch and Auld JJ: October 4, 1991.
C was charged with arson connected with insurance fraud.
He was informed of his rights after arrest and said that he did not want a solicitor.
He asked that his son be informed, but the custody officer authorised delayed notification, and C was advised of this.
However, he was not advised when the embargo on notifying his son was lifted.
During the third interview, he was asked to confirm that he did not want a solicitor, and he replied ‘I haven't got a solicitor.’
Meanwhile, his family had instructed a solicitor to represent him.
Upon contacting the police station, that solicitor was told that C did not want a solicitor.
C was not advised of this call, nor of a further call from the solicitor the following morning.
Before the fourth interview, C as asked if he wanted a solicitor, and he signed the custody record to the effect that he did not.
In the course of that interview, he admitted employing men to set fire to his shop.
On appeal following conviction it was submitted,inter alia , that he should have been informed of the calls from the solicitor, and given a choice as to whether he wanted one or not, particularly as he had not been advised that the authority of the custody officer for the delayed notification to his son had been lifted (see Jones (Sally)February 2, 1984).
Held , dismissing the appeal, there were striking differences between the Jones case and this.
Jones occurred before PACE, and no reference had been made to a solicitor;Jones had a weak intellect.
Although the trial judge in Jones was said to have been wrong in saying that the police need not have informed her of the presence of a solicitor called by another person, the admission of a statement made by Jones in the absence of a solicitor was upheld.
In the present case, there were at least two occasions, one immediately before the confession.
in which C had affirmatively said that he did not want a solicitor.
He was certainly not of weak intellect, being a mature businessman who must have known the precise circumstances in which he found himself.
It was plain from the summing-up and the interview notes that the reason for the change of mind from denial to admission was the wish to prevent members of his family being interviewed, charged with or suspected of a crime which he was admitting.
Having been told of his rights, he had decided, not surprisingly in the circumstances, that he did not require a solicitor.
The trial judge was correct to conclude that he was not obliged, by PACE, S.78, to exclude the confession.
Commentary .
As the transcript of the judgment reveals, the Crown of Appeal was of the view that even if the appellant's assertion of a right to be informed of the solicitor's calls had been upheld, it does not follow that in all the circumstances of the case fairness would have required that the confession should have been excluded under section 78.
It is generally for the suspect, and no-one else, to decide whether he wants legal advice, and D had already made an informed decision to do without it.
The only exceptional cases are those concerning juveniles or the mentally disordered or handicapped, where an ‘appropriate adult’ is supposed to be involved in the decision-making process (see revised Code C, para. 3.13 and Annex E).
The suspect in Jones , reported at [1984]Crim.LR. 357 and decided before PACE came into force, might well have been within the class of persons now entitled to this special protection.
[D.J.B. ]
Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, s. 4(1), 7(2) — cross-examination as to spent convictions
R. v.
Evans
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Lord Lane C.J., Auld and Judge JJ.: July 16,1991.
The appellant was convicted of wounding with intent.
His defence was that of self-defence; he alleged that the victim had attacked him first.
Counsel for the appellant sought to put to the victim that she had a number of previous convictions for dishonesty and violence.
The convictions were spent under the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.
The judge refused to allow the questions to be put.
The appellant appealed against conviction.
Held , allowing the appeal, but ordering a retrial.
Section 7(2) of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 provides that the sweeping provisions of section 4(1) of the Act do not apply to criminal cases.
The matter was complicated by a Practice Direction [1975]1 W.L.R. 1065.
Whatever may be the effect of the Practice Direction read against the word of the statute the present case was clearly one where the judge, if he had a discretion about the matter at all, should have allowed the convictions to be put to the witness.
There was evidentially speaking a head-on collision between the appellant and the principal prosecution witness.
The jury were entitled to know the witness's criminal record.
Paraskeva (1983) 76 Cr.App.R. 162;Practice Direction [1975]1 W.L.R. 1065 considered.
Commentary .
See Paraskeva [1983]Crim.
L.R. 186 and Commentary thereon.
In that case, there was a ‘head-on collision’ between the evidence of D and of the complainant, a public health inspector whom D was accused of having robbed.
Unfortunately, the prosecution failed to disclose that the complainant had a spent conviction for theft, and it was held that, had the conviction been duly disclosed, the defence would have applied for and would undoubtedly have been granted leave to cross-examine the complainant about it.
As the Court of Appeal put it: ‘Somebody was not telling the truth and it could not be said that it was not a relevant matter for the jury to be told that one man had been dishonest in the past.’
A similar issue arose in the present case D had undoubtedly used considerable violence against the victim, his girlfriend, but was it (as she said) an unprovoked and drunken attack with a stick or (as he contended) an attempt to fend off an attack by the woman who was armed with a carving knife?
No doubt the jury would have been interested to hear that the victim had convictions for offences of dishonesty, and conceivably even more impressed (though in law they would be wrong to be) to learn that she had in the past tried to stab a policeman.
Of course one effect of the making of these revelations would have been to put D's record (if he had one) in issue as well, so that the jury would have had even more to think about to assist them in the weighing of the evidence in this case or (depending on how you look at it) to distract them from it.
As the Court of Appeal says, ‘par excellence a case where there should be a retrial.’
[D.J.B. ]
Caution — administer before accused makes a voluntary statement — need for accused to record that caution has been administered and understood in accordance with Annex D, paragraph 2 of Code
R. v.
Pall
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Glidewell L.J., Hodgson and Buckley JJ.: October 11, 1991.
P was charged with conspiracy to defraud, following interviews properly preceded by cautions.
Whilst on bail awaiting trial, he was served with statements of his co-accused which implicated him to a significant extent.
He was later arrested, and cautioned on suspicion of complicity in a further offence.
He asked to see the officer involved in the investigation of the earlier charge.
He had spoken to his solicitor earlier, and the officer offered him the chance to see a solicitor, which was declined.
Following a short interview about the further offence, the officer whom he had requested to see told him that he could not ask him any questions about the early offence for which he had already been charged but said that he could make a statement if he wished.
P wrote his own statement.
Half way through he had a break, and noted the record that he had been told he could consult a solicitor if he wished.
The statement put most of the blame on his co-accused, but also contained admissions.
On completion he was briefly interviewed, and told that he was still under caution.
He confirmed that he understood and signed the record of interview as accurate.
At trial, his counsel sought to have the statement excluded because P had not been cautioned again before writing it, which was a breach of the Code.
The trial judge rejected that submission and, on appeal, counsel argued that he had not specifically dealt with the issue of breach of the Code.
Held , dismissing the appeal, the judge had not referred to any specific provision  of the Code.
Nonetheless, he had clearly purported to pose the question of whether a caution was required, but had not answered it.
The proper question was whether there was a breach of the Code — in other words, was a caution necessary?
If so, was it given?
If there was a breach, was it significant or substantial?
If so, did it lead to such unfairness that the statement ought not to have been admitted?
As these questions had not been directly answered, they must now be answered by the Court.
Since the trial, the Code had been replaced by a second edition.
The wording, as far as this matter was concerned, was identical so the new paragraph numbers would be used.
Paragraph 10 of Part C dealt with when the caution must be given.
Sub-paragraph 13 of paragraph 12 provided that all written statements made under caution should be in accordance with Annex D, paragraph 2 of which provided that where a person wished to write his own statement, he should be asked to write out and sign before so doing: ‘I make this statement of my own free will.
I understand that I need not say anything unless I wish to do so and that what I say may be given in evidence.’
There was force in the Crown's argument that, strictly, the making of a statement in circumstances in which a person had already been charged and, in part at least, was intending to speak about matters relating to the charges already put did not fall within paragraphs 12, 13 and 2 of Annex D. However, the Code must be read as covering this situation.
It could not properly be interpreted as leaving a gap where that unusual situation arose.
No blame was put on the officers who were confronted with a situation that was, perhaps, totally novel to them; certainly it was unusual.
As P had previously been cautioned, and also cautioned before interview on the further charge only half an hour before he came to write his statement, it might not have occurred to them that a further caution was necessary.
Nevertheless, it was necessary and in future the officer who was overseeing the making of such statements should require the maker to record that he had been cautioned and that he understood.
The absence of a caution was in most circumstances bound to be significant (see Keen an (1990) 90 Cr.App.R. 1).
That left the issue of whether the judge should have excluded the statement under section 78.
Appellate counsel's point was that P was anxious to make it clear that the major part of the blame for the offences fell on others, and he might not have appreciated that the statement could be used against him; it was thus unfair.
But in the circumstances of this case, that was not an accurate picture.
The cautions referred to had been given and he had been questioned months earlier on the first charges.
It was inevitable that if, in saying anything that blamed others, he did make admissions in part that would tend to confirm the accuracy of the allegations that had already been made against him.
He was not misled or lulled into a sense of false security or anything of that kind.
Had the judge considered the matter directly and decided that there was no unfairness in admitting the statement, he would have been wholly justified.
Accordingly, the statement was properly admitted.
Commentary .
There is no express provision in the Code which states that a person who has already been charged must be cautioned before making a voluntary statement.
This is presumably because the situation was not foreseen: the Code takes a very strict line on questioning after charge, a course of action only permitted in very narrowly defined circumstance  under caution (para.
C16.5).
Nothing in the Code seeks to prevent a suspect volunteering a statement after charge otherwise than in response to questioning, but it is presumably such an infrequent occurrence that it was not thought necessary to spell out the procedure for doing so.
However it is clearly desirable that where such a statement is to be made in writing it should be in the same form as a statement written by the suspect following an interview,i.e. a statement under caution in compliance with paragraph C12. 13 and Annex D.
That having been said, where gaps appear in the Code it would be better for them to be filled by a change in the Code itself rather than by judicial interpretation, for it must not be forgotten that breach of the Code is a disciplinary offence and it would be unfortunate if the officers in the present case, who were rightly not made the subject of any criticism by the court, should even in theory be liable to disciplinary proceedings.
It might have been better in the present case to regard the omission to caution as a breach of the spirit of the Code rather than a breach of the Code itself.
This provides no impediment to the exclusion of evidence under sections 76 or 78 of PACE should the facts merit such exclusion, for those sections can be triggered without any express breach being shown.
In D.P.P. 
v. 
Blake [1989]1 W.L.R. 432, for example, officers infringed the spirit rather than the letter of the Code and the confession subsequently obtained was excluded under section 76.
The Code was later amended to reflect the difficulty which had arisen in the case, which concerned the selection of an estranged parent as an ‘appropriate adult’ to be present during the interviewing of a juvenile: see now Code C Note 1C, which provides that an estranged parent should not be asked to fulfil this role if the juvenile objects to his presence.
[D.J.B. ].
MAGISTRATES COURTS PROCEDURE
Magistrates Courts Act 1980, s.9(2) — failure of bench of two justices to agree — adjournment to bench of three for rehearing
R. v.
Redbridge justices, ex p.
Ram
Queen's Bench Divisional Court: Watkins L.J.
and Tudor Evans J.: July 31, 1991.
The applicant was charged with theft and appeared before a bench of two justices who were unable to agree on a verdict.
They adjourned the case and directed that it be heard before a differently constituted bench of three justices.
Before the fresh bench began to hear evidence the applicant's solicitor submitted that the justices would be acting unlawfully and ultra vires if they proceeded.
On their clerk's advice the justices rejected the submission but adjourned the case.
The applicant sought judicial review and an order directing the first bench to determine the information and relied upon section 9(2) of the Magistrates Courts Act 1980.
Held , dismissing the application.
Where there is a failure of two justices to agree the justices have no discretion.
They must adjourn the matter for trial by a bench of three justices.
Section 9(2) of the Magistrates Courts Act 1980 is in identical terms to section 13(2) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1952.
Prior to 1952, section 14 of the Summary Jurisdiction Act 1848 provided that justices  ‘shall convict…or make an order…,’i.e. that they had to come to a decision.
In essence those statutory provisions had been to the same effect.
The authorities relating to those provisions demonstrated the desirability at the very least of the need to adjourn for fresh hearing when a bench of two disagree.
The language of section 9(2) imposes a more rigorous approach to the problem.
It declares that there shall and must be one of two decisions, a conviction or an acquittal.
If a bench of two justices cannot bring themselves thus to dispose of the case there was no other sensible construction of section 9(2) then that a bench of three must become seized of the matter, rehear the evidence and comply with the statute,i.e. convict or acquit on the evidence.
Per curiam .
It would be open to the prosecutor to give an indication to the bench that he was not prepared to prosecute again.
Commentary .
As Watkins L.J.
rather sorrowfully observes in the course of his judgment ‘No-one can possibly doubt that ideally there should never be a bench composed of an even number of justices.’
When the less-than-ideal situation arises, however, and the magistrates find themselves unable to agree it appears that justices clerks have also been unable to reach a verdict on the correct interpretation of section 9(2) of the 1980 Act.
with some taking the view that a disagreement must lead to an acquittal and that no rehearing is possible.
This represents the literal approach to the construction of the section, which stipulates simply that the court, ‘after hearing the evidence and the parties, shall convict the accused or dismiss the information.’
According to Divisional Court, however, the literal approach overlooks the discretion which the justices have to do ‘what they consider to be just in the circumstances: a discretion which the court traces back as far as Kinnis v. 
Graves (1898) 67 L.J.Q.B. 583 and Bagg v. 
Colquhoun [1904]1 K.B.
554.
The duty referred to in section 9(2) is to reach a decision on the evidence, not by what Watkins L.J.
refers to as some contrived means such as a disagreement,’ and if that duty can only be discharged by adjourning for rehearing by a bench of three then that is the just and proper course to take.
It is also, of course, from the perspective of the defendant and the prosecutor the inconvenient and expensive course to take, and one which could never have been taken if the case had begun in front of a bench of three (see e.g. Bromley JJ. ex p Haymills (Contractors) Ltd. [1984]Crim.L.R. 235).
[D.J.B. ]
SENTENCE
Bomb hoax — placing imitation bomb in shop — whether offence so serious that a non-custodial sentence for it cannot be justified
R. V. WILBURN: Mustill L.J., Ognall and Potts JJ.
August 22 1991.
Facts : pleaded guilty to placing an imitation bomb in a department store with intent to induce a belief that it was likely to explode or ignite.
The appellant constructed  an imitation bomb out of a plastic box, flour, putty and sealant, and left it in a toilet in a department store.
He then telephoned the shop and warned the staff that two bombs had been placed and would explode within 10 minutes.
The shop was evacuated and bomb-disposal services were called.
Streets were cordoned off and fire engines and ambulances attended.
The shop suffered a substantial loss of trading.
Previous convictions : none.
Sentence : two years' detention in a young offender institution.
Special considerations : there was no indication that the appellant was suffering from psychiatric disorder.
He attributed the offence to pressure from his friends to carry the scheme out, when it was thought up.
Decision : the need to deter other people from carrying out similar acts outweighed the effect of the sentence on the appellant's future prospects: the appellant's personal position came second to the public interest in deterring others minded to act as he did.
The Court agreed that a non-custodial sentence could not be justified for the offence, and was satisfied that the offence called for a substantial sentence.
The sentence imposed was correct.
Commentary .
The maximum sentence for an offence under Criminal Law Act 1977, s.51 is increased to 10 years by Criminal Justice Act 1991, s.26, with effect from October 25: the new maximum sentence applies to offences committed on or after that date.
Detention in young offender institution — offender aged sixteen pleading guilty to offence punishable with fourteen years imprisonment or more — whether wrong in principle to impose sentence of twelve months' detention in a young offender institution
R. v.
KEARSLEY: Russell L.J., Waterhouse and Kennedy JJ.
August 19,1991.
Age ; 16 (m.)
Facts : pleaded guilty to one attempted robbery and one robbery.
The appellant and two companions decided to rob a shop, and entered the shop wearing stocking masks and carrying knives; they ran away when a friend of the proprietor threw a toffee jar at them.
One month later the appellant and another accomplice entered an off licence, wearing stocking masks and carrying a gun which was not in working order; the female licencee was threatened and £65 taken from the till.
Previous convictions : several as a juvenile for theft and taking without consent: conditionally discharged on each occasion.
Sentence : 12 months' detention in a young offender institution.
Special considerations : the appellant had experienced difficulties following his parents' separation; a community service order was recommended.
Decision : the sole ground of appeal was that in sentencing the appellant to 12 months detention in a young offender institution, the maximum term for an offender aged 16, the sentencer had not allowed any discount for his plea of guilty.
It was clear to the Court that the case was covered by the principle in Godber (1986) 8 (Cr.App.R.
(S.) 460, which established that where a juvenile pleaded guilty to an offence for which he could be ordered to be detained under Children and Young Persons Act 1933, s.53(2), it was open to the sentencer to impose a term of 12 months detention in a young offender institution, if he considered that apart from the plea of guilty a sentence of detention under section 53(2) would have been warranted.
It was clear from the sentences imposed on the other defendants, one of whom was sentenced to three years' imprisonment, that the sentencer considered that a longer  sentence would have been appropriate if the appellant had been over 21.
This was a case for which a substantial punishment was called for, and in the absence of a plea of guilty, a sentence of detention under Children and Young Persons Act 1933, S.53(2) of at least two years would have been called for.
Although the sentencer did not expressly mention section 53(2), it was clear that he had allowed a substantial discount for the pleas of guilty.
The appeal would be dismissed.
Commentary .
It is now clearly established that a juvenile who pleads guilty to an offence or series of offences for which the maximum term of custody is a sentence of 12 months' detention in a young offender institution should normally receive an  appropriate discount to reflect his plea, subject to the general principles governing the award of a discount.
The principle was first recognised in Stewart (1983) 5 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 320, and has been applied in a number of subsequent decisions, such as Fleming and Dodge (1984) 6 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 222 and Littlefield (1987) 9 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 232.
Another series of decisions, beginning with Reynolds (1985) 7 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 335 recognise the exception illustrated by this decision: if the offence to which the juvenile has pleaded guilty is punishable with 14 years' imprisonment and is therefore one for which the juvenile can be detained under Children and Young Persons Act 1933, s.53(2) for a longer period, a sentence of 12 months' detention in a young offender institution is not objectionable, despite the plea of guilty, if the offence would have justified a longer term of detention under section 53(2) and the sentencer has given the juvenile a discount for his plea by choosing to impose a term of detention in a young offender institution rather than detention under Children and Young Persons Act 1933, s.53(2).
Juvenile — juvenile subject to maximum term of twelve months' detention in a young offender institution — effect of sentence in excess of twelve months' detention in young offender institution — whether Court of Appeal may substitute sentence of detention under Children and Young Persons Act 1933 section 53(2)
R. v.
ANDERSON: Farquharson L.J., Tucker and Owen JJ.
September 26, 1991.
Age : 16 (m.).
Facts : pleaded guilty to two offences of robbery, one of attempted robbery and two of assault with intent to rob.
The appellant was concerned with another youth aged 17 in a number of incidents in which five different people were approached in the street, threatened with violence and robbed in two cases of small sums of money.
One victim was head butted and another was threatened with a crude imitation gun.
Sentence : three years' detention in a young offender institution.
Special considerations : the sentence was unlawful by reason of the appellant's age.
Decision : it would have been open to the sentencer to impose a term of detention under Children and Young Persons Act 1933, S.53(2), but he had made no reference to the section and it was clear that the sentence was unlawful.
An attempt had been made to have the case relisted before the sentencer within the 28 day period during which variations in sentence are permitted by Supreme Court Act 1981, S.4;, and if the matter had come back before the sentencer within that period it would have been open to him to review the sentence and impose a lawful sentence.
As that course had not been taken, the sentence of three years' detention took effect, by reason of Criminal Justice Act 1982, 5.1B(S) as a sentence of 12 months' detention, and the excess of the sentence over 12 months' was remitted.
The Court of Appeal  was restricted by Criminal Appeal Act 1968, s.11(3) which provided that the Court might not deal with an offender on appeal in a manner which resulted in him being dealt with more severely on appeal than by the court below.
The appellant had been sentenced to a term of detention which took effect as a sentence of 12 months' detention in a young offender institution, and the Court's powers were limited to declaring that that was the effect of the sentence passed by the Crown Court.
Commentary .
In normal circumstances, when an unlawful sentence is passed by the Crown Court the Court of Appeal can treat the sentence as a nullity and impose a lawful sentence in place of the unlawful sentence passed by the Crown Court (see for instance Hollywood (1990) 12 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 325).
That course could not be taken in the present case, because of a specific and unusual statutory provision which anticipated the kind of mistake which was made by the sentencer in this case.
Criminal Justice Act 1982, s. 1B(5) provides that if a sentence of detention in a young offender institution is passed on a juvenile which results in a total term of detention exceeding 12 months', any excess over 12 months' is remitted and the sentence takes effect as a term of 12 months' detention in a young offender institution.
Although the sentencer had exceeded his powers by passing a sentence of three years' detention in a young offender institution, the error was automatically corrected by this provision and a lawful sentence resulted.
It followed that the Court of Appeal could not substitute a term of three years' detention under Children and Young Persons Act 1933, s.53(2), despite the fact that that sentence would have been available to the sentencer in the Crown Court, as there was an effective sentence in place.
The substitution of a term of detention under section 53(2) would have amounted to an increase in the sentence, which is permissible only on a reference by the Attorney General under Criminal Justice Act 1988, s.36.
The case is one more illustration of the extreme technicality of the law relating to the sentencing of juveniles, and the need to simplify the provisions governing the relationship between two forms of detention which are likely at least in this type of case to be indistinguishable from each other in their implementation.
Detention in young offender institution — statutory criteria — only a custodial sentence would be adequate to protect the public from serious harm from him — whether criterion applicable to offender previously placed on probation
R. v.
POWELL: Taylor L.J., Ian Kennedy and Morland JJ.
July 2. 1991.
Age : under 21.
Facts : pleaded guilty to two counts of indecent assault.
The appellant attacked a girl aged 13 as she was walking home in mid-morning; he put his arms round her waist from behind, pushed her to the ground and shouted ‘Let me have it.’
He was detained by a passing motorist who intervened.
He also admitted fingering the private parts of a two and a half year old child for whom he was baby sitting.
Previous convictions : one, for indecently assaulting a girl aged 19.
Sentence : two years' detention in a young offender institution.
Special considerations : the appellant was originally put on probation with a requirement that he should reside at a probation hostel which specialised in providing treatment for young men guilty of indecent assault.
The appellant failed to comply with the rules of the hostel, on one occasion leaving without permission, and was brought before the magistrates' court who returned him to the hostel.
Following further unacceptable behaviour, breach proceedings were started a second time, and the appellant absconded from the hostel; he was eventually arrested and committed to the Crown Court to be dealt with for the original offences.
Decision : it  was clear to the Court that a sentence of detention in a young offender institution could be justified under Criminal Justice Act 1982, s.1(4A) (b), on the ground that only a custodial sentence was adequate to protect the public from serious harm from him.
The nature of the two indecent assaults, coupled with the failure of the attempt to treat him, which had to be laid at his door, reinforced the concern.
The sentence was not wrong in principle, and there had been no failure to comply with the requirements of the Criminal Justice Act 1982.
The sentence was not excessive.
Commentary .
The interest of this case is that it indicates that a sentence of detention in a young offender institution can be justified under Criminal Justice Act 1982, s.1(4A) (b), notwithstanding the fact that the offender was originally dealt with for the offences by means of a probation order.
It may have been that on his original appearance this condition would not have been satisfied, as it could not have been said that only a custodial sentence was adequate to protect the public from serious harm from him, if the alternative of a probation order requiring residence at a hostel specialising in sexual offenders was available.
Given the appellant's failure to comply with the requirements of the hostel regime, the court was entitled to leave that alternative out of account and assess the dangerousness of the appellant on the basis of his offences and reluctance to participate in treatment.
Although the passing of a custodial sentence could be justified under the Act on the basis of dangerousness, the length of the sentence was limited by reference to the gravity of the offence, and the court found that the sentence was not excessive judged on this basis.
Under Criminal Justice Act 1991, s.2(2) (b), in a case such as this the court will have power to pass a sentence which is longer than the gravity of the offence would justify, on the ground that such a sentence is necessary to protect the public from serious harm (which includes serious psychological injury, see s.31) from the offender.
Custody for life — criteria for imposition of sentence
R. v.
LYNAS: Watkins L.J., Rougier and May JJ.
October 8, 1991.
Age : 18 (m.).
Facts : convicted of attempted robbery: pleaded guilty to two further offences of robbery and one of indecent assault.
On four occasions the appellant accosted a woman in the street, threatened her with violence, on three occasions carrying a knife, and stole or attempted to steal the victim's purse.
On a fifth occasion the appellant approached a woman who was walking to work, grabbed her breast, but walked off when she pulled away.
Previous convictions : one for indecent exposure, one for indecent assault.
Sentence : custody for life.
Special considerations : there was evidence that the appellant was suffering from a seriously disturbed personality, but was not mentally ill; he was subject to rages and fantasies.
Decision : the criteria for the imposition of an indeterminate sentence had been considered in many cases, in particular Hodgson (1968) 52 Cr.App.R. 113,Pither (1979) 1 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 209 and Turton (1986) 8 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 174.
The court had to have regard to the ascertainable defect in the mentality of the defendant, and whether it showed a predilection to do harm to others.
The medical reports showed that the appellant was not subject to a definable mental illness, but was disturbed; there were however signs that he was maturing and that with appropriate treatment he should overcome his difficulties and achieve an increase in maturity and a more balanced outlook on life.
The Court had reached the conclusion that it should quash the indeterminate sentence and substitute a sentence of seven years' detention.
R v.
BUSBY: Watkins L.J., Rose and Pill JJ.
August 13, 1991.
Age : 18 (m.)
Facts : pleaded guilty to buggery.
The appellant was babysitting for a number of young children and committed buggery on a girl aged three.
The appellant claimed that he intended to have normal sexual intercourse with her.
Previous convictions : several for various offences, including two indecent assaults on young children, for which a care order had been made.
Sentence : custody for life.
Special considerations : the medical evidence was that the appellant was not suffering from mental illness or mental impairment, and was not suffering from psychopathic disorder.
The appellant was however described as flat and detached, with no signs of remorse for his offences: he was thought to be developing a personality disorder.
There was no indication of any desire on the part of the appellant to change his behaviour, and it was considered unsafe to release him into the community.
Decision : the criteria for the imposition of an indeterminate sentence were well known.
Although the appellant was not suffering from mental illness, there was clearly something radically wrong with him: he presented a deeply worrying problem.
The prime responsibility of the courts was to protect the public against a person who showed a propensity for very disturbing behaviour when he had the opportunity to interfere with the young and defenceless.
The relevant considerations had been stated in Flemming (1973) 57 Cr.App.R. 524,Bell (1989) 11 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 472 and Hill (1989) 11 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 530.
It was recognised in these cases that an indeterminate sentence could properly be passed in a case where dangerousness arose from a non-treatable personality disorder.
Those observations were applicable to the present case: the appellant was at the present time a dangerous young man for whom a determinate  sentence was not appropriate.
The future must take care of when it was that the appellant would be released.
Commentary .
These cases indicate that the criteria for the imposition of a sentence of custody for life, where it is discretionary, are  substantially the same as those which apply to imprisonment for life.
Deprivation of rights in property used to commit offence — necessity for evidence of value of property
R. v.
RICHARDS: Woolf L.J., Leonard and Hidden JJ.
July 26, 1991.
Facts : pleaded guilty to three counts of theft and five counts of damaging property.
The appellant and two accomplices broke into a number of cars and stole various objects from them.
Previous convictions : two for dishonesty; one previous custodial sentence.
Sentence : 180 hours community service, ordered to pay £83 compensation and £11 towards the costs of the prosecution, and ordered to be deprived of his rights in a car in which the appellant and his accomplices drove to the places where the thefts were committed.
The appeal was limited to the order depriving the appellant of his rights in the car.
Special considerations : the sentencer passed sentence on the basis that all three offenders were equally implicated, and imposed the same sentence on each of them, except in respect of the order for deprivation.
At the time of sentencing, it was assumed that the car was worthless, having been stolen from the appellant and returned to him in a damaged condition: it had subsequently been established that the car was worth  £3,000.
Decision : considering R. v. Highbury Corner Stipendiary Magistrate ex parte di Matteo (1990) 12 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 594 and Otey (1984) 6 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 163.
Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973, s.43(1A) required the court to have regard to the value of the property concerned and the likely financial effect of the order on the offender, taken together with any other order which the court contemplates making.
It was clear that the sentencer would not have made the order if he had known what was now known by the court.
There was a clear difference between the facts as they appeared to the court and the facts as they appeared to the sentencer, and the order depriving the appellant of his car would be quashed.
Commentary .
R. v.
Highbury Corner Stipendiary Magistrate ex p. di Matteo established that before making an order depriving an offender of his rights in property under Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973, s.43, the court must have some evidence of the value of the property concerned (also in that case a car) so that it can fulfil the obligation imposed by section 43(1A) to have regard to the value of the property concerned.
The effect of this requirement is probably in practice to make the power unusable in many cases, as unless the prosecution anticipate that the court will wish to make such an order, it will not be equipped with the necessary evidence, particularly as the car will not necessarily be in the possession of the police at this stage, and the court will be faced with an adjournment if it wishes to proceed with an order.
As no order will have been made in respect of the property at this stage, the defendant appears to be free to dispose of it before the order can be made and thus defeat the object of making the order.
There are other difficulties in making an order in such a case as this where a number of defendants have been equally involved in committing a crime, for the purpose of which a vehicle belonging to one of them has been used.
As an order depriving the owner of his rights in property must (in accordance with a number of decisions) be treated as part of the total punishment imposed on an offender, an order depriving only one of them of his rights in an object of significant value.
such as a car, will result in an objectionable disparity of sentence, unless some compensating adjustment is made in the other sentences, either in the form of an equivalent financial penalty imposed on the accomplices, or a reduction in the primary sentence imposed on the owner of the car which is the subject of the order.
Causing grievous bodily harm with intent — premeditated attack involving blows to the leg with a hammer, causing fractures — whether suspended sentence of eighteen months unduly lenient
ATTORNEY GENERAL'S REFERENCE No. 11 of 1991 (R. v.
BURNETT): Lord Lane C.J., Roch and Auld JJ.
October 15, 1991.
Age : 24 (m.).
Facts : convicted of causing grievous bodily harm with intent.
The offender had a dispute with the victim as a result of the sale by her of his car: the offender claimed that she had sold it for less than it was worth, and had not paid over to him his proper share in the proceeds of the sale.
The offender drove up behind the victim as she was walking in the street one evening with her daughter, aged two and a half, and attacked her with a hammer, striking her two blows on the leg and one on the knee.
The victim suffered a fractured tibia and a laceration.
Previous convictions : none of substance.
Sentence : 18 months' imprisonment suspended for two years, and ordered to pay £440 towards the costs of the prosecution.
Special considerations : the Attorney General invited the Court to review the sentence on the ground that it was unduly lenient.
Decision :(considering McLoughlin (1985) 7 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 67 and Attorney General's Reference No. 4 of 1989 ,(1989) 11  Cr.App.R.
(S.) 521) This was a premeditated attack instituted because of a financial grievance which existed in the mind of the attacker.
There was no mitigating feature in the shape of a plea of guilty.
It seemed to the Court that a sentence of 18 months' imprisonment, suspended, was outside the area of sentences which the judge could reasonably have considered appropriate.
Bearing in mind the provocation, and the fact that the offender had to face the prospect of being sentenced a second time, the sentence was far too lenient, and a proper sentence would have been two years' immediate imprisonment: that sentence would be substituted.
Commentary .
The sentence imposed by the Court of Appeal presumably incorporates a discount to reflect the fact that the offender had to face the prospect of being sentenced a second time, but there is no indication of the extent of the discount: the case is therefore of limited value as an indication of what the proper sentence would have been at first instance.
Rape — rape of girl of thirteen by person with temporary care of her — whether thirty months' imprisonment unduly lenient
ATTORNEY GENERAL'S REFERENCE No. 8 of 1991 (R. v.
JEPSON): Lord Lane C.J., Roch and Auld JJ.
October 8,1991.
Age : 41 (m.).
Facts : pleaded guilty to rape.
The offender was the father of a girl of 11, whose friend aged 13 came to stay overnight with her.
The offender arranged for the two girls to swim at a local swimming pool where he was employed as a cleaner after it had closed.
He took the girls to the swimming pool after midnight, and then persuaded the victim to come with him to a changing room, on the pretext that the manager of the swimming pool might find them at the pool.
The offender then raped her by force against her protests.
They then returned to the offender's home, but the victim left immediately and returned to her parents' home.
Sentence : 30 months' imprisonment.
Special considerations : the Attorney General applied for a review of the sentence on the ground that it was unduly lenient.
Decision : the locus classicus for sentencing in rape cases was Billam (1986) 8 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 48.
The relevant passage in the judgment indicated that where a rape was committed by a person who was in a position of trust towards the victim, the starting point for consideration of the appropriate sentence should be eight years.
The crime was aggravated by evidence of careful planning and the fact that the victim was very young.
The offender had a degree of responsibility for the victim, there was evidence of planning and the victim, while not as young as some victims, was only 13.
It seemed to the Court that the sentencer had used the same mitigating factors twice over; once to reduce the starting point, and then to justify a further reduction.
The approach of the Court was that taking into account the three aggravating circumstances, the responsibility of the offender, the age of the girl and the degree of planning, the proper starting point would have been in the region of eight years: against that were the plea of guilty, the offender's remorse and the effect on the offender of the double appearance.
The mitigating effect of these factors amounted to three years.
The consequence was that, deducting three years from eight, the proper sentence would have been five years: that sentence would be imposed.
Commentary .
The Court appears to have taken the view that although the victim was staying overnight in the offender's house, and therefore he had a degree of responsibility for her welfare, his responsibility was not so strict as that of a parent or other person with a longer lasting relationship with the victim, and that the degree of responsibility in this case did not justify the adoption of eight years as a starting point as opposed to the normal five years.