

May 1992
The War Crimes Act and procedural protection
In his article at [1992]Crim.L.R. 173, Mr. Ronald Cottrell argued that the Schedule to the War Crimes Act 1991 leaves a defendant without an opportunity to challenge the prosecution case if a notice of transfer has been served.
In fact, paragraph 6 of the Schedule does provide that a defendant charged under the Act can apply to the Crown Court at any time after the notice of transfer has been served, and the judge must dismiss the charge unless satisfied that there is sufficient evidential basis for a conviction.
We apologise to readers for this error.
Bail decisions and crime prevention
Much publicity was given at the beginning of this year to claims that large numbers of offences are committed by offenders who are already on bail as a result of other charges.
The implication was that the efforts to reduce the use of remands in custody, which appear to have met with some success in the last two years after the spectacular rise of the custodial remand population during the 1980s, were having unintended and unwanted effects on the crime rate.
In Home Office Research and Planning Unit Paper 65,Offending while on Bail: a survey of recent studies , by Patricia M. Morgan (Home Office, 1992), the figures which gave rise to the recent claims are subjected to careful analysis.
As always in interpreting statistics, much depends on the time-period studied and on the definition of ‘offending on bail.’
Looking at five sets of data relating to different police areas, the author finds that the proportion of defendants given bail who are found guilty of offences committed while they were on bail is around 10 to 12 per cent., rising to some 17 per cent .
if offences which are followed by a caution or taken into consideration are included.
These rates are fairly similar to those found in a large-scale Home Office survey in 1978 although, because a higher number of people are now granted bail, it follows that the number of offences they commit will also be higher.
Several other ways of measuring the effect of bail on rates of offending are considered in this survey, as is the question whether more crime would be prevented if more people were remanded in custody rather than given bail.
Even at a purely statistical level, the answer is not straightforward.
If it is accepted that between 10 and 17 per cent.
of defendants granted bail were convicted of an offence committed whilst on bail, this means that some 83 to 90 per cent.
were not.
Figures from the Metropolitan Police show that, in cases where bail was granted although the police had recommended that it be opposed, the offending rate on bail was 18 per cent., compared with 9 per cent .
for others.
This means that, of those for whom the police had indicated an objection to bail, some 82 per cent.
were not convicted of a ‘bail’ offence.
And if one moves from the statistical to the policy level, who are the most likely people to offend on bail?
The highest rates were for those charged with theft of or from a vehicle (23 per cent.
in London) and with burglary (20 per cent.
in London, 16 per cent.
outside); the lowest rates were for persons charged with offences of violence.
Young adults aged 17 to 20 are also a high-risk group.
The problem is that there is a special  policy of using custody sparingly for young offenders (e.g. s.1(4A) of the Criminal Justice Act 1982), and some of their offences are not particularly serious.
Indeed, many would not be sentenced to custody on conviction.
Therefore, before any policy conclusions are drawn from the figures recently published, do we not need to be sure (i) that we can predict with some success which defendants are likely (at more than 50 per cent.
probability, at least) to offend whilst on bail, and (ii) that a custodial remand is the only justifiable way of responding to this prediction, lesser methods of prevention (e.g. through bail hostels or other methods) being likely to fail?
‘False confession; false evidence’
A seminar for practitioners and other professionals has been organised by the British Academy of Forensic Sciences, the Criminal Bar Association and the London Criminal Courts Solicitors' Association on the subject, ‘False Confession; False Evidence — can psychiatrists assist the courts?.’
The speakers will be Dr. J. Mackeith and Dr. G. Gudjonsson on ‘The risk of false confession after PACE and the revised Codes of Practice’; Dr. D. Jenkins on ‘Fit to be interviewed?’;
Professor G. Stephenson on ‘Collaborative testimony; taking witness statements; interrogative techniques’; Dr. M. Macleod on ‘Eye witness evidence’; and D. Sheldon on ‘The admissibility of psychiatric evidence.’
The seminar will take place on the evening of Thursday 18 June at the Atkin Hall, Grays Inn, and will be chaired by the Lord Chief Justice.
Applications for tickets, at £20 each, should be made to Robert Roscoe, BAFS seminar, Victor Lissack and Roscoe, 8 Bow Street, Covent Garden, London WC2E 7AJ
Legal aid research
The Centre for Criminal Justice Studies at Leeds University is embarking on a research project to examine decision-making in the administration of criminal legal aid.
The main study will focus on four particular courts, but the researchers will be grateful to receive any comments from readers of the Review on experiences with, or impressions of, the system of criminal legal aid.
Comments should be sent to David S. Wall, Centre for Criminal Justice Studies, The University, Leeds LS2 9JT.
Expert evidence in the courts
There is to be a national conference on the role of experts in criminal proceedings, to be chaired by Woolf L.J.
and Professor John Gunn.
Among the speakers will be Professor John Monahan from the United States, and Mme. Brigitte Bliecq, a Court of Appeal judge in France.
The conference will be at Regent's College, London, on June 3.
Further details from Jill Elliott, Centre for Criminal Justice, Faculty of Law, The University, Southampton: phone 0703 593024.
Miscarriage of Justice — A Root Treatment
Summary :The roots of miscarriage of justice usually lie in the police investigation.
The legal procedures may be improved, but they are bound to remain vulnerable to an erroneous police case.
Attempts, in continental law, to reduce this vulnerability, by introducing a legal official into the investigatory stage, have not been successful.
Consequently efforts must be made to tackle the problem at its source by aiming to  improve  the truth value of the police findings themselves.
Erroneous police conclusions are often caused by considerable obstacles to the discovery of what happened in the past.
These obstacles are not unique to police investigations.
They also hamper the search for factual reality in sciences, where they have been tackled by a powerful culture of verification.
This culture provides both the means and the incentives for discovering and remedying errors.
The way forward is, therefore, to introduce into police practices verification procedures aimed at similarly averting cognitive pitfalls.
One possible model of verification involves re-investigation of problematic cases by an independent police team.
Such a practice would tend to promote suitable professional standards and reduce the chances of miscarriage of justice.
Introduction
Recent revelations of substantial miscarriages of justice have drawn attention, not for the first time, to the shortcomings of the criminal trial as a reliable test of guilt.
As on other occasions, when the criminal process comes under scrutiny, the thrust of suggestions for reform is largely directed towards improving the legal procedures.
Yet, while pretrial and trial procedures may be wanting, it is not there that the source of trouble lies.
The roots of miscarriage of justice are to be found in police investigations.
It is erroneous police conclusions that lead to prosecutions and to unwarranted convictions.
We may try, as has been done in the past, to arm prosecutors and judges with better procedures for discovering police mistakes.
But past experience suggests that such an indirect approach is unlikely to improve dramatically the ability of the trial system to withstand mistaken police results.
We would do better to adopt a direct approach and tackle  the problem at its source by attempting to reduce the risk of police mistakes in the first place.
As soon as we turn our attention to the source of police errors we find that they do not, in the main, spring from malpractice, ill will or even slackness, as is sometimes supposed.
Rather the reason lies in very real obstacles to the discovery of what happened.
These cognitive obstacles are not unique to police investigations.
They tend to hamper every search for factual reality, including research in science.
For a long time now scientists have been aware of, and occasionally fallen victim to, a myriad of biases and artifacts which tend to falsify the results of factual investigations.
In science these distorting factors have been tackled by a powerful culture of verification, which provides both the means and the incentives for discovering and remedying errors.
As a result, high standards of professional competence have evolved and have spread throughout the field.
Research in science is not the only prey to these distorting factors, they affect policemen as acutely.
Yet the contrast between the success of science in devising methods to overcome these problems and the under-developed state of police practice could not be greater.
The cognitive obstacles faced in the investigation of crime are not openly discussed in our system of criminal justice, let alone solved.
When things go wrong we tend to assume that the police have offended, rather than that they were defeated by real cognitive problems.
True, the police do at times breach the rules laid down by the law.
But these breaches are frequently mere secondary symptoms of a fundamental problem: first making a factual mistake and then finding oneself propelled towards a wrong conclusion.
Policemen have few reliable tests for gauging the correctness of their conclusions.
They employ no advanced verification procedures in criminal investigations.
While they adhere to some uniform practices, these are not systematically informed and shaped by pertinent experience and knowledge gained elsewhere.
The present article starts by highlighting the pivotal role of police results in the criminal process.
This is followed by a brief outline of the continental legal  system to which critics have turned for a solution to our problems.
Notwithstanding claims made by these systems to limit the role of the police in criminal investigations, it will be pointed out that police results have even greater sway on the continent than in England.
The third part shows that many problems encountered in police investigation turn up in scientific research and considers what lessons may be learnt from the experience of science.
Lastly, the introduction of verification procedures into police practices is examined.
This course should foster suitable professional standards in investigations and help reduce the chances of miscarriage of justice.
The prominence of police investigation in the English criminal process
The common law displays an ambivalent attitude towards the police process and its product.
On the one hand, it accords no special status to police findings or to the police file.
The theory is that the results or factual conclusions of police investigations have no special standing but have to be proved by admissible evidence  just like any other relevant fact.
On the other hand, the law cannot but recognise that police investigation plays a crucial role in the criminal process and it therefore seeks to regulate it.
Legal rules govern important aspects of the process of gathering evidence, such as the interrogation of suspects.
The legal regulation of police practice ill fits the theory that the fruits of police investigation are in principle no different from any other source of information; that, as it were, a confession in the police station is no different from an admission made to a casual bystander.
Convictions in criminal cases are pronounced by the courts, yet to a large extent they are the product of police action.
It is to the police that crimes are reported.
It is the police who investigate complaints, gather evidence, interrogate suspects and, at the end of the investigation, place their conclusions before a legal official.
In deciding whether to take the case to trial, this legal official acts on the basis of the material provided by the police.
At the trial, the case presented is essentially that prepared by the police.
It is widely believed that the case presented by the police to the prosecutor and, through him, to court, consists purely of facts or evidence.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The police case does not contain just raw objective facts.
The police present an entire picture of reality which is interlaced with evaluative conclusions (such as the description of the conduct to fit a particular legal definition), with evidence created by the police in its interaction with the suspect (the confession), and is shaped by numerous decisions taken in the course of the investigation to pursue certain leads or hypotheses and drop others.
Indeed, the reality constructed by the police may represent one version chosen from a number of alternatives, as a recent study by McConville, Sanders and Leng shows.
Police results and conclusions, to which reference is made throughout this article, are taken to be an amalgam of evidence found, such as fingerprints, evidence created through police intervention, such as confessions, and inferences based on these and other matters.
Inevitably, value judgment plays an important role in this process.
As the outcome of official action by an organ of the state, the police case comes before the court stamped with a seal of authority which gives it a powerful influence.
In his book,The Limits of the Criminal Sanction .
H. Packer drew attention to the factual presumption of guilt operating in the criminal process:
‘If there is confidence in the reliability of informal administrative fact-finding activities that take place in the early stages of the criminal process, the remaining stages of the process can be relatively perfunctory without any loss in operating efficiency.
The presumption of guilt…is the operational expression of that confidence.’
In their recent work on the English police McConville, Sanders and Leng draw attention to a pervasive ‘general presumption of regularity about police evidence.’
There is nothing peculiar or improper in the courts, or anywhere else, proceeding on the assumption that police conclusions are reliable.
In a fairly well ordered society, such as ours, one is justified to act on the assumption that, on the whole, our official organs, be they the police or any other governmental body, do their job properly.
Indeed, it would bode ill for our political system if we mistrusted our state organisations, and if the courts approached the results of police investigations with the assumption that nothing can be taken at face value.
If prosecutors, magistrates, judges and jurors were to proceed on an entirely sceptical footing, many fewer search and arrest warrants would be issued, fewer people would be prosecuted, even fewer would be committed to trial, and, of those tried, many more than at present would be acquitted.
In short, law enforcement would suffer.
Furthermore, to the extent that a tendency has developed to disbelieve policemen, who are after all officers of the law, it marks a serious deterioration in the quality of the administration of justice.
The authority with which police results are invested by the legal regulation of police procedures is not necessarily warranted.
It simply does not follow that because the legal forms have been observed, the results are more reliable; any more than it follows that whenever the forms are breached, the results are unreliable.
Yet by inevitably proceeding on an assumption of regularity of police action the legal process cannot help making itself vulnerable to police mistakes.
The vulnerability of continental legal systems
Continental legal systems have sought, with little success, to overcome this vulnerability to police results by introducing a legal official into the investigative process.
Continental law claims to give legal officials, rather than policemen, pre-eminence in the investigation.
Yet a cursory look at these systems reveals that in practice the police still influence the process greatly.
Continental procedure is hierarchical and sequential.
At each procedural stage an official creates a file, consisting of evidence and of his conclusions and decisions, which is then passed on.
At each successive stage the file created below is taken as a starting point.
‘And while the accuracy of information in the file is not unchallengeable,’ writes Damaska, ‘it commands considerable weight.
Indeed, unless such weight were attributed to it, the very foundation of the hierarchical process would begin to tremble.’
Since criminal investigations are conducted by the police in the first instance, the police file tends to shape the case in all its subsequent stages.
France
French criminal procedure distinguishes between crimes and délits .
The former are offences punishable by imprisonment for five years or more while the latter are those punishable by a term of two months to five years.
An investigation by an examining magistrate, the juge d'instruction , is mandatory in the case of crimes but not for délits .
For the latter the prosecutor has discretion to invoke a judicial examination but rarely does so.
Furthermore, not infrequently an examination is also avoided in crimes by ignoring aggravating circumstances and treating the offence as a délit .
The French police may bring in a suspect for interrogation under the process of garde à vue .
They may detain the suspect for 24 hours (extendable by the prosecutor to 48 hours) and question him without access to legal advice or notification of his right to maintain silence.
Confessions made during this period are admissible and often devastating.
Police powers are even wider in relation to crime or délit flagrant .
An offence is regarded as flagrant where it is being, or has recently been, perpetrated, or the suspect is found in possession of incriminating materials.
The French police tend to interpret these conditions liberally and exercise wide investigatory powers without countervailing checks such as legal representation for suspects and contemporaneous recording of interviews.
At the end of the police investigation the suspect must be taken before a prosecutor who decides how the case should proceed.
Before the prosecutor he may offer his side of the story, which is placed on the file.
The prosecutor may decide to terminate the case, treat it as délit or, exceptionally, send it to an examining  magistrate.
Before an examining magistrate the accused is entitled to legal representation.
The magistrate may question the suspect and other witnesses and conduct his own enquiries.
But, on the whole, he prefers to empower the police, by commission rogatoire to do much of the work on his behalf.
It appears that a great deal of weight is given by examining magistrates, who may be young and inexperienced, to the police file, which includes the accused's incriminating statements.
Thus, although examining magistrates may conduct a fresh investigation and take a detached look at the police evidence, it is difficult to establish whether this takes place to any serious extent.
Germany
In Germany the responsibility for pretrial investigation is given to the public prosecutor in respect of both Verbrechen , offences punishable by imprisonment of one year or more, and Vergehen , punishable by lesser sentences.
The police are under a duty to report all crimes to the prosecutor who is charged with the duty of conducting criminal investigations.
Underlying the German criminal process is a principle of mutual trust between the police and the prosecutor.
The result is that although prosecutors may direct investigations, they tend to leave matters to the police.
At the start of the police interrogation the suspect is informed of his right of silence and of his right to consult a lawyer, but he has no right to have the lawyer present during the interrogation.
A suspect may be accompanied by a lawyer when he is brought before the prosecutor.
In those cases in which the prosecutor takes an active role in the conduct of the investigation, he directs the police enquiries.
However, except in some cases of serious or organised crime, prosecutors leave the interrogation of the suspect to the police.
The prosecutor's pretrial dossier, which contains a substantial input by the police, has a considerable influence on the outcome of the case since the judge works from it at the trial in developing the case and examining witnesses and accused alike.
Italy
Italian law provides an interesting comparison because the inquisitorial model has been found wanting and has been recently altered to include adversarial elements.
The inquisitorial model was more solidly entrenched in Italy than in France.
All serious offences had to be investigated by an examining magistrate.
The pretrial phase, the instruzione formale , was in theory controlled by the judge and only in the less complicated cases by the public prosecutor who conducted the instruzione sommaria .
But in practice the pretrial process was often conducted not by an examining magistrate but by the prosecutor or the police.
Moreover, the pretrial phase dominated the process to the extent that the pretrial dossier formed the basis for the final verdict without being put to further searching judicial scrutiny.
It would appear that the pretrial investigation determined the accused's fate without as much as affording him a right of effective participation in the process.
Much of this has been changed by the 1988 Code of Criminal Procedure, which attempts to move away from the inquisitorial system and to introduce adversarial elements into the criminal process.
There are three stages in the new pretrial procedure.
The remarkable aspect of the first, the investigative, stage is the limited scope given to the police.
Independent interrogation by the police is confined to the first 48 hours after the offence has been reported.
During this period the police may formally interrogate the suspect only in certain circumstances.
If the suspect is not under arrest he may only be interrogated in the presence of his lawyer.
If a statement is then taken, it is usable at the preliminary hearing but not at the trial, except for the purpose of impeaching the accused.
If the suspect is under arrest, he may be interrogated only in the vicinity of the scene of the crime and in proximity of time to its commission.
If the suspect's lawyer is present at this on the spot interview, a statement taken may be used in the ways just described.
If the suspect's lawyer is not present, his statement may not even be documented, let alone used in later proceedings.
As soon as the initial 48 hour period is over, the police must pass to the prosecutor all materials concerning the offence and hand over the investigation to him.
Thereafter, the police are at his disposal.
The prosecutor may direct policemen to carry out inquiries and interview witnesses, but he cannot deputise them to interrogate the suspect, a task which he must perform himself.
The process passes into its second stage when the prosecutor submits his dossier to an examining magistrate.
The judice per le indagini preliminari will hold a hearing in the presence of the accused and his counsel on the basis of the prosecutor's  file.
The examining magistrate will decide to send the case to trial, except when proof of innocence is clear.
The third stage, the trial, makes a fundamental breach with the past.
It does not proceed on the pretrial dossier.
The documents used during the preliminary hearing may not, subject to limited exceptions, be used at the trial.
Instead the trial proceeds on the basis of oral evidence given by witnesses who are called by the parties and examined in much the same fashion as in England.
Whether the curbs on police investigation will reduce police influence on the outcome of the criminal process is not easy to determine.
It is notable that although the police's formal powers of interrogation during the first 48 hours are limited, their informal opportunities are not.
For the Code does not limit their freedom to question suspects provided they do not propose to use their statements in evidence.
Thus the police may obtain useful leads relatively freely.
Further, although after the initial period the prosecutor may direct police investigation, it is doubtful that prosecutors will have the time or expertise to give more than general directions, thus leaving the police to do the job according to their lights.
These and the close co-operation between police and prosecutor probably enable the former to have a greater input than is formally allowed for.
Scotland
This comparative outline would be incomplete without a reference to the Scottish system.
All prosecutions are undertaken by the public prosecutor, the Lord Advocate, or his subordinates, the procurators fiscal.
On completing their inquiries the police submit a report to the procurator fiscal who, on the basis of the report, determines whether charges should be brought.
This process is known as marking.
The fiscals are lawyers whose first concern is with the proper and fair application of the law.
The procurator fiscal has a wide measure of autonomy, both in a discretion whether to prosecute and in choosing the charges.
Although the fiscal does not collect information or investigate the crime he is entitled to  intervene and direct himself police investigations.
However, procurators fiscal hardly ever take advantage of this power.
It follows that marking is entirely done on the basis of the police report and is therefore dominated by it.
Whatever the fiscal sees, he sees through the policemen's eyes.
The result is that, by and large, the fiscal has to take the case as the police have presented it; he does not seize the opportunity to come into direct contact with the investigation and has little chance of finding out what the police have ignored.
Continental model offers little help
Whether progress can be made by importing foreign devices is doubtful.
Even in non-adversarial systems the police investigation occupies a central place.
True, continental systems provide procedures for prosecutorial and judicial pretrial review of police conclusions and for re-investigation directed by these judicial officers.
But the underlying tendency is to place faith in the police process.
In Europe police organisation is hierarchical, centralised and supervised by the government, all of which may account for the tendency to rely on police investigations while, at the same time, declining to constrain them by the kind of normative rules we find in Anglo-American law.
The cognitive obstacles in the way of police investigations
Detectives who seek to establish what happened come up against serious cognitive obstacles.
These are neither peculiar to the police nor unknown outside the criminal process.
Bias in favour of held belief
One of the most prominent obstacles is the bias of a researcher in favour of his starting hypothesis.
This bias can have several results: interpreter effect, observer effect, and intentional effect.
The most obvious manifestation of bias is to be found in the interpretation of data.
Experimenters, who approach an experiment with a belief that their hypothesis will be borne out by the experiment, tend to make mistakes of interpretation that favour their hypothesis and tend to overlook interpretations which are unfavourable to it.
Less obvious but quite common is the observer effect.
Belief in one's hypothesis has been found to lead to errors in observing and in recording the results of experiments.
In a recent well-publicised controversy a group of scientists  claimed to have obtained results whereby water that once had a certain substance in it continued to behave as if the substance was present even after the substance had been removed; as if the water retained a ‘memory’ of the substance.
The scientific journal Nature dispatched a team, which included a magician, to observe the conduct of these experiments.
It was found that the results were the outcome of some basic mistakes in observation and calculation of the data.
It might be thought that while biased interpretations and biased observations are present in sciences, conscious misrepresentation of data is absent from this field.
Alas, the world of science is not so immune.
Like policemen, scientists are under pressure to produce results and competition amongst them can be intense.
The prizes in fame and funding are substantial and attractive.
Sometimes scientists too work under pressure of time or the pressure of danger, from disease or epidemic for example.
The cold fusion controversy provides a vivid illustration.
A pair of researchers arrived at the extraordinary conclusion that fusion of deuterons could be achieved without the application of massive external energy, which had previously been thought to be an indispensable condition.
This conclusion was the result of misinterpretation of data, presumably prompted by the scientists' preconceived idea that they were on to something very important.
In the normal course of events they would not have publicised their conclusion without further tests.
But, fearing that others would claim the credit for the discovery, they went into print.
When pressed for concrete experimental results to validate their claim, they announced that supporting data had already been obtained, in the belief that they would be able to obtain it in future.
The expected results did not materialise.
Rosenthal comments that ‘the history of science generally, and the history of psychology more specifically, suggest that more of us are wrong longer than we need to be because we hold our theories not quite lightly enough.’
Can this not also be true of the conduct of criminal cases?
Surely, if scientists, whose work is in the public domain and open to critical scrutiny, are prone to distortion, the police must be many times more vulnerable, seeing that police investigations are far less structured and not at all open to outside scrutiny.
It might be said that the analogy between policemen and scientists is incorrect because, while a scientist engages in experiment in order to test a pre-existing hypothesis, a policeman approaches an investigation with an open mind and is, therefore, not vulnerable to bias.
It is true that on first arriving at the scene of the crime the detective may have no pre-conceived ideas.
But, at some stage in his investigation, depending on the material at his disposal and the background knowledge that he possesses, the detective will form a hypothesis about the  commission of the crime, its motive or the identity of the perpetrator.
Thereafter he would be testing his hypothesis.
Distortions in the response of subjects
We have so far considered distortions that operate in the mind of the investigator.
To these we have to add distortions in the response of the subject of the investigation.
These distortions are interactional in that they arise from the reaction of the subject to the investigator and are the product of unconscious interference of the experimenter in the subject's response.
Scientists refer to these distorting factors as artifacts.
One of the earliest instances of an artifact concerns the tendency of the subject to respond in a way that the experimenter expects and is pleased by.
Both animals and humans seem to be prone to this.
H. M. Johnson's dog turned out to have a threshold for pitch discrimination identical to Johnson's because the dog watched Johnson's face and wanted to please.
Another well-known example is that of the horse Clever Hans.
By means of tapping his foot the horse could perform mathematical calculations, and solve problems of musical harmony.
On investigation it was found that the horse watched his questioner and judged when to stop tapping according to the questioner's inclination of the head and facial expression.
The conclusive proof that the horse was being unconsciously cued by the questioner emerged when it was shown that if the questioner was ignorant of the answer to the question, the horse could not provide one either.
In experiments on rats it has been shown that where experimenters expected rats to be maze-bright, the rats fulfilled their expectation and where they were expected to be maze-dull the rats also fulfilled expectations.
The reason was not hard to find.
Experimenters who expected their subjects to be brighter behaved differently towards the rats and thus affected the rats' learning abilities.
The tendency of the subject to confirm the investigator's expectation is not confined to the lower animals.
Rosenthal documents cases where human subjects responded in a certain way because the experimenter had, unconsciously, communicated his expectation to them.
In one set of experiments subjects were shown photographs of people they did not know and were asked to indicate whether they thought the person in each picture was a successful person or a failure.
It was found that when the experimenter expected subjects to infer success, they fulfilled the expectation, as they did when they were expected to infer failure.
Dominant experimenters can induce greater expectation bias.
More surprisingly, there is some evidence that the more experienced experimenters may induce greater rather than smaller expectancy effects.
Expectancy seems to be communicated to the subject immediately on first contact with the experimenter.
It is communicated both by auditory and visual cues.
The expectation is so subtle that it can be transmitted even when the experimenter conveys his instructions by means of a tape recording.
Moreover, even when experimenters are aware of the expectancy factor, its effects can persist.
Usually, however, the experimenter is ignorant of the expectancy effects he exerts.
‘But all the time,’ Rosenthal writes:
‘in his interaction with his first subject, he is emitting a myriad of unprogrammed and unintended cues in the visual and auditory channels.
If whatever pattern of cues he is emitting happens to affect the subject's response, so that the experimenter obtains the response he expected to obtain, that pattern of cues may be more likely to recur with the next subject.
In short obtaining an expected response may be the reinforcement required to shape the experimenter's pattern of unintentional cueing.
Subjects may teach the experimenters how to behave…so as to increase the likelihood that the next subject's response will be more in the direction of the experimenter's expectancy.’
The pertinence of these findings to police investigation can hardly be exaggerated.
The police interrogator tends to approach his suspect, and sometimes even witnesses, with definite expectations which could inadvertently affect the information he gets from them.
Expectancy effect may, for instance, be behind the otherwise inexplicable phenomenon of misidentification of the same suspect by a number of independent witnesses.
On their part, policemen may be affected by the expectations of their superiors.
The police have come in for heavy criticism but Rosenthal's following observation about distortion in behavioural science may be cited as an apologia for some police shortcomings:
‘Expectancy effects on subjects’ responses are not public matters.
It is not only that other scientists cannot know whether such effects occurred in the experimenter's interaction with his subjects; the investigator himself may not know whether these effects have occurred.
Moreover, there is the likelihood that the experimenter has not even considered the possibility of such unintended effects on his subjects' responses.’
Evaluation apprehension
The investigator's expectation is not the only factor that affects the subject's response.
Another factor is the evaluation apprehension, namely, the anxiety experienced by the subject that his ability and character are being subjected to examination.
This apprehension propels the subject to seek a favourable evaluation from the experimenter.
Subjects affected by such apprehension will tend to modify their responses in a way they think the experimenter considers them to be healthy.
In the interrogation of suspects the investigator's expectancy (of finding guilt) and the suspect's evaluation apprehension (resulting in a desire to show himself innocent) may pull in different directions.
But psychological research seems to indicate that they do not necessarily cancel each other out.
Countering bias and artifact in scientific research
The distorting factors that have been discovered in scientific research have prompted extensive examination of past methods of research and of past results.
Psychological models derived from the observation of groups consisting of students can no longer be taken as representing general truths.
Results obtained by experimenters whose aims were known to their subjects are mistrusted.
Experimenters continually strive to insulate and neutralise distorting factors.
The discovery of mistakes and the taking of remedial action have been propelled by a powerful correcting mechanism.
This mechanism does not rely on a disciplinary code nor on a court-like body.
Rather, it consists of a culture whereby discoveries are submitted to peer discussion and to verification or falsification by others working in the same field.
This is coupled with strong incentives operating within the scientific community to subject new results to searching scrutiny.
Central to this is the fact that scrutiny is facilitated by shared professional standards of valid inference, which, in turn, tend to be continually sharpened by debate within the profession.
There are two principal aspects to scientific scrutiny.
The first is replication.
To be accepted by the scientific community as true, a result needs, in the first place, to be capable of replication.
Only if other scientists are able to obtain the same results using similar methods of operation, will a result be taken seriously and treated to further tests.
On its own, replication does not validate a theory derived from experimental results; it merely shows that the results are obtainable.
To be validated a theory needs to pass a further test, which we might call the review test.
The results under review have to be shown to support, by the relevant criteria, the conclusions drawn from them.
A reviewing scientist may conclude that although the same results are obtainable on replication, they are incapable of supporting the  theory or hypothesis advanced by the original scientist.
It may be, for example, that the experiment was flawed in some way or that the conclusion derived from its results was invalid.
Both replication and review can be carried out only where a full and detailed record of the original experiment is provided.
Since no new discovery is acceptable without verification, all serious scientific results are backed by full documentation.
Since a scientist knows that his results will be examined by others, he will aim to achieve in his work the standards that he knows will be applied in assessing the validity of his discovery.
Thus the scientific model of verification has an inbuilt mechanism for the evolution and promotion of generally accepted standards.
There is continual improvement in standards, since each discovery of a flawed experiment is published and leads to the tightening of future procedures.
There are incentives to engage in verification tests because a scientist obtains credit not only from establishing the truth of a new hypothesis but also from discrediting an existing one; the latter, as much as the former, contributes to truth.
By contrast, a scientist who produces results which are later found to be false runs the risk of losing respectability amongst his peers, advancement from his employers and future support from funding institutions.
This system of verification is not foolproof.
Mistakes do occur and are not always promptly discovered.
However, the culture of professional debate provides both the means and the incentives for discovering mistakes and strong deterrents to making them.
Existing procedures no alternative to the lessons of science
We do not have to extrapolate from science to conclude that bias and artifact are present in police investigation.
Police interrogation has received the attention of social scientists.
Trankell identified three distorting effects in police interrogation which largely correspond to those already mentioned.
He explained that the examiner's hypothesis influences his formulation of questions and biases his treatment of answers by inclining him to fasten onto those that agree with his hypothesis and overlook those that do not.
Secondly, witnesses tend to adapt their account to the examiner's expectations.
Thirdly, the witness's own memory can become corrupted in the course of the interrogation.
These factors have been studied and further elaborated in England by, amongst others, G. H. Gudjonsson, B. Irving and J. A. C. MacKeith.
Gudjonsson and MacKeith have drawn attention to the suggestibility of witnesses and to their tendency to absorb and assimilate information emanating not from their own perceptions but from the interrogator.
They have shown the extent of compliance leading witnesses to provide answers which please.
Irving has demonstrated the tendency of investigators to employ interrogation techniqes likely to  accentuate rather than ameliorate these and other distorting factors.
How is it, then, that such findings have not brought about the introduction of a formal corrective mechanism?
One reason may lie in the belief that our criminal procedure provides ample mechanisms for verification through prosecutorial review, committal proceedings, the trial, and by virtue of legal norms governing the conduct of investigations.
However, on examination we find that the criminal process does not and cannot fulfil this role.
Prosecutorial review
Prosecutorial review of police results tests the prospect of mounting a successful prosecution at the trial.
There are important differences between a review by the prosecution and review by a process of police investigation analogous to scientific verification.
Prosecutors examine the police case as a complete product, in the making of which they cannot interfere.
They can accept or reject it, but they cannot test it out in the field.
Policemen are trained to seek out evidence and interview suspects in the rough and tumble of criminal enquiries, whereas prosecutors lack both the training and the inclination for this task.
Prosecutorial review therefore provides no robust verification.
At best it is an armchair consideration of whether the case would stand up in court.
At worst it is a process by which the police conclusions are transformed into a formal accusation.
Committal proceedings
Committal proceedings are supposed to test the soundness of the prosecution's case but, on the whole, nothing of the kind is achieved because defence lawyers prefer to reserve their probing of the police case for the trial, where they may deploy the tactics of surprise to greatest effect.
The trial
For its part, the trial does not test factual accuracy alone and does not test it by the same method as that employed by the police in their own investigation.
An acquittal does not necessarily, and perhaps not even typically, falsify a police conclusion that the accused is guilty.
By demanding proof of guilt to be beyond reasonable doubt we accept that some accused who are probably guilty will be nonetheless acquitted.
Exclusion of relevant evidence because of non-conformity to some legal rule can also undermine the factual quality of acquittals.
If we add to these the possibility that juries sometimes acquit notwithstanding convincing evidence of guilt, we have to accept that an acquittal does not indicate that the police were wrong to conclude that the accused was guilty.
While an acquittal does not falsify police results, may we not regard a conviction as verifying them?
Here too matters are not so simple.
Our concern about police investigations was sparked off by the realisation that the trial is not an adequate tool for testing their reliability, which in turn disqualifies the trial as a verifying test.
But is it possible to sharpen the trial procedure so that it does function as an effective arbiter of the truth value of the police case?
It is, of course, important to improve the trial process as much as possible but the trial cannot be expected to offer an alternative to testing by way of re-investigation for reasons similar to those that led us to reject prosecutorial review as an alternative.
By its very nature the trial is a passive form of review which confines itself to an examination of the finished product of the police investigation.
It can probe it but it cannot reconstruct it.
and it cannot produce an alternative to a defective police case.
Legal norms for the conduct of investigation
The need for a verifying procedure is not displaced by the existence of legal rules for the conduct of police investigations.
Such rules are not always calculated to improve the truth value of the police case and a few are at odds with the fact-finding object of police investigation.
As a result the police treat them as something to be overcome rather than respected.
Since breaches of these norms can lead to an acquittal, there is a strong temptation to conceal breaches, especially when the police believe that they have strong evidence of guilt.
Concealment for the purpose of getting at the truth received encouragement from the courts in their refusal.
before PACE, to exclude evidence obtained in breach of the Judges' Rules.
The perception that some legal norms are at odds with the discovery of truth has also undermined the disciplinary enforcement of the norms.
The enforcement of the norms introduced by PACE, and the Code of Practice, has greatly improved, but the conflict between them and the police  task of determining what happened remains.
While some norms designed to secure proper management of police investigations are clearly desirable, the inevitable tensions that some of them produce make it all the more important to have some systematic verification of the truth value of the police case.
Despairing of prosecutorial review, the trial process and legal norms for police conduct as effective tests of the police case, Weinreb advocates a radical solution.
This is, ‘to assign the work now done at the police station to another agency which has responsibilities and characteristics more consistent with the way we want the work done.’
This agency would, essentially, be fashioned on the model of the continental investigating magistrate, but, as we have already seen, that model is of little help.
More fundamentally, even if we could invent a new investigative body, it too would have to be trained to produce reliable results, and for it too we would have to invent some sort of internal verification mechanism.
Rather than create a new institution, is it not more feasible to improve our existing one, the police?
A strategy of verification of police results
It is to some extent understandable why the police have failed to learn the lesson of science.
The information gained in social sciences cannot simply and straightforwardly be transplanted into the criminal process.
For this information to be integrated into police activities practical tools have to be forged.
Just as scientists have developed special techniques for overcoming bias and artifact, such as the ‘double blind’ procedure, so would policemen have to invent concrete measures to overcome the problems they meet.
This task cannot be performed by social scientists.
It has to be performed by the police themselves.
To that end the legal system has to ensure that there is a mechanism by which the police are able, in an organised and systematic way, to adapt relevant scientific information to the concrete needs of criminal investigations.
Furthermore, there are certain limitations to what we can learn from science because the concept of replication does not obtain in police investigation.
Science seeks to discover the operation of general laws which, by their nature, always manifest themselves in certain situations.
By replicating the relevant conditions scientists are able to see these laws manifest themselves again and again.
By contrast, policemen are interested only in what happened on one  particular occasion in the past, which they are not able to recreate in laboratory conditions if only because they do not know what happened.
It may be interposed here that it is not the past event, the crime, which needs replication for the purpose of verification, but the investigation.
However, even the investigation is not truly replicable.
Impressions formed by investigators at the scene of a crime and in its immediate aftermath cannot be repeated later.
Suspects and witnesses have special characteristics that will not be found in precisely the same mix in other randomly chosen members of the population and cannot, therefore, be precisely re-enacted with others.
Furthermore, a reinvestigation involving the same suspects and witnesses cannot be independent of the original investigation because the experience of the original investigation will influence the way they behave in any further investigation.
The impossibility of replication in police investigation is not as crippling as might appear at first sight because it is far less important, or even necessary, in the criminal context than in science.
We are not interested here in whether a second investigator who slavishly follows in the footsteps of his predecessor gets the same results.
Instead, we are concerned with the review aspect of the verification.
We would wish a second investigator to consider whether his predecessor took the right route, whether all the relevant leads were followed, whether sufficient attention was paid to evidence which was inconsistent with the working hypothesis, and whether the methods used (particularly in interrogation) did not distort the result.
The aim of a second investigation would be not to repeat the first one but to improve on it.
This is not to say that re-investigation of this kind guarantees verification.
Some aspects of police investigation, such as scientific tests, are more susceptible to fresh scrutiny than others.
But recent developments in the recording of all stages of investigations make it easier to follow their precise course.
With video taping of interrogation, now being introduced, even interrogations can be closely monitored.
Naturally, the standards and norms likely to be developed by the police in employing a verification procedure are not going to be pure and objective scientific generalisations.
They will inevitably involve value judgment and stereotype assumptions.
What is important to stress, however, is that the operation of a professional system of norms is a pre-requisite to identifying and examining the tacit assumptions which must already guide the investigation of crime.
Moreover, the impossibility of achieving scientific standards of objectivity  increases the need for review.
For if scientists who can make repeated experiments have difficulties in overcoming cognitive biases, policemen who cannot have the advantage of scientific methodology must be doubly prone to these biases.
The strategy advocated here may not be the only means for achieving systematic internal verification.
The improvements in the documentation of all stages of the investigation provides the basis for other forms of review.
But the strategy we choose must provide good quality control, because only an investigator who knows that his results are subject to verification or falsification will aim to satisfy the highest standards that he thinks will be employed in testing his conclusions.
Practical aspects of re-investigation of crime
The strategy of re-investigation which is proposed here gives rise to considerable difficulties.
While not insurmountable they can be overcome only by those with experience and intimate knowledge of police work.
Here only some general comments can be made.
Selectivity in re-investigations
The aspect likely to present the greatest difficulty is cost.
It would clearly be far too expensive to repeat every investigation carried out by the police, to say nothing of delays.
Given that resources are limited, they would have to be concentrated where the need is most pressing and where the gains are likely to be substantial.
The problem is to identify those cases that can most benefit from a further investigation.
Several models for determining which cases deserve to be re-examined suggest themselves.
The first is the auditing model.
Auditing of accounts aims to check periodically the adequacy of accounting procedures.
It looks at both the validity of the accounting procedures as such and at the faithfulness of their conclusions to reality.
Given that a detailed examination of every transaction of a business is impossible, auditing concentrates on a sample confined to a period of time or to a type of transaction which is singled out for detailed examination.
However, the auditing model is inappropriate in the present context.
An auditing system would tell us something about the investigations looked at and, by way of extrapolation, also about the general reliability of the system.
We may conclude, for example, that 90 per cent .
of convictions were factually correct.
But this would still leave us wishing to put right the remaining 10 per cent.
A known margin of error has no place in the administration of justice because of the value we place on doing justice in each individual case.
Furthermore, auditing is not a continuing exercise but is conducted periodically, typically once a year.
In the investigation of crime a considerable lapse of time between the initial investigation and the re-investigation could rob the latter of some of its usefulness.
Thus what we should be looking for is a system of screening that is capable of picking out expeditiously all cases that require testing and not just a sample.
This task is daunting but not unattainable.
Many investigations involve cases where the evidence is incontestable.
Little would be gained, for example, from a repeated investigation where the accused has been caught red-handed.
We need  therefore to devise a screening procedure which singles out the problematic investigations.
Screening would have to be systematic and sensitive to what might be termed trouble indicators, of which the following provide some examples.
A key element in most investigations is the suspect's statement which is also the element most likely to give rise to difficult problems.
The chief cause of difficulty lies in the fact that confessions are typically obtained from reluctant suspects by officers who, on their part, believe in the suspects' guilt.
As we have seen, this combination of factors provides fertile ground for cognitive mistakes.
A case founded on a confession must always be a strong candidate for reinvestigation.
The treatment of the confession as a factor triggering reinvestigation could, in time, import into police practices the fruits of useful research that has been conducted by psychologists and sociologists on the subject.
Eye witness identification provides a further type suitable as a triggering factor.
Yet another category will doubtless consist of instances in which evidence of guilt rests on novel scientific methods, such as devices for identifying child abuse.
The seriousness of the offence might have a role to play, though not a conclusive one.
In sum, it should be possible to draw up a list of factors relevant to a decision whether to embark on re-investigation.
As important as a list of triggering factors will be the manning of the screening office.
The effectiveness of screening will depend on the independence and expertise of the screening officer.
If he becomes too closely associated with the initial investigation, his ability to take a critical look at the results of the  initial investigation would be greatly undermined.
The screening officer should therefore be a person of experience and professional independence.
It is open to debate whether the office should be performed by a police officer or by a prosecutorial figure.
But whatever choice is made, it should be borne in mind that prolonged performance in this office may undermine independence.
Independence and impartiality
In the scientific world there is, by and large, little danger of collusion.
The multitude and diversity of scientific institutions, their independence of each other, and the stiff competition amongst scientists, provide a powerful impetus for proper control.
Clearly, we cannot create a competitive market of ideas in crime investigation.
But a degree of independence and impartiality will have to be achieved if re-investigation is to be beneficial.
Independence is already attainable in certain circumstances.
When, occasionally, police operations have to be investigated, the examination is carried out by a team from another force since the structural separation of forces makes collusion less likely.
Such a solution is, however, likely to prove impractical and cumbersome.
The reason why at present independence is thought to be achievable only by involving a different force is that investigations of police operations typically involve suspicion of malpractice.
It is natural, therefore, to think that impartiality within the same force is doubtful.
By contrast, the model suggested here is not primarily directed to uncover malpractice or breaches of discipline.
Its main function will be to ascertain whether the results of the first investigation would appear as firm to another team going over the same ground.
Once re-investigation becomes routine, the fact that a case has been referred for re-investigation should attract no more concern than the fact that a medical diagnosis has been subjected to the test of a second opinion.
Indeed, there is already in existence a practice whereby a new team can make a fresh start where an earlier investigation has drawn a blank.
It seems that such a re-investigation may take place without negative implications.
One cannot over-emphasise the need to remove any disciplinary flavour from the proposed system.
Experience suggests that the fear that discovery of faults in investigations would result in adverse criticism from the courts or the media, and in public clamour for scapegoats, causes considerable difficulty.
This fears contributes to concealment which, in turn, impedes review of any kind.
It would be desirable, therefore, to confine the conclusions to the crime investigated and generally avoid comments about competence and probity.
Any decision about disciplinary matters should rest elsewhere.
Once the purely factual purpose of the system becomes assimilated, resistance to, and fear of, constructive criticism should weaken.
Since it is crucial to achieve as much independence and detachment as practically possible, much attention will have to be devoted to the creation of the right institutional conditions.
It would be important to promote a culture in which the discovery of mistakes is regarded by officers not as a method of policing their colleagues but as a means of improving the service and therefore as a source of professional pride.
It might even come to be accepted that the discovery of flaws in the original investigation need not necessarily lead to the dropping of charges but may, instead, strengthen the case against the suspect through discovery of fresh evidence or by plugging of gaps in the original investigation.
Models of re-investigation
Different models of re-investigation will have to be considered.
For instance, a hierarchical model will involve re-investigation by officers of superior rank, whereas in a horizontal model it will be conducted by officers of the same rank.
An obvious advantage of the hierarchical model is that the reinvestigation is conducted by more experienced investigators.
Against this we have to set the disadvantage that re-investigation might come to be considered as a disciplinary review.
A horizontal model, for its part, has clear educational merits.
There are different ways of conducting a re-investigation.
The question will  arise: should a re-investigation be conducted from scratch, avoiding in the first instance the records and materials created by the primary investigation or, alternatively, should it be started as a review of the previous investigation's record?
There are pros and cons to both options.
A re-investigation which largely involves a fresh examination of evidence, witnesses, and hypotheses about the commission of the crime, is better conceived as an independent verification procedure.
Its disadvantage lies in cost and delay.
But we do not have to opt exclusively for one or the other of these forms.
It should be feasible to employ the review form in some cases and the de novo form in others, depending on the nature of the problems encountered in the primary investigation.
Legal ramifications of re-investigation
A formal system of re-investigation is bound to affect our criminal procedure in many ways which cannot be considered here.
I will just mention a few factors.
A police case which has emerged unscathed from re-investigation will carry greater weight.
The risk is that this could tend to accentuate institutional complacency.
It will therefore be crucial to ensure that re-investigation does offer real quality improvement so that the additional weight attached to it is factually justified.
The use that may be made of the occurrence or non-occurrence of a reinvestigation by the defence is bound to be problematic.
For instance, should a screening decision not to re-investigate become a focus of attention and criticism at the trial?
A further problem concerns differences between separate investigations.
Given that it is impractical to have a third investigation, how should inconsistencies be treated?
If it comes to be feared that the defence might make procedural capital from such inconsistencies, which is out of all proportion to their factual significance, a tendency might develop to iron out inconsistencies regarded as minor or marginal, thus weakening the re-investigation process.
More important still will be the attitude of defence lawyers.
In science.
the results of an experiment will be undermined if it is shown that not all the relevant factors have been taken into account.
Similarly, the value of a reinvestigation could be weakened if, instead of co-operating, the suspect leaves his explanation for the trial, when not only can it not be investigated but when it could also cast doubt on the value of any re-investigation that has taken place.
Such concerns bring into relief the wider and more fundamental problem of our criminal procedure: the conflict between certain procedural rights, such as the right of silence, and the object of determining the truth.
However, the fact that the defence may resort to procedural tactics or that the weakness of some investigations may become apparent under re-investigation should not lead us to reject a formal mechanism of quality control.
What it would require is a reassessment of certain aspects of our criminal  procedure .
For example, at the screening stage, discussed above, it might be desirable to establish whether the  defence has any complaints against the original investigation.
This will provide an opportunity for investigating the complaints and remedying any flaws before the trial.
Conclusion
Past efforts to improve the quality of the criminal process have tended towards the creation of detailed legal norms for the treatment of suspects in custody.
Such strategies may improve the  condition of suspects but they do not deal directly with the real difficulties encountered by police investigators and do not necessarily improve the quality of their results.
To increase the reliability of police investigations we need, in the first place, to accept that the cause for flawed police results is generally rooted in serious problems encountered in attempts to determine what happened in the past.
Once these problems have been identified, we can proceed to develop adequate mechanisms for overcoming them.
A strategy of re-investigation by the police itself might not, at least at first, provide an invincible check on mistakes.
But it is bound to stimulate the evolution of formal procedures for overcoming the obstacles met by investigators.
The high professional standards present in some other occupations, such as science or medicine, are the outcome of a long process.
In the field of criminal investigation there are as yet no advanced and generally accepted standards of professional competence.
Those most intimately involved in criminal investigations, the police, must be encouraged to sharpen their practices and adopt formal mechanisms for their continual improvement, in much the same way as do members of other professions.
Fair Hearing and Finality: reflections on Berry (No. 2)
Summary : This article is focused on the decision in Berry (No. 2), where the Court of Appeal refused to relist the applicant's appeal following a successful prosecution appeal to the House of Lords, notwithstanding that two arguable grounds of appeal previously heard by the Court of Appeal remained outstanding.
The case raises important issues concerning the nature of the Court of Appeal's relisting jurisdiction and the compatibility of the decision with protections for defendants provided by the European Convention on Human Rights.
In Berry (No. 2), the applicant, B, had been convicted of making an explosive in circumstances giving rise to the reasonable suspicion that he was not making it for a lawful object.
His appeal to the Court of Appeal contained five separate strands, contending that the verdict of the jury was unsafe or unsatisfactory, or that there had been a material irregularity or that there had been a wrong decision on a question of law.
The Court of Appeal quashed the conviction on the last ground; it did not deal with the remaining grounds of appeal, albeit that submissions on all points of appeal had been made.
Subsequently, the court certified a point of law of general public importance and, in due course, the conviction was restored by the House of Lords, reversing the Court of Appeal's opinion on the law.
The House merely addressed the certified question, unsurprisingly as no argument was addressed to the outstanding grounds of appeal.
B applied to the Court of Appeal for a relisting of his appeal in order that these remaining grounds could be disposed of.
Although the court was of the view that these remaining grounds were arguable, it refused to relist the appeal.
Moreover, it refused to certify that its decision raised any point of law of general public importance, thereby precluding any further hearing under domestic law.
B has  petitioned the European Commission of Human Rights, alleging that there have been violations of the European Convention of Human Rights.
This case has been the occasion of some powerful comment in the press.
Certainly one would expect judges to exhaust every resource available to them to avoid committing to prison (in this instance for six years) a person who has not had an answer to arguable grounds of appeal.
One may imagine the furore if the Court of Appeal were to take the same stance in a capital case, a contingency happily remote.
Thus it is of considerable interest to ascertain if English law mandated this result and, if it did, whether, yet again, our legal practices fall below the minimum standards prescribed by the European Convention.
Relisting powers of the Court of Appeal
The jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) is governed by the Criminal Appeal Act 1968.
The Act itself makes no reference to any power to relist but in an important judgment in Daniel Lawton L.J., stated:
‘The court clearly has jurisdiction within the ambit of the 1968 Act and rules to see that no injustice is done to any applicant or appellant.
If in any particular case because of a failure of the court to follow the rules or the well established practice there is a likelihood that injustice may have been done…a case should be relisted for hearing.’
Daniel affirmed that the power of relisting is not confined to cases where the previous hearing can be characterised as a nullity and that the power can be exercised after the court has issued a final order.
A relisting, of course, involves a resumption of the original appeal and arguably the substantive hearing must take place before the original panel of judges.
Berry (No. 2)confirms that the question on a relisting application is whether the original appeal can be re-opened.
There is no question of leave being granted for a second appeal.
In Berry (No. 2), Watkins L.J.
accepted that if the subsequent appeal to the House of Lords were set to one side, there might be grounds for a relisting on the basis that the Court of Appeal had departed from well-established practice in resolving but one of the grounds of appeal, leaving outstanding points of appeal on which submissions had been made.
However, for reasons to be examined presently, he regarded the subsequent proceedings before the House of Lords as leaving the court ‘powerless’ to take the matter further.
It is worth stressing the irony of the applicant's position.
Had B lost on the question of law in the Court of Appeal, it is practically inconceivable that the court would not have gone on to deal with the remaining points of appeal.
Had the inconceivable happened, a relisting would surely have been granted on the most fundamental ground imaginable — a failure of the court to give judgment  on issues properly raised before it and essential to a disposal of the case.
The finding in favour of B and the implicit assumption that the remaining issues argued on his behalf were rendered supererogatory were essential precursors to the ultimate denial of judgment on the other points.
From B's perspective of obtaining his freedom the unresolved issues were equally fundamental to the point addressed.
The Jurisdiction of the House of Lords in Appeals from the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division)
An appeal to the House of Lords from a decision of the Court of Appeal can be made by the prosecution or defence if the Court of Appeal certifies that its decision raises a point of law of general public importance and leave to appeal is granted by that court or the House of Lords.
Once the House is seised of the case it may exercise ‘any powers of the Court of Appeal.’
It was decided in Att. -Gen. for Northern Ireland v. Gallagher that the House need not in all circumstances confine itself to the certified question.
In that case, Lord Reid,obiter , gave as an example justifying the assertion by the House of total jurisdiction a situation where the Court of Appeal had resolved the point of law subsequently certified for the House but had left outstanding other issues which might result in acquittal:
'…in that case at least this House must go beyond the point certified and hear and decide the second point which may have no connection at all with the first.’
At face value this passage asserts that in such a case the appellant/respondent is entitled to raise before the House of Lords any issue on which leave had been granted at the outset of the appeal and which was raised before but left unresolved by the Court of Appeal.
It is not unreasonable, on such a view, to take the position, as did the Court of Appeal in Berry (No. 2), that the hearing before the House is the ‘final opportunity’ to take such points as he wishes.
Such an analysis is compelling if counsel for B had, in what he perceived as the interests of his client, decided not to pursue any grounds beyond the certified question provided that the House would have allowed him to address those grounds had he raised them .
No explanation emerges from Berry (No. 2)of the failure to raise the non-certified issues before the House.
If it were, as is being currently assumed, an omission to raise points on which the House would have heard counsel, the most obvious forum in which to resuscitate the appeal would be the House of Lords itself.
There are no indications from Berry (No. 2)that this was contemplated and considerable reason to think that any attempt to have done so would have been futile.
Locus standi to argue for a relisting would seemingly not require a fresh certificate as it would not constitute an appeal as such but an application to the House to exercise an inherent jurisdiction to re-open an appeal, analogous to that developed by the Court of Appeal, in order to do justice under the scheme of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968.
But any grounds for the House to consider that the appeal hearing was so defective as to require re-opening seem nonexistent.
The certified question was addressed and answered after argument focused exclusively on it.
However, the position taken by the Court of Appeal loses much of its force if it cannot be assumed that the House would have taken non-certified points of appeal had they been raised.
The language of Lord Reid quoted above and cited in Berry (No. 2)was obiter and may be compared with a later passage where his lordship carefully left open whether an appellant as of right could raise matters unrelated to the certified question.
The issue in Gallagher was not whether an appellant could raise a non-certified point but whether the House itself could depart from the certified question and address what it took to be the true question arising.
Additionally Lord Tucker stated,
‘It will always be a matter of discretion whether to allow a point in no way connected with the certified point to be argued in the appeal.
It is not to be assumed as a matter or right.’
Watkins L.J., in Berry (No. 2)may have had such dicta in mind when he stated,
‘It is, of course, a matter of discretion for the House of Lords how far, if at all , it will allow points other than that certified to be developed…’.
One can, surely, only convincingly use a ‘last opportunity’ rationale to refuse relisting if one can be sure that such opportunity would have been provided.
It is clear from their context and from the structure of criminal appeals that these judicial doubts as to the right of the appellant/respondent to raise non-certified questions before the House of Lords can only refer to the situation exemplified by Berry (No. 2)— viz , where grounds of appeal have been argued before but not determined by the Court of Appeal.
It has never been contended that non-certifiable grounds of appeal considered and dismissed by the Court of Appeal can, in addition to the certified question, be argued before the House of Lords.
Jurisdiction to relist in the Court of Appeal after appeal to the House of Lords
As argued for above, a denial of re-hearing based on a ‘last opportunity’ rationale only convinces if premised on the foregoing of an opportunity which would have been afforded.
It may be that Gallagher does provide the House with a full jurisdiction which an appellant/respondent can avail himself as of right.
But Gallagher does not decide this and only a House of Lords judgment  on the point can resolve the uncertainty.
That uncertainty, acknowledged by Watkins L.J., should, it is submitted, have provided a powerful reason for the Court of Appeal to allow the applicant to have a judgment by the court on the unresolved points, particularly as they had been previously argued before but had been unanswered by the court.
Nonetheless, a House of Lords appeal was perceived as, in all conceivable circumstances, final.
Watkins L.J.
conceded that the failure of the Court of Appeal to give judgment was an ‘arguable’ breach of established practice.
This bland characterisation is apt only if B is misleadingly conceived as a person who has had his conviction quashed on the basis of successfully arguing one of his points of appeal.
Under such a description, which B at one point fitted, it verges on the punctilious to insist on judgment on the other points.
However in the light of the subsequent prosecution appeal to the House of Lords and the doubt discussed above concerning whether the non-certified points of appeal could have been raised there, B's position was tantamount to a person who loses on the one point of appeal judicially addressed and who is given no answer to his remaining points of appeal.
That would not merely be a breach of established practice but a fundamental failure of justice.
The Court of Appeal refused to certify that its refusal to relist raised a point of law of general public importance, foreclosing any prospect of redress in the domestic sphere.
The fact that the Court of Appeal contemplated that an appeal might lie to the House of Lords on this matter arguably indicates a confusion concerning the nature of the jurisdiction it was exercising.
In Berry (No. 2)the Court of Appeal was not, of course, hearing an appeal but an application to relist an appeal.
Although this jurisdiction is a concomitant of its appellate jurisdiction under the Criminal Appeal Act 1968, the Act only provides for appeals from the Court of Appeal to the House of Lords from appeals heard by the Court of Appeal.
In deciding whether or not to relist an appeal, it could be said that the Court of Appeal is not hearing an appeal but is exercising an autonomous jurisdiction relating to its own procedures.
It is in the field of its own procedures that the Court of Appeal, in the past, has been receptive to the claim of substantive justice.
The best known example is the relaxation in the binding quality of its own decisions in favour of the liberty of the subject, provided for by Taylor .
There was also the practice, now seemingly defunct, of relisting a case before a full court at the behest of the dissentient member of a tripartite panel.
It is to be regretted that no such flexibility was exhibited on the current occasion.
An argument against such flexibility is that the House of Lords itself, in respect of any case that it is seised of, lacks authority to remit the case to the court below directing it to re-open and re-hear the case.
Impliedly, it might be said, this precludes any re-opening at the instance of the applicant.
But it is one thing to say that once the House of Lords is seised of the case it must resolve all outstanding issues in the appeal itself.
It is quite another to say that an absence of a power of remit vested in the House is an insuperable barrier to the Court of Appeal exercising its own jurisdiction to relist.
Indeed no such point was taken against the applicant in Berry (No. 2).
Fundamentally, despite the applicant's unenviable position, the Court of Appeal lacked the temerity to disturb an order of the House of Lords:
‘It would be extra-ordinary and, in our opinion, unthinkable if the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) were to be in a position thereafter to pronounce upon other grounds of appeal and thereby destroy the order of the House of Lords by again quashing the conviction.’
Obviously, the Court of Appeal must follow any House of Lords ruling binding upon it.
It would be unthinkable for the Court of Appeal to undermine any ruling on a point of law determined by the House of Lords.
However, one may query whether the Court of Appeal paid heed to the distinction between the status of a court's decision in terms of the precedential weight of any ruling on a point of law and the legal status of the order the House issued consequent upon that decision.
In the very nature of things the orders disposing of a case by a final court of appeal will almost invariably remain inviolate.
But that is not because its orders have greater status per se than the orders of a court of first instance or any intermediate court of appeal.
The status of the order of any court acting within its competence is one of full validity until, if ever, it is set aside by any other court acting within its competence.
That the Court of Appeal possesses in particular circumstances the competence to set aside convictions ordered to be restored by the House of Lords is implicit in section 17 of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968, providing for referrals to the Court of Appeal by the Home Secretary.
It is not credible that the Court of Appeal would refuse to quash a conviction in the context of a referral on the ground that the conviction was inviolable because it had been restored by the House of Lords in the original proceedings.
Admittedly, in cases covered by section 17, the capacity of the Court of Appeal to set aside an order of the House of Lords is invested by clear statutory implication.
Nonetheless, the jurisdiction to relist, albeit extraordinary and confined, has been characterised as a necessary concomitant of the statutory scheme  instituted by the 1968 Act, under which both courts operate.
It enables a final order to be disturbed should justice require.
It would have been exercised in Berry (No. 2)to determine issues exclusively addressed before the Court of Appeal and without questioning, let alone‘destroying,’ any ruling on a point of law by the House of Lords.
The refusal to relist and the European Convention of Human Rights
The purpose is not to anticipate what claims B will make in his application to the Commission, which may range far beyond the concerns of the present article.
Attention is exclusively on the right to a fair hearing.
Indeed on one analysis, for procedural reasons, B may not be able to raised the issue dealt with here in Strasbourg.
The Convention establishes what have become known as the ‘seven hurdles’ of admissibility which an applicant must overcome if the Commission is to consider his case.
One of those hurdles is set up by Article 26.
‘The Commission may only deal with the matter after all domestic remedies have been exhausted, according to the generally recognised rules of international law.’
The provision has been interpreted with some strictness against individuals.
In international law generally the duty to exhaust domestic remedies is to protect the interests of States but, in the context of the protection of human rights, also because the institutions in Strasbourg regard the development of effective domestic mechanisms for their protection as a necessary concomitant of the international procedures: individuals are required to make use of what the national systems provide before invoking the international jurisdiction.
If B's claim, which, in substance, would be a claim that his right to a fair criminal trial under Article 6 had been violated, were to be ventilated before the Commission, it would have to be satisfied that domestic remedies had been exhausted.
What this means is that B should have raised the substance of his Convention claim under any domestic procedure which was capable of giving him a remedy, including any avenues of appeal, unless, according to Commission practice, there were some reason for excusing him from doing so.
What remedies, if any, were available?
One was that the House of Lords should have been asked to exercise its Gallagher jurisdiction to decide the uncertified points which B had argued before the Court of Appeal.
Why was the House of Lords not asked to dispose of these matters?
The law reports give no  answer.
Argument before the House of Lords in B's appeal and the judgments were confined to the certified question.
The judgment in Berry (No. 2)is no more enlightening.
Because the question remains unanswered, much of the discussion that follows is based on hypothetical alternatives, some more plausible than others.
There are several possible explanations.
First, that the possibility was considered but was rejected as a matter of litigation strategy.
Secondly, that the matter was considered but was rejected because of doubts about the extent of the House of Lords' jurisdiction.
Thirdly, that it was considered that any non-certified outstanding points could be decided subsequently by the Court of Appeal.
Fourthly, that the matter was not adverted to at all.
How do these alternatives operate on the domestic jurisdiction matter?
On substantive questions under the Convention, particularly whether the applicant has had a fair trial, matters of ‘lawyer failure’ generally do not result in a violation of the Convention because such failure cannot be attributed to the State, which is the only respondent before the Commission or the Court.
On the question of the exhaustion of domestic remedies the Commission has taken a different approach.
The duty on an applicant to have recourse to ‘effective and adequate’ remedies extends to testing whether a possible avenue of redress will in fact operate to provide a remedy in his case.
If B's lawyers entertained doubts about the reach of the Gallagher jurisdiction, they should have tested it.
It is, of course, the contention of this article that the ambit of the Gallagher jurisdiction is (and was then) unknown, On the other hand, if there is a settled legal opinion that a particular remedy will not be effective or adequate, an applicant will be excused from using it.
Indeed, that may be the case, even if the applicant has simply been wrongly advised by his lawyer.
The legal advice an applicant has received is part of the evidence that a remedy.
theoretically available, would not.
in practice, be effective or adequate.
Unless the opinion is totally misconceived, an applicant should not be prejudiced merely because it was wrong.
B then would not find his claim inadmissible for failure to exhaust domestic remedies if his advisers thought that the House of Lords would not and/or that the Court of Appeal would have given judgment on the unresolved arguments.
If, for reasons of litigation strategy or for a total failure to address the question, an available remedy was not tried, then the claim would be inadmissible.
If the Court of Appeal could have been sure that there was jurisdiction in the House of Lords to have heard B's unresolved grounds of appeal.
which the House of Lords would have exercised if it had been asked to do so but had not in fact been so asked,Berry (No. 2)would have been a very easy case for the Court of Appeal to deal with, but there is no indication that it found Berry (No. 2)to be so simple.
If B is to avoid his application to Strasbourg being declared inadmissible for failure to exhaust domestic remedies he will have to show that he is absolved from having had to raise the issue of the reach of the Gallagher jurisdiction before the House of Lords because legal advice, erroneous but not wholly unreasonable, suggested either that the House would not hear his arguments or that the relisting option remained open.
This brings us back to the refusal of the Court of Appeal to relist.
Given the uncertainty about the Gallagher jurisdiction.
the failure of the Court of Appeal to relist in order to dispose of B's remaining arguments about his trial (and, if necessary, to certify matters for appeal to the House of Lords, including the reach of the Gallagher jurisdiction) is both a substantive failure of the legal system to provide B with a fair criminal trial and a demonstration that there are no further remedies to raise the issue available to B within the English legal system that he must pursue as a precondition for the admissibility of any claim under the European Convention.
Put this way, the claim helps B overcome another admissibility hurdle.
Applications to the Commission must be brought within six months of the final national decision.
If B's complaint were that an attempt should have been made to invoke the Gallagher jurisdiction when his appeal was before the House of Lords, then it is long out of time.
If it is that the Court of Appeal should have relisted his case, then his application would have to have been made to the Commission by March 1991.
In essence, B's claim can be characterised as asserting that he has been denied the right to a fair criminal trial.
However bringing that claim within the scope of  Article 6(1) of the Convention raises a series of problems.
Unlike some other international instruments, the Convention requires only that the State provide one level of criminal trial which satisfies the requirements of Article 6.
There is no right to a criminal appeal.
Nonetheless, the European Court has held that, where the State does provide an appeal process, then that process must satisfy,mutatis mutandis , the standards of Article 6.
In Berry's case, English law did certainly provide for one level of appeal to the Court of Appeal and may have provided one level of appeal beyond that.
‘May’ disguises several possibilities.
First, there is an appeal to the House of Lords with leave on a point of law if the Court of Appeal certifies that a point of general public importance is involved.
If an appeal on these conditions goes ahead, it must satisfy the requirements of Article 6, but there is no violation of Article 6 if leave is not granted.
Suppose leave is granted.
Then there is the nature of the Gallagher jurisdiction to consider.
If the jurisdiction were discretionary, no refusal to exercise it nor any failure to exercise it by the House of Lords would constitute a breach of Article 6, but, again, if the appeal goes ahead, it must be by a process which the Convention recognises as fair.
If the jurisdiction were mandatory and the House of Lords refused or failed to exercise it, then another issue under the Convention would arise, that of access to a tribunal.
The same point would occur if the complaint were that the denial of the right to fair trial arose because of the failure of the Court of Appeal to exercise its jurisdiction to resolve B's remaining arguments.
In Golder , the European Court decided that Article 6 embodied an inherent obligation on States to grant a right of access to the courts:
‘It would be inconceivable, in the opinion of the Court, that Article 6(1) should describe in detail the procedural guarantees afforded to parties in a pending law suit and should not first protect that which alone makes it in fact possible to benefit from such guarantees, that is access to a court.
The fair, public and expeditious characteristics of judicial proceedings are of no value at all if there are no judicial proceedings.’
The Court went on to say that, in the case before it, there was no need to decide whether and to what extent Article 6(1) required a decision on the very substance of the dispute — what might be called a right to a judgment.
The reason why the Court found there was a right of access within Article 6(1) — that the rule of law required that the authorities ought not to be able to stand between individuals and tribunals — applies with equal force to a right to a judgment — that the authorities, including the courts themselves, ought not to be able to refuse litigants before them their judgments.
If this be correct, then one would say that a refusal by the House of Lords to exercise any mandatory Gallagher jurisdiction to dispose of B's undetermined arguments would have denied him his right to a judgment and would have been in violation of the terms of Article 6.
What, though, if the jurisdiction be discretionary and was not exercised in B's case?
Here, the answer depends upon whether those unresolved arguments could have been determined otherwise.
We have seen that it is practically inconceivable, even on the strongest reading of Gallagher , that the House of Lords could have been persuaded to reopen the case.
On the other hand, there does seem to have been the option for the Court of Appeal to complete its unfinished business and dispose of the arguments that B had put to it in his original appeal.
It is the failure to exercise this option which is ultimately the explanation for B's situation.
In stark terms, B has been denied a judgment by a tribunal which had agreed that certain issues should be heard by it and upon which it had heard argument.
It will be appreciated that much of the discussion and some of the judgments made in this note turn on an uncertainty in English law,i.e. the extent of the Gallagher jurisdiction.
Of itself, that uncertainty is capable of generating a Convention argument.
A defendant is entitled to his trial before a tribunal ‘established by law.’
‘Law’ embraces jurisdiction as well as procedure and personnel.
The Court and Commission regard the term ‘law’ as ‘autonomous.’
Whilst it is necessary that there be a national legal rule to which reference can be made, when the Convention stipulates ‘law,’ it is not sufficient.
The national legal rule must satisfy the autonomous European conception of being certain and ascertainable.
The Gallagher jurisdiction rule is uncertain; the refusal of the Court of Appeal to relist B's appeal combined with its refusal to certify prevented B from resolving the uncertainty or ascertaining what English law is on this matter.
Argument along this line reinforces the claim that the injustice of B's position is not compatible with obligations under the European Convention.
If concern for B's predicament as a pure matter of justice were not sufficient to convince the Court that it should have exercised its discretion in B's favour, the Convention arguments ought to carry more weight.
By refusing to relist B's case to deal with the points undisposed of, the Court of Appeal was denying B his right to a judgment.
Although Brind has indicated that there are substantial  impediments to relying on the unimplemented European Convention before the English courts, it did not suggest that they were always insuperable.
In interpreting ambiguous primary legislation or in construing common law powers, the Court could have heard Convention-based arguments and, if convinced by them, acted upon them.
The case is not untypical in that the Convention points seem to fall to be considered only after the case has been dealt with and the deficiencies of the process have been revealed.
Quite apart from the importance of the outcome of the case to B himself, if it is even arguably inconsistent with the Convention, then there is the prospect of yet another case from this country going to Strasbourg.
While one would have liked to have thought that the injustice of B's situation would of itself have been enough to persuade the Court of Appeal to strain to find a way of bringing it to an end, the Convention considerations ought to convince a future court that it has the duty to do so.
If the point is finally disposed of by the European Court and if the judgment goes against the United Kingdom, then the question will arise about the appropriate response to bring the legal system into line with the State's international obligations.
Two possibilities are obvious.
One is that a power of the House of Lords to remit an appeal to the Court of Appeal to resolve any remaining uncertified points be provided by statute.
The policy basis for this solution is that it is desirable that some points of law of general public importance be finally resolved by the House of Lords.
Since they may be determined in a way favourable to the defendant, there is no need to decide any other complaints he might have about the conduct of his trial.
for he will have been acquitted in any event.
On the other hand, if the certified point goes against the defendant in the House of Lords, the unresolved questions should be remitted to the Court of Appeal, which has the experience to deal with them most effectively.
Only if the House of Lords decides that it is appropriate that it should decide the uncertified point should it do so, perhaps in circumstances like those in Gallagher where the certified issue and the question ultimately determined by the House of Lords were not easily disentangled.
The alternative would be for the Court of Appeal to decide all the matters before it.
If, on any of them, the defendant would be acquitted, the proceedings would end then.
A point should be certified only where the outcome of the appeal depends upon it — the prosecution to appeal where a defendant would be acquitted on the certified point alone if the Court of Appeal's judgment were to stand; the defendant to appeal where a reversal by the House of Lords of the Court of Appeal's decision on the certified point would be his only means of acquittal.
Either alternative would avoid B's predicament.
Others may suggest themselves.
One of them should be chosen and be put rapidly into effect.
In the meantime, to avoid cases like Berry arising, counsel should explicitly request a decision on all points of appeal raised before the Court of Appeal whenever there is a realistic prospect of a prosecution appeal to the House of Lords on any issue.
If a case like Berry should arise, counsel would be advised to raise the points not disposed of by the Court of Appeal before the  House of Lords.
There is no certainty that the House will hear them but it is certain that the Court of Appeal will not.
Addendum
The Home Secretary has referred the Berry case to the Court of Appeal in the following terms:
‘I have exercised my power under section 17(1) (b) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 to refer a point in the case of the Court of Appeal.
As you will know I may make a reference under this section when I desire the opinion of the Court, not on the whole case but on a point arising on it.
In this instance, I am asking the Court whether, having regard to the terms of its judgment upon Mr. Berry's application for relisting, the Court considers that it has the power to entertain an appeal of the whole case upon a reference to the Court by me under section 17(1) (a) of the Act.
I am asking the Court further, in the event that it considers itself so empowered, to treat the case as having been referred to it by me under section 17(1) (a).’
(Compare above.)
The reference will be heard on April 3, 1992.
Current Topic
The Crack Explosion
In April 1989 a United States drug enforcement agent gave his personal guarantee that in two years time the United Kingdom would have a serious crack problem.
Do the statistics bear him out'?
Total seizures of cocaine (including crack) for the last five years available (together with comparable figures for heroin) in kilograms are:
These figures appear to show that cocaine use has overtaken heroin use but the number of arrests does not bear this out.
In 1990 the police made 1,410 arrests for cocaine of which 349 consisted of ‘crack’ whereas they made 2,321 arrests for heroin.
Prices of cocaine, crack and heroin were fairly stable in 1989 and 1990.
What is striking is that the weight of crack seized by the police was only 0.85 kilograms and by the customs only 0.05 kilograms.
So the quantity of cocaine seized has increased considerably but the quantity of crack is a very small proportion of it and the quantity of crack coming into the country is  minuscule .
Crack use, however, may be much higher than the figures for seizures indicate if ‘crack’ is taken to include ‘freebase.’
‘Crack’ is often described as ‘a derivative’of cocaine.
It is not.
Cocaine usually comes into this country in the form of cocaine hydrochloride.
This is a water soluble salt of cocaine and it is a class A drug by virtue of paragraph 4 of Schedule 2 to the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
It can be snorted'' or injected but it does not vaporise easily and is not suitable for inhaling or smoking.
For this purpose it must be converted into its base form — cocaine CIS listed in paragraph 1 of Schedule 2.
The base is variously known as ‘crack’ or ‘freebase.’
‘Crack’ is produced by mixing cocaine hydrochloride with sodium bicarbonate and water.
The alkaline baking powder causes the cocaine to separate and, since the base is insoluble, it sinks to the bottom.
The water is poured off and the base is dried when it may make a cracking noise — hence ‘crack.’
The process can be carried out in a micro-wave oven.
‘Freebase’ is produced by dissolving cocaine hydrochloride in water and either baking powder or household ammonia which results in the liberation of the cocaine base.
Ether is added  which floats on top of the water and the cocaine transfers to the ether.
It is removed and evaporates leaving the ‘free base.’
This may be done by means of a pipette and a mirror.
Either process has the effect of removing soluble cutting agents such as glucose.
From clinical and pharmacological viewpoints crack and freebase are the same.
They both have the advantage that when smoked they have an enhanced effect which is, however, short-lived.
The production of crack can easily be carried out in a domestic kitchen.
It requires a quantity, which may be only a gram or so, of cocaine hydrochloride, bicarbonate of soda, containers such as jam jars, glass tubing, stirrers and a source of heat.
It can be smoked on the premises in cigarettes or by means of a water pipe or it can be peddled on the streets at a price of about £25 for a quarter of a gram.
This explains why the extent of the use of crack is not necessarily indicated by the scale of seizures.
It does not appear that there is any large scale production in this country, although there was a seizure in 1991 of about 0.7 kilo apparently made in a saucepan.
Since ‘crack is bulkier than cocaine hydrochloride there is no incentive to import cocaine as crack.
Since either method only results in the drug changing place from one paragraph in Part I of Schedule 2 to another paragraph it has been argued that nothing has been ‘produced’ within the meaning of section 4 and the definition in section 37 of the Act.
This argument is reinforced by the decision in Greensmith where the analyst had not tested to discover whether a specimen of cocaine was a salt (para. 4) or a stereoisomeric form (para. 2).
The Court of Appeal held that the word ‘cocaine’ as used in paragraph one is a generic word which includes within its ambit both the direct extracts of the coca leaf and whatever results from a chemical transformation.
Forensic scientists have tended to adopt this argument.
It was not however accepted by the Court of Appeal in Peter Andrew Russell where it was held that the conversion of the salt (cocaine hydrochloride) into the base form amounted to production.
It was the production of a substance with physical and chemical features different from the cocaine hydrochloride from which it sprung.
The Court might have added that the value of the drug had also been enhanced.
Case and Comment
BURGLARY
Recent possession — goods found at defendant's premises in his absence — no evidence of prior instructions — whether proper to infer arrangement
R. v. Lloyd
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: McCowan L.J., Ognall and May JJ.: January 28, 1992.
On the night of June 3/4, 1990 there was a burglary at a shop.
Some £4,000 worth of property was stolen.
L lived some two miles from the burgled premises and during the morning of June 4, police officers saw bin liners and a cardboard box being carried out of L's home and put into a car.
(It was alleged but not proved that L was carrying the cardboard box.)
The property in the car was later put into a van and found by the police who discovered that it had been stolen in the burglary.
Police officers searched L's house in his absence and were let in by his girlfriend.
Some of the stolen items were there.
The Crown's case against L was that it could be inferred that the stolen property had come to his premises with his knowledge and by prior arrangement and therefore was in his control and possession; and that he was therefore guilty of burglary or handling.
L unsuccessfully submitted that there was no case to answer and did not give evidence.
He appealed against conviction, submitting that the judge was wrong to leave the case to the jury.
Held , allowing the appeal, the judge had referred to Cavendish (1961) 45 Cr.App.R. 374 in ruling that it was open to a jury to infer from all the circumstances that there must have been prior arrangement with the occupier for such a large quantity of burglary proceeds to arrive so quickly at the premises.
The factors were the scale of the burglary, the evident planning, the speed at which the goods arrived and the quantity of goods.
However,Cavendish was of more assistance to L: Lord Parker C.J. emphasised (at p.378) that more must be proved for actual or constructive possession than that the goods were found at the premises, it had to be shown that goods had come to the premises by arrangement and that a servant or agent had instructions to take the goods.
There was no evidence in the present case that L's girlfriend had taken delivery of the goods or that she or anyone had had instructions from L to take the  goods, and L was not the only adult living there.
To leave the case to the jury was to invite speculation.
Commentary .
In Cavendish the defendant was charged with receiving stolen goods contrary to section 33 of the Larceny Act 1916 so it was essential to prove that he was in possession of the goods.
If he had not taken possession of the goods after the theft he had not received them.
Possession established the actus reus and was evidence of the mens rea.
In the present case L was charged with burglary.
Proof that he was in possession of the stolen goods on his premises was not an element of the offence which the prosecution were bound to prove.
Proof of possession was relevant as evidence of his participation in the burglary.
If there had been sufficient other evidence of participation he might have been properly convicted.
The so called‘recent possession’ rule is only an application of circumstantial evidence.
But in the present case it appears that there was no sufficient evidence.
[J.C.S. ]
DRUGS
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, ss.4(2) (a) and (b) & Sched. 2, Part I — producing class A drug — conversion of cocaine hydrochloride into free base cocaine — whether ‘production’
R. v. Russell
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Lord Lane C.J., Rose and Owen JJ.: December 11, 1991.
R was charged with various drugs offences including being concerned in the production of a controlled drug (count 2) and production of a controlled drug (count 2A).
After a visit to a prison, where he supplied an inmate with cannabis, his car was searched and found to have glassware, knife blades, bicarbonate of soda and gauze filters which was equipment used to turn cocaine hydrochloride into free base cocaine.
R admitted that he took the equipment to parties and converted the cocaine into a form in which it would vaporise and be inhaled.
At the trial R submitted that the converting of hydrochloride into free base cocaine did not amount to producing a Class A drug because all that was involved was changing one form of cocaine into another.
The trial judge ruled that this was production’ and R changed his plea to guilty to the two counts.
He appealed against conviction, submitting that the trial judge's decision was wrong in law.
Held , dismissing the appeal, free base cocaine was included in paragraph 5 of Part I, Schedule 2 to the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 because that paragraph covered any preparation or other product containing a substance or product…specified in any of paragraphs 1 to 4 (which included cocaine).
The salt (cocaine hydrochloride) was covered in paragraph 4.
It had been conceded that the two forms of cocaine were chemically different and had different physical properties.
Section 37 of the Act defined ‘production’ as producing by manufacture, cultivation  or other means.
The conversion of one kind of cocaine to another was production of a substance ‘by other means’ albeit that the same generic term, cocaine, covered both substances.
[Another ground of appeal was considered and rejected.]
The court certified the following point of law of general public importance but refused leave to appeal to the House of Lords:
‘Whether the conversion of one substance which is a controlled drug into a chemically and physically different substance which is also a controlled drug can constitute ‘production’ of a controlled drug within the meaning of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971?’
Commentary .
There is no useful definition of ‘production’ in the Act so the question seems to be one of the natural meaning of the word.
It seems to fit the process described well enough.
The construction perhaps derives some small support from Part IV which provides that ‘concentrate of poppy-straw’ means the material produced [commentator's italics]when poppy-straw has entered into a process for the concentration of its alkaloids.’
Poppy-straw and concentrate of poppy-straw are controlled drugs and the Act apparently contemplates that one may be produced from the other.
The conversion of the drug in the present case seems to fall within the mischief of the Act since it renders the cocaine suitable for smoking.
[J.C.S. ]
EVIDENCE
Identification —‘dock’ identification by defendant's name — complainant's knowledge of defendant's name based on hearsay — one previous sighting of defendant — whether identification satisfactory
R. v. Fergus
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Glidewell L.J., Hodgson and Buckley JJ.: November 6, 1991.
F was charged with wounding with intent and affray.
The prosecution case was that the victim, R, came with others to a party attended by F and was stabbed by F during a general disturbance when R and the two other men in his group were stabbed by F's two brothers (who were also charged).
The issue was the identity of R's first assailant.
R said that he did not really know F beforehand but had seen him and his brothers once before when someone had told him who F was.
The Crown sought leave to ask R if the man he knew as F was in court.
The judge agreed and F and his two brothers changed places in the dock.
R then identified F as the man he knew by that name.
A further witness named F as the attacker but likewise said that he did not know F, though he had seen him.
A submission of no case to answer was rejected.
The defence was alibi; the judge gave the jury a full and careful Turnbull (1977) 65 Cr.App.R. 132 direction.
F  was convicted and appealed, submitting,inter alia , that the judge should not have admitted the evidence of R purporting to identify F.
Held , allowing the appeal, there was an important distinction to be made between cases where the complainant claimed to recognise the assailant as a person he already knew well and those where the complainant had never seen the assailant before.
Although danger of mistake existed in the ‘recognition’ case it was less than in the identification case:Turnbull , above, at p.138;Byrne & others , unreported, April 11, 1990.
The case where the complainant had seen the assailant only once or on a few occasions before might well be treated as that of identification rather than recognition.
It was acknowledged that dock identification was unsatisfactory but the identification of a person through a name which was only known by hearsay was almost equivalent to a dock identification.
In a case of recognition an identification parade would often be pointless but in the present case an identification parade or at the least a controlled confrontation should have been held.
Since the only previous time when R had seen F was a casual incident when there was little occasion to remember him and bearing in mind the difficult lighting and other circumstances when the attack occurred the conviction was unsafe or unsatisfactory.
Commentary .
In Conway (1990) 91 Cr.App.R. 142;[1990]Crim.L.R. 402 it was held that an identification parade might be called for notwithstanding that an identifying witness claimed to know the suspect, and had identified him by name.
The difference in Conway was that the suspect had asked for a parade, and in such circumstances the Code of Practice on Identification states (in para. 2.1 of the original Code; 2.3 of the revised version) that a parade is mandatory unless it is impracticable to hold one (Brown [1991]Crim.L.R. 368).
In cases where no request is forthcoming from the suspect, it is for the officer in charge of the investigation to decide whether a parade would be ‘useful.’
If it would be useful, but there are reasons for not holding a parade, the Code permits other, less formal, procedures such as a group identification and (ultimately) a confrontation with the witness.
It is easy to see why a police officer might take the view that there is no obvious use for a time-consuming and expensive procedure such as an identity parade where it appears that the suspect is known to the witness.
As the present case shows, however, there are other matters to be considered, the most important of which is proof: how is the identity of the accused to be established at trial in the absence of any out-of-court identification?
If the answer turns out to be by a ‘dock identification’(i.e. the witness is identified for the first time in court) then it must be remembered that this procedure is potentially so unfair to the accused that the court of trial retains a discretion to prevent it (Horsham JJ., ex p.
Bukhari (1984) 74 Cr.App.R. 291).
If the risk of this happening leaves the prosecutor up a gum tree, it is apparent that the Crown Prosecution Service may have an interest in ensuring that something has been done prior to trial to remove the need for a dock identification, whether the police can see a use for one or not.
(If the suspect, having been asked to do so, refuses to take part in a formal identification procedure the prosecutor is in the clear, as the refusal provides a justification for the dock identification:John [1973]Crim.L.R. 113.)
The position is, of course, quite different if the witness knows the person concerned well enough to say: ‘I was hit by a man I know well and whose name is Jack Spratt.’
The prosecution will then know themselves to be in a position to prove identification from the outset, and a parade will only come into the picture if Spratt specifically requests one.
But if, as in the present case, all he can say is: ‘I saw him once in Peckham High Street and someone told me his name was Joseph Fergus’ then there is obviously a weak link in the case: how is it to be shown that the accused is the same man that was pointed out to the  witness as Fergus'?
If the answer is, only by a dock identification, then it would be advisable to strengthen the case by seeking some pre-trial evidence to confirm the correctness of the name given.
[D.J.B.]
PACE Code D 2.2 — identification parade — officer involved in investigation not to take part in parade — whether bringing suspect to parade ‘taking part’
Identification evidence — correct identification by same witness of another suspect — whether supporting identification
R. v. Jones (Terrence)
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Farquharson L.J., Alliott and Cresswell JJ.: November 20, 1991.
TJ was charged with three others, including his brother AJ, with attempted robbery.
It was alleged that AJ struck a security guard forcing him to drop a bag he was carrying and, when a police officer intervened, other men with weapons came to help AJ.
It was alleged that one of those men was TJ.
All four men escaped but were later arrested.
At an identification parade one of the police officers at the scene identified TJ, although his description of him differed in several ways from TJ's true description.
(The other officer picked out a volunteer at the parade).
There was evidence from an informer, D who had not himself taken part in the attempted robbery but knew about its planning and in particular implicated AJ, the appellant's brother.
At the trial however D gave hearsay evidence prejudicial to TJ when recounting what AJ had told him.
The judge directed the jury not to be affected by what D said as against TJ.
Counsel for TJ submitted that the evidence of identification should be excluded because a police officer involved in the investigation took TJ to the parade from the place where he was currently detained, in breach of Code D 2.2 to PACE.
The judge ruled that there had been no breach of the Code.
TJ, who did not give evidence, was convicted and appealed, submitting that (1) the judge was wrong to rule that there was no breach of the Code;(2) the judge wrongly told the jury that there had been no breach, thus undermining the defence speech to the jury on this point;(3) the evidence was unsafe and unsatisfactory having regard to the evidence given by D; and the judge should have withdrawn the case from the jury.
Held , dismissing the appeal,(1) taking a suspect to the parade seemed to the court to be outside the provisions for the administration of the parade itself and so there was no breach of the Code.
If this was wrong, the judge plainly had a discretion under section 78(1) of PACE whether to admit the evidence and his approach had been correct.
The court recognised that the police officer's description of TJ did not fit his appearance at court; and there was a 17-month delay between the incident and the parade.
However, AJ had been identified by that police officer and another officer (who did not identify TJ); and the correct identification of AJ was in itself relevant to the accuracy of the same witness's identification of TJ (Castle [1989]Crim.L.R. 567).
Moreover evidence of association between the brothers was relevant to whether the identification of TJ was accurate and could support identification evidence (Turnbull [1977]Q.B.
224).
(2) It was necessary for the judge to deal with the point about the breach of the Code to the jury because TJ's counsel's speech had referred to it, although strictly the issue whether there had been a breach of the Code was a matter for the judge and not the jury.
(3) Counsel rightly did not apply for a discharge of the jury following D's evidence; the judge gave a careful direction to the jury advising them not to be affected by what D said in relation to TJ and properly warned the jury of the dangers in identification evidence.
The judge properly left the case for the jury's consideration.
Commentary .
The relevant provision of the (revised) Code D is para. 2.2 which states:
‘No officer involved with the investigation of the case against the suspect may take any part in these procedures.’
(The previous version of the Code, which was still in force when Jones was tried, was identical except that it referred only to parades, not to other identification procedures.)
Although the ban is sufficiently wide to be capable of applying to the officer who conducts the suspect to the parade, the mischief at which the provision is obviously aimed is the risk of contact between the identifying witness and the officer involved in the investigation.
In Ryan [19921 Crim.L.R. 187, where the identifying witness was brought to and conducted around the police station where the parade took place by officers involved in the investigation, the Court of Appeal regarded what had occurred as a ‘substantial breach’ of the Code, and the subsequent identification of the suspect was admitted in evidence only because there was proof that nothing untoward had in fact been said to the witness by the officers in question.
In the circumstances of the present case there was either no breach, or no breach sufficiently substantial to be capable of triggering exclusion.
[D.J.B. ]
Whether jury after retirement should be allowed to hear tape recording of interview for the first time — practice
R. v. Riaz
R. v. Burke
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Lord Lane C.J., Rose and Owen JJ.: November 18, 1991.
The point in both appeals was whether the jury should have been allowed to hear the tape recording of the appellant's interview with the police when they requested it after retirement, it not having been played to them during the course of the trial.
In the first case, the appellant was a serving police officer who was charged with obtaining property by deception.
In interview, she at first denied being dishonest but later admitted it.
No part of the tape of the interview was played to the jury but a full transcript was exhibited and read to them.
Her evidence was that being interviewed by two senior police officers had put her in considerable fear and trepidation and that her confession was accordingly not a true one.
The jury's request, made after retiring, to hear the tape, was granted by the trial judge.
In the second case, the appellant had been identified by the victim as one of three men who had committed a robbery.
The victim said he stood out because of his short size and deep, gruff voice.
The jury's request, after retirement, to hear the tapes of the appellant's police interviews was refused by the trial judge.
Held , dismissing both appeals, the tape recording of an interview was itself the primary exhibit, although as a matter of convenience it was usual for the prosecution, with the consent of the defence, to provide an abbreviated transcript of its contents for the use of the court and the jury.
Either side, or the jury, could ask for the tape itself to be played during the trial and the judge would almost always accede; difficulties might arise where the tape contained objectionable or inadmissible evidence, for example, references to previous convictions, but these could usually be overcome.
The general rule was that no fresh evidence could be adduced once the jury had retired;Davies (1976) 62 Cr.App.R. 194, at p.201 and Owen [1952]2 Q.B.
362 at p.386.
However, the court agreed with the views expressed obiter by another division of the court in the case of Emerson (1990) 92 Cr.App.R. 284; where a transcript was provided it was merely a means of presenting the exhibit, which was the tape itself, to the court: if the jury wished to hear the tape rather than rely on the written transcript, there was no proper reason why they should not be allowed to do so.
The judge's ruling in the first case was therefore correct.
The Court would however respectfully disagree with the observation made in Emerson that no purpose would be served by bringing the jury back into open court to hear the tape; this was a matter for the judge's discretion but the better practice would be for him to order the reassembling of the court so that the jury could hear the tape in open court.
The effect of the Court's decision on the second appeal was that the trial judge should have allowed the jury to hear the way in which the appellant had answered the questions of the police.
However this was not a material irregularity; the Court had heard the tape and had the jury done so, it would have confirmed their views, expressed in the verdict of guilty, because they would have heard the gruff, bass voice of the appellant, as described by the victim in his evidence, and any lingering hesitation they might have felt would have been dispelled.
Commentary .
In Emmerson (reported at [1991]Crim.L.R. 194 with Commentary) the tape had been played at trial, and the question was whether the jury were entitled to be provided with a copy of it after retiring, so that they could hear again the all-important tone of voice of the officer conducting one of the interviews.
It was held that they could, as it was the tape itself which was the evidence at the trial (rather than.
as the trial judge had thought.
the transcript of it).
As it had been made an exhibit at trial they were entitled to inspect the tape in the jury room, subject to the discretion of the trial judge to prevent e.g. an unedited version containing inadmissible material from being handed over.
Lloyd LJ.
further considered that there was no advantage, and some disadvantage, in reassembling the court so that the jury could re-hear a passage which had already been played in open court.
As the present case shows, the position may be different if the tape has not been played in court.
Admittedly.
the written transcript will only be used in preference to the tape if neither prosecution nor defence sees any advantage in playing it, but it does not necessarily follow from this that the tape discloses nothing more than the transcript.
In the first of  the two instant appeals, for example, the tape might have revealed whether the investigators' tone of voice was unduly menacing, or the accused's particularly timid.
In the second appeal, the tape clearly did demonstrate something about the gruffness and depth of the accused's voice which could not have been gleaned from the transcript.
In both cases, relevant information about the speaker's voice can be said to be evidence in the case, going beyond what is contained in the written version.
(If this proposition is doubted, consider s.76(4) (b) of PACE, under which a confession, inadmissible as evidence of its truth, may nevertheless supply evidence of the way that the accused ‘speaks, writes or expresses himself.’)
Obviously, in both of the instant cases the parties had chosen, for reasons best known to themselves, not to adduce any extra evidence of the sort provided by the tapes.
But once the jury had asked, in their innocence, to hear them, it seems obvious that the parties should be present when the tape is played, so that any material which comes to light and is thought worthy of comment can be dealt with.
In the second appeal, counsel thought it might have been relevant that the accused was shown not only to be the possessor of a deep, gruff voice, but also to hail from a working-class area of Dublin.
It is not clear precisely why it was thought that inferences might be drawn from this revelation, but if they might, the jury should not be left alone to draw them.
[D.J.B. ]
Interview — whether questions resulting in response ‘nothing to say’ should be edited out by trial judge — materiality of questions — direction on right to silence
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Taylor L.J., Gatehouse and Auld JJ.: October 24, 1991.
W was convicted of conspiracy to illegally import a controlled drug.
The alleged conspirators had been under surveillance by customs officers for some time before arrest.
At interview, W responded to some questions by ‘nothing to say,’ including questions seeking his observations on what had been seen by the officers.
On appeal the primary submission was that the questions which were responded to as above should be edited out by the judge.
The right not to answer was pointed out to W when he was cautioned and it would be wrong to put before the jury a question and answer where the question might influence the jury, and the answer amounted to nothing.
Held , allowing the appeal, the problem was considered in Mann (1972) 56 Cr.App.R. 750 where Lord Widgery C.J. had said that if an accused remained silent in response to every question it might well be that the evidence of the onesided dialogue should not be admitted.
However, where a number of questions were answered, interspersed with others which an accused refused to answer, there were many reasons why the whole dialogue should go before the jury.
Subject always to the judge's discretion in individual cases, a dialogue of that kind which was clearly admissible in part should go in in toto in the ordinary case.
Counsel for W sought to distinguish that case from this by saying that the questions which W had answered were irrelevant and ought therefore not to be considered as questions which he had effectively answered.
That was not so; the  questions answered included those which were material and those said not to be relevant might well have become so.
Therefore the basic submission that a blue pencil should have been applied throughout the interview was rejected.
However, the questions and answers relating to the officers' comments on what they had observed during surveillance might well have been edited out.
The questions were simply putting the officers' belief in his guilt to W, and he was making no reply.
The effect on the jury might well have been to make them wonder why W did not answer if he was innocent.
It would have been better if they had been omitted.
As they had all gone in, having regard to the number of answers in the form of ‘nothing to say,’ it was vital that a proper direction be given.
In fact, the judge had said’…
I shall not have to concern myself with the interview of [W]but I shall concern myself with the interviews of [the co-accused].’
He might have said that because he did not think the interview/s with W took the Crown's case any further.
But to a lay jury that might not have been so clear.
Particularly having regard to the weight of the evidence against W, it was extremely important to remind the jury that W had a right to respond as he had done, was not bound to answer questions, and that they should not infer guilt from any failure to respond.
Ideally he should have indicated to them that there might be other reasons for failing to reply, other than guilt.
Certainly with regard to the accusations of the officers, he should have told the jury that such accusations, particularly those not supported by evidence, did not amount to evidence in the case and that where a defendant declined to reply the net result of the questions and answers was nil.
The trial judge did not so direct the jury.
More generally, and more importantly, this was a classic case in which it was possible the jury could be tempted to convict W by association with his co-accused against whom the evidence was stronger.
The judge had told the jury of what they had to be satisfied before convicting any of the accused, but the case cried out for a direction which amounted to the reverse side of the coin, namely, that they should not convict any person who was in their charge simply because of his association with others.
The officers' comments about what they had seen were observations of association between W and others, but in no case was any act shown on W's part which could be regarded as an overt act in respect of the conspiracy charge.
The verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.
Commentary .
Mann was also followed in Raviraj (1987) 85 Cr.App.R. 93, where the unsuccessful contention on appeal was that the admission of an interview containing some answers and some refusals to comment amounted to a breach of the right to silence.
Technically it does not: the right is still upheld in so far as the jury are told that no inferences can be drawn from silence in the face of allegations.
The worry is that the jury cannot be made to abide by directions of this kind, and so it is alleged that, if no evidential weight attaches to the refusal to answer, it would be better to exclude it altogether than to run the risk.
As Mann says, this may be acceptable if the only evidence consists of a ‘one-sided dialogue’ where the suspect refuses to answer any questions at all, but where some, a significant number perhaps, are answered, it may be highly impracticable to sever a conversation in this way and still expect a jury to make sense of it.
The last part of the interview in the present case was in a different class: it was clearly severable and, as it contained no answers to which any evidential weight could attach, it ought to have been severed.
[D.J.B. ]
MAGISTRATES' COURT
Conviction in absentia— whether case can be re-opened by a different Bench — conditions in section 142(2) and (4) M.C.A.
1980 on time limits and constitution of court are mandatory
Robinson v. D.P.P.
High Court of Justice Queen's Bench Divisional Court: Watkins L.J.
and Judge J.: December 12, 1991.
Informations were listed for hearing but the justices were not satisfied that they had been served so further summonses were issued.
The appellant did not attend on the return date, but the justices were satisfied as to service and adjourned until May 16; the appellant was notified by recorded delivery.
He was not present when the case was called on but the justices were satisfied that he was aware of the hearing.
They heard the Crown's evidence and convicted.
Later, the appellant arrived at court but was advised of the decision and that the case had been adjourned until June 13.
On that date, he appeared with the duty solicitor and an application was made under the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s. 142 to re-open the case so that it could be heard by different justices.
Proceedings were adjourned until July 11, so that witnesses could be called, but the justices sitting on that date concluded that they had no power to consider the case afresh and proceeded to sentence.
On appeal:
Held , dismissing the appeal, the issue was whether, on June 13, the justices had any jurisdiction to set aside the convictions recorded on May 16.
There was no inherent or common-law jurisdiction in a magistrates' court to order rehearing of a case which had already been decided (R. v. Campbell, ex. p.
Hoy [1953]l Q.B.
585;R. v. Essex JJ., ex.p.
Final [1963]2 Q.B.
816), so any jurisdiction depended on statute, in particular the M.C.A.
1980, section 142.
Section 142(2) provided that where a person had been convicted by the magistrates when he had pleaded not guilty or been convicted in his absence and it subsequently appeared that it would be in the interests of justice that the case be heard again by different justices the court might, subject to sub-section (4) so direct.
Sub-section (4) provided that the power to re-hear should be exercisable only within 28 days of the order/sentence/finding of guilt as the case may be and only by a court constituted in the same manner as that which made the earlier decision.
The relevant conditions of section 142(2) and (4) were mandatory, not directory, and unless they were established there was no jurisdiction to set aside the earlier conviction.
Strict attention must be paid to the time limits (Bradburn v. Richards [1976]R.T.R. 275) and to the constitution of the court (Morris v. Grants (1983) 147 J.P.
351).
The justices purported to set aside the conviction 29 days after the finding of guilt and none of the convicting justices had been a party to the decision to set it aside, so neither of the two conditions obtained.
Therefore, the decision to set aside was made without jurisdiction and was void, and there was no legal objection to the justices proceeding to sentence on July 11.
REPORTING RESTRICTIONS
Grounds for making order under section 11 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 — whether risk of economic damage to defendant pending prosecution sufficient grounds
R. v. Dover Justices ex parte Dover District Council and Wells
High Court of Justice, Queen's Bench Divisional Court: Neill L.J.
and McCullough J.: October 14, 1991.
The defendant in proceedings before the Dover Justices carried on a restaurant business.
Informations were laid against him relating to offences under the Food Hygiene (General) Regulations 1970 and the Electricity at Work Regulations 1990.
On February 21, 1991 a hearing took place before the justices,in camera , at which it was submitted on the defendant's behalf that the publication of the prosecution would be a penalty highly prejudicial to the defendant's business, that the publicity would bring about closure, that the restaurant had strong defences to each summons and that there had been serious breaches of PACE by the investigating officer.
The justices adjourned the matter for the trial to take place on June 19, 1991 and made orders prohibiting publication of the defendant's name and address and those of his business and the allegations made against him.
As a result, the proceedings on February 21 received no publicity at all.
The Council and the environmental health officer applied for judicial review seeking to quash the justices' order.
The applicants accepted that the justices had jurisdiction to make such an order but contended that they had erred in law in making it on the facts of this case.
Leave was granted and the trial was ordered to be adjourned until the determination of the application for judicial review.
Held , granting the application and quashing the order by the justices, save in exceptional circumstances, court proceedings took place in public and the press were free to report.
This was a principle of fundamental importance.
There were exceptions, recognised by the statute and the courts, but this was not such a case; all that could be said was that economic damage, perhaps very severe, might be done to the defendant if publicity were not withheld.
It was impossible to say that the order made by the justices had any foundation in law and they had erred in principle in making it;MacDougall v. Knight [1889]A.C. 194,Scott  v. Scott [1913]A.C.417,Att. -Gen. v. Leveller Magazine Ltd .
[1979]A.C. 440.
Horsham Justices [1982]Q.B.
762 and Evesham Justices [1988]Q.B.
53, considered.
Commentary .
Section 11 provides that a direction prohibiting publication may be made ‘where a court (having power to do so ) allows a name or other matter to be withheld from the public in proceedings before the court.’
The section does not of itself confer a power to withhold information in the proceedings themselves, but an application under the section necessarily raises the question of whether it is proper to do so.
That question must be determined by reference to general principles, or which the first (and in most cases also the last) is that judicial proceedings are supposed to take place openly, and publication of those proceedings is ‘merely enlarging the area of the court, and communicating to all that which all has the right to know’(per Lord Halsbury, L.C. in MacDougall v. Knight [1989]A.C. 194 at p.200.
Exceptions to the rule as stated above are rarely encountered, which is not surprising given that any such exception must be founded on a policy which can assert a greater claim to the court's respect than that of open justice.
Examples given in Scott v. Scott [1913]A.C. 417 include wardship proceedings which might fail in their primary purpose to protect the interests of the ward if they took place public.
In Att. -Gen. v. Leveller Magazine Ltd .
[1979]A.C. 440, Lord Diplock stated the key principle to be that the general rule may be departed from only where its application would ‘frustrate or render impracticable the administration of justice.’
Whatever sympathy one might feel for the restaurateur in the present case (or for any other defendant who might suffer economic loss, social ostracism, shame or intimidation as a result of publication of details pending charges which may or may not result in his conviction) nothing in the present case comes close to satisfying Lord Diplock's test.
[D.J.B. ]
TRIAL
Indictment — conspiracy to rob and substantive robbery counts — whether prosecution, having elected, may re-elect on which to proceed Evidence — PACE — code C. 12.12 — whether necessary to allow suspect notes of pre-interview conversations — breach of s.58 & Code C. 6.3 — refusal of access to solicitors — effect on admissibility of interview notes
R. v. Findlay
R. v. Francis
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: Lloyd L.J., French and Tucker JJ.: December 20, 1991.
Findlay and Francis were both indicted (with others) with conspiracy to rob  and also with substantive counts of robbery, including two robberies five weeks apart at a sub-post office in Hainault.
Findlay was arrested and according to the Crown made damaging admissions, asking who had ‘grassed’ him and saying that he was only concerned in one post office robbery.
He identified that robbery as occurring at Hainault (where there had been two robberies).
During the car journey to the police station he continued to admit being concerned in the one robbery.
The police officer had him handcuffed to him and so was unable to make a contemporaneous note of the conversation until he reached the police station (though he did not record the reason for not making the note at the time, nor the time when the note was made).
It was thus conceded that there was a breach of Code C 11.5 and 11.6 of PACE.
When Findlay arrived at the police station the superintendent ordered that he be held incommunicado.
He then made a full written confession and was then shown the notes made of the earlier oral admissions (which he refused to sign; the police however failed to record the refusal in the pocket book though it was recorded in the custody record.)
He was then allowed to see a solicitor.
At the trial Findlay applied to exclude both the oral admissions and the written confession.
After a voir dire the judge admitted the oral admissions but excluded the written confession, because (a) the breaches of C 11.5 and 11.6 were relatively trivial;(b) it would have been impracticable to have a contemporaneous note of the conversation and there was therefore no breach of C 11.3(b) (ii);(c) Findlay was shown the notes as recorded in the custody record and there was no need to record the refusal in the pocket book as well;(d) there was a serious breach of section 58 and Code C 6.3 in ordering Findlay to be kept incommunicado without sufficient reason and therefore although the interview leading to the written confession was itself fairly conducted the confession would be excluded.
As a result of the exclusion of the written confession the prosecution's only evidence against Findlay was that of his oral admissions which related to only one robbery at Hainault, and not saying which.
Accordingly having at the outset elected to proceed on the substantive robbery counts rather than the conspiracy count they applied to re-elect, add a new count alleging conspiracy to rob against Findlay alone, and proceed no further on the substantive counts against him.
The trial judge permitted the amendment and Findlay (who gave evidence denying the oral admissions) was convicted of conspiracy to rob.
He appealed, submitting that (1) the judge should have excluded evidence of the oral admissions;(2) the judge should not have permitted the Crown's application to re-elect and amend the indictment.
Francis was arrested and also kept incommunicado (in breach, so that judge found, of s.58 and Code C 6.3).
He made detailed admissions and at the end was asked whether not seeing a solicitor had made any difference, He said not, but would like to see a solicitor, and refused to sign the notes of interview until he had done so.
He was then allowed to see a solicitor for half an hour.
According to the police evidence (which the judge at the voir dire preferred) Francis agreed to plead guilty and sign the notes; the solicitor advised him not to and was reprimanded by the police.
(The solicitor gave different evidence).
Francis applied at trial for the interview notes to be excluded under section 78 of PACE.
Three reasons were given for his signing the interview notes: he had toothache; he was tired and subdued; and he was afraid that his solicitor might be reprimanded  again.
The judge admitted the notes of interview and Francis was convicted of substantive offences of robbery.
He appealed, submitting that the judge wrongly admitted the evidence.
Held , dismissing both appeals,Findlay :(1) the judge had accepted the custody officer's evidence that the notes in the pocket book were shown to Findlay, though he was at that time incommunicado; and Code C 12.12 in its unamended form (which governed this case) only applied to interviews at police stations so that it did not require the notes in the present case to be shown to him:Brezeanu & Francis [1989]Crim.L.R. 650.
[This was no longer law under the amended Code].
The judge was therefore right to admit evidence of oral admissions. (2) the prosecution had originally elected to proceed on substantive counts rather than conspiracy under the Practice Direction [1977]1 W.L.R. 537 which was designed to avoid overloading indictments:Novac (1976) 65 Cr.App.R. 107;Thorne (1977) 66 Cr.App.R. 6.
It was not like compelling a party to make an irreversible election between two inconsistent remedies; if an election were irreversible, there would be no point in allowing conspiracy counts not proceeded with to lie on the file, as was commonly done.
There was no demonstrable prejudice to Findlay by the amendment: the case against him, based on the admissions. remained the same: that he had agreed to rob the Hainault post office at a date unknown.
Francis : the judge considered why Findlay had signed the interview notes and concluded that the toothache was exaggerated and that though tired he was not the sort of man who would have signed incriminating notes out of consideration for his solicitor.
The reason for drawing a distinction between Francis and Findlay though both had been held incommunicado in breach of PACE was that Francis, unlike Findlay, had been able to see his solicitor for half an hour before signing the notes.
The interview itself was conducted fairly and the judge exercised his discretion rightly under section 78 of PACE to admit the evidence.
Commentary .
The case decides nothing new about exclusion of confessions under section 78: it was simply a question of whether the judge, having correctly identified the relevant breaches of PACE and Code C, had reached an untenable decision with regard to the exercise of his discretion.
Not surprisingly, the court does not feel it necessary to disturb the decision with regard to either appellant.
In the case of Findlay, the only breaches in respect of the interview in the car were relatively minor.
In Francis' case, a serious breach was involved in keeping him incommunicado, but this was (to use the trial judge's expression)‘counterbalanced’ by the belated granting of access to a solicitor and Francis' subsequent decision to sign the notes as correct.
The conspiracy point is more novel.
Where an indictment contains substantive counts and a related count for conspiracy, the Practice Direction [1977]I W.L.R. 537 obliges the prosecution either to justify the joinder or to elect whether to proceed on the substantive or conspiracy counts.
The court attributes the Direction to concern expressed in the Court of Appeal in Novac (1976) 65 Cr.App.R. 107 and Thorne (1977) 66 Cr.App.R. 6 about the overloading of indictments.
Both cases were clearly bedevilled by the combination of conspiracy and related substantive charges, although of the two only Novac had reached the Court of Appeal when the Practice Direction was issued.
If the explanation given is correct, however (and no other suggests itself) then there is no reason to prevent the prosecutor who has elected in favour of the substantive offence from seeking to amend so as to substitute the conspiracy count instead: a straight exchange of counts based on the same facts cannot be said to be over-burdensome.
[D.J.B. ]
Summing-up — failure to direct jury on burden of proof — whether rendering conviction unsafe
Proviso to Criminal Appeal Act 1968, s.2 — applicability
R v. Roberts
Court of Appeal Criminal Division: McCowan L.J., Ognall and May JJ.: January 23, 1992.
R was charged with burglary.
In summing-up the judge directed the jury fully on the standard of proof but failed to mention the burden of proof.
R was convicted and appealed, submitting that the misdirection rendered the conviction unsafe.
Held , dismissing the appeal, it was a serious defect in the summing-up to omit a direction on the burden of proof: but the omission was not necessarily fatal to the conviction and the court could properly consider whether to apply the proviso to section 2 of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968:Donoghue (1988) 86 Cr.App.R. 267, 272 per Watkins L.J., distinguishing Edwards (1983) 77 Cr.App.R. 5 (where the omission was as to a direction on the standard of proof).
Holden [1991]Crim.L.R. 478, considered.
In the present case the jury could have been in no doubt where the burden of proof lay.
The issue, the truth of alleged admissions at interview, had been clearly defined and the jury had heard the tapes of the interview.
Moreover both counsel would shortly before the summing-up have reminded the jury of the burden of proof.
Accordingly it was a proper case for the application of the proviso.
Per curiam .
It needed re-emphasising that it was the duty of counsel to draw the judge's attention to any omission to direct the jury on the burden of proof or on any other essential matter of law:Donoghue (above) at p. 271 per Watkins L.J.
Commentary .
Judges are required to give separate and distinct directions as (i) the burden and (ii) the standard of proof — i.e.
‘The burden of proof is on the prosecution.
It is for the prosecution to establish the defendant's guilt:’ and
‘Before you can convict you must he satisfied so that you feel sure — which is the same thing as being satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the defendant's guilt.’
Judges are cautioned against offering any further explanation of ‘reasonable doubt.’
It may be thought that the direction on burden is implicit in that on standard.
so the latter is sufficient by itself; but this is not the opinion of the Court of Appeal.
On the question of counsels' duties on hearing the judge make a slip in his summing up, see commentary on Holden [1991]Crim.L.R. at 480.
The present case suggests that not only are counsel under a duty to point out errors they observe but, citing Donoghue , that ‘it would be helpful’ if counsel for the prosecution were to make a check list of essential directions and draw attention to any omissions before the retirement of the jury.
[J.C.S. ]
SENTENCE
Robbery — robbery of small branch bank by single offender armed with replica firearm capable of firing blanks — adequacy of sentence
ATTORNEY GENERAL'S REFERENCE No. 14 OF 1991 (R. V. REED): Lord Lane C.J., Kennedy and Potts JJ.
November 4, 1991.
Facts : pleaded guilty to robbery, having a firearm with intent and driving while disqualified.
The offender went by motorcycle to a small branch of a national bank, and entered the branch wearing a crash helmet with a scarf wrapped round the lower part of his face.
The offender was equipped with a realistic replica pistol, which was capable of firing blank cartridges.
The offender held his pistol to the head of a customer who was being served and demanded that the assistants filled two bags with cash; when one of them hesitated he pulled back the breech of the gun and threatened to shoot the customer.
The offender escaped with £1,900.
He was pursued by the customer who had been threatened, who caught up with him and knocked him off his motorcycle; the offender then threatened him with the gun.
The offender was arrested shortly afterwards and all of the money was recovered.
Sentence : two years' imprisonment for robbery, with sentences for the other offences concurrent (total, two years).
Special considerations : the Attorney-General asked the court to review the sentence on the ground that it was unduly lenient.
Decision : the offender had a good record and a good job; he had got into matrimonial and financial difficulties and was in debt.
He had now met another woman and was about to make a fresh start.
The sentencer regarded the case as an exceptional one The Court considered that it had many exceptional features which would allow a sentencer to reduce the sentence which would otherwise have been imposed, but it was seldom in such a case that a sentence of less than seven years would be appropriate.
The problem was how far leniency could go in these exceptional circumstances.
The Court had considered Attorney-General's Reference Nos. 3 and 4 of 1990 (1990) 12 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 479, and was driven to the conclusion that the sentence was too far outside the area in which most sentences lie to be allowed to stand.
The proper sentence, taking account of all relevant factors, would have been five years for the robbery.
The sentence took account of the fact that the offender had to face the prospect of being sentenced on two occasions, and the Court had made a deduction for that reason.
A sentence of five years would — be substituted.
Commentary : as in other References, the final sentence substituted by the Court incorporates an unspecified discount to compensate the offender for the stress and anxiety necessarily involved in being the subject of a reference.
The case would be more useful as a guide to sentencers in similar cases if the extent of the discount were more precisely stated and a clear indication given of the court's view of what would have been the correct sentence at first instance.
Community service order — breach of order — offender re-sentenced for original offence — age of offender
R. V. PESAPANE: Lord Lane C.J., Kennedy and Potts JJ.
November 1, 1991.
Facts : the offender pleaded guilty to burglary and was ordered by the Crown  Court to perform 80 hours community service.
He performed only 24 hours within the first 12 months of the order, and was brought before the Crown Court where he was found to be in breach of the order, which was revoked.
The appellant was sentenced to 9 months' imprisonment.
Special considerations : the appellant was 20 years old when the original community service order was made, and was 21 when it was revoked.
It was argued that he should have been sentenced to a term of detention in a young offender institution, and that he did not qualify for a custodial sentence for that purpose under Criminal Justice Act 1982, s.1(4) and 1(4A).
Decision : it was clear that under Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973, s.16 (5)(b) a court dealing with an offender for breach of a community service order must consider his age and position at the time when the order was made (considering R. v. Wyre Magistrates' Court ex parte Boardman (1987) 9 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 214 and Webster (1991) 12 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 760).
However, it was clear that the appellant did qualify for a custodial sentence under Criminal Justice Act 1982.
The gravity of the offence was sufficient to justify a sentence of imprisonment in the case of an adult, and the appellant had a history of failure to respond to non-custodial penalties and was unable or unwilling to respond to them.
The correct sentence would have been nine months' detention in a young offender institution, and that sentence would be substituted.
Commentary : where an offender is dealt with for a breach of a community service order, he must be sentenced (if the order is revoked) in a manner in which he could have been sentenced by the court which made the order, if he is in breach of a probation order, the court may sentence the offender as if he had just been convicted of the offence concerned.
This means that in the case of a community service order, the court which revokes the order must sentence the offender to a sentence which would have been available on the occasion when the community service order was made, and if it is considering whether the offender qualifies for a custodial sentence for the purposes of Criminal Justice Act 1982, s.1(4) and 1(4A), must consider his history and attitude on the day when the original order was made.
His failure to comply with the community service order must be disregarded for this purpose (see Webster (1991) 12 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 760) This anomaly will be removed by Criminal Justice Act 1991, Sched. 2, which provides a common scheme for courts dealing with breaches of probation orders and community service orders.
In either case, a court which revokes the order following a breach will be empowered to sentence the offender as if it had just convicted him of the original offence.
Recommendation for deportation — necessity for proper inquiry before recommendation is made
R. v. OMOJUDI: Glidewell L.J., Hodgson and Buckley JJ.
October 4, 1991.
Facts : convicted of conspiracy to defraud.
The appellant was concerned in a conspiracy to defraud the clearing banks of £60,000.
Sentence : four years' imprisonment and recommended for deportation.
Special considerations : no notice had been served on the appellant as is required by Immigration Act 1971, s.6.
Decision : the court had made a recommendation for deportation without following the proper procedure and without inviting either counsel to assist.
The statutory requirements of the Immigration Act 1971 had not been complied with.
The Court had no alternative but to allow the appeal.
In doing so, the Court wished to draw attention to the clear and strict provisions of the Act and the further guidance given in Nazari (1980) 2 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 84.
The Court was  concerned to learn from counsel that these matters were not always adhered to in some courts.
R. V. FRANK: Lord Lane C.J., Rose and Owen JJ.
November 22, 1991.
Facts : pleaded guilty to being concerned in the fraudulent evasion of the importation of a controlled drug.
The appellant was stopped on arriving in England by car ferry.
His car was found to contain 19.93 kilos of cannabis resin, with a street value of £65,000.
Sentence : two years and nine months' imprisonment and recommended for deportation.
Decision : the sentence of imprisonment was too long, in the light of Aramah (1982) 4 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 407; a sentence of two years would be substituted.
The recommendation for deportation had apparently been added as a last minute after thought, without any proper inquiry.
The question had been considered in Nazari (1980) 2 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 84 and Bouchereau (1977) 66 Cr.App.R. 202 and other cases.
Both the European Directive and the principles of natural justice required that there should be a full inquiry before a recommendation is made, and reasons should be given for the recommendation.
The last minute addition of the recommendation did not in any way comply with the law and the recommendation would be quashed.
R. v. ODENDAAL: Lord Lane C.J., Roch and Auld JJ.
October 4, 1991.
Facts : pleaded guilty to six counts of theft, burglary and obtaining by deception, and asked for 14 similar offences to be considered.
The appellant committed a number of offences including stealing cheque books and using the cheques to obtain cash and various goods; stealing a car which was then sold with false number plates, and two burglaries and the theft of another car.
Sentence : 18 months' imprisonment and, recommended for deportation.
Special considerations : the appeal was directed to the recommendation for deportation.
The appellant was a South African citizen who had left South Africa to avoid apprehension for a burglary.
He had a conviction for burglary in South Africa.
Since his arrest in England, he had married a 16 year old girl who was pregnant by him and who had now had a child.
The appellant had lived with the girl and her parents while on bail.
The appellant did not wish to return to South Africa.
Decision : the sentencer indicated that there was little mitigation in the case apart from the plea of guilty, and that he did not consider the appellant's presence conducive to the good of the country.
It was argued that the sentencer has failed to give weight to the effect on the appellant's wife and child if he were deported, and that his good behaviour while on bail indicated that he was not a threat to the country if he remained.
The principles had been stated in Kandhari (April 27, 1979).
The court should have regard to the gravity of the offences under consideration and the offender's criminal history.
The sentencer was entitled to view the appellant's offences and history as meriting a recommendation for deportation.
It was established in Nazari (1980) 2 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 84 that the sentencer must consider the extent to which the offender's presence in the country was to the detriment of the country, and the effect of the recommendation on the members of the offender's family.
As the Court had said in Cravioto (1990) 12 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 71, this called for a delicate balancing exercise between the possibility that the offender might commit further crimes in this country and the harm that might be done to innocent people if he were  deported.
It was clear from the sentencer's observations that he had given careful consideration to these matters.
In the view of the Court, the sentencer had given proper recognition of the seriousness of the history and the offences for which he was sentencing the appellant, and had taken into account all the relevant guidelines and principles.
He was right to make the recommendation on the material before him.
Commentary : the procedural requirements for making a recommendation for deportation are well established.
There is a statutory requirement that the offender be given seven days' written notice setting out the conditions of eligibility for deportation, and the exceptions; additionally the Court has indicated in a number of cases that the sentencer should invite counsel to address the court with specific reference to the question of deportation, and give reasons where a recommendation is made.
Compensation order — offender claiming to have means from which compensation can be paid — means subsequently shown not to exist — whether ground for quashing compensation order
R. v. HAYES: McCowan L.J., Tucker and Ian Kennedy J. November 5, 1991.
Facts : pleaded guilty on one indictment to one count of theft, one of false accounting and one of obtaining by deception, and on a second indictment to seven counts of theft.
The appellant was the treasurer of a sports and social club; he stole £4,567 from the club.
He then obtained another job, in which it was his responsibility to order materials.
He submitted false invoices and thereby stole a total of £12,448.
Sentence : 18 months imprisonment and ordered to pay £17,015 compensation.
Special considerations : the appellant's counsel had informed the sentencer that the appellant was prepared to sell his house to raise the funds to pay compensation, and that the house was subject to an offer to purchase which would leave the appellant with an equity of almost £17,000.
In the event, only £200 was available to pay compensation.
The appellant had deceived the court; he had told lies to his advisers so that these lies could be unwittingly advanced to the sentencer in mitigation.
The truth was that there was a substantial mortgage on the property which would never enable the appellant to pay compensation in the amount which he instructed his representatives to offer.
The Court would not interfere.
It must be made perfectly plain that if a man in this position chooses to deceive the court and his legal advisers and put up a false story which had the result of reducing his sentence of imprisonment, the Court would not intervene.
Before these offers are put before judges careful instructions should be taken and researches made.
Commentary .
This case illustrates a common phenomenon.
The defendant at the Crown Court instructs his advisers that he has assets or resources from which substantial compensation can be paid, in the hope of securing some mitigation of the sentence.
When the sentence has been passed, possibly (as the sentencer indicated in this case) with the benefit of some mitigation, it is discovered that the means to pay either did not exist or have in one way or another disappeared.
The defendant comes to the Court of Appeal, asking that the compensation order should be quashed, on the ground that there is not reasonable prospect that he will be able to pay it.
Often in the past the Court has quashed the compensation order on this ground, leaving the appellant with the benefit of the mitigation.
(For examples, see Huish (1985)7 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 272,Bond (1986) 8 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 11.)
This  case is an indication (as in Slack (1987) 9 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 65) that the Court of Appeal is less likely to be persuaded to quash the compensation order in such cases, where the offender in the Crown Court has caused specific information relating to his finances to be put before the court.
Suspended sentence — activation — whether activation of a suspended sentence is subject to restrictions on the maximum aggregate term of imprisonment which may be imposed in particular circumstances
R. v. CHAMBERLAIN: Watkins L.J., Tudor Evans and Blofeld JJ.
December 16, 1991.
Facts : The appellant had been sentenced to a term of 15 months' imprisonment, suspended, at the Crown Court.
He thereafter committed a large number of summary offences and two either way offences, of which he was convicted by a magistrates' court.
He was committed to the Crown Court to be dealt with in respect of the suspended sentence under Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973, s.24(2), and in respect of the summary and either way offences under Criminal Justice Act 1967, s.56.
He was sentenced to a total of 12 months' imprisonment for the summary and either way offences and the suspended sentence was activated consecutively.
Decision : the Court had to consider the legality of the sentences imposed, with particular references to Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s.133.
The Court was of the opinion that section 133 did not apply to the activation of the suspended sentence, as it was clear that when a sentencer activated a suspended sentence he did not ‘impose’ the sentence for the purpose of section 133.
A similar conclusion had been reached in Lamb [1968]2 Q.B.
829 and Pike (1971) 1 W.L.R. 1321.
The second question was whether it was lawful to pass sentences totalling 12 months for the offences in respect of which the appellant had been committed under Criminal Justice Act 1967, s.56.
Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s.133 allowed a magistrates' court to pass an aggregate of 12 months' imprisonment for two or more either way offences.
In the case before the court, there were two either way offences, one of theft and one of fraudulently using an excise licence, but the court had imposed a sentence of one months' imprisonment for the theft and no separate penalty for the fraudulent use of the excise licence.
Consecutive sentences of three months had been passed for two offences of driving while disqualified, with a further six months consecutive for an excess alcohol offence.
The court was bound by the maximum aggregate of six months in section 133 in respect of these offences, and the jurisdiction to pass them in this form did not exist.
The sentences for those offences would be made concurrent, so as to produce a total of six months for all the offences for which the appellant was committed under Criminal Justice Act 1967, s.56.
The suspended sentence would be activated with the term reduced so as to produce an overall total of 18 months.
Commentary .
Where the Crown Court is dealing with an offender for offences for which he has been committed for sentence under Criminal Justice Act 1967. s.56, whether they are summary or either way, the Court must observe the limitations which would apply in the magistrates' court to the sentence for those offences.
As this case illustrates, it is a common mistake for the Crown Court to overlook the limitations on the permissible aggregate sentence in the magistrates' court, set out in Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s.133.
These are a maximum of 12 months for two or more either way offences, and a  maximum of six months for two or more summary offences.
The second common mistake (not made in this case) is to impose a sentence for an either way offence for which the offender has been committed under Criminal Justice Act 1967, s.S6 a sentence in excess of six months' imprisonment, which is possible if the offender is committed for the same offence under Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s.38.
It is not obvious why the Court was concerned with the possible application of Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s.133 to the activation of the suspended sentence in this case (although it concluded that it did not apply in any event).
As the suspended sentences were imposed by the Crown Court, there was no reason why in respect of these sentences the Crown Court should be inhibited by the restrictions affecting magistrates court.
The position is the same if the offender is committed for some offences under Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s.38 and for some under Criminal Justice Act 1967, s.56; the restrictions in Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s.133 have no application to the offences subject to committal under section 38, as the Crown Court can sentence for those offences as if the offender has just been convicted of them on indictment, but do apply to the offences committed under section 56.
Robbery — robbery at sub-post office by man armed with firearm or imitation firearm — length of sentence
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S REFERENCE No. 20 OF 1991 (R. v. ROAST): Lord Lane C.J., Kennedy and Jowitt JJ.
January 27,1991.
Facts : convicted of robbery and possessing a firearm with intent to commit an indictable offence.
The offender and his accomplice went to a sub-post office at nine o'clock in the morning just as the safe was being opened.
The offender entered the premises wearing a balaclava and told the sub-postmaster to open the safe.
The offenders's accomplice stood at the door holding what appeared to be a shotgun.
The offender approached the till, kicked down the security glass and took various documents from the safe.
The offender and his accomplice ran away when an alarm was sounded, and the offender was detained by passers by; his accomplice escaped.
All the property was recovered.
The offender was on licence at the time of the offence from a sentence of 15 years' imprisonment imposed in 1981.
Sentence : seven years imprisonment with three years imprisonment concurrent for the firearms offence.
Special considerations : the Attorney-General asked the court to review the sentence on the ground that it was unduly lenient.
Decision :(considering Turner (1975) 61 Cr.App.R. 67,Smith (1981) 3 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 168,Gould (1983) 5 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 72,Horseman (1983) 5 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 200, and Dickson (1990) 12 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 479) the Court would proceed on the basis that the offender was not in possession of a real gun; people who carry real guns that are loaded, particularly if they are discharged, stood to receive greatly enhanced sentences.
The Court had a discretion on a reference by the Attorney-General; it had first to decide whether the sentence was too lenient, and then whether it was unduly lenient.
Even then, the Court had a discretion whether to increase the sentence or not.
In the view of the Court the sentence was too lenient.
The Court did not however think that it fell so far below what might properly be imposed by way of sentence so as to justify the Court in interfering so as to increase the sentence.
The sentence was too lenient, but it was not unduly lenient, and the Court would take no action on the reference.
Commentary .
As in the case of Attorney-General's Reference No. 14 of 1991 (above).
this decision would be more helpful to sentencers in the Crown Court if the Court had  indicated what the proper sentence at first instance would have been.
One aspect of the case which is not explored in the judgment is the fact that the appellant was on parole when the offence was committed, although by the time he was sentenced it seems that his licence would either have been close to expiry or have expired already.
Under Criminal Justice Act 1991 the position of an offender who commits an offence following his release from a long sentence such as the 15 years which the appellant had received in 1981 will be very different.
The court which sentences him for the latest offence will have to decide whether to return him to prison to serve a period equal to the balance of the sentence which remained on the day the offence was committed.
In this case, the offender would be liable (at the discretion of the sentencing court) to be ordered to be returned to prison to serve up to almost six years of the original sentence, in addition to whatever sentence is imposed for the latest offence.
For this purpose, the totality principle is excluded.
While the revocation of a parole licence is a relatively rare occurrence, this type of decision in the new scheme will become commonplace, and it is to be hoped that the Court will address the policy questions and give guidance as early as possible after the implementation of the Act.
Robbery — robbery of taxi driver — adequacy of sentence
 ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S REFERENCE Nos. 22 AND 23 OF 1991 (R. v. JACQUES AND JACQUES): Lord Lane C.J., Kennedy and Jowitt JJ.
January 31,1992.
Facts : pleaded guilty to robbery.
The offenders were passengers in a taxi late at night.
The taxi dropped off one of the passengers, and the offenders instructed the driver to take them to a farm club, and then asked him to turn down a farm track.
The driver was then seized from behind and treated with a degree of violence; the offenders demanded money.
The driver was hit a number of times on the head and back, either with fists or with an implement, and suffered injuries to the face and eyes as well as bruising.
Previous convictions : both offenders had convictions for a number of offences including burglary, all dealt with summarily.
Sentence : 12 months' imprisonment in each case.
Special considerations : the Attorney-General asked the Court to review the sentence on the ground that it was unduly lenient.
Decision : the aggravating features of the offence were the age of the victim (61), the fact that as a taxi driver he was vulnerable and an easy target; the isolated location in which the offence was committed; the degree of violence and the fact that it continued after the theft had been completed; the fact that the victim had been left, so far as the offenders were aware, unconscious, and the fact that two men were involved, and an implement may have been used.
The Court had considered a number of similar cases, of which the most helpful was Murphy (1988) 10 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 468, where a sentence of four years imprisonment was upheld for robbery of a taxi driver who was threatened with a lighted cigarette and a knife, although he did not suffer injuries comparable with those suffered by the victim in this case.
Cases involving taxi drivers usually took place at night in remote areas; it was an easy form of attack.
The Court had come to the conclusion, making allowance for the fact that both men had had to face the prospect of punishment twice, that sentences of three years should be substituted for the sentences imposed.
Commentary .
Again, a clearer indication of what the right sentence in the Crown Court would have been without the discount for the fact that the case was a reference would  make the decision more useful.
The reference to Murphy suggests that a sentence of four years would have been upheld on an appeal by the offenders.
Community service orders — consecutive orders — consecutive orders exceeding 240 hours in aggregate
R. v. SIHA: Farquharson L.J., McCullough and Waite JJ.
January 31, 1992.
Facts : the appellant pleaded guilty before a magistrates' court in April, 1990 to an offence of receiving and was ordered to perform 180 hours community service.
In October 1990 he pleaded guilty in the Crown Court to handling, and was ordered to perform 90 hours community service.
The total number of hours in the two orders was 270, which exceeded the maximum aggregate number of hours which the court would order on the same occasion by virtue of Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973, S. 14(3) in its original form.
Held : The Court had held in Evans (1976) 64 Cr.App.R. 127 that there was no reason why consecutive community service orders should not be made, but the total number of hours to which the offender was subject should not exceed, as a matter of principle, 240 at any one time.
The Act had been amended in 1982, but the amendments made no material difference.
The Court had held in Anderson (1989) 11 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 417 that it was wrong in principle to impose a consecutive community service order on an offender already subject to an order if the effect was to create a combination of orders whose total length exceeded 240 hours.
The Court did not however read section 14(3) as restricting what might be done by different courts on different occasions.
There was nothing in the section or elsewhere which prohibited different courts on different occasions from making orders which in aggregate exceeded 240 hours, and there was nothing in Evans which conflicted with that conclusion.
Plainly, a court which was considering whether to impose a community service order while an earlier order was still current should bear in mind that Parliament had prescribed 240 hours as the maximum that could be ordered on a single occasion.
This was the reason for the comments in Evans , but there was nothing said in Evans against making a second order on a later occasion which would take the total above 240 hours when added to the original order, but would not do so when added to the hours yet to be worked under it.
In the present case the Court had not been informed how many hours remained under the original order; the later order would be quashed and an order for 60 hours substituted.
This would bring the total number of hours under both orders down to 240.
Commentary .
This is a useful decision on a matter of general principle.
A court dealing with an offender who is already subject to a community service order may make a further consecutive order, so long as the total number of hours remaining to be performed does not exceed 240 (as this is a matter of principle rather than statute, the court is prepared to contemplate minor departures, as where the offender has very few hours to work off under the original order.)
As offending during the currency of a community order will not necessarily be a ground under Criminal Justice Act 1991 for re-sentencing an offender who is subject to a community order, and failure to respond to a community order must be disregarded when considering whether an offence is sufficiently serious to justify a custodial sentence (s.29(1)), it may be that this decision will become particularly important under the new legislation.
Theft — attempted theft of small sum — whether sufficiently serious to justify community service order
R. V. CORDNER: Lord Lane C.J., Kennedy and Jowitt JJ.
January 24, 1992.
Facts : pleaded guilty to theft and attempted theft.
The appellant and an accomplice discovered a method by which it was possible to insert a 10 pence piece into a ticket machine and cause the machine to release a 50 pence coin when the reject button was pressed.
The appellant was detained by a booking clerk who saw him putting the coins into the machine.
The appellant was anxious for the matter to be dealt with in the magistrates' court, but his accomplice elected to be tried in the Crown Court, but changed his plea at the last minute.
Previous convictions : one for possessing a controlled drug, fined.
Sentence : 100 hours community service.
Decision : the appellant submitted that a community service order was inappropriate in the circumstances, and that the order which was made was excessive.
The Court disagreed with both submissions.
Commentary .
This case presented the Court with the opportunity to consider what may be some of the most difficult problems under Criminal Justice Act 1991, and it is regrettable that the opportunity was not taken.
Under section 6(1) of the Act a court will not be able to pass a community sentence unless it is of the opinion that the offence (or the combination of any two of the offences concerned) is sufficiently serious to justify such a sentence (it is a question of argument whether this is a reference to any kind of community sentence, or to the particular kind of community sentence which the court has in mind).
Under section 6(2) (b) the court must be of the opinion that the restrictions on liberty imposed by the community sentence are commensurate with the seriousness of the offences involved.
The Act gives no guidance whatever on how these provisions are to be applied; it assumes a pre-existing scale which is to be found elsewhere.
It would be wrong to treat this case as a decision on the application of section 6. which was clearly not in the court's contemplation, but it may be permissible to comment that if an offence of this kind is to be held to be sufficiently serious to justify a substantial community service order, the scheme of the Act, with its albeit clumsy attempt to raise the public perception of the severity of community sentences, seems destined to failure.
AIDS — offender suffering from AIDS — whether a ground for mitigating sentence
R. V. STARK: Lord Lane C.J., Kennedy and Jowitt JJ.
January 17,1992.
Facts : pleaded guilty to possessing heroin with intent to supply.
The appellant was found in possession of 1.03 grammes of heroin.
Two further quantities of heroin were found at his home, amounting to 26 grammes.
The street value was estimated at £2,500.
Sentence : four years imprisonment.
Special considerations : the appellant had been diagnosed some time previously as HIV positive and more recently AIDS had developed.
His life expectancy was now very limited; it was estimated at between 12 months and two years.
Decision : The appellant's condition made life in prison particularly hard.
The Court was asked to reduce what was otherwise a perfectly appropriate sentence to allow the offender to be released and to die with dignity.
The Court had every sympathy with that desire, but it was not the province of the court to manipulate a sentence in this way.
The appellant had appeared before the Crown Court and the indictment was allowed to lie on the file because of his condition; shortly afterwards he was arrested again in possession of heroin and the prosecution obtained leave to proceed on  the indictment.
This showed that there was a grave risk that the appellant would continue to traffic in drugs as long as he was able to do so.
It was not for the court to manipulate the sentence; this was a matter for the exercise of the Royal Prerogative of mercy.
The appeal would be dismissed.
Commentary .
Compare Moore (1990) 12 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 384, dealing with an offender who was diagnosed as HIV positive.
Revenge attack — approach to sentence
R. v. NELMES: Glidewell L.J., French and Brooke JJ.
January 24, 1991.
Age : 44 (m.)
Facts : pleaded guilty to causing grievous bodily harm with intent.
The appellant's 18 year old daughter was indecently assaulted by the father of her boyfriend, while he was giving her a lift in his van.
She escaped by getting out of the vehicle while it was moving.
The matter was reported to the police, but the proceedings against the man were discontinued after he had been charged with kidnapping.
The appellant, having discovered that the man had a number of previous convictions for similar offences, equipped himself with a hammer and a quantity of weak sulphuric acid and sought out the man at his place of work on two occasions.
When he found the man he threw the acid into his face and beat him with the hammer, fracturing his skull and his thumb.
The acid was weak and caused only temporary injury to the man's eyes.
Previous convictions : none.
Sentence : six year's imprisonment.
Special considerations : the appellant's niece, a young woman of similar age, had been killed 20 years ago in circumstances which may have amounted to murder, but no one was arrested.
Decision :(considering Smith-Bryant (1989) 11 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 49) the case posed the sentencing judge a very considerable problem.
If there had been no reason for the attack, it called for a severe sentence; in one sense, revenge attacks, which themselves strike a blow at public justice, could be said to aggravate the gravity of the offence.
On the other hand they did mean that the defendant had considerable mitigation.
The same mitigating circumstances were present in this case as were present in Smith-Bryant .
The imprisonment of the appellant had had a depressing effect on the victim of the indecent assault.
There was no doubt that a custodial penalty was needed, and the sentencer could not be blamed for taking the view that he had to impose a sentence of immediate custody.
Revenge attacks however grave the provocation, cannot be allowed; the law must view them seriously.
Nevertheless, on the material before the court, it was not necessary to impose so long a term of imprisonment.
With the addition of the information about the effect of the sentence on the daughter, which was not before the trial court, the court had come to the conclusion that the appellant should not remain in custody.
The sentence would be reduced to two years, with the balance of the sentence remaining to be served suspended (the appellant having served six months).
Commentary .
The situation which faced the Court of Appeal in this case is by no means unprecedented; apart from Smith-Bryant another relatively recent example is D. (1986) 8 Cr.App.R.
(S.) 487, where a young woman who had been raped took part in an attack on the man responsible, after he had been released from a sentence of 18 month's imprisonment  after serving six months.
In all three cases the Court has stressed the gravity of revenge attacks and the danger of dissatisfied victims or their relatives taking the law into their own hands, and then found reasons to mitigate the sentence so as to allow the immediate release of the offender.
In all such cases, there is likely to be a strong element of provocation, and the stronger the provocation, the graver the violence used by the dissatisfied victim or relative is likely to be.
The Court of Appeal has the advantage (if dealing with cases such as these after the trial judge has made the initial decision; it is difficult to say on the basis of these cases how a trial judge at first instance should approach them.