

NEWSDESK
THE HOUNDS OF WILLIAM WEGMAN
As the above photograph suggests, American artist, photographer and video-maker William Wegman has rather a penchant for doggies of all shapes and sizes, and his work is positively littered with them.
He uses a variety of dogs for his creations, but his preferred canine poseurs are his own pets Man Ray (as committed a surrealist as his illustrious namesake, by all accounts) and the gorgeous, pouting Fay Ray (the mutt on the right in the above pic).
Basically Wegman expresses his view of the world as an absurd and irrational place by photographing Man Ray in a variety of disguises — inked-on whiskers and ears cunningly transform him into a cat, in a dress he becomes a transvestite, and in a hotel bed with Fay he becomes the envy of every red-blooded hound on the planet.
Not so much an everyday as a canine chameleon, in fact.
It's even been suggested by American art critics with nothing better to do that the hound himself is the gifted genius of the outfit, and Wegman merely an adoring sycophant.
A Mr. Gary Indiana, for example, suggests that ‘Ray himself chose a career in art, pestering Wegman whenever the latter tried to work, running in front of the camera at every opportunity, and ultimately getting his idea across to his owner’, and adds that ‘Wegman's work has only approached real genius in collaboration with Man Ray’.
We're not making any of this up, you know — it's all perfectly true, as you can discover for yourselves by visiting the ICA before September 1st, when the Man Ray & Wegman show will officially close.
A TRIBUTE TO MADAME YEVONDE
Profiled recently in this magazine, Madame Yevonde was a highly influential but sadly unsung pioneer of colour photography who began experimenting with the new Vivex colour print process in the early thirties and was soon producing work of startling and refreshing originality.
Almost forgotten at the time of her death in 1975, Madame Yevonde is now the deserving subject of a major retrospective organised by the National Portrait Gallery in conjunction with the Royal Photographic Society.
Born Yevonde Cumbers in Streatham Common, London, in 1893, she had a fairly conventional start to her career, serving an apprenticeship to the society photographer Lallie Charles, but by the early Twenties had build up a substantial portrait practice of her own and was attracting much attention as an eloquent advocate of the cause of women's photography.
Then came the colour experiments and the famous Godess series, in which actresses and society ladies posed as various Deities before the technicolour lens of Madame Yevonde.
This trailblazing series is currently on show at the National Portrait Gallery in its entirety for the first time since 1935, together with more conventional colour portraits of John  Gielgud , Vivien Leigh, the Mountbattens and Lisa Maugham, and black-and-white work from the later years.
A book of Madame Yevonde's pioneering work has just been published, price £14.95, and the exhibition runs at the National Portrait Gallery until September 30th.
END-OF-THE-CENTURY SHOW
Originally a painter, Peter Kennard has been making photomontages since the mid-Seventies, and is now widely regarded as the most important exponent of the art in Britain today.
Most of his work is now done to commission, and deals with world issues such as the Arms Race and famines, subjects which Kennard feels can only be addressed by using ‘more than a single click of the camera’.
His images have definitely earned themselves a place in the visual language of the past two decades, having been published frequently in newspapers, pamphlets and on postcards, though the claim in a recent press release that his Haywain with Cruise Missiles image was now almost as well known as the original painting by Constable does seem a little far-fetched.
In 1989, Kennard was invited by the United Nations to exhibit his work at the Palais des Nations in Geneva as part of the United Nations Disarmament Week, and as a follow-up to this event, the Imperial War Museum has also mounted a show.
Rather grandly entitled Images at the End of the Century, the exhibition includes a series of specially commissioned works that deal with recent events in Eastern Europe, and should prove fascinating to lovers of this intricate branch of photography.
A book of the same name has just been published by Pluto Press, and the exhibition will run until September 16th.
IN SEARCH OF YOUNG TALENT
During your schooldays, were you ever given any encouragement to look at photography as a possible way of earning your living?
Were you taken through the trials and tribulations of getting a stunning ‘grabbed shot’ of life in your town or at a local event?
Did anyone tell you that galleries were interesting places to visit, or even take you there?
All of this is very unlikely, unless you happened to be lucky enough to attend a reasonably progressive school.
During the planning of Magnum's In Our Time exhibition, Kodak UK decided to limit the funds available for the traditional party-style reception, and set the money aside for educational use instead.
The aim was to reach students in the Fourth to Sixth Form age group by setting up workshops and visits to the Hayward Gallery, persuading professional photographers to go to as many schools as  possible to talk about their own work and the Magnum show, and encouraging ‘young hopefuls’ to shoot and print some of their own work.
Sue Robertson, Educational Officer at The South Bank Centre, feels extremely grateful to Kodak for their essential contribution to this project, and believes that it's very important to combat the idea many young people seem to have that galleries are very boring places to visit.
Sue is convinced that it's vital for young people to be exposed as early as possible to The Arts and attain a clearer understanding of life as a professional creative person.
It's a question that their parents may also be unable to answer, so it's important that students be given some idea of what it's like to earn one's living creatively as early as possible, and so help dispel some of the fear and disbelief that discussions about this ‘odd’ way of working always seem to produce.
The visits to local schools by freelance photographer Dave Hevey and Network documentary photographer Paul Reas, covered Crowdale Urban Studies, Camden College, Catford County Girls, Lillian Baylis School and Sydenham School.
Paul Reas was very enthusiastic about the whole project, and clearly remembers the moment he himself became inspired to be creative.
When he was a child, an artist visited his school — he happened to be a musician — and left behind him an impression of a man very clearly committed to his chosen subject, and a feeling of passion for doing something you really want to do, that stayed with Paul for years until he finally decided to become a photographer.
While he realises that there will always be problems in trying to teach anyone a new subject, Reas admits that it was sad to see a keen student being teased by his less keen classmates, but felt hopeful that perhaps a seed had been planted that one day would grow.
Fortunately though, most students proved very interested in the shots taken by Magnum Photographers.
Anandi Ramamurthy, a freelance educational gallery tutor brought in specially for this project, was commended for the way she made viewing interesting and easy to understand.
Paul Reas found it was important to ‘keep it simple’ at first, and had to keep reminding himself that while today's young people are often very machine friendly, they are not the graduate students he normally teaches.
When it came to producing work of their own, an interesting collection was exhibited in the special workshop space The South Bank Centre has recently created.
Nick Wright of the Photo Co-op also took four or five groups around the exhibition, and some 400 Education Packs were sent to schools around the country, explaining what Magnum is, how it started with a small band of six, and how it has now grown to over a hundred, with offices in New York, Paris and London.
The pack contains descriptions of the founding photographers — Bob Capa, a hedonist, Henri Cartier-Bresson, a puritanical pacifist and George Rodger, the archetypical English gentleman — and asks why such an odd band of individualistic, loner photographers joined forces to form this special cooperative.
Romeo Martinez claims that Capa was the unifying factor: ‘he was driven by a single notion, which proved to be the healthiest idea in the history of photography — that a reporter is nobody if he doesn't own his own negatives.’
Photojournalism and the birth of photography are briefly touched on, Context and Ambiguity expanded on in some depth, ethics briefly considered and a fair selection of illustrations from the exhibition are included, including Robert Capa's The Last Man to die, Leipzig, Germany and Chris Steele-Perkins Famine in Karamoja Province, Uganda , images that are almost commonplace today.
A special note carefully explains there have been a number of women members too.
In fact, Magnum's first and second Presidents were women.
Barbara Jackson of Kodak UK was very pleased with the way the efforts to bring photography to the classroom had gone, and is very keen to keep this sort of working dialogue with schools going.
Having put its money behind the project, Kodak felt that the photographers involved should be suitably rewarded.
Money was allocated for coaches and teacher supervision (now that there are so many educational cutbacks on outings), special allowances for printing and photographic paper were made, as it was impossible for some schools to provide such basics.
The effects of the seeds that were hopefully planted in the minds of the young students during this period of contact with the world of photography may not become evident for years, but it seems likely that as long as lively and enthusiastic people remain involved in showing young people the variety of their creative options, Britain's high artistic standards will be zealously maintained for some time to come.
Ellie Angel 
ASSIGNMENT
THE UNDERSEA WORLD OF NORBERT WU
Underwater photographer Norbert Wu has been acclaimed for his studies of the plants and animals living in the oceans of the world.
As chief stills photographer aboard many important research vessels, including Jacques Cousteau's Calypso , Wu has encountered an incredible variety of living organisms — the comb jellies of the Arctic Ocean are just a few
Comb Jelly feeding, tentacles in gut, Arctic
What happens if you are run over by an iceberg?
If the iceberg is too big, you might find yourself trapped underneath a moving mountain, bumped and towed along with less and less of a choice of where to go.
Following the safety line up to your guide boat seems to be the best possibility, but only if the line has not been cut on the sharp edges of the ice, or if the boat tender has not had to release the safety line to keep his boat from being capsized or dragged under the iceberg.
Icebergs are notoriously unstable, and may flip over at the touch of a careless finger or the thump of a careless boot.
Krill being digested by comb jelly, Arctic
A team of divers that included myself once found ourselves in such a situation.
We entered the water with enthusiasm, as a previous dive had shown the waters to be filled with life.
Since the days were long during the Arctic summer, we had opted to do one more dive before the night.
The sea was flat as we entered the water, and the scientists began collecting animals at once.
Suddenly, an enormously large and dark shape blocked out what little light that remained at depth.
We looked up to see the safety diver frantically untangling himself from suddenly treacherous lines before being bumped by this moving mountain.
He swam up and away from the tangle of lines and disappeared on the other side of the iceberg.
In order to escape from the situation, my two colleagues below the surface unhooked from the safety line only to be swept  away by the current.
They drifted even deeper as I looked back, probably to get below the iceberg.
I pulled myself up the safety line and made my way past the tangle of tethers up to the surface, where the boat tender was frantically pulling in all the lines.
The other divers were nowhere to be seen at this time, which made for an extremely dangerous situation in the open ocean.
Having collected all the safety lines, we quickly motored around the to the other side of the iceberg.
The safety diver had clambered onto the iceberg, risking a tear in his suit and the possibility of tipping the iceberg over on top of himself in order to signal his presence in the deepening gloom.
A heavy fog had descended upon us, and we realized that finding the other two divers had to be the immediate priority.
Finding a lone man amid open ocean is doubtful at the best of times, and we had just been  through the densest fog bank either one of us had ever experienced.
We motored around in this soup, attempting to follow the current that the two divers had followed.
We finally found them and quickly picked them up.
They had drifted much farther than I would have thought possible.
Our man on the iceberg was clearly miffed at not having been picked up.
He was almost blue with cold, having had to scramble up an iceberg, loaded with a hundred pounds of scuba gear, and then left for long minutes all by himself.
After all, he was the chief scientist on board the boat, it was his $250,000 paying for this month-long expedition (this research vessel cost $7000 a day to run), and he was getting a little nervous out there, all by himself, getting colder by the second and drifting away on a little piece of ice.
Fortunately, it had been a small iceberg, as icebergs go.
Small enough to swim under and around, large enough to support a man, and big enough to teach all of us a lesson.
Comb Jelly with Krill caught in gut, Arctic
This incident occurred during a five-week scientific expedition to the Greenland and Norwegian Seas in the summer of 1988.
The purpose of the expedition was to collect and count gelatinous zooplankton such as jellyfish, comb jellies and other types of life in the open ocean.
Diving in the open ocean is also termed ‘blue water’ diving, since open ocean water can often be startlingly clear and blue.
Space and depth are easily confused; an animal 20 yards down may appear to be only a few feet away, and in following it down to get a closer look, a diver may suddenly find himself well past prescribed diving depths.
One day, even one hour, can make a huge difference in the environment as a previously barren stretch of water is suddenly filled with swarms of jellyfish or other planktonic organisms.
Larger animals which are not subject to the whims of wind and current may flash by or come closer for a brief look.
Scientists diving and photographing in blue water have devised methods of dealing with the   possibilities of runaway icebergs, strong currents and disorientation by using a system of safety divers and tethers.
Diving in freezing water (in the Arctic, we encountered water temperatures as low as minus two degrees C) can be tricky.
Regulators freeze up if the diver breathes too hard.
Valves of drysuits freeze up if pressed for too long, and a careless diver in a drysuit may find himself suddenly hurtling up to the surface, with potentially fatal consequences.
A diver is reputedly more susceptible to the bends the colder the water is.
One diver on a previous expedition to the Arctic got bent after chasing an elusive jellyfish down past a safe limit and having his regulator freeze up.
It took a long helicopter ride to Norway to treat him, and he can no longer dive or even walk without a limp.
Norway and Greenland are the closest contacts, and neither of these countries will promise rescue or decompression facilities of any sort.
The Arctic was everything I expected it to be, and much more in the way of high seas than I had bargained for.
The midnight sum indeed lasted all night, and one scientist became the ghost of the ship, a phantom who one would glimpse briefly only at three or four in the morning.
Five weeks is a long time to spend on a boat with only 20 people, and the scientists traded stories and theories the entire time.
They even began to assign personalities to those blobs of jelly that we collected.
For instance, one comb jelly,Beroe , was voracious in its eating habits.
My roommate Chris took to feeding these animals other comb jellies, and delighted in watching Beroe ‘snarf up’ the other jellyfish.
He raised one as a pet and named it ‘Snouter’.
We saw killer whales near the coast of Iceland, numerous seals and birds resting on ice floes, and heard constant stories of 30-foot Greenland sharks and aggressive Porbeagle sharks.
One popular story was of walrus who sneak up on divers and such out their brains.
We didn't see any whales, sharks, or polar bears underwater, but I became fascinated by the cast of characters which made up the food chain in these waters.
We encountered huge swarms of pteropods, Pelagic Snails which had huge feet modified into flippers and pun mucus nets to catch plankton.
Their close relatives, the Sea Butterflies, have lost their shall and feed exclusively upon them.
These were Clione , and I cam to think of them as the party animals, always feasting and fighting and mating.
The jellyfish were a wonder, coming in all sizes ranging from the 30-foot, one-ton Lion's Mane Jellyfish to the fingernail-sized Glass Jellyfish,Aglantha .
It was indeed the best of times and the worst of times, as I have found most prolonged expeditions to be.
When the sun came out from behind the fog, the world turned golden and beautiful.
But there were long days of gloom and seasickness, as the ship plunged through the 20-foot seas and storms of the Arctic summer.
I'll be back, though, and one day I'll get those shots of walrus and polar bears — underwater.
Norbert Wu
Norbert Wu is a marine naturalist, author and photographer currently working out of San Diego.
In 1986 deep-sea researcher Jacques Cousteau selected him as the still photographer for the research ship Calypso   
Isopod stealing food from jellyfish (sarsia), Arctic
PORTRAIT
PUERTO RICO COMES OF AGE
In the last 40 years, the Puerto Rican people have had to adapt quickly to many changes.
Once a feudal, agrarian society, the island has recently been urbanised, industrialised and Americanised.
Jack Delano has recorded the little state as she once was, and as she now is
The island of Puerto Rico has altered substantially in the last 40 years.
A country once dependent on agriculture, as not only a means of income but a way of life, has evolved into a society almost totally structured around urban industry.
Photographs from the 1940s depict the gaunt and hungry faces of workers in the fields, whereas those photographed in the 1980s are well-fed and healthy as they are shown assembling electronic accessories in thoroughly modern factories.
These changes have been documented through the years by the camera and intuition of Jack Delano, a photographer with remarkable foresight considering the enormity of the project.
Delano was hired as a photographer by the Farm Security Administration (FSA) in 1940, which was set up to document the plight of the displaced farmer and the accomplishments of the Roosevelt administration's agricultural relocation and land-improvement programs.
Ponce Iron Works, Puerto Rico, 1946 — the workers take a lunch break
In 1941, as part of the work he was undertaking, Delano was sent  to the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, but the inevitable involvement of the United States in World War II cancelled his assignment prematurely.
In 1946 he returned and, under the sponsorship of the local government, began a new photographic project in which he would cover every aspect of life on the island.
He became immediately aware of the developing cultural life taking place on the island and, along with his wife, Irene, taught, lectured and exhibited work alongside their Puerto Rican colleagues.
Both the Delanos wrote books for children and adults in an effort to encourage the population to become more literate and hopefully generate a sense of pride in the history of the island.
All this activity left little time for photography but, even after returning to the States to continue his work for the FSA, Delano never lost sight of the fact that his introduction to Puerto Rico had been through a camera.
With this in mind, he planned to return to the project and, in 1978, funded by the National Endowment for Humanities, the documentation entered its final phase.
Jack Delano was never an invisible photographer — his subjects were always aware that they were being photographed — in fact he had acquired so many friends during the early stages of the project in the 1940s that approaching the same people in the 1980s was a mere formality.
He was encouraged by what he saw in these rekindled friendships.
People that had once been poor, often virtually on the breadline, were now much more elegantly dressed and had achieved a far higher standard of living.
By revisiting his own previous work, Delano has achieved something that very few photographers have even attempted before.
He has reinterpreted subjects and landscapes without compromising his original intentions.
A perfect example of his remarkable intuition is reflected in his ‘harvesting’ pictures.
Exactly 40 years separate the shots, which show just how much Puerto Rico has benefited from its own ‘industrial revolution’.
Of this Delano says, ‘to confront these conditions people, too, have changed.
Perhaps symbolic is the typical picket line of today; people in high spirits shouting slogans and singing to the beat of a salsa band as they march defiantly under the eyes of the police contrast with the solemn processions of strikers we had seen in the 1940s, walking through the streets in silence and in proper order, as if to create any disturbance was a mark of poor breeding.
People today are more outspoken, more assertive in their demands for social justice and more aggressive in the fight for social rights.
Do these changes mean that the traditional moral values of decency and respect for one's neighbours are being lost?’
This parting question will undoubtedly invite a varied response, but there is no doubt that Delano confronted these issues unflinchingly throughout the project.
Jack Delano believes that enriching the human spirit in some measure is the purpose of all art, and if any of his work has come close to doing that for anyone, then he and his wife, who sadly died in 1982, would be more than satisfied.
Puerto Rico Mio — Four Decades of Change by Jack Delano is published by the Smithsonian Institute Press.
Eric Johnson 
A sugarcane cutter in Guanica, 1941
A cane-cutting machine near Juana Diaz, 1980
Little boy on the roadside near Corozal, 1941
Farmer near Cagus who was receiving aid from the Farm Security Administration, 1941
Family of a farm labourer in Barceloneta
COMPETITION
PHOTOGRAPHY & JANNEAU
SHOOT THE NEXT JANNEAU ARMAGNAC ADVERTISEMENT
Win a Nikon F801,and a trip for 2 to Condom (the home of Janneau)
Janneau is the leading brand of Armagnac in Britain, and Armagnac, as you may know, is France's oldest brandy, and the connoisseurs' favourite.
Stemming solely from the Gascony region of France's South West, it has a smoother, richer flavour than Cognac.
Janneau VSOP is the very cream of Armagnacs available in this country, and confers on its devotees a certain ‘Janneau-sait-quoi’, which the advertising has not been slow to demonstrate.
THE FLAVOUR OF FRANCE
The advertising is in black-and-white and is authentically ‘French’— concentrating on moments or happenings in which French people, young and old, are enjoying their Janneau as a part of their everyday life — relaxed with that indefinable French quality of style which instils ordinary events with a particular panache, whether it be over a meal or simple as a complement to civilised living at any time of day.
COMPETITION GUIDELINES
The ‘Shoot the Next Janneau Armagnac ad’ competition offers you a chance for your work to be featured as part of the 1990 Janneau advertising campaign.
The photographs we are looking for will reflect a French mood whether shot in England, France or Patagonia!
In addition any photograph entered — and it can be as many as you like — should ideally  include the Janneau VSOP bottle as an integral part of the photography, without having to be artificially positioned.
Only black-and-white prints are required (min 8″ × 10″, with camera and film speed quoted) and must be of high quality for advertising reproduction purposes.
The Judges will be looking for style, individuality and a unique portrayal of the Janneau drinking occasion combined with that certain ‘French quality of life’.
Advertising alcohol is governed by certain restrictions, and therefore your photographs must adhere to the following disciplines:-
i) Permission must be obtained from all people appearing in your shots for their entry in the competition, and their possible appearance in advertisements.
ii) No-one under the age of 25 (or who looks under 25) should be featured drinking Janneau.
iii) No evidence of excessive drinking or drunkenness should be shown.
COMPETITION SPECIFICS
All entries must be submitted by August 31st 1990 to the Editor of PHOTOGRAPHY,.
The panel of judges includes:-
i) Eamonn McCabe
ii) Mark Warford, Editor of PHOTOGRAPHY magazine
iii) Etienne Janneau
iv) Creative Director of Holmes Knight Ritchie/WRG Ltd, the Advertising Agency for Janneau
RICHARD BRAINE
Photographer Richard Braine's objective during the Janneau shoot was in  essence , that the camera be merely an intruder into real life situations.
CONDITIONS OF ENTRY
PHOTOGRAPHY magazine will endeavour to return all entries if accompanied by a stamped addressed envelope.
PHOTOGRAPHY magazine will not accept any liability for loss or damage to photographs.
Prize-winning entries may be used for publication, promotions or advertising purposes.
The competition is not open to employees of Holmes Knight Ritchie/WRG Ltd, Seagram's UK Ltd and their Agents, or Argus Specialist Publications, or their families.
REVIEW
BEAUTIFUL BROADS
We refer, of course, not to vast numbers of physically appealing American females, but to the stunning vistas of the Norfolk coast, which Richard Denyer has spent the last few years painstakingly photographing
When Richard Denyer first began knocking on doors in the book publishing world, with the synopsis of a photographic essay on the Norfolk Broads in his hand, he found himself facing something of an image problem.
For most, the Broads conjure up either a dull picture of flat, uncontoured landscapes sadly unrelieved by dramatic mountain scenery or stunning views, or else the cheap ‘n’ cheerful chips-with-everything ambience of Great Yarmouth and its neighbours.
‘It doesn't grab people visually’, says Denyer.
‘You can't drive round it in a car and say, ‘I've seen the Broads’, because you can only get to the most beautiful and interesting parts by boat or on foot, and you've got to be pretty determined.
It's quite a subtle place’.
One publisher was interested initially, but it soon became clear that the book Denyer was proposing wasn't one they wanted to market without the pulling power of a big name.
He realised then that he would have to do the job himself.
Several tortuous fundraising exercises and much sweat and tears later,Still Waters (Still Waters Press, 1989, £9.95) was finally published.
The book is a beautifully produced collection of 52 duotone images that offers a glimpse into a world of mysterious enchantment: of still, reed-fringed waterways where boats glide silently across a glass surface or lie wrecked and rotting, slowly merging into their graveside foliage; a  world of early morning mists and huge open skies.
But these aren't just pretty pictures: Denyer also portrays the Broads as a living working community where farming, fishing, boat-building, reed-cutting and thatching thrive alongside the summer tourist trade.
‘I wanted to show the Broads as they are’, he says, ‘a working landscape, a self-supporting community.
It's not just pretty reed-beds, windmills and tourists; there's something happening all the year round.’
The Still Waters project began two years ago, while Denyer was doing shoots for the Broads Authority, a body set up in the late 1970s to manage and protect the area.
The Authority was — and still is — his biggest client, commissioning a large number of environmental pictures from him, mainly for educational purposes.
Through these his knowledge of and interest in the Broads grew, and he began taking pictures for himself.
It then occurred to him that there was no contemporary pictorial record of the Broads, the last person to seriously photograph them having been P.H. Emerson, in the 1890s.
‘His pictures were very beautiful and painterly’, says Denyer, ‘and I wouldn't knock them artistically.
But to me they're all heavily set up and contrived.
People sometimes look at my pictures and compare them to Emerson's.
At first, I used to grind my teeth and think, oh God, we've got to move on from Emerson.
But then I thought, they're recognising something about my pictures or the place, and now I don't mind’.
Meanwhile the Broads were due to be given National Park status in April 1989, and it seemed appropriate to mark the occasion with a modern study, albeit a subjective one.
Denyer decided to put together a mix of landscapes and portraits, images that gave him particular visual pleasure.
Working in black-and-white was pretty much a natural choice, partly for practical and economic reasons.
‘Also’, he says, ‘I've always liked black-and-white.
There's an immediacy and drama about it, and the fact that I can control the entire process from pressing the shutter right through to the dry print counts for a lot.
Colour is a completely different medium’.
The photographs were shot, like all of Denyer's work, on a 35mm Nikon FM, which he cherishes for its durability and ‘workhorse’ quality.
He believes that 35mm is an undervalues medium.
‘People often assume that the only way to do big landscapes is on medium or large format, but it isn't true.
If you're careful, you can get fantastic quality out of 35mm.
The limitation only comes if you want to blow it up any bigger than 8x10 — then you've got to use large format’.
Due to its flat landscape, Norfolk has long had a reputation for its fantastic light quality, a phenomenon that has been captured to great effect by many painters.
Surprisingly though, it's not an advantage that Denyer chooses to exploit.
‘I appreciate it, and if I get a nice sky in a picture then fine, I'll manipulate it in the darkroom and make the best of it.
But it's not something that I'm particularly trying to capture’.
When making final selections for his book, Denyer found himself afflicted by severe mental block.
‘I originally got them down first to 100, then to 80, but finance dictated that I select a smaller number.
Then I got stuck: I just couldn't do it.’
But inspiration came in the form of a fellow photographer he met at the printers, who suggested a different way of looking at the images.
‘He said: ‘They've very nice, but some of them are purely illustrative; they don't have anything of you in them.
So kick out the illustrations.’
With that the scales fell from my eyes.
I came home, put them on the floor and they virtually sorted themselves into two piles.
It was quite magical’.
At the same time, Denyer had the idea of setting up an accompanying exhibition: it seemed an obvious extension of the book.
He approached the Broads Authority and the Countryside Commission, who agreed to fund the whole project, and the first showing was held in Norwich last year.
The book is also Denyer's personal celebration of having lived close to the Broads for 16 years — ten years longer than he's lived anywhere else.
To him, it's an absorbing world of contrasts.
‘It's quite introspective, which is good and bad.
Everybody knows and helps each other, like a family: but they can also be adverse to change, even if it's constructive.
When you get off the beaten track and talk to people, you find out what's really going on beneath the surface that the visitors see, the intimate details’.
Mostly, he feels, the book's gone down well with the local community, ‘though occasionally I do meet someone who doesn't like a particular photograph for some reason, usually because they know the place very well, which is fair enough.
But I think they recognise that I'm not trying to exploit the Broads to line my pocket, and that I've taken a bit of care.
It's highly subjective, of course: but for better or worse, it's an honest viewpoint.’
The Still Waters exhibition will be at the Corridor Gallery, Glenrothes, Fife from September 1st to September 30th 1990.
Sue Taylor 
PHOTOFILE
BISCHOF
Werner Bischof was one of the great photographic witnesses of his time.
Whether documenting a war atrocity or capturing the beauty of a Japanese garden, his photographs always retained that special ingredient — sensitivity
Werner Bischof died young: he was only 38 when the Jeep in which he and two companions were travelling plunged into a gorge in the Andes on May 16 1954.
His entire oeuvre as a photographer fits into a period of 18 short years.
It has a sense of fulfilment, of completeness.
There is something indecent about comments from the living on the fate of the dead, and to say that ‘those whom the gods love die young’ is to assume an unsuitably Olympian pose.
Yet in their intensity, their beauty and their perfection, Werner Bischof's photographs speak of a life that was at all times deeply considered and lived to the full.
That he would have done much more is years to come is certain; yet the quality and the richness of what he left behind him make it equally certain that this very patient man, who to achieve his ends knew how to take his time, never wasted a minute of his life.
His first student essays in photography show him fascinated by natural order and symmetry, the geometry of nature, the abstract face of concrete things.
The Neue Sachlichkeit (‘New Objectivity’) movement in Switzerland and Germany included among its dogmas the belief that ‘the world is beautiful.’
The young Bischof and his friend the painter Hans Erni were not unaware of the dark clouds gathering in the sky over Europe; but at this point, on the threshold of adult life and a career — as yet undecided between painting and photography — he paused to make a careful, thoughtful study of the beauty of the world around him, to search, in minute things, for the harmony of the universe.
By the age of 18 or 20, he had completed his apprenticeship in life: he might have become a very good photographer, probably an excellent painter, a good mountaineer and hiker, or a fine skier.
When he left the Kunstgewerbeschule in 1936 he set up in Zurich as a freelance photograph, a job he fitted in between the traditional periods of military service compulsory in Switzerland, then worked for a year in the famous magazine Graphics .
He still longed to be a painter though, and in the summer of 1939 he moved to Paris, where he intended to settle and paint.
War broke out in September.
Bischof returned to Switzerland, where he was conscripted.
After the war ended he found himself a completely free agent, suddenly removed from the safety of neutral Switzerland; he was shaken, disturbed; his true self was born.
First as a reporter for Du , and then on missions for Schweizer Spende, the Swiss relief organisation for victims of the war, he was thrown into a Europe of ruins and displaced persons.
In a few months, he discovered the sufferings of the world, found his calling as an artist, met the woman he was to marry, and became Werner Bischof, one of the finest photographers of his time.
He felt the sufferings of the world most keenly when he was confronted with those who were weakest, most vulnerable, least able to defend themselves — refugees: men and women with no home to go to, and, most bereft of all refugees, children.
Across Europe, from the war-devastated areas of France and Germany as far as Greece and Italy, from Austria to Hungary, Poland, and Romania, Bischof carried his camera equipment and bundles of warm clothing for those in need, infinitely caring, attentive to all victims, but above all to children.
Saint-Exupéry said that ‘loving someone does not mean looking into each other 's eyes, but looking in the same direction together.’
In 1946 in Milan, Werner met a young woman who was looking at the same things as he was.
Rosellina was on her way to Rimini, to work in a children's village set up for orphans and children who had become separated from their families.
They looked at the same things together as they walked through the ruins of Milan.
(Milan in 1946…
I remember that year: Elio Vittorini was living in a house which had been reduced to two walls.)
Together, Werner and Rosellina looked at poverty, hunger, and lost children.
They did not meet again for five months.
‘We had fallen in love,’ she said later, simply.
They were married in 1949; Marc Bischof was born in 1950, Daniel in 1954, nine days after his father's death.
‘My life with him was short,’ his wife said, ‘but clear and bright as a crystal.’
‘People coming and going’ were to provide Bischof's subject matter in the eight years of life that remained to him after his meeting with Rosellina; people in camps, people displaced by the Second World War and then by the regional wars that succeeded it, from Eastern Europe to Indochina, and from Scandinavia to Japan.
In 1949 he and Rosellina settled in England, where he worked for Picture Post and The Observer .
In the same year he joined Magnum, and those kindred spirits Henri Cartier-Bresson, David Seymour (‘Chim’), Ernst Haas, and George Rodger.
‘What matters to me in this cooperative,’ he wrote to his wife from Helsinki, ‘is that they are all well-established people, with left-wing sympathies.
Two of them took part in the Spanish Civil War.
They are free spirits, to independent to tie themselves to a single magazine.’
Robert Capa was president of Magnum at the time, and active in its head office.
Bischof had long conversations with him in Paris and London, in which they discussed choices to be made, goals to be pursued, and the practical and moral aspects of their work.
‘Capa can be like a father when you're alone with him,’ wrote Bischof.
He must have been a very brotherly father, since he was only three years older — though it's true that he was a Hungarian and a Jew, and by the age of 20 had a thousand years' experience.
He was killed when he stepped on a mine in Indochina on 25 May 1954, a few days after Bischof's death.
It seems that with photographers there is no middle ground: you either live to be a hundred or die young.
WERNER BISCHOF — PHOTOFILE, is published by Thames & Hudson, price £4.95  
Zeng Yilu, Zeng Nian's father, in December 1988, a year before his death
PORTFOLIO
THROUGH CHINESE EYES
After the rash of Chinese shots by Western photojournalists that followed last year's student uprising, Zeng Nian's views of Peking come as a welcome and refreshing change, giving us the chance to see the country through Chinese eyes
When thousands of students began their peaceful protest in Tiananmen Square last spring, the eyes of the world turned towards China.
Suddenly, newspapers and magazines everywhere were awash with images of Peking and its people, and when events finally took their brutal and bloody turn on June 3rd, western photojournalists were there in force to record every grim detail for posterity.
But how did the Chinese themselves react to these momentous happenings?
Did any indigenous photographers dare to document the Peking Spring and its bloody aftermath?
The vast majority of the images that appeared in the Western press were taken by foreigners, but there were Chinese photographers at work in Peking last year, and perhaps the most outstanding among them was Zeng Nian.
Zeng knew more than most about Peking, having spent the previous two years wandering the streets of the ancient capital Leica-in-hand in an attempt to document the lives of its multitudes, and by the time the student protests began he had already amassed an impressive body of work.
His photographs from this time succeeded in capturing the real China in a way that would have been impossible to a foreigner.
Furthermore, they displayed a freshness, vitality and love of experimentation that probably stem from the fact that Zeng is a completely untrained photographer.
In fact, he has only been working as a professional for three years or so, and has had to learn his trade by trial and error.
Members of the Peking Song and Ballet Troupe
Like most Chinese children unfortunate enough to grow up in the Sixties, Zeng's education was severely disrupted by the Cultural Revolution, and he had to sit through the shouting matches and brain-washing sessions just as everyone else did.
The classrooms rang to the repetitive chants of ‘Long Live Chairman Mao’ and the lifeless, monotonous verses of ‘Without the Party there would be no New China’as Zeng and his classmates were forced to write and rewrite constant self-criticisms without ever really understanding them.
On frequent trips to farms and factories, the children were subjected to an obligatory, unpaid form of child labour, all under the guise of education.
Unsurprisingly, Zeng's childhood was not a happy one, and he played truant from his persecutors as often as he could.
In 1971, the farce one could hardly call an education ended, and he began his working life as a marine labourer in Nanjing Port.
He was 17 years-old, and he enjoyed the release of physical labour, but his first love had always been photography.
As a boy, Zeng had taken to developing old negatives that he found lying around in his house, and an interest in actually taking photographs naturally followed.
By borrowing Chinese cameras, and gaining access to more sophisticated foreign models that had been ‘liberated’ from bourgeois homes by the Red Guards, he gradually mastered the art and became a very proficient photographer.
He continued enthusiastically perfecting his art throughout the Seventies, even becoming the official visual diarist of his work unit, but he has since described his photographic style during those years as petit-bourgeois.
It was only after the Cultural Revolution had ended and travel within China had once again become a possibility, that Zeng began to find his feet photographically.
In 1979 and 1980, Zeng spent his summers on cycling holidays to Hangzhou and Shanghai, and the following year he took the unprecedented step of applying to his work unit for extended leave to travel, even threatening to resign if his wishes were not granted.
Surprisingly, his superiors agreed to his request, and the subsequent journey was to change his life forever.
He toured Western China and Tibet on his bicycle, paying his way by developing the many photographs he had taken in local universities and sending them back north to paying customers.
Inside the Forbidden City
The trip was a great success, the subsequent Travels in the West exhibition proving very popular in Nanjing and giving him his first taste of newspaper and television attention.
Even more importantly though, the feeling of freedom that travelling gave Zeng had such a profound effect on him that returning to normal life with his work unit seemed practically unthinkable.
Luckily, though, his adventures had already turned him into a local hero, and his bosses were only too happy to allow him to devote as much time as he wanted to his art.
Two years later, he left work to visit his sick father in Peking, and never returned to his unit.
Completely free to devote his life to photography, Zeng learnt quickly and improved in leaps and bounds.
In 1984 he married a French woman, and the following year travelled to France to try his hand at the colour photography which seemed so popular in European magazines.
He also made further photographic excursions into Tibet, and in 1986 briefly joined the Sipa agency in Peking.
Zeng was deeply affected by being exposed to a wider range of photographic influences and styles during these years, but it took an exhibition of Cartier-Bresson's work in Peking in 1987 to finally convince him that photographs could actually carry meaning and profundities   just as a painting or a piece of music can.
He learnt the lesson well, and has since produced an impressive and highly original body of work.
Crushed bicycles in Western Changan Avenue, more than four kilometres from Tiananmen Square, June 6th, 1989
Perhaps his finest single shot is an affectionate portrait of Zeng Yilu, his long-suffering father, who died last year.
As a prominent political thinker and intellectual, Zeng Yilu, was an obvious target for the Red Guards when the Cultural Revolution took hold.
Although then 70-years-old, the old man was sent to prison and forced to endure re-educative hard labour and constant self-criticism for several years, and by the time he returned home his despairing wife had already committed suicide.
But at the end of a very long, very hard life, he was still able to smile enthusiastically into his son's lens and show that his experiences hadn't got the better of him.
When the army began getting tough with the Peking students last year, Zeng was there to act as the country's conscience, but a week after the outbreak of violence he realised that his life was in danger and that he must leave China while he could.
He fled to France, somehow managing to smuggle all his rolls of film out with him.
His work in Peking has now been published in book form, and will hopefully be given the critical accolades it so undoubtedly deserves, but that will be small consolation for a man who may never seen his homeland again.
Still, his wife is with him, his career is booming, and his sense of humour seems wonderfully intact.
‘For some reason’, he says, ‘students went on hunger strike last May; in June they were fired on.
That night, it was like firecrackers going off at New Year's; the next morning the blood flowed like rivers.
Always something new in China!’
Peking — photographs by Zeng Nian is published by Studio Publications in hardback only, and retails at £24.00 Jimmy Sweeney 
EXHIBITION
HOWZAT!
Mike Roles claims to have no knowledge of cricket whatsoever, yet he's managed to produce as eloquent a testament of the noble game as you're ever likely to see
Mike Roles' half-lifesize photosculpture The Cricketer is the end result of a deep fascination, not with the game of cricket — he doesn't play it and he's no devotee — but with the movements of the players.
‘I remember watching a cricket match’, he says, ‘and thinking it was almost like some ritual dance, particularly the bowling: watching the guy contort and twist.’
Roles contacted a local cricket club, told them he wanted to photograph a bowler in action, and asked if they could help.
The club put him in touch with an obliging volunteer.
‘We went out on the cricket pitch one night, and this poor fellow just ran and ran.
I think he bowled a hundred or so deliveries for me before I got the images right.
Afterwards I had to take him out to the pub to revive him.’
Roles managed to get all the shots he needed in two sessions, hand-holding his Hasselblad.
‘The trouble with using a Hasselblad is that you black out after each shot, and in the first session I'd cut off the arms in one or two shots, so I had to go back and re-shoot those.
I had a very strong idea of what I wanted, even through I had plenty of photos: I knew exactly the kind of movements I was looking for, I'm glad we did it in two — I don't think the cricketer would've been very keen to do it again!’
Measuring 22ft long, 56″ high and 30″ wide, the three-dimensional sculpture comprises 16 vertically-angled  figures in the various stages of bowling a ball.
Placed back to back in eight pairs, they form a double-sided piece.
Viewed from either side, one of each pair becomes a shadow figure for the other, creating a spectacular effect.
‘I'm interested in sequential imagery’, he says, ‘in building things which, as you walk around them, give an unfolding, a sort of sequential narrative.
I wanted to create a spacial sense of having a shadow; the shadow reinforces the movement.
I also wanted to get a rhythm through the work which portrayed some kind of dance.
It needn't have been cricket; that was almost an aside to my interest in the movements.
‘When the guy was preparing to bowl, he leaned right forward so that his body was almost parallel to the ground.
Then he seemed to rise up and throw himself backwards and completely roll over; then he was parallel to the ground again.
I found the movement fascinating.’
Roles began his career by serving his apprenticeship as a photographer's assistant after leaving school, but then transferred to an education in sculpture and painting.
After two years designing murals for Wimpey, the construction company, he took a teaching post that enticed him back into the photography world, and led to a post-graduate degree at the Royal College.
Nowadays he combines part-time photography teaching  with his partnership in a commercial studio in Windsor.
He admits to using a little artistic licence in the sequence he chose for his Cricketer figures.
‘I did swap things around a little, just for the visual side.’
Predictably, perhaps, one eagle-eyed visitor to the Royal Photographic Society in Bath, where the sculpture is currently showing, rang up to complain that it wasn't accurate, that the bowler couldn't have been doing all those things.
Another comment was that the images aren't sharp.
‘I said: no, when you get someone running very fast and you're using  th a second, you can't expect them to be.
In fact, I deliberately allowed the images to blur.
But I tried to keep one thing — the foot — in focus throughout, because it seemed to be moving slowest.’
Having been printed on fibre-based paper, the images were masked out, hand-coloured and sulphide-toned before being cut out and mounted onto plywood.
Something else that interests Roles is the authority of the photographic image, our strong conventions of how to view a photograph.
By taking a scalpel to his work he felt he was challenging these.
Not everyone approved.
‘Some of my photography friends were horrified: ‘You can't cut photographs out!’
It did feel strange, but I rather liked the idea.
For me, it started a whole new way of thinking about the photograph.
In education, one is always confronting the latest thinking, but when it comes to doing it you have to face your personal hang-ups as well.’
Roles works most of the time with one of his two Hasselblads, which he finds a good compromise between quality and portability; these and a range of lenses comprise his field equipment.
For printing, he uses a wall-mounted De Vere enlarger, with which, to get the size, he shoots literally from ceiling to floor — with many pairs of worn jeans to prove it.
‘I crawl around on my knees getting the focus right.
I'm not particularly equipment oriented, and the great thing about this enlarger is that the controls are on the bottom.
I can lie on the floor, reach up  in a rather contorted way and focus it myself, rather than shouting instructions to somebody else, as you have to with a more conventional one.’
The Cricketer serves as a foretaste of things to come, with a full-scale exhibition of Roles ‘work due to be mounted in the summer of 1991 in Bath.
Preparing for this will be time-consuming, but he likes the discipline of a deadline.
‘You know you've got to have the work there and on time; it's something to aim for.
I always have to keep my eye on the clock.’
Currently he's absorbed in a piece of work on a theme he calls Love Story , which will also be a sequential piece, though in different form to The Cricketer .
‘It's another fascination.
It reminds me of my youth, and passions for the opposite sex; how you'd die for people whose names you can't even remember now.
It's very basic to us all.
‘My work on it will be romantic through to tragic, playing around with figures in a more complex, narrative situation.
It's quite a breakthrough for me.’
Although there's been a lot of interest in the Bath exhibition, Roles has found that his radical approach to the medium has made it hard to get his work established in this country.
In the United States and Europe they've been much more appreciative, which saddens him a little.
‘I'm English and I want to work here.
There seems to be a certain convention that governs what goes on.
People like Calum Colvin have shaken that up a little, but even he ends up with a picture which he puts a frame around.
That's what seems to worry people — that photography should be hung on a wall, not stood in the middle of a room.’
Whatever the opposition,The Cricketer is fielding well; at any rate, he's bowling them over out West.
Here's to a prolonged innings…
The Cricketer is on show at the Royal Photographic Society in Bath until August 26th.
Sue Taylor 
PROFILE
MICHAEL PETO
Jo Gross assesses the career of one of the finest post-war portraitists, a man whose love of humanity shone through his classically constructed shots
The Dalai Lama, Dharamsala, 1964
The late Samuel Beckett, 1961
Korean girl saved by the Save the Children Fund, Pusan, Korea, 1964
Fisherman, Konarak, India, 1967
With so much media space currently devoted to the heinous depredations the naked ape has inflicted on his habitat, it seems an inappropriate moment to celebrate the career of an artist whose entire work reflects his abiding faith in mankind; an artist who gloried in presenting humanity dressed up in the paraphernalia of a glamorous performer, or as an honest victim of other men's rapacity, so as to elicit for him the onlooker's sympathy.
‘High-spirited slum children, a tired ballet dancer, a work face imprinted with the sweets of life and wisdom, a miner proud as a nobleman, these were some of his favourite subjects’ said Stanley Turner, of the University of Dundee, the Trustees of the Peto legacy.
Such was the classical repertoire of Michael Peto, a photographer of the Fifties and Sixties who, during 20 years of work for The Observer was one of the best exponents of a fast-disappearing attitude.
The  optimistic view of mankind that Peto favoured was generated in the 18th Century by the French philosophers of Enlightenment.
In place of a blind faith in divine providence, they proposed a rational social contract which they believed would free mankind from many of our perennial ills.
Since the task seemed enormous, as it indeed was, they endowed the feeble human with supernatural powers, and artists of the period reflected this philosophy by glamourising the general public and monumentalising the heroes of the daily toil.
Much of the work of Michael Peto was executed in the spirit of this time-honoured tradition.
A typical Peto story tells how when dispatched by The Observer to photograph a major rail disaster, he came back with a picture of an exhausted rescue worker drinking tea, man's ability to fight disaster and overcome it having inspired this warm-hearted humanist photographer.
The postmodernists rejected this viewpoint, however, as excessive romanticism, but Peto would surely not have cared.
When he visited The National Gallery in London, he was enchanted by the Italian Masters Massacio and Pierro  de la Francesca, and the manner in which they portrayed the human figure.
‘They are big, they are still, they are noble’ he said.
Peto was born in 1908 in a small town called Bata, in Hungary, which was then still a part of the Hapsburg's Austro-Hungarian Empire.
His parents were storekeepers, and nothing in his education pointed to a career in the arts, except perhaps that when, as a young man, he began buying locally manufactured handicrafts, for subsequent resale, he was introduced to the creative urge latent in the people who produced the goods.
By the early Thirties, Peto had settled in Budapest, then a thriving, beautiful and historic city, in a ‘folksy’ business specialising in embroidery and handicrafts.
From this it was only a short step to total involvement in folk culture, and his ability to play the gipsy violin led him to join the Gyorgyos Bokreta group, which at that time offered a programme of traditional songs and dances from the Bata region.
At the outset of World War Two, with Hungary still a neutral country, Peto travelled to London on business.
While he was there Nagybanya Horthy, the dictator of Hungary, moved closer to the Axis powers and a ‘New Democratic Hungarian Government’, led by Count Michael Karolyi, was formed in London to fight alongside the Western Allies.
Peto involved himself in Karolyi's work, becoming his personal secretary, the establishment of a free socialist Hungary after the anticipated liberation being their aim.
Child and adult education was one of Peto's principal concerns, since he was convinced of the merits of progressive education as well as the usefulness of psychoanalysis.
He advocated an international exchange of teachers and pupils in a free Europe.
Since the war had interrupted his career as a merchant, Peto needed to find an alternative outlet for his many talents and interests, and when childhood friend Ervin Marton, a photographer and designer domiciled in France, introduced him to photography, he quickly realised that he had found his true artistic vocation.
Achieving a personal style became his ultimate photographic ambition, and under the influence of Josef Herman, a Polish photographer who spent many years in Wales documenting the lives of the coal miners, he paid his first visit to The National Gallery, where he gazed at the Old Masters and eventually formed what he called ‘a concept of total image’.
As a result of his visits to The National Gallery, Peto recognised ‘that the recording of the basic serenity of the human form must be my objective’.
Later, upon seeing the paintings of Georges Seurat (1859–1891), he decided that ‘the human silhouette is everything.’
According to Stanley Turner, curator of the Michael Peto archive at Dundee University, ‘he was continuously searching for the vision of a monumental human form to epitomise the universality of whatever scene, situation or event he was out to capture…always intent on raising his workday subjects from fleeting, mundane, accidental movement into symbolic representatives of their class or profession.’
If Michael Peto is somewhat forgotten these days, it is perhaps partly due to his wife's decision to leave his entire archive to the University of Dundee where, because of limited funding and the Scottish city's relative geographical remoteness, it is not, for most of us, readily to hand.
I am greatly indebted to the personal efforts of Stanley Turner, who very kindly supplied me with an ample selection of prints as well as many of the obscure details of Peto's life.
Jo Gross 
Michael Peto died in December, 1970 at the age of 62 .
RUNNING IN THE SAHARA
Covering the gruelling Hoggar Super Marathon turned out to be a personal and professional turning point for sports photographer John Evans
As a boy, John Evans was fascinated by deserts, and always dreamed of visiting one.
He had to be patient, but his wish finally came true last year, when at the age of 40, his work as a sports photographer brought him face-to-face with the biggest desert of them all — the awe-inspiring Sahara.
He was there on a Kodak sponsorship to cover a gruelling four-day Super Marathon through the Hoggar Mountains in Algeria, but he found himself constantly distracted by the staggering terrain that surrounded him.
‘The Sahara Desert was everything I'd hoped it would be and more’, says Evans.
‘It really had a profound effect on me.
Whereas the raw beauty of the Australian deserts can often be very disturbing, the Sahara left me with a deep sense of peace and tranquillity.’
But his tranquillity was disturbed by the annual Hoggar Super Marathon, a 104 mile race run over four days in temperatures that rarely drop below 30 degrees in the shade, if there is any shade.
At 8am each morning, the 80-odd contestants were expected to run a full marathon while it was still cool enough.
Then they lunched, visited the extremely hard-working Swiss masseurs, and spent the remainder of the day resting in preparation for the rigours of the following morning.
Overleaf: The start of the Hoggar Marathon, Algeria; Above; Runners with camel escort on a training run.
If the race was tough on the runners, it wasn't the easiest job in the world for a photographer to cover either.
‘When the race was on’ remembers Evans, ‘I travelled in a Land Rover driven by a local Taureg tribesman.
We tried to keep about a mile in front of the runners, grabbing photographs whenever we could, but it wasn't easy.
The Tauregs know every nook and cranny in the Hoggars, and proved  excellent guides, but every ride was a bumpy one, and by the end of the day I had more need of the masseurs than the runners did!’
But bumps and bruises weren't the worst injuries he received: early in the race, fired by the desire to produce the perfect picture, Evans began taking photographs without his sunglasses on, and in the Sahara, that's a deadly mistake.
He burnt both retinas in his eyes, but was thankfully treated by a doctor in time, and has since completely recovered.
However, his sufferings in the Sahara were more than compensated for when the Sports Council voted him Sports Photographer of the Year for 1989 in recognition of his work in the Super Marathon.
Even more importantly, though, he regards his experiences in Africa as a professional and personal turning point.
‘I definitely began to feel more mature as a photographer after my first visit to Africa’, he says.
‘It affected me very deeply, and really broadened by professional horizons.
For the previous five years I'd worked solely as a sports photographer, and had really enjoyed it, but my work on the Hoggar Marathon was different, because I was just as interested in the scenery that surrounded me as I was in the race itself.
Sometimes I was so affected by a particular view or landscape that I'd wait for the athletes to run into it before taking a photo.
I was very happy with the African work, and it's left me wanting to do some exploration work, travelling expeditions and so on, as well as pure sports work.’
John Evans has covered cricket, football, rugby, tennis, swimming and many other sporting events in the past, but in the last five years has tended to concentrate on athletics.
He covered both the World Championships in Rome in 1987 and the Seoul Olympic Games (for Life magazine) the following year, and has been used regularly in newspapers, Sunday supplements and running magazines.
That he has managed to carve out such a successful photographic career for himself is extraordinary when you consider that he spent the first 12 years of his working life as a bricklayer.
Born and raised in Merthyr Tydfil, he emigrated to Australia as a young man and worked in the construction industry until he injured his back 12 years later and was forced to reconsider his working future.
He decided to return to England and try his hand at photography, which had long been a hobby of his.
He was initially hired by the Oxford Mail , then began to concentrate on sport, and the rest is history.
His work in the Sahara was recently included in a Sports Council exhibition that nearly never happened due to a last-minute decision by sponsors Kodak to pull out half of their backing money, which was needed for other photographic projects.
This left the Sports Council without a venue for the show, but the day was saved by Whitleys, the oldest department store in London, who volunteered the use of their third floor for six weeks entirely free of charge, thus allowing the show to go ahead as planned.
There was much to admire in the exhibition, but perhaps most impressive was Evans' work.
He may have started his photographic career at a comparatively late stage, but that hasn't hindered his progress one little bit.
The Sports Council exhibition will be on show at the Royal Photographic Society in Bath in September and October.
Jimmy Sweeney  
Left: Ladies winner Fabiola Rueda has her Legionnaire-style cap blown off by the wind
INTERVIEW
SELF-MADE MAN
Fired by the desire to become a professional photographer, ex-ambulance driver Max Henery has survived a severe diet of Do-it-yourself books and trial-and-error sessions to achieve just that
Two years ago, Max Henery was driving an ambulance in London, but was far from satisfied with his lot.
He had always wanted to do something creative, but had so far failed to find a suitable medium — then he discovered photography.
It happened on a visit to his native Glasgow, when he decided to borrow a friend's camera and see what he could do.
His own description of what followed is worth repeating: ‘I found this location in Glasgow that I really liked and took about 15 shots of it.
I thought they all be brilliant, but they were utter shite, so I thought to myself: ‘There's a great talent here just waiting to be discovered!’’
As you may have gathered, Max Henery seems to possess an inexhaustible supply of self-deprecating deadpan humour, but he is also an extremely determined individual.
Undeterred by his early disasters, he decided to persevere with photography by first learning as much about it as he possible could.
With this aim in mind, he bought as many teach-yourself-photography books as he could lay his hands on, and read them all avidly.
‘I bought them all,’ he remembers, ‘John Hedgecoe's book of this, David Bailey's book of that, and I totally immersed myself in them for six months.
Some of them are pretty useless, but you do pick up a little information from each one.
So when I'd read them all I thought ‘I'll become a professional now’’.
His next move was to Madrid, an upheaval that he and his girlfriend had been planning for some time, and there his photographic education continued apace, despite one or two minor problems.
‘When I arrived I couldn't speak a word of Spanish, didn't know anything about the photographic scene in Madrid and had never worked as a professional photographer before, so it wasn't the easiest of situations to begin with.’
But he persevered, and soon began to master both the language and his camera to the extent where he could begin touting for work from the local magazines.
By now he had managed to amass an impressive portfolio, and so was quickly given work by a couple of Spanish car magazines.
Encouraged by this early success, he decided it was time to visit Spanish Elle , and turned up uninvited at their Madrid offices late one Friday afternoon.
‘They'd never heard of me, surprisingly enough, but they went mad over my work and asked me to do some portraits for them.
I was delighted, not to mention shocked, but I had to turn them down because I am definitely not a portrait photographer.
‘However, they were kind enough to refer me to Elle Decoration , an interiors magazine that was much more my kind of thing.
They immediately commissioned me to photograph this expensive restaurant nearby.
It turned out to be a very arty, dimly-lit place, and I was harried constantly by the manager, who wanted me out before he opened up, but somehow I managed to get the job done, and I was quite pleased with it too’.
Unfortunately, however, just as his career in Madrid was really beginning to come together, Max was forced to return to Britain for personal reasons earlier this year.
It was a pity in a way, but he's learnt a lot in the last two years, and now feels ready to try his hand at professional photography in London.
He's currently trying to get into Elle over here, and also hoped to get into the postcard and poster market.
‘I enjoy photographing dilapidated buildings, rundown factories and interesting cars’ says Max, ‘and think that kind of work would be very suitable for posters.
I've also been told that some of my shots would make very good ‘New Age’ album covers, so you never know.
Basically, I'll stay happy as long as I'm taking pictures.’
Long may he continue to do so.
John Bloom 