

[PRIVY COUNCIL]
STRATHMORE GROUP LTD.
PETITIONER
AND
A. M. FRASER AND OTHERS RESPONDENTS
[PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL FROM THE COURT OF APPEAL OF NEW ZEALAND]
1992 April 30; May 18
Lord Templeman, Lord Mustill and Lord Slynn of Hadley
New Zealand — Appeal to Privy Council — Appeal as of right — Determination of preliminary issue — Decision reversed on appeal — Whether decision on appeal interlocutory or final — Whether appeal as of right to Privy Council — New Zealand (Appeals to the Privy Council) Order 1910 (S.R. & O. 1910 No. 70 (L. 3))(as amended, by New Zealand (Appeals to the Privy Council)(Amendment) Order 1972 (S.I.
1972 No. 1994)), r. 2(a)
The petitioner commenced proceedings in the High Court of New Zealand alleging, inter alia, breach of fiduciary duty.
The respondents denied the allegations and contended that there had been a compromise whereby the petitioner had agreed to abandon those claims.
The petitioner alleged that no compromise had been reached or, alternatively, that it had been cancelled.
The compromise issue was tried as a preliminary issue, but there was also evidence and argument directed to the cancellation issue.
The judge held that there was no binding compromise.
The Court of Appeal of New Zealand reversed that decision, held that the compromise had not been cancelled, and dismissed the petitioner's action.
The petitioner applied to the Court of Appeal for leave to appeal to the Privy Council.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the application, holding that the judgment was interlocutory and the petitioner was not entitled to appeal as of right under rule 2 (a ) of the New Zealand (Appeals to the Privy Council) Order 1910, as amended.
On the petitioner's application for special leave to appeal to the Judicial Committee:—
Held , granting the petition, that where the hearing of an action was divided into two parts and there was an appeal to the Court of Appeal of New Zealand after the determination on the first part, justice required that an appeal therefrom to the Privy Council should lie if such an appeal would have lain had all the issues been determined prior to the appeal to the Court of Appeal; that, accordingly, the judgment of the Court of Appeal deciding the compromise and cancellation issues in the respondents' favour and dismissing the petitioner's action was a final judgment for the purposes of rule 2 (a ) of the New Zealand (Appeals to the Privy Council) Order 1910 entitling the petitioner to appeal as of right to the Privy Council; and that, therefore, the Court of Appeal had erred in refusing to grant the petitioner leave to appeal and the Board in the exercise of its discretion would grant the petitioner special leave to appeal (post, pp. 6G, 8B, D, F).
White v. Brunton [1984]Q.B.
570, C.A. applied.
Hunt v. Allied Bakeries Ltd. [1956]1 W.L.R. 1326, C.A. distinguished.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment of their Lordships:
Hunt v. Allied Bakeries Ltd. [1956]1 W.L.R. 1326;[1956]3 All E.R.
513, C.A.
Lopes v. Valliappa Chettiar [1968]A.C. 887;[1968]3 W.L.R. 92;[1968]2 All E.R.
136, P.C.
White v. Brunton [1984]Q.B.
570;[1984]3 W.L.R. 105;[1984]2 All E.R.
606, C.A.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association v. Chai Yen [1980]1 W.L.R. 350, P.C.
Boston v. Lelièvre (1870) L.R. 3 P.C. 157, P.C.
Bozson v. Altrincham Urban District Council [1903]1 K.B.
547, C.A.
Chase (No. 2), In re [1989]1 N.Z.L.R. 345
Haron bin Mohammed Zaid v. Central Securities (Holdings) Bhd. [1983]1 A.C. 16;[1982]3 W.L.R. 134;[1982]2 All E.R.
481, P.C.
Montreal (Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of the City of) v. Brown and Springle (1876) 2 App.Cas. 168, P.C.
Ratnam v. Cumarasamy [1965]1 W.L.R. 8;[1964]3 All E.R.
933, P.C.
Salaman v. Warner [1891]1 Q.B.
734, C.A.
Tampion v. Anderson [1974]3 A.L.R. 414, P.C.
William Cable Ltd. v. Trainor [1957]N.Z.L.R. 337
PETITION by the petitioner, Strathmore Group Ltd., for special leave to appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal of New Zealand (Richardson, Hardie Boys and Gault JJ.) given on 4 October 1991 allowing an appeal by the respondents, A. M. Fraser, C. Y. Todd and Durafort Investments Ltd., from the judgment of Robertson J. in the High Court of New Zealand on 9 November 1990, whereby he held that there had been no compromise which concluded all existing and future litigation between the parties; and, as far as necessary, from the judgment of the Court of Appeal (Cooke P., Richardson and Hardie Boys JJ.) given on 4 November 1991 dismissing the petitioner's application for leave to appeal to the Privy Council.
At the close of the hearing before the Judicial Committee Lord Templeman announced that their Lordships would advise that the petitioner should be granted special leave to appeal for reasons to be delivered later.
The facts are stated in their Lordships' judgment giving the reasons for their decision.
Jules Sher Q.C.
and Michael Ring (of the New Zealand Bar) for the petitioner.
David Baragwanath Q.C.
and Margaret Casey (both of the New Zealand Bar) for the first and second respondents.
Sean Naidoo for the third respondent.
18 May.
The judgment of their Lordships was delivered by LORD TEMPLEMAN.
At the conclusion of the hearing of this petition for special leave to appeal their Lordships announced that they would humbly advise Her Majesty that the petitioner ought to be granted special leave to appeal and that they would give their reasons later.
This they now do.
The question raised by the petition is whether an order made by the Court of Appeal of New Zealand on 4 October 1991 dismissing the petitioner's action was a final order which entitled the petitioner to appeal as of right to Her Majesty in Council or whether the order was an interlocutory order against which there was no appeal save with the leave of the Court of Appeal or the grant of special leave by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
By rule 2 of the New Zealand (Appeals to the Privy Council) Order 1910, as amended, an appeal shall lie to Her Majesty in Council:
‘(a ) as of right, from any final judgment of the Court of Appeal where the matter in dispute on the appeal amounts to or is of the value of 5,000 New Zealand dollars or upwards, or where the appeal involves, directly or indirectly, some claim or question to or respecting property or some civil right amounting to or of the value of 5,000 New Zealand dollars or upwards; and (b ) at the discretion of the Court of Appeal from any other judgment of that court, whether final or interlocutory, if, in the opinion of that court, the question involved in the appeal is one which by reason of its great general or public importance, or otherwise, ought to be submitted to His Majesty in Council for decision.
The power of the Board to grant special leave to appeal is expressly preserved by rule 28 which provided:
‘Nothing in these Rules contained shall be deemed to interfere with the right of His Majesty, upon the humble petition of any person aggrieved by any judgment of the court, to admit his appeal therefrom upon such conditions as His Majesty in Council shall think fit to impose.
By the Judicial Committee (General Appellate Jurisdiction) Rules (in Schedule 2 to the Judicial Committee (General Appellate Jurisdiction) Order 1982 (S.I.
1982 No. 1676)) regulating the practice on appeal to the Judicial Committee, an appeal from the Court of Appeal of New Zealand can be entertained only if leave to appeal has been granted by that court or if special leave has been granted by Her Majesty in Council.
In the present case the Court of Appeal on 4 November 1991 refused leave to the present petitioner, Strathmore Group Ltd., to appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 4 October 1991.
If the judgment dated 4 October 1991 was ‘a final judgment’ then the Court of Appeal had no discretion to refuse leave to appeal.
In these circumstances the petitioner, claiming that the Court of Appeal had no discretion to refuse leave, petitioned Her Majesty in Council for special leave to appeal.
In 1986 and 1987 there were various commercial transactions between the petitioner and its associates including a company called Omnicorp Investments Ltd.
(‘Omnicorp’) on the one hand and the respondents and their associates on the other hand.
These transactions led in 1988 to disputes, to legal proceedings and to threats of further litigation.
One dispute concerned the acquisition by the petitioner from the respondents of the shares of a company called Clearwater Partners Ltd.
(‘Clearwater’); at the time of the acquisition the first two respondents were directors of the petitioner.
According to the respondents all the disputes were resolved by an oral agreement which was concluded on 6 May 1988 whereby the first two respondents agreed to pay $100,000 to the petitioner and $50,000 to Omnicorp and it was agreed by all parties that the legal proceedings and threatened litigation with regard to all matters in dispute would be abandoned.
Nevertheless on 20 December 1988 the petitioner instituted these present proceedings against the respondents claiming damages and alleging breach of fiduciary duty in selling to the petitioner at an undervalue the shares in Clearwater.
The respondents defended the proceedings denying all the allegations made against them by the petitioner.
In addition the respondents pleaded that the petitioner was not entitled to pursue these allegations because of the compromise made on 6 May 1988 whereby it was agreed that ‘all litigation between Omnicorp,[the petitioner, the first respondent and the second respondent](including the present proceedings) would be discontinued.’
The petitioner pleaded in reply that no binding compromise had been reached and asserted, in the alternative that the compromise agreement had been cancelled by the failure on the part of the respondents to pay the sums due to be paid thereunder.
So on the pleadings there were three separate issues, first the compromise issue namely whether the petitioner had agreed to abandon its claims in respect of the Clearwater transaction, secondly the cancellation issue, namely whether any compromise had been cancelled by breach on the part of the respondents, and thirdly the misconduct issue, namely whether, the petitioner was entitled to damages in respect of the Clearwater transaction.
On 27 April 1990 Wylie J. directed that the compromise issue be tried as a preliminary issue.
On the hearing of the preliminary issue before Robertson J. evidence was called and arguments advanced dealing not only with the compromise issue but also with the cancellation issue.
Robertson J. decided the preliminary issue in favour of the petitioner holding that no binding compromise had been reached; he did not therefore decide whether there had been any cancellation of compromise.
The respondents appealed and on 4 October 1991 the Court of Appeal (Richardson, Hardie Boys and Gault JJ.) reversing Robertson J., held that a binding compromise had been concluded.
Gault J. delivering the judgment of the court also dealt expressly with the cancellation issue which had been argued in the course of the appeal.
He said:
‘It cannot be said that the contract was cancelled by [the petitioner]when payment was not made by [the first and second respondents]on 23 May 1988.
At that time [the petitioner]was asserting that there was no contract and purported to withdraw an offer which had been made on terms different from those that had been agreed.
We are satisfied the agreement is enforceable.…
The court, in the words of Gault J., held that:
‘Determination in favour of[the first and second respondents]of their defence of settlement entitles them to judgment on [the petitioner's]claims…
The appeal is allowed.
There will be judgment for all three [respondents].
Both the compromise issue and the cancellation issue were therefore finally decided by the Court of Appeal.
Both issues could of course be raised before the Board on the hearing of any appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 4 October 1991.
But on 4 November 1991, the Court of Appeal (Cooke P., Richardson and Hardie Boys JJ.) held that the petitioner was not entitled to appeal as of right against the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 4 October 1991 because that judgment was an interlocutory and not a final judgment and refused leave to the petitioner to appeal to the Board.
The petitioner now petitions for special leave to appeal on the ground that the Court of Appeal were in error on 4 November 1991 when they decided that the petitioner was not entitled to appeal as of right.
If no preliminary issue had been ordered, the trial judge would have tried the whole action and decided the compromise issue, the cancellation issue and the misconduct issue.
If the judge awarded damages to the petitioner on the grounds that there was no compromise or that the compromise had been cancelled and on the grounds that the respondents had been guilty of misconduct in the Clearwater transaction, then the respondents could have appealed to the Court of Appeal and either party, losing before the Court of Appeal, could have appealed to the Privy Council as of right and on that appeal all three issues, the compromise issue, the cancellation issue and the misconduct issue could have been argued.
If the trial judge dismissed the petitioner's action either on the compromise issue or on the misconduct issue, then the petitioner could have appealed to the Court of Appeal and either party, losing before the Court of Appeal, could have appealed to the Privy Council as of right and on that appeal all three issues, the compromise issue, the cancellation issue and the misconduct issue could have been argued.
The judgment of the Court of Appeal would have been final if the action by the petitioner were dismissed and final if the petitioner were awarded damages.
All three issues, the compromise issue, the cancellation issue and the misconduct issue would be in play on the hearing of any appeal to the Privy Council.
If the judgment of the Court of Appeal on 4 October 1991, finally deciding the compromise issue and the cancellation issue, was not a final judgment for the purposes of rule 2 of the Order of 1910, then the petitioner has been deprived of an appeal to the Privy Council as of right, an unintended consequence of the decision by Wylie J. that, in the interest of justice and for the possible saving of time and expense, the compromise issue should be tried as a preliminary issue.
It is admitted that the object of the preliminary issue was to save time and money; the compromise issue and the cancellation required to be decided in any event and if first decided and in favour of the respondents would render unnecessary any further expenditure of time and money.
As Mr. Sher on behalf of the petitioner pithily observed
‘the purpose of the order by Wylie J. directing the preliminary issue was to save costs, not to deprive either party of an opportunity of appeal as of right.
It seems to their Lordships that the petitioner cannot be deprived of a right of appeal solely because the trial was divided into two parts, the first part dealing with the compromise issue and the cancellation issue and the second part, so far as necessary, dealing with the misconduct issue.
In White v. Brunton [1984]Q.B.
570 an order deciding a preliminary issue of documentary construction was held to be a final order for the purposes of an appeal under the Supreme Court Act 1981 which does not allow an appeal to the Court of Appeal in England without leave from an interlocutory order.
Sir John Donaldson M.R. said, at p. 573:
‘It is plainly in the interests of the more efficient administration of justice that there should be split trials in appropriate cases, as even where the decision on the first part of a split trial is such that there will have to be a second part, it may be desirable that the decision shall be appealed before incurring the possibly unnecessary expense of the second part.
If we were to hold that the division of a final hearing into parts deprived the parties of an unfettered right of appeal, we should be placing an indirect fetter upon the ability of the court to order split trials.
I would therefore hold that where there is a split trial or more accurately, in relation to a non-jury case, a split hearing, any party may appeal without leave against an order made at the end of one part if he could have appealed against such an order without leave if both parts had been heard together and the order had been made at the end of the complete hearing.
Their Lordships gratefully adopt the reasoning of Sir John Donaldson M.R. which applies equally to the Order of 1910 now under consideration.
A trial in two parts involves the danger of two appeals to the Court of Appeal and two appeals to the Privy Council.
On the other hand the second part of the trial may be rendered wholly unnecessary by the decision on the first part.
The litigants must take these factors into account when considering whether to apply for or consent to the division of the trial into two parts.
The judge must decide whether, taking into account the issues involved and the nature of the evidence required for each issue, the disputes between the litigants can best be resolved by a single trial or by a trial in two parts.
If the judge orders a trial in two parts there is an irremediable danger of two appeals to the Court of Appeal and justice requires that an appeal to the Privy Council should not be denied on the first part but perforce accepted on the second part.
In the present case, if the Court of Appeal had upheld the decision of Robertson J. on the first part, it would have been unfair to deny the respondents a right of appeal to the Privy Council on the compromise issue or the cancellation issue while accepting the petitioner could appeal to the Privy Council as of right if the petitioner failed on the misconduct issue.
It is equally unfair to deny the petitioner a right of appeal against the decision of the Court of Appeal which reversed Robertson J. on the compromise and cancellation issue and therefore finally dismissed the claim by the petitioner for sums vastly in excess of N.Z.$5,000.
When the Court of Appeal held that the petitioner was not entitled to appeal as of right, the court was unfortunately and inadvertently and erroneously informed that the cancellation issue had not been finally determined by the judgment of the Court of Appeal delivered on 4 October 1991.
Cooke P. delivering the judgment of the Court of Appeal on 4 November 1991 said:
‘while this court held that there was a settlement, there remains to be determined, if the plaintiffs persist with it, the claim or allegation by them that the settlement has been cancelled for breach.
Counsel in support of the application this morning has not been able to say that that claim or allegation has been abandoned.
Evidently it remains alive.
Whether or not it has any prospect of success this court is in no position to determine, but while it remains alive we do not consider that the judgment of this court can be described as final within the meaning of rule 2 (a ).
Counsel then appearing for the petitioner does not seem to have appreciated that the cancellation issue had been heard in the course of the trial of the preliminary issue and finally decided by the Court of Appeal on 4 October 1991.
Counsel for the petitioner and counsel for the respondents instructed in connection with the present petition submitted to the Court of Appeal and to the Board a consent memorandum dated 28 April 1992 which makes this position clear.
If Cooke P. had been aware of the true position he could not have denied to the petitioner an appeal to the Board as of right on the ground that the cancellation issue remained alive.
The result of the application to the Court of Appeal on 4 November 1991 might have been different if the true position had been known to that court.
However that may be, Cooke P. also relied on an analogy which their Lordships are unable to accept.
Cooke P. said:
‘in this notoriously difficult area it is customary to look for analogies.
One fairly obvious analogy is the type of case considered by this court in In re Chase (No. 2)[1989]1 N.Z.L.R. 345 where, following in particular the decision of the Privy Council in Tampion v. Anderson [1973]3 A.L.R. 414, the view was taken that an order dismissing an action on the ground that there was no reasonable cause of action was an interlocutory judgment and that therefore no appeal lay as of right.
An order or judgment determining that proceedings are at an end because of what is held to be a settlement is reasonably analogous and, adopting the pragmatic approach referred to for instance by Lord Denning M.R. in Salter Rex & Co. v. Ghosh [1971]2 Q.B.
597, 601, we conclude that that in itself is a sufficient ground for holding that an appeal does not lie as of right in this case.
There are cases, including the authorities to which Cooke P. referred, in which an order apparently final has been treated as interlocutory so as to deprive a litigant of a right of appeal or so as to restrict such right.
In Hunt v. Allied Bakeries Ltd. [1956]1 W.L.R. 1326, 1328, Lord Evershed M.R. said:
‘…
I am left in no doubt at all that, rightly or wrongly, orders dismissing actions — either because they are frivolous and vexatious, or on the ground of disclosure of no reasonable cause of action — have for a very long time been treated as interlocutory.
The cases to which Cooke P. referred are to the like effect.
But their Lordships do not accept that any analogy can be drawn between those cases and the instant case.
In each of the cited authorities the court had come to the conclusion that there was no issue proper to be determined.
To allow a litigant to appeal would only encourage an unnecessary expenditure of time and money.
If there was nothing to determine, there was nothing to appeal.
In the instant case the decision of the Court of Appeal finally disposed of separate issues which had been pleaded, entertained, supported with evidence, argued and considered.
There is every reason why such a decision should be included in the classification of decisions which are appealable as of right.
It is of course open to the Government and Parliament of New Zealand at any time to abolish or restrict the classification of decisions which are appealable as of right.
That is not a matter upon which the Board is competent or authorised to comment.
But there can be no logic in depriving a litigant of a right of appeal where the final hearing is divided into parts by analogy with the decisions whereby a frivolous or vexatious litigant is deprived of a right to any hearing.
Although the petitioner was, for the reasons indicated, entitled to appeal as of right, the present petition by the petitioner is of necessity a petition for the grant of special leave to appeal and the grant of such leave remains discretionary: see Lopes v. Valliappa Chettiar [1968]A.C. 887.
In his careful, helpful, written and oral submissions Mr. Baragwanath, who appeared for the respondents before the Board, accepted that special leave to appeal would as a general rule be granted by the Board in the exercise of its discretion to a petitioner who had been erroneously refused leave to appeal as of right save in exceptional circumstances, for example, where the judgment of the courts below and the record available led the Board to conclude that the petitioner's chances of success or the amount involved did not justify the imposition on the respondents of the delay and expense which an appeal necessarily entails.
Mr. Baragwanath made detailed submissions to the effect that an appeal to the Board in the instant case was unlikely to succeed.
Their Lordships are not persuaded that this is a case in which the petitioner should be deprived of its right to argue that the trial judge was correct and that the Court of Appeal was wrong.
Solicitors: Barlow Lyde & Gilbert; Macfarlanes; Clifford Chance.