

[FAMILY DIVISION]
R. v. OXFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL (SECURE ACCOMMODATION ORDER)
1992 Feb. 17
Douglas Brown J.
Children — Child in care — Secure accommodation order — Justices' reasons for making secure accommodation order welfare of child — Whether order valid — Whether hearing before justices ‘family proceedings’— Children Act 1989 (c. 41), ss. 8(3), 25, 92(2)
A child aged 14 in the care of a local authority who had a history of absconding was placed in an open unit from which he absconded and was absent for 94 days.
The local authority applied to the justices, under section 25 of the Children Act 1989 for an order that the child be placed in secure accommodation.
Statements of evidence and a psychiatric report prepared for the hearing were ruled inadmissible on the advice of the clerk to the justices on the ground that as the proceedings were not family proceedings within the meaning of the Act of 1989, the Children (Admissibility of Hearsay Evidence) Order 1991 did not apply.
The justices made the order and, in giving their reason for doing so, stated that the order was required so that the child could be given help and guidance to meet his special needs.
On the child's appeal:—
Held , allowing the appeal,(1) that, although the definition of ‘family proceedings’ in section 8 of the Children Act 1989 did not specifically refer to the provisions in Part III of the Act, the section was to be read with section 92(2) of the Act which made it clear that all applications to the justices under the Act were family proceedings; that, accordingly, the application to the justices for a secure accommodation order under section 25 in Part III of the Act were family proceedings; and that, therefore, the statements of evidence and the psychiatrist's report should have been admitted in evidence in accordance with the provisions of the Children (Admissibility of Hearsay Evidence) Order 1991 (post, pp. 91E–G, H — 92A).
(2) That a secure accommodation order could only be made if the provisions of subsection (1) were satisfied and the justices had to consider the statutory criteria and then formulate their reasons within the criteria; that the justices' reasons clearly demonstrated that they had not considered whether the order was necessary to protect the child from harm if he was likely to abscond from other types of accommodation; and that, therefore, the appeal would have to be allowed but the court would make an interim order restricting the child's liberty for three weeks within which time the matter should be reheard (post, pp. 93C–F, 94H — 95B, 96G–H, 98D).
Per curiam .
When an appeal is made from a decision of a family proceedings court in a secure accommodation order case, or in any case of urgency where time is short, it is the duty of the appellant solicitor to make the district registry or the district judge aware of the need for urgency and to invite the district registry or district judge to list the matter at the nearest court where an early hearing can take place before a High Court judge (post, p. 92D–E).
The following case is referred to in the judgment:
Practice Direction (Family Division: Appeals from Justices)[1992]1 W.L.R. 261;[1992]1 All E.R.
864
No additional cases were cited in argument.
APPEAL from North Avon Family Proceedings Court.
On 23 December 1991 the justices made an order under section 25 of the Children Act 1989 by which the child should be held in secure accommodation.
The justices' reason for making the secure accommodation order was that in view of the facts found an order was required in order that the child could be given the help and guidance to meet his special needs.
By notice of appeal dated 2 January 1992, the child appealed against the order on the grounds, inter alia, that the justices erred when they found that he was likely to suffer significant harm as a result of his absconding as no evidence had been produced that he had suffered such harm when he had absconded.
By an amended notice of appeal dated 31 January 1992, the following additional grounds were added.
(1)(a) The justices were under a duty to determine whether any relevant criteria for keeping the child in secure accommodation were satisfied, pursuant to section 25(3) of the Children Act 1989.
Further, the justices were under a duty to state any findings of fact and the reasons for the court's decisions, pursuant to rule 21(6) of the Family Proceedings Courts (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 1395 (L. 17)).
The justices either failed to make any determination in accordance with section 25(3) or failed to make any findings (or state any reasons for finding) as to whether (i) he was likely to abscond from any other description of accommodation (part of the criteria under section 25(1) (a )(i) of the Act;(ii) if he absconded, he would be likely to suffer significant harm;(b) alternatively, any such findings as were made were not supported by the evidence before the justices.
(2)(a) The justices were under a duty to consider whether it was better for the child for a secure accommodation order to be made rather than no order at all being made upon the application (in accordance with section 1(5) of the Children Act 1989).
Further, the justices should have considered The Children Act 1989, Guidance and Regulations Volume Court Orders , vol. 1, p. 66, para. 5.1.
The justices either failed to make any determination or failed to make any findings (or state any reasons for finding) as to whether (i) there was any genuine alternative to the making of a secure accommodation order;(ii) all other alternatives had been comprehensively considered and rejected.
(b) In the alternative, any findings of the justices that there was no alternative to a secure accommodation order were unsupported by the evidence before them.
(3) The justices were under a duty to ensure that there was a clear view of the aims and objectives of a secure accommodation placement and that those providing the accommodation could fully meet those aims and objectives.
The justices failed to make any determination or finding upon that issue.
In the alternative, in the event that any such determination or finding was made, it was unsupported by the evidence before the justices.
(4) The justices were under a duty to make any secure accommodation order only for so long as was necessary.
In the light of the evidence that a full planning meeting was due to be held on 30 December 1991, the justices should either have adjourned the application until after that meeting or should have made an order to last until shortly after that meeting.
In the premises, the duration of the order made by the justices was excessive.
(5) The justices erred in failing to consider the evidence of potential detriment to the child if he remained in secure accommodation, particularly in the light of the evidence.
(6) The only finding of fact in respect of physical harm made by the justices (‘He has made threats of physical harm to himself and others’) related to a time when the child was in secure accommodation.
The justices, however, treated that as a finding that supported the making of a secure accommodation order.
(7) In the report of the guardian ad litem reference was made to psychiatric assessments of the child.
Although the justices were entitled to receive hearsay evidence in support of the application under section 92(2) of the Children Act 1989, if psychiatric opinions were available, they should have been before the court in full by way of a report and/or direct evidence.
In the absence of such evidence, the justices were unable to assess whether the last resort of making a secure accommodation order was justified on the totality of information relating to the child's background.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Stephen Wildblood for the minor.
Nicholas Marston for the local authority.
William Helfrecht for the guardian ad litem.
DOUGLAS BROWN J. This appeal is in relation to the child who is a boy of 14, nearly 15, and, as judgment is given in open court I make it clear that there must be no publication of any part of these proceedings which would lead to the identification of this boy.
He appeals from the order of the North Avon Magistrates' Family Proceedings Court on 23 December 1991 when they made a secure accommodation order in respect of him for three months.
There had earlier been an interim order which lasted for some 13 days up to 23 December 1991 and it is common ground on this appeal that the 13 days must by reason of the regulations be subtracted from the three months.
So in effect the order made by the justices was three months less 13 days.
The circumstances leading up to the matter being before the family proceedings court on 23 December 1991 I need mention only in outline having regard to the course which I am going to take in regard to this appeal.
The child was born on 10 May 1977 and he was adopted two years later.
In the late 1980s his parents separated.
In the middle of 1988 he was placed with foster parents because his mother was finding difficulties with him.
I need not refer to his history in any more detail up to June 1990, but in that month he went to a residential school where his mother continued to visit him and in October 1990 he absconded from that school.
That was the first of many abscondings from establishments which were run by local authorities.
At the end of November 1990 he was placed by his mother in the voluntary care of the local authority and on 5 December 1990 he was moved to an open unit but which has an attached secure unit.
On 7 December 1990 a secure accommodation order was made by the justices under section 21A of the Child Care Act 1980.
That order was for three months' duration.
The following year, in March and April the child was admitted to hospital for an assessment and he was then returned to the open unit from where he again absconded for a short period.
On 23 May 1991 he absconded for 17 days.
On this occasion he was dealt with by the juvenile court for an offence of being a passenger in a stolen car or a car taken without authority and he received a conditional discharge.
He was back at the open unit on 9 June 1991, but the following day he absconded again and this time was absent for 94 days.
He has given very little account of how he spent his time, but he has said he spent the majority of that time with a travelling circus, both in this country and in the Irish Republic.
On 13 September 1991 a secure accommodation order was made by justices, again pursuant to the Act of 1980 and that order was of three months' duration.
Whilst that order was in operation he was transferred to the secure unit near Bristol.
Whilst that order was in operation the Children Act 1989 came into force and on 4 December 1991 the local authority made application under section 25 of the Children Act 1989 for a secure accommodation order.
On 11 December 1991 the interim order was made and on 23 December 1991 the order under appeal was made.
Before turning to the grounds of appeal there are two matters which I must mention which are of some importance.
As Mr. Wildblood, for the child, said, before the justices the case followed a most unusual course.
Statements of evidence were prepared and served in accordance with the rules and a psychiatric report from a consultant psychiatrist was available at court and that gave the early history and background about this very disturbed boy.
An informal discussion took place between the advocates with the clerk of the court as to the use that could be made by the justices of those statements and that medical report.
The clerk expressed the view that they contained inadmissible material because of the hearsay rule and he took the view that the evidence was inadmissible despite the relevant provisions of the Children Act 1989 designed to overcome that difficulty.
For hearsay evidence to be admissible in proceedings in the magistrates' court the proceedings have to be family proceedings.
The matter is now governed by the Children (Admissibility of Hearsay Evidence) Order 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 1115) which by paragraph 2 provides that in civil proceedings before the High Court or a county court and in family proceedings in a magistrates' court evidence given in connection with the upbringing, maintenance or welfare of the child shall be admissible notwithstanding any rule of law relating to hearsay.
Apparently the clerk took the view that because section 25 applications fell within Part III of the Children Act 1989 they were not family proceedings within the meaning of the Act.
Reliance was apparently placed — I say ‘apparently’ because there is nothing in the papers which indicates clearly one way or the other what the view of the justices' clerk was on this subject — I am told that reliance was placed on section 8(3) which provides: ‘For the purposes of this Act ‘family proceedings’means any proceedings…(b ) under the enactments mentioned in subsection (4).’
In subsection (4): ‘The enactments are (a) Parts I, II and IV of this Act;…
’ Section 8 however must be read with section 92(2) which provides: ‘Proceedings under this Act shall be treated as family proceedings in relation to magistrates' courts.’
I was told at the Bar that in section 25 application cases hearsay evidence was regarded in some family proceedings courts as not admissible.
Equally it was agreed by all counsel that such a view was erroneous, and I agree.
When justices are advised not to have regard to statements of evidence and to medical reports on that ground they are being deprived of potentially valuable material in these difficult cases and I wish to make it clear that hearsay evidence is available to assist the court in all these cases although its weight will always be a matter for the judgment of the court.
The second matter which I mention at the outset is this.
As I have said, the order was made on 23 December 1991.
The notice of appeal (just out of time) was dated 2 January 1992.
In accordance with Practice Direction (Family Division: Appeals from Justices)[1992]1 W.L.R. 261 the appeal was entered in the district registry of the appropriate care centre.
The appeal was set down at Bristol, which is the nearest High Court centre where family business is taken but there was no High Court judge then sitting at Bristol, or indeed anywhere else on the Western Circuit.
Eventually, on 11 February 1992 the appeal was transferred to the High Court in London where the matter has been listed before me today, 17 February 1992.
This matter, involving the liberty of the subject, was, of course, urgent and should have been listed as a matter of urgency.
If the district registry had appreciated the urgency and the short period of the order without doubt they would have sought directions and the result would certainly have been that the appeal would have been set down at some other convenient centre or, as happened, in London at or before the beginning of this term and would have been heard within a few days, that is, the appeal would have been heard approximately a month ago.
When an appeal is made from a decision of a family proceedings court in a secure accommodation order case, or in any case of urgency where time is short, it is the duty of the appellant solicitor to make the district registry aware of the need for urgency and to invite the district registry or the district judge to list the matter at the nearest court where an early hearing can take place before a High Court judge.
That was not done in this case and as a result this matter comes on for appeal with only three weeks of a two-and-a-half month order to run.
The justices, in making their order, heard evidence from the social worker and from the acting deputy head of care and the key team leader at the special unit.
They heard of course from the child himself and they had the advantage of a very full report prepared at short notice from the guardian ad litem and the guardian ad litem was present and assisted the justices at the hearing.
At the end of the hearing the justices made these findings of fact:
‘[The child]has a history of absconding.
On the last occasion he was absent for 94 days.
He absconded from [the open unit]and his whereabouts were unknown for the major part of the time.
There was no substantial evidence of how he supported himself financially.
There was no legitimate income, he relied on other people.
He displays immature behaviour for a boy of 14.
He has made threats of physical harm to himself and others.
He has no family support for emotional development.
Those are the findings of fact.
The reasons for making the order: ‘In view of the facts found an order is required in order that [he]can be given the help and guidance to meet his special needs.’
No counsel appearing on this appeal has attempted to defend those findings of fact or suggest that the reasons are in any way adequate.
Mr. Wildblood put the matter in this way.
Section 25 of the Act of 1989 requires the court considering the application for a secure accommodation order to have regard to a number of crucial matters.
Section 25 provides:
‘(1) Subject to the following provisions of this section, a child who is being looked after by a local authority may not be placed, and, if placed, may not be kept, in accommodation provided for the purpose of restricting liberty (‘secure accommodation’) unless it appears —(a ) that —(i) he has a history of absconding and is likely to abscond from any other description of accommodation; and (ii) if he absconds, he is likely to suffer significant harm; or (b ) that if he is kept in any other description of accommodation he is likely to injure himself or other persons.
…(3) It shall be the duty of a court hearing an application under this section to determine whether any relevant criteria for keeping a child in secure accommodation are satisfied in his case.
(4) If a court determines that any such criteria are satisfied, it shall make an order authorising the child to be kept in secure accommodation and specifying the maximum period for which he may be so kept.
It is clear that before the decision stage is reached the court must make findings of fact as to the evidence which it has heard.
Rule 21(6) of the Family Proceedings Courts (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991 requires the court to state any findings of fact and the reason for the court's decision.
It is obvious that the facts found must relate to the issues before the court and the statutory criteria for making a secure accommodation order.
Equally, it must be apparent from the statement of reasons how the court has approached its duty under section 25 or indeed whatever section or sections of the Act of 1989 with which they are concerned.
It is apparent from the findings of fact that the justices made no findings, or if they did they did not record them, as to whether (i) the child was likely to abscond from any other description of accommodation, or (ii) that if he absconded he would be likely to suffer significant harm.
Mr. Wildblood makes the comment, which in my judgment is inescapably correct, that the justices have approached their decision in this case on general welfare principles.
That is the first ground of appeal and it is obviously well founded.
Counsel for the local authority, Mr. Marston, and counsel for the guardian ad litem, Mr. Helfrecht did not argue to the contrary.
The other grounds of appeal were these.
Ground 2(a) (I need not trouble with 2(b)) was this — and as it succinctly sets out Mr. Wildblood's argument, I read it in full:
‘The justices were under a duty to consider whether it was better for the child for a secure accommodation order to be made rather than no order at all being made upon the application in accordance with section 1(5) of the Children Act.
Further, the magistrates should have considered the guidance and regulations in volume 1 of The Children Act 1989 Guidance and Regulations , vol. 1, p. 66, para. 5(1).
I should add that in argument he also invited my attention to paragraph 5(7) and I will refer to that:
‘The justices however failed to make any determination, or failed to make any finding or state any reasons for finding as to whether (i) there was any genuine alternative to the making of a secure accommodation order;(ii) all other alternatives had been comprehensively considered and rejected.
I am told that certainly parts of this guidance were cited in argument to the justices and it is apparent from the report of the guardian ad litem that sections were quoted from it.
It is convenient if I read paragraph 5(1) in the introduction to this section:
‘Restricting the liberty of children is a serious step which must be taken only when there is no genuine alternative which would be appropriate.
It must be a last resort in the sense that all else must first have been comprehensively considered and rejected — never because no other placement was available at the relevant time, because of inadequacies in staffing, because the child is simply being a nuisance or runs away from his accommodation and is not likely to suffer significant harm in doing so, and never as a form of punishment.
It is important in considering the possibility of a secure placement, that there is a clear view of the aims and objectives of such a placement and that those providing the accommodation can fully meet those aims and objectives.
Secure placements, once made, should only be for so long as is necessary and unavoidable.
Guidance is given to the court as to what its role should be in paragraph 5(7):
‘It is the role of the court to safeguard the child's welfare from inappropriate or unnecessary use of secure accommodation, both by satisfying itself that those making the application have demonstrated that the statutory criteria in section 25(1) or regulation 6, as appropriate, have been met and by having regard to the provisions and principles of section 1 of the Act.
The court must therefore be satisfied that the order will positively contribute to the child's welfare and must not make an order unless it considers that doing so would be better for the child than making no order at all.
In non-criminal proceedings applications to keep a child in secure accommodation are ‘specified proceedings’ within the meaning of section 41.
The court is required to appoint a guardian ad litem for the child, unless it is satisfied that it is not necessary to do so in the interests of the child.
The guidance that I have referred to is, as it says, guidance to the court and to practitioners in every discipline, but it is authoritative guidance and valuable guidance which family proceedings courts should make clear that they have had regard to when they are arriving at or announcing their decision.
Associated with that guidance and arising out of it is ground of appeal (3) which again conveniently summarises Mr. Wildblood's argument:
‘The magistrates were under a duty to ensure that there was a clear view of the aims and objectives of a secure accommodation placement and that those providing the accommodation could fully meet those aims and objectives.
— and reference is made to the guidance, at p. 66, that I have just read.
The justices failed to make any determination or finding upon this issue.
In the alternative, in the event that any such determination or finding was made, it was unsupported by the evidence before the justices, in particular in the light of the evidence of the social worker and of the guardian ad litem.
So far as the availability of evidence before the justices, again, I say little because of the course I am going to take but there clearly was evidence for them to consider and assess.
But the first criticism I regard as entirely correct and these quite inadequate findings and reasons did not deal with this aspect of the case at all.
There was evidence before the justices as to the local authority's aims and objectives in this difficult case which the justices had to assess.
They may have done so, but they did not make it clear that they had.
In this respect also I regret to have to say that the stated approach of the justices was seriously flawed.
Ground (4) reads:
‘the justices were under a duty to make any secure accommodation order only for as long as was necessary’— and again the guidance and regulations are referred to —‘In the light of the evidence that a full planning meeting was due to be held on 30 December 1991 the magistrates should either have adjourned the application until after that meeting or should have made an order to last until shortly after that meeting.
In the premises the duration of the order was excessive.
Having considered the evidence before the justices and Mr. Marston's submissions upon that evidence I do not think that the argument underlying ground (4) is sustainable.
It is clear that the planning meeting was for the purpose of deciding how the period in secure accommodation should be managed.
Again, I am not going to say anything about the length of the order or how it should be arrived at, because of the course I am going to take.
Ground (5) in effect argues that the justices did not appear to carry out the balancing exercise that they were required to do, weighing benefit against risk and I regard that as also a legitimate criticism.
Ground (6) is in these terms:
‘The only finding of fact in respect of physical harm made by the magistrates ‘he has made threats of physical harm to himself and others’ related to a time when he was in secure accommodation.
The evidence in support of that is to be found in the evidence of Helen Taylor.
The justices, however, treated that as a finding that supported the making of a secure accommodation order.
I think it is doubtful whether evidence of attempts at self-injury and threats to others whilst in secure accommodation could be evidence on which the likelihood of self-harm or threats when at large could be assessed.
However, it might be that psychiatric opinion would have been helpful on that aspect of the case.
That leads me to the last question, ground (7).
In the report of the guardian ad litem reference was made to psychiatric assessments of the child.
In the absence of such evidence the justices were unable to assess whether the last resort of making a secure accommodation order was justified on the totality of information relating to his background.
It may not be possible in every case where there is considerable pressure on those preparing the cases, when time is short, for there to be psychiatric evidence called, but I think in these cases where almost invariably disturbed young people are being discussed, an effort should be made to obtain psychiatric evidence.
The very minimum I think these justices should have had was a psychiatric report from one of the psychiatrists who were attached to the secure unit.
Of those Dr. Martin Gay is a well known expert in the field of child and adolescent psychiatry and the report from him or his registrar would have been extremely valuable.
This boy is clearly highly disturbed and there are dangers for him in either of the options which were open to the justices to make the order or to refuse it.
Those are the ground of appeal and counsel for the local authority and the guardian, whilst not seeking in any way to defend the approach of the justices, asked the court to utilise the provisions of R.S.C., Ord. 55, r. 7(7) to dismiss this appeal notwithstanding the defective nature of the findings of fact and the reasons.
Paragraph (7) reads:
‘The court shall not be bound to allow the appeal on the ground merely of misdirection, or of the improper admission or rejection of evidence, unless in the opinion of the court substantial wrong or miscarriage has been thereby occasioned.
Mr. Marston points, for example, to the evidence of the social worker, who took the view that no other non-secure units were available for the child.
There was evidence that the overwhelming likelihood was, on the history, that he would abscond and if he did so there was a serious risk of significant harm.
One of the areas that has to be considered on the question of harm is impairment of intellectual development and on the evidence, if he was absent for another three months with a travelling fair, there is considerable likelihood of his education not taking place with consequent impairment of his intellectual development, if indeed there were no other risks attendant upon such a way of passing his time.
The guardian ad litem it was pointed out, put the matter in this way in paragraph 32 of her report:
‘As far as I can see there is no evidence that when [he]has absconded he has come to any real harm.
However, common sense dictates that for a boy of 14 to be away from home and unsupported with no income, home or friends, is a very serious, vulnerable and lonely situation for him to be in, especially when this is for a period of three months.
If he had friends or relatives who were hiding or supporting him it would be a different matter, but this does not appear to be the case.
Mr. Marston says that the court therefore has material on which it could confirm the order made by the justices, notwithstanding the way they dealt with the matter.
Mr. Marston may be correct in submitting that there is such material.
However, I have come to the conclusion that this order cannot stand.
To use Mr. Marston's phrase, the proceedings were so fatally flawed that it would be unjust to leave this order standing.
The justices in the first place wrongly, on the advice of their clerk, declined to consider witness statements or such psychiatric report as were available.
They decided the matter apparently on general welfare grounds and did not apply the section 25 criteria.
It is impossible to say from their findings of fact, or reasons, what their view of the witnesses was and in the result this decision cannot stand.
I cannot substitute my own view of the evidence, which I have not heard.
The option of allowing the appeal, with the result that the child moves at once to open accommodation, is not one that was seriously pressed upon me by Mr. Wildblood, for whose skilful and moderate submissions I am grateful.
The only option to this court in the circumstances is to order a rehearing before a freshly constituted family proceedings court and that should take place as soon as possible.
Under section 25(5) of the Act of 1989 I will make an interim order permitting the child to be kept in secure accommodation for three weeks from today.
I am told the guardian ad litem needs approximately 14 days to prepare an up to date report, which I will order to be prepared.
This boy, as I have said, is clearly very disturbed.
I direct that an up-to-date psychiatric report be available to the court and to the parties and that the local authority make arrangements for that to be done through the secure unit.
I will also make any other orders and directions that counsel feel may be of help and I will canvass that at the end of this judgment.
This appeal presents an early opportunity in the life of the Children Act 1989, to give what I hope is useful guidance to family proceedings courts and their clerks on the subject of findings of facts and reasons.
I say at once that I have considerable sympathy with justices called upon to comply with rule 21(6) of the Family Proceedings Courts (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991.
They are not professional judges, whose duty often requires them to deliver extempore findings of fact and give reasons of some complexity.
Nevertheless, as this case illustrates, there are certain minimum findings and reasons which must be stated so that the parties and the appellate court can see how the justices have approached their task.
Justices must learn new skills and learn them quickly, although no one expects them to give judgments in the way that a judge does.
A good starting point is the statutory framework within which they are working.
Section 25 of the Act of 1989 provides criteria and just as in cases arising under section 8 and in Part IV cases regard has to be had to the section 1(3) circumstances.
Using the statutory criteria as a check list the findings of fact and reasons can be built round them without undue length.
A useful approach, is to be found in Dawson and Stevens, Family Proceedings Court (1991) which I commend to practitioners in this field and to justices and their clerks.
In this handbook, at p. 175, there is an appendix in which these two experienced justices clerks, who are the authors, borrow from the skill and experience of a third, Mr. Matthew Pink, who provides a pro forma for both findings of fact and statements of reasons.
The various headings by way of example are these.
1.
Facts not in dispute.
2.
Disputed facts.
3.
Findings of the court, that is facts which the court found proved.
4.
The extent to which witnesses, including the applicant or respondent, were believed or disbelieved, if that has not already been stated under 3, and the information upon which the court relied upon reaching its decision.
Then there is a section which deals with the citation of authority by the parties, whether a welfare report has been considered, and the pro forma is dealing with cases where specifically the welfare check list has to be considered and the suggestion is made that each of the considerations under section 1(3) (a ) to (g ) are set out individually and the judgment or the findings of fact set out under each paragraph.
The various headings in that pro forma remind justices and their clerks of the essential matters they have to decide and provide a logical pattern for the statement of findings and reasons.
My experience in Divisional Court appeals is that regrettably all too often the facts are not found clearly, disputed evidence is unresolved, and reasons and facts are intermingled.
Very often, of course, in Divisional Court appeals the justices have not been asked to state their findings of fact and record the reasons until some time afterwards, sometimes a considerable time afterwards, after a notice of appeal has been lodged.
But now in every case justices have to give findings and reasons when making the order they do.
It could not be suggested that these justices in the instant case did not take time to consider the matter and it is not suggested, nor could it be, that they did not take a great deal of care in carrying out their duties.
The hearing lasted some four-and-a-half hours.
If they had been able to take more time over preparation of their findings and reasons the difficulties this court has faced on this appeal might not have arisen.
Justices should be reminded that they must not delay their decision.
Their duty under the rules is to make their decision as soon as practicable.
It is however possible for one of their number to come back the next day and give the decision, the findings of fact and the reasons of the court, considered at rather more leisure than sometimes time will permit.
After a long day's hearing, such as obviously took place here, that might be the sensible thing to do so that the court is not producing these important findings and reasons under pressure.
In the result this appeal will be allowed and I order a rehearing before a fresh bench of the family proceedings court.
There will be an interim secure accommodation order for three weeks from today.
I will ask the guardian ad litem to prepare a further report for the use of the court and I will direct that a psychiatric report be obtained by the local authority for the use of the court with copies to be made available to the parties under rule 26 of the Family Proceedings Courts (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991.
Order accordingly.
Solicitors: Douglas & Partners, Bristol; Kirby Simcox, Bristol; Bower & Bailey, Oxford.