

[COURT OF APPEAL]SWANSEA CITY COUNCIL v. GLASS 1991 Nov. 20;
Dec. 11
Purchas, Ralph Gibson and
Taylor L.JJ.
Limitation of Action — Statute, action on — Accrual of cause of action — Local authority notice to repair — Landlord failing to do work — Repairs carried out by local authority — Action to recover cost of repairs — Whether service of demand for payment prerequisite to or necessary ingredient of cause of action — Whether cause of action accruing on completion of work or service of demand — Housing Act 1957 (c. 56), s. 10(3) (4)— Limitation Act 1980 (c. 58), s. 9(1)
A tenant complained to the plaintiff local authority about the condition of his house.
The local authority served two notices on 1 June and 28 October 1983, under section 9 of the Housing Act 1957, as amended, requiring the defendant, as the person in control of the property, to effect repairs.
On his failure to do so the local authority carried out the necessary work and served written demands on 31 May 1984 and 25 April 1985 for the costs incurred.
The defendant did not pay, and on 30 May 1990, more than six years after completion of the works but less than six years from the service of the demands, the local authority, pursuant to section 10(3) of the Act of 1957 issued a summons in the county court seeking payment.
The judge, asked to decide as a preliminary point when the cause of action accrued for the purposes of section 9(1) of the Limitation Act 1980 held that it arose on completion of the works required by the notices.
On appeal by the local authority:—
Held , dismissing the appeal, that it was implicit in the Housing Act 1957 that a local authority must serve a demand for expenses before bringing an action to recover them under section 10(3); but that the requirement to serve such a demand before taking action was a mere procedural step which was not part of the cause of action and that, save as expressly provided by section 10(4) for summary proceedings, the period of limitation began to run from the completion of the works; and that, accordingly, the action was statute-barred (post, pp. 126F–G, 129E — 130B).
Coburn v. Colledge [1897]1 Q.B.
702, C.A.;Central Electricity Board v. Halifax Corporation [1963]A.C. 785, H.L. (E.) and Sevcon Ltd. v. Lucas CAV Ltd. [1986]1 W.L.R. 462, H.L. (E.) considered.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment of the court:
Central Electricity Board v. Halifax Corporation [1963]A.C. 785;[1962]3 W.L.R. 1313;[1962]3 All E.R.
915, H.L. (E.)
Coburn v. Colledge [1897]1 Q.B.
702, C.A.
Read v. Brown (1889) 22 Q.B.D. 128, C.A.
Sevcon Ltd. v. Lucas CAV Ltd. [1986]1 W.L.R. 462;[1986]2 All E.R.
104, H.L. (E.)
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Pegler v. Railway Executive [1948]A.C. 332;[1948]1 All E.R.
559, H.L. (E.)
West Riding County Council v. Huddersfield Corporation [1957]1 Q.B.
540;[1957]2 W.L.R. 428;[1957]1 All E.R.
669
APPEAL from Judge Michael Evans Q.C.
sitting at Swansea County Court.
The plaintiff, Swansea City Council, served two notices on the defendant, Martin Glass, as the person in control of 96, King Edward Road, Swansea, requiring him to execute repairs to the property following a complaint from the tenant.
The defendant failed to comply and the local authority carried out the requisite works and served two demands, on 31 May 1984 and 25 April 1985, for the costs.
On 30 May 1990 the local authority issued a summons for payment.
On 6 February 1991 the judge held as a preliminary point that the cause of action was statute-barred.
By notice of appeal dated 25 February 1991 the local authority appealed on the grounds that (1) the judge was wrong in law in holding that the cause of action accrued under section 10 of the Housing Act 1957 when the works were completed; and (2) the judge ought to have held that on the true construction of, inter alia, section 10 the cause of action arose when the demands for payment were served or, alternatively, when the demands became operative following the determination of any appeal.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Taylor L.J..
Kenneth Thomas for the local authority.
Robert Kirk for the defendant.
11 December.
The following judgments were handed down.
TAYLOR L.J.
This is an appeal by Swansea City Council against a decision of Judge Michael Evans Q.C., given in Swansea County Court on 6 February 1991.
The judge had to consider a preliminary point concerning the application of the Limitation Act 1980 to the local authority's claim.
He decided in favour of the defendant, Mr. Martin Glass, but granted leave to appeal.
The facts were not in dispute.
The defendant, as the executor of Mr. H. Glass, was the person in control of 96, King Edward Road, Swansea, for the purposes of the Housing Act 1957.
The house was let to a tenant.
In 1983 the tenant complained to the local authority about the condition of the property.
As a result, the local authority issued two notices under section 9(1B) of the Act of 1957 (as inserted by section 149 of the Housing Act 1980) requiring the defendant to put the house into proper repair.
The first notice was served on 1 June 1983 and the second on 28 October 1983.
The defendant did not appeal and failed to comply with the notices.
Accordingly, the local authority did the necessary work themselves.
They completed the works required by the first notice on 7 September 1983.
There is some uncertainty as to when they completed the works required by the second notice but the precise date is immaterial to the present appeal.
The local authority served on the defendant written demands for the expenses they had incurred in respect of the works required under the notices, respectively on 31 May 1984 and 25 April 1985.
The defendant did not pay.
There was then a long delay for which no explanation has been given.
Finally, on 30 May 1990 the local authority issued a summons in the county court seeking payment of both amounts.
The summons was thus issued more than six years after completion of the works but less than six years from the service of the demands.
The local authority were empowered to do the work themselves by section 10(1) of the Act of 1957 which provided that if the person in control of the house did not comply with a notice to execute work then after specified periods of time ‘the local authority may themselves do the work required to be done by the notice…
’ The entitlement to recover their expenses for doing the work derived, at the relevant time, from section 10(3) of the Act which provided, so far as is relevant:
‘Any expenses incurred by the local authority under this section, together with interest from the date when a demand for the expenses is served until payment, may…be recovered by them, by action or summarily as a civil debt, from the person having control of the house…
The relevant limitation period was prescribed in section 9 of the Limitation Act 1980:
‘(1) An action to recover any sum recoverable by virtue of any enactment shall not be brought after the expiration of six years from the date on which the cause of action accrued.
The preliminary point to be decided by the judge was: when did the local authority's cause of action accrue?
The defendant contended it accrued when the works were completed, in which event the action is statute-barred.
The local authority contend the correct date is when the demand for payment was served or when it became operative.
It is convenient first to consider an argument on behalf of the local authority that the relevant statutory provisions are those contained in the Housing Act 1985.
Mr. Thomas took this point before the judge, who rejected it.
He has repeated the argument before us.
The Act of 1957 was clearly in force at the time of the notices, the works and the demands.
It was repealed by the Housing (Consequential Provisions) Act 1985 which came into force on 1 April 1986, as did the Housing Act 1985 which is a consolidating Act.
Section 2 of the Housing (Consequential Provisions) Act 1985 provides, so far as is relevant:
‘(1) The re-enactment of provisions in the consolidating Acts, and the consequent repeal of those provisions by this Act, does not affect the continuity of the law.
(2) Anything done…or having effect as done, under a provision reproduced in the consolidating Acts has effect as if done under the corresponding provision of the consolidating Acts.
Section 5(1) of the same Act provides that Schedule 3 has effect with respect to transitional matters.
The relevant provisions of Schedule 3 are:
‘1(1) The general rule is that the provisions of the consolidating Acts apply, in accordance with section 2 of this Act (continuity of the law), to matters arising before the commencement of those Acts as to matters arising after that commencement.…
(4) The general rule does not apply so far as a provision of the consolidating Acts gives effect to an amendment (in pursuance of a recommendation of the Law Commission and, in some cases, the Scottish Law Commission).
The provisions which replace those contained in section 10(3) of the Act of 1957 are to be found in section 193 of and Schedule 10 to the Housing Act 1985.
In particular, if one compares the provisions relating to recovery of expenses in section 10(3) of the Act of 1957 with those in Schedule 10 to the Act of 1985 it is clear that the whole scheme has been rewritten and amended in accordance with recommendations in the Law Commission Report on the Consolidation of the Housing Acts (1985)(Law Com.
No. 144)(Cmnd. 9515).
In those circumstances, the judge held that the provisions in the legislation of 1985 did not apply in the present case which continued to be governed by the Act of 1957.
In my judgment he was right.
I should add that the outcome would have been no different even if the Act of 1985 had applied since Mr. Thomas concedes the time when the cause of action arises must be the same under both Acts.
Approaching the crucial issue in this case by reference to the Act of 1957 Mr. Thomas put forward two propositions.
(1) Although the Act does not expressly say so, it is implicit in sections 10 and 11 that a demand for expenses must be served by the local authority before proceedings can be taken to recover them.
(2) Service of the demand is not merely a procedural requirement but an essential ingredient in the cause of action.
In my judgment, his proposition (1) is correct.
It is supported by reference to section 10(4), section 11(1) and section 37(1) of the Act which provide as follows:
‘10(4) In all summary proceedings by the local authority for the recovery of any such expenses, the time within which the proceedings may be taken shall be reckoned from the date of the service of the demand or, if an appeal is made against that demand, from the date on which the demand becomes operative.’
‘11(1) Any person aggrieved by —(a ) a notice under the foregoing provisions of this Part of this Act requiring the execution of works,(b ) a demand for the recovery of expenses incurred by a local authority in executing works specified in any such notice,(c ) an order made by a local authority with respect to any such expenses, may, within 21 days of the service of the notice, demand or order, appeal to the county court within the jurisdiction of which the premises to which the notice, demand or order relates are situate, and no proceedings shall be taken by the local authority to enforce any notice, demand or order in relation to which an appeal is brought before the appeal has been finally determined.’
‘37(1) Any notice, demand or order against which an appeal might be brought to a county court under this Part of this Act shall, if no such appeal is brought, become operative on the expiration of 21 days from the date of the service of the notice, demand or order, and shall be final and conclusive as to any matters which could have been raised on such an appeal, and any such notice, demand or order against which an appeal is brought shall, if and so far as it is confirmed by a county court judge, or the Court of Appeal, become operative as from the date of the final determination of the appeal.
Clearly section 10(4) assumes a demand will be served before summary proceedings are taken.
There seems no good reason why the same should not apply before county court proceedings are brought.
Moreover, under section 11 and section 37, a person aggrieved by a demand has a right of appeal against it and proceedings cannot be brought until any appeal has been finally determined.
It would be surprising if the right of appeal depended on whether the local authority chose to serve a demand before taking proceedings.
It is of interest that the Law Commission, at p. 33 of their report, were of the view that service of a demand was implicit in section 10 of the Act of 1957.
On their recommendation, the obligation to serve a demand is imposed expressly in the Act of 1985.
However, given that a demand must be served before proceedings could be taken, it does not follow that Mr. Thomas's second proposition is correct.
The classic definition of a cause of action is that originally propounded by Lord Esher M.R. in Read v. Brown (1889) 22 Q.B.D. 128 and repeated by him in Coburn v. Colledge [1897]1 Q.B.
702, 706–707:
‘The definition of ‘cause of action’ which I gave in Read v. Brown has been cited.
I there said that it is ‘every fact which it would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove, if traversed, in order to support his right to the judgment of the court.’
The language I used obviously means this: the plaintiff in order to make out a cause of action must assert certain facts which, if traversed, he would be put to prove.
Coburn was a solicitor who did some work for the defendant, Colledge, in 1889.
He sent a bill of costs in 1889 which did not reach the defendant in Australia until 1891.
Action was commenced in 1896.
Section 37 of the Solicitors Act 1843 (6 & 7 Vict. c. 73) provided that no solicitor could commence an action for fees until one month after he delivered to his client a bill of fees.
The question was whether delivery of the bill amounted to an ingredient of the cause of action or whether the cause of action arose when the work was done and delivery of a bill was only a procedural requirement.
Lord Esher said, at pp. 705–706:
‘Before any enactment existed with regard to actions by solicitors for their costs, a solicitor stood in the same position as any other person who has done work for another at his request, and could sue as soon as the work which he was retained to do was finished, without having delivered any signed bill of costs or waiting for any time after the delivery of such a bill.
Then to what extent does the statute alter the right of the solicitor in such a case, and does the alteration made by it affect or alter the cause of action?
It takes away, no doubt, the right of the solicitor to bring an action directly the work is done, but it does not take away his right to payment for it, which is the cause of action.
The Statute of Limitations itself does not affect the right to payment, but only affects the procedure for enforcing it in the event of dispute or refusal to pay.
Similarly, I think section 37 of the Solicitors Act 1843 deals, not with the right of the solicitor, but with the procedure to enforce that right.
It does not provide that no solicitor shall have any cause of action in respect of his costs or any right to be paid till the expiration of a month from his delivering a signed bill of costs, but merely that he shall not commence or maintain any action for the recovery of fees, charges, or disbursements until then.
It assumes that he has a right to be paid the fees, charges, and disbursements, but provides that he shall not bring an action to enforce that right until certain preliminary requirements have been satisfied.
If the solicitor has any other mode of enforcing his right than by action, the section does not seem to interfere with it.
For instance, if he has money of the client in his hands not entrusted to him for any specific purpose, there is nothing in the section to prevent his retaining the amount due to him out of that money.
Coburn v. Colledge was a case arising from a contract for services and it is well established at common law that the cause of action in such cases accrues when the work is complete.
In the present case the cause of action arises under statute and Mr. Thomas argues that different considerations apply.
However, in Central Electricity Board v. Halifax Corporation [1963]A.C. 785, where a similar issue arose, the cause of action derived from statute.
The Electricity Act 1947 transferred the assets of electricity undertakings to electricity boards and provided that the property held by local authorities in their capacity as authorised undertakers should, on vesting day, 1 April 1948, vest in the relevant board.
The question whether certain moneys had been held by the respondent in the relevant capacity was referred under section 15 of the Act to the minister, who decided on 18 September 1958 that it was.
The appellants sought to recover the money.
A limitation point was taken.
The House of Lords held that the cause of action accrued at vesting date, even though the appellants could not have proved the moneys were held by the respondents as authorised undertakers until the minister so decided.
Lord Reid said, at p. 801:
‘No new right or liability came into existence at [the date of the minister's decision].
It is quite clear, and it is now admitted by the appellants, that the effect of the minister's decision was merely to prove that this sum had belonged to the appellants ever since the vesting date.
It created no new right of property or chose in action: it merely enabled a pre-existing right to be enforced.
Again, in Sevcon Ltd. v. Lucas CAV Ltd. [1986]1 W.L.R. 462, 465, the House of Lords had to consider section 13(4) of the Patents Act 1949, which provided:
‘After the date of the publication of a complete specification and until the sealing of a patent in respect thereof, the applicant shall have the like privileges and rights as if a patent for the invention had been sealed on the date of the publication of the complete specification: Provided that an applicant shall not be entitled to institute any proceedings for infringement until the patent has been sealed.
It was held that an applicant for a patent has all the rights which a holder has from the moment the complete specification of the patent is published.
Accordingly, his cause of action for an infringement before the date of sealing accrues at the date of the infringement but cannot be enforced until the procedural requirement of sealing is met.
Lord Mackay of Clashfern said, at p. 467:
‘If he were to institute proceedings for infringement before the patent for the invention was sealed, the procedural requirement of the proviso would not be satisfied but a statement of claim could not be struck out as disclosing no cause of action although it might be liable to be struck out as an abuse of the process of the court.
Although not on all fours with the present case, these decisions show that a cause of action may well accrue before, for procedural reasons, the plaintiff can bring proceedings.
Where the cause of action arises from statute, the question as to what is merely procedural and what is an inherent element in the cause of action is one of construction.
In the present case, the judge carefully analysed the provisions of section 10(3) and (4) and in my judgment reached the correct conclusion as to when the cause of action arose.
Section 10(3) gives a right to recover ‘any expenses incurred by the local authority under this section.’
The local authority must therefore prove (1) that notice in accordance with section 10(1) was served on the person having control of the house to execute works,(2) that he failed within the time specified to execute them,(3) that the local authority have themselves carried out the works specified in the notice and (4) that they have incurred expenses in so doing.
A statement of claim alleging those matters could not, in my view, be struck out as disclosing no cause of action.
The phrase ‘together with interest from the date when a demand for the expenses is served until payment’ in section 10(3) shows that interest runs only from the date of the demand and, by implication, not from the date when the cause of action arose.
Section 10(4) provides expressly that where the local authority opts to take summary proceedings to recover their expenses, the limitation period runs from the date of service of the demand or, if there is an appeal, the date when the demand becomes operative.
Again, by implication, since no such provision is applied to proceedings in the High Court or county court, time in those proceedings does not run from the date when the demand is served or becomes operative.
It will run from the accrual of the cause of action which, ex hypothesi, is a different time.
The rationale of the distinction between summary and other proceedings probably lies in the respective limitation periods.
In summary proceedings the period is six months.
If time were to run from the accrual of the cause of action, i.e. when the expenses were incurred, summary proceedings might often be statute-barred before they could be brought, especially where there was an appeal against the demand.
In other proceedings, however, the limitation period of six years gives, or should give, the local authority ample time to sue even after an appeal against their demand.
In my judgment, the expression, special to section 10(4), that time runs from service of the demand or when it becomes operative, is intended to distinguish summary proceedings from other proceedings.
Inclusio unius, exclusio alterius.
In other proceedings, time runs from the accrual of the cause of action, i.e. when the four elements identified above are complete.
Thus, I conclude that the requirement to serve a demand is a procedural condition precedent to bringing proceedings.
It is not part of the cause of action.
I am fortified in this view by consideration of what could result if the local authority were right.
Upon their argument, the local authority could delay service of a demand indefinitely.
Then, having served their demand long after the works were complete, they would have a further six years in which to take proceedings in the High Court or the county court.
In Coburn v. Colledge [1897]1 Q.B.
702, 709, Lopes L.J.
said:
‘There is nothing in the section, so far as I can see, inconsistent with the view that the cause of action arises when the work is completed.
It was urged that, if this construction were adopted, a solicitor would have a shorter time during which he may abstain from bringing his action for work done than the rest of Her Majesty's subjects.
That may be so; but on the other hand, if the plaintiff's contention is correct, the solicitor may abstain from delivering his bill for 20 years, and then at the end of that time he may deliver it and sue after the expiration of a month from its delivery.
It seems to me that that would be a very anomalous and inconvenient result.
For the reasons given above, I am of the opinion the judge's answer to the question posed was correct and I would dismiss this appeal.
RALPH GIBSON L.J.
I agree.
PURCHAS L.J.
I also agree.
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Solicitors: Solicitor, Swansea City Council; Peter Williams & Co., Swansea.
[Reported by James Kelly Esq., Barrister]