

[COURT OF APPEAL]
In re PAN AMERICAN WORLD AIRWAYS INC.
AND OTHERS' APPLICATION
1992 May 5; 15
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R.,
Balcombe L.J.
and Sir John Megaw
Evidence — Foreign tribunal, for — Examination of witness — Letters rogatory — Request for examination of former Crown servant — Evidence sought in respect of information acquired during employment as Crown servant — Whether jurisdiction to order examination — Evidence (Proceedings in Other Jurisdictions) Act 1975 (c. 34), s. 9(4)
The defendants to proceedings begun in New York by the families and personal representatives of persons killed in an air crash in Scotland in 1988 applied for an order under the Act of 1975 for the examination of a retired Crown servant who during his period of employment as a senior forensic scientist had conducted an investigation into the crash.
The deputy judge, granting the application, rejected the claim by the Treasury Solicitor on behalf of the Crown that section 9(4) of the Evidence (Proceedings in Other Jurisdictions) Act 1975excluded the court's jurisdiction to make the order sought.
On appeal by the Treasury Solicitor:—
Held , allowing the appeal, that on its true construction section 9(4) of the Evidence (Proceedings in Other Jurisdictions) Act 1975 was a paramount provision which limited all other provisions of that Act and related back to the time of the events in respect of which evidence was sought rather than forward to the time when such evidence would be given; that since all the evidence sought from the retired Crown servant related to matters which had come to his notice in his capacity as an officer or servant of the Crown, section 9(4) applied and the court had no jurisdiction to make the order for his examination (post, p. 197F–G, H).
Decision of Mr. Simon Goldblatt Q.C.
sitting as a deputy judge of the Queen's Bench Division reversed.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment of the court:
Garland v. British Rail Engineering Ltd. [1983]2 A.C. 751;[1982]2 W.L.R. 918;[1982]2 All E.R.
402, H.L. (E.)
Merricks v. Heathcoat-Amory [1955]Ch. 567;[1955]3 W.L.R. 56;[1955]2 All E.R.
453
Town Investments Ltd. v. Department of the Environment [1978]A.C. 359;[1977]2 W.L.R. 450;[1977]1 All E.R.
813, H.L. (E.)
Westinghouse Electric Corporation Uranium Contract Litigation M.D.L. Docket No. 235 (Nos. 1 and 2), In re [1978]A.C. 547;[1978]2 W.L.R. 81;[1978]1 All E.R.
434, H.L. (E.)
The following additional case was cited in argument:
M. v. Home Office [1992]1 Q.B.
270;[1992]2 W.L.R. 73, C.A.
The following additional cases, although not cited, were referred to in the skeleton argument:
Attorney-General v. Guardian Newspapers Ltd.
(No. 2)[1990]1 A.C. 109;[1988]3 W.L.R. 776;[1988]3 All E.R.
545, H.L. (E.)
Attorney-General's Reference (No. 1 of 1988)[1989]A.C. 971;[1989]2 W.L.R. 729;[1989]2 All E.R.
1, H.L. (E.)
Continental Reinsurance Corporation (U.K.) Ltd. v. Pine Top Insurance Ltd. [1986]1 Lloyd's Rep. 8, C.A.
Conway v. Rimmer [1968]A.C. 910;[1968]2 W.L.R. 998;[1968]1 All E.R.
874, H.L. (E.)
Customs and Excise Commissioners v. Top Ten Promotions Ltd. [1969]1 W.L.R. 1163;[1969]3 All E.R.
39, H.L. (E.)
Desilla v. Fells & Co. (1879) 40 L.T. 423
Rayner (J.H.)(Mincing Lane) Ltd. v. Department of Trade and Industry [1990]2 A.C. 418;[1989]3 W.L.R. 969;[1989]3 All E.R.
523, H.L. (E.)
Thorburn v. Hermon (unreported), 21 February 1992, Otton J.
APPEAL from Mr. Simon Goldblatt Q.C., sitting as a deputy judge of the Queen's Bench Division.
By a formal letter of request for international judicial assistance pursuant to the Hague Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial Matters (1970)(Cmnd. 6727) made by Chief Judge Platt in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York and dated 24 January 1992, examination was sought of Dr. Thomas Hayes, formerly senior forensic scientist at the Forensic Explosives Laboratory of the Royal Armament Research Establishment, for use as evidence at the trial of actions brought by personal representatives and families of those killed in December 1988 in the air crash at Lockerbie against the defendants to those actions, Pan American Airways Inc., Pan Am World Services Inc. and Alert Management Systems Inc.
By his order dated 8 April 1992, made on the application of the defendants to the actions and opposed on behalf of the Crown by the Treasury Solicitor, the deputy judge directed that Dr. Hayes attend before an examiner for the purpose of taking his evidence on oath.
By its order dated 14 April 1992 the Court of Appeal (Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. and Steyn L.J.) stayed the judge's order pending an appeal by the Treasury Solicitor.
By a notice of appeal dated 23 April 1992 the Treasury Solicitor appealed on the grounds that (1) on a true construction of the Evidence (Proceedings in Other Jurisdictions) Act 1975 the court was precluded from making the order for examination;(2) the deputy judge had erred in law in making the order and in holding that (i) it was possible to interpret section 9(4) of the Act so as not to preclude the order sought,(ii) the exclusion contained in section 9(4) was restricted to cases where the actual capacity in which the witness was called on to give evidence was a Crown capacity and that the fact that the evidence sought was acquired in the course of the witness's employment as a servant of the Crown was not of itself sufficient to bring the case within the exclusion,(iii) the fact that the witness was now retired from his position was relevant to the question whether the exclusion in section 9(4) applied,(iv) if some other interpretation were possible, it would be unacceptable to approach section 9(4) as requiring the court to refuse to make the order that a witness who was competent and compellable within the United Kingdom should give evidence for foreign proceedings,(v) there was nothing in the material sought to be given in evidence which it could have been the policy or intention of the Act to have prevented being explored;(3) the deputy judge had erred in law in approaching the question of capacity by concentrating on the position of the witness at the time that the evidence was to be given as opposed to the position of the witness at the time that he acquired the information which was the subject matter of the evidence and the nature content and source of such evidence;(4) the judge had wrongly ignored the fact that the Crown as a party to the Hague Convention was in a position to give effect to it and to provide evidence to foreign courts in accordance with it without recourse to the court; and (5) the judge had wrongly approached section 9(4) on the footing that it most likely addressed prejudice to the sovereignty of the state.
The facts are stated in the judgment of the court.
At the conclusion of argument Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. announced that the appeal would be allowed for reasons to be given later.
A. W. H. Charles and Fernanda Pirie for the Treasury Solicitor.
David Pannick Q.C.
for the applicants.
15 May.
The following judgment of the court was handed down.
LORD DONALDSON OF LYMINGTON M.R.
Introductory
Proceedings are pending in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York in which representatives of the estates and families of passengers and crew members who died when Pan American World Airways Flight 103 crashed at Lockerbie on 21 December 1988 claim damages from Pan American World Airways Inc., Pan Am World Services Inc. and Alert Management Services Inc.
On 24 January 1992 the Honourable Thomas C. Platt, Chief Judge of that court, issued a formal letter of request for international judicial assistance pursuant to the Hague Convention of 18 March 1970 on the Taking of Evidence abroad in Civil or Commercial Matters (Cmnd. 6727).
The request was addressed to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office which is the central authority of the United Kingdom for the purposes of the Convention.
It sought the examination of Dr. Thomas Hayes, formerly senior forensic scientist in the Forensic Explosives Laboratory of the Royal Armament Research and Development Establishment, Dr. Hayes having played a leading role in that capacity in the investigation of the crash.
The procedure for dealing with such requests is set out in R.S.C., Ord. 70 and often involves the Treasury Solicitor making application to the court under the Act of 1975: see Ord. 70, r. 3.
The power to make orders under that Act pursuant to letters of request from a foreign court is assigned to the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court: see Ord. 70, r. 1(2).
Nothing turns on the procedure adopted in this case and it suffices to say that when, on 8 April 1992, the matter came before Mr. Simon Goldblatt Q.C., sitting as a deputy High Court judge, the application for an order under the Act of 1975 was made by those who are the defendants in the United States action and it was opposed by the Treasury Solicitor, although purists might perhaps have expected that any opposition would have been made by or on behalf of the Attorney-General, the objection being one taken on behalf of the Crown.
That objection was quite simply that the courts of this country have no power to make the order applied for.
The judge ruled that he had power to make the order and did so, but action under that order was stayed pending the hearing of this appeal by an order of this court (Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. and Steyn L.J.) made on 14 April 1992.
Skeleton written arguments were submitted by both parties in accordance with the usual procedures of this court and this was followed by oral argument in open court on 5 May 1992.
At the conclusion of that argument we announced that the judge's order would be set aside and the application refused for want of jurisdiction.
However, in the light of the importance of this decision to the United States' court, to the parties to the proceedings in that court and in clarifying the law of England, we announced our intention of expressing our full reasons in writing to be delivered at a later date.
This we now do.
The issue
The issue is a narrow one, namely whether on the true construction of section 9(4) of the Act of 1975 and in the light of the facts that (a) Dr. Hayes was a servant of the Crown at the time when he made his investigation into the Lockerbie disaster,(b) he has since retired from the service of the Crown, and (c) that the evidence sought relates to what he discovered when acting as such a servant, the court has any power to make the order sought.
Legislative history
The Act of 1975 was passed in May 1975, but only took effect from 4 May 1976.
The Hague Convention had been signed on behalf of the United Kingdom in March 1970 and was undoubtedly in the contemplation of the legislature when passing the Act of 1975, notwithstanding that the Convention was only ratified by the United Kingdom on 16 July 1976: see In re Westinghouse Electric Corporation Uranium Contract Litigation M.D.L. Docket No. 235 (Nos. 1 and 2)[1978]A.C. 547, 608.
It is common ground that any power to make the order sought must be found in the Act, since the English courts have no inherent jurisdiction to act in aid of a foreign court and, as a matter of English domestic law, treaties only take effect as part of that law to the extent that they are incorporated by statute, with or without modification.
It was also, we think, common ground and is certainly correct that, against this background, any ambiguity in the Act should be resolved in favour of consistency between the Act and the Convention, the presumption being that the legislature was seeking to give effect to the principles of the Convention and would not lightly legislate inconsistently with the United Kingdom's treaty obligations thereunder: see Garland v. British Rail Engineering Ltd. [1983]2 A.C. 751, 771.
Public interest immunity
Although it has no bearing on our decision, it should be pointed out that had the courts had power to make the order sought, Dr. Hayes' evidence would in any event have been circumscribed by two public interest immunity certificates issued on 13 April 1992 respectively by the Secretary of State for Transport relating to ‘security measures’ and by the Lord Advocate in relation to potential criminal proceedings in Scotland.
A third public interest immunity certificate of the same date issued by the Secretary of State for Transport, relating to particular details of the explosive device thought to have been involved in the disaster, has now been withdrawn.
It should also be pointed out that the Crown, in the shape of the Ministry of Defence, has said that no objection would be raised to Dr. Hayes giving evidence in strictly controlled circumstances similar to those which applied in the case of evidence furnished by Mr. Feraday in accordance with an agreement dated 22 August 1991 exhibited to an affidavit of Mr. David Brummell dated 13 April 1992.
The difference between the position of Dr. Hayes and Mr. Feraday lies solely in the fact that Dr. Hayes has, and Mr. Feraday has not, retired from the service of the Crown.
The Act of 1975
Section 1 provides that where an application is made which meets certain conditions, as is the case here:
‘the High Court, Court of Session or High Court of Justice in Northern Ireland, as the case may be, shall have the powers conferred on it by the following provisions of this Act.
Sections 2 to 6 inclusive then set out those powers, of which mention need only be made of section 3.
This, so far as is material, is in the following terms:
‘(1) A person shall not be compelled by virtue of an order under section 2 above to give any evidence which he could not be compelled to give —(a ) in civil proceedings in the part of the United Kingdom in which the court that made the order exercises jurisdiction; or (b )…(3) Without prejudice to subsection (1) above, a person shall not be compelled by virtue of an order under section 2 above to give any evidence if his doing so would be prejudicial to the security of the United Kingdom; and a certificate signed by or on behalf of the Secretary of State to the effect that it would be so prejudicial for that person to do so shall be conclusive evidence of that fact.
Section 9(4), which is the crucial provision, occurs under the general rubric of ‘Interpretation’ and reads:
‘Nothing in this Act shall be construed as enabling any court to make an order that is binding on the Crown or on any person in his capacity as an officer or servant of the Crown.
The contrast between section 9(4) and section 3 lies in the fact that section 9(4) applies at the moment when the court is called upon to consider an application for an order under the Act, whereas section 3 applies only after and subject to an order being made.
Furthermore the application of section 3 is not limited to officers or servants of the Crown.
The argument
Mr. David Pannick, appearing for the applicants, submitted that the language of section 9(4) focused not on the historic question of how the relevant information was acquired by the intended witness, but upon the contemporaneous question of the capacity in which the evidence is to be given.
No one, he submitted, can give evidence ‘in his capacity as an officer or servant of the Crown’ if he is no longer such an officer or servant.
If section 9(4) was intended to have the effect contended for in the skeleton argument of Mr. William Charles, appearing for the Treasury Solicitor, appropriate words could easily have been found.
Indeed they were found when Parliament enacted section 1(1) of the Official Secrets Act 1989:
‘A person who is or has been…a member of the security and intelligence services…is guilty of an offence if without lawful authority he discloses any information…which is or has been in his possession by virtue of his position as a member of any of those services…
Similarly in section 1(3): ‘A person who is or has been a Crown servant…’
As a matter of English law ‘The Crown’ has no legal personality, but is a legal fiction denoting the executive branch of government which equally is devoid of legal personality: see Town Investments Ltd. v. Department of the Environment [1978]A.C. 359, 380–381.
In order to overcome the problems which flow from this lack of legal personality, the Crown Proceedings Act 1947 was passed giving rights of action against the executive branch of government either by suing specified departments in their own name or by suing the Attorney-General on behalf of the Crown.
But Parliament also took account of the fact that the Crown can only act through its officers or servants.
In order to prevent the limited extent to which the Crown was amenable to the jurisdiction of the courts being outflanked and extended by suing individual officers of servants of the Crown, it was provided by section 21(2):
‘The court shall not in any civil proceedings grant any injunction or make any order against an officer of the Crown if the effect of granting the injunction or making the order would be to give any relief against the Crown which could not have been obtained in proceedings against the Crown.’
See Merricks v. Heathcoat-Amory [1955]Ch. 567.
In Mr. Pannick's submission, section 9(4) of the Act of 1975 was intended to do no more than protect ‘the Crown’ from being required by a court to give evidence in proceedings in a foreign court by stipulating that none of its officers or servants can be so required.
So construed, section 9(4) would have some effect, because it would prevent a court from ordering a Crown officer or servant to give evidence of the executive branch's current attitudes or policies, but it would be of very limited scope.
The improbability of Parliament having intended section 9(4) to have this limited effect was spotlit by a question from the court in the course of the oral argument.
We know from the signed statement of the Secretary of State for Transport withdrawing the ‘explosive device’ certificate of public interest immunity, and would in any event have assumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that ‘the Ministry of Defence retain the documents relating to Dr. Hayes' work in respect of the Lockerbie air disaster.’
The question was whether on any construction of section 9(4) the court would have power to order an officer or servant of the Crown currently working in the Ministry of Defence to produce or give evidence of the contents of these documents.
In our judgment the answer has to be ‘No’ and it would be peculiar in the extreme if Dr. Hayes could in effect be ordered to give evidence of their contents merely because he was no longer in Crown employment.
The Convention
Quite apart from the fact that we can detect no ambiguity in section 9(4) of the Act of 1975, the Convention gives Mr. Pannick no assistance.
Article 11 provides that:
‘In the execution of a letter of request the person concerned may refuse to give evidence in so far as he has a privilege or duty to refuse to give the evidence —(a ) under the law of the state of execution; or (b ) under the law of the state of origin…
This is the basis of section 3 of the Act which, of course, only applies after an order has been made by the court for the taking of evidence.
Article 12 provides separately for the circumstances in which the execution of a letter of request may be refused, namely,
‘only to the extent that (a ) in the state of execution the execution of the letter does not fall within the functions of the judiciary; or (b ) the state addressed considers that its sovereignty or security would be prejudiced thereby.
Mr. Pannick submits that the only justification for section 9(4) in terms of the Convention is that it is addressed to avoiding prejudice to the sovereignty of the Crown since the states party to the Convention can never have contemplated that one of their number could limit the scope of its own obligations simply by refraining from giving the judiciary power to execute letters of request in particular circumstances.
The difficulty about this argument is that, if it is accepted, there is no scope for the operation of paragraph (a ) of article 12.
The states would always be under an obligation to give the judiciary all-embracing powers.
Conclusion
(1) The English court's power to comply with letters of request from a foreign court is to be found in the Act of 1975 and nowhere else.
(2) Section 9(4) is a paramount provision which limits all other provisions of the Act however expressed.
(3) Factual evidence will always be historic in nature in the sense that the witness will be giving evidence of events and matters which have occurred before he gives evidence.
Section 9(4), which operates at the time of the application for an order under the Act, looks back towards the time in relation to which the witness would give evidence if an order was made and not forward to the time at which he would do so.
(4) The limiting words ‘in his capacity as an officer or servant of the Crown’ leave the court free to order a witness to give evidence notwithstanding that at the relevant time he was an officer or servant of the Crown, if the matters in respect of which he is to give evidence did not come to his notice in that capacity, for example, the civil servant who, when on holiday or at home, happens to witness a road traffic accident.
(5) The whole of the evidence sought from Dr. Hayes relates to matters which came to his notice in his capacity as an officer or servant of the Crown and accordingly section 9(4) applies.
(6) Nothing in the Act or in the Convention prevents the Crown from facilitating the giving of evidence by its present or former officers or servants, subject to such conditions if any as it may deem appropriate, but the courts have no power to order anyone to give evidence in circumstances in which section 9(4) applies.
Appeal allowed with costs in
Court of Appeal and below.
Leave to appeal refused.
Solicitors: Treasury Solicitor; Frere Cholmeley.