

[COURT OF APPEAL]IRTELLI v. SQUATRITI and Others 1992 Feb. 10
Sir Donald Nicholls V.-C.,
Taylor and Farquharson L.JJ.
Contempt of Court — Committal order — Civil contempt — Breach of injunction — Application to adduce fresh evidence to excuse contempt — Whether fresh evidence admissible — Criminal Appeal Act 1968 (c. 19), s. 23
In an action for breach of an agreement embodied in a Tomlin order the plaintiff was granted an injunction against the defendants restraining them from ‘selling disposing or otherwise dealing with seeking to sell dispose or deal with’ property of which they owned the freehold.
Thereafter the defendants executed a charge on their property in favour of the second defendants.
The plaintiff served on the defendants notice of motion making application to the county court to commit them to prison for the alleged contempt of court entailed by breach of the injunction.
The defendants did not appear before the judge on the hearing of the motion and no adequate explanation was given for their absence by the solicitor then acting for them.
The judge found them to be in contempt and committed each to prison for a term of four months.
On the defendants' appeal and application for leave to adduce fresh evidence:—
Held ,(1) granting the application, that (per Taylor and Farquharson L.JJ.), since the defendants stood to lose their liberty if the judge's order were upheld, the court should act by analogy with the practice of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) which, by section 23(1) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968, permitted the adduction of fresh evidence where justice required it; that (per Sir Donald Nicholls V.-C.) under R.S.C., Ord. 59, r. 10(2) the court retained sufficient flexibility to enable it to admit fresh evidence where justice so required; and that, accordingly, the evidence would be admitted notwithstanding that the usual conditions for admissibility admitted might not have been satisfied (post, pp. 223C–E, 226F–G, 227C–D).
Ladd v. Marshall [1954]1 W.L.R. 1489, C.A. distinguished.
(2) Allowing the appeal, that, having regard to the fresh evidence, it was impossible to conclude that the defendants had intentionally breached the injunction; and that, accordingly, the committal order would be discharged (post, pp. 225D, 226H, 227E–G).
Per curiam .
Further applications in committal proceedings where no error by the court at the original hearing is alleged should be dealt with by an application to the county court for a rehearing under Order 37 of the County Court Rules 1981.
The appeal procedure is designed for cases where it is sought to correct an error in the judge's decision (post, pp. 226C–E, 227D–E).
The following cases are referred to in the judgments:
Bramblevale Ltd., In re [1970]Ch. 128;[1969]3 W.L.R. 699;[1969]3 All E.R.
1062, C.A.
Ladd v. Marshall [1954]1 W.L.R. 1489;[1954]3 All E.R.
745, C.A.
Reg. v. Lattimore (1975) 62 Cr.App.R. 53, C.A.
Sofroniou v. Szgetti [1991]F.C.R. 332, C.A.
The following additional case was cited in argument:
Savings & Investment Bank Ltd. v. Gasco Investments (Netherlands) B.V. (No. 2)[1988]Ch. 422;[1988]2 W.L.R. 1212;[1988]1 All E.R.
975, C.A.
The following cases, although not cited, were referred to in the skeleton argument:
Attorney-General v. Newspaper Publishing Plc. 
[1988]Ch. 333;[1987]3 W.L.R. 942;[1987]3 All E.R.
276, C.A.
Ketteman v. Hansel Properties Ltd. [1987]A.C. 189;[1987]2 W.L.R. 312;[1988]1 All E.R.
38, H.L. (E.)
Lee v. Walker [1985]Q.B.
1191;[1985]3 W.L.R. 170;[1985]1 All E.R.
781, C.A.
Reg. v. Ensor [1989]1 W.L.R. 497;[1989]2 All E.R.
586, C.A.
Supply of Ready Mixed Concrete, In re [1992]1 Q.B.
213;[1991]3 W.L.R. 707;[1991]4 All E.R.
150, C.A.
Appeal from Judge Stockdale sitting at Watford County Court.
By an order dated 9 October 1989 Mr. Anthony Coleman Q.C.
sitting as a deputy judge of the Queen's Bench Division granted the plaintiff in an action for breach of an agreement embodied in a Tomlin order, Jean-Pierre Irtelli, an injunction restraining the first defendants, Renato Squatriti and Livia Vidor (trading as L'Aiglon)(‘the defendants’), ‘by themselves or their servants and agents from selling disposing or otherwise dealing with seeking to sell dispose or deal with the premises at 220, Westbourne Grove, London W.11.’
By notice of motion dated 12 April 1991 the plaintiff made application to the county court for committal to prison of the defendants, alleging breach of the injunction by their execution of a charge over the property.
When the motion came before Judge Stockdale on 2 August 1991, neither of the defendants attended the hearing.
The judge found the defendants to have been in breach of the injunction and committed each to prison for four months.
By re-amended notice of appeal dated 30 August 1991 the defendants sought an order to set aside or vary the judge's order or to order a retrial and sought leave to adduce fresh evidence on the grounds, inter alia,(1) that the judge had erred in law in failing to take into account (a) the lack of a penal notice on the order which it was claimed that the appellants had breached; and (b) the plaintiff's delay of 18 months in applying for the committal order;(2) that the judge's decision was arrived at without regard to fresh evidence which the defendants had obtained since the hearing, part of which related to matters subsequent to the hearing and the remainder of which could not have been obtained with reasonable diligence; which, if given, would probably have had an important influence on the result, which was credible and which should, therefore, be admitted;(3) that, alternatively, the court should exercise its discretion to admit the fresh evidence as the liberty of the defendants was at risk; and (4) that the sentence imposed was excessive.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Farquharson L.J.
James Wadsworth Q.C.
and William Flenley for the defendants.
The plaintiff did not appear and was not represented.
Farquharson L.J.
There are two matters presently before the court.
The first of them is an appeal by the first defendants in the present action (‘the appellants’) against an order made by Judge Stockdale, sitting at the Watford County Court on 2 August 1991, committing each appellant to prison for a term of four months by reason of their contempt.
The second matter is an application to adduce fresh evidence in support of the appeal which is directed to the judge's finding of contempt.
The original claim by the present plaintiff against the appellants was one for money lent in the sum of £500,000.
The action was compromised on 10 June 1989.
The agreement between the parties was embodied in a Tomlin order.
The appellants were the owners of the freehold of a valuable house at 220, Westbourne Grove, London, W.11, and at the time of the Tomlin order there were already in existence two charges against that property which had been made by the appellants.
The first was in favour of the Allied Irish Financial Services Co. in the sum of £400,000 and the second was in favour of the National Westminster Bank, the amount of that charge being some £70,000.
By the terms of the Tomlin order the appellants agreed to pay off the second charge and to grant a further charge to the plaintiff for the purpose of securing payment to the plaintiff of the sum of £150,000, such payment being one of the terms of the agreement made between the parties.
On 19 June 1989 the plaintiff entered a caution on the property at the Land Registry.
Thereafter the appellants never took steps to discharge their obligations under the agreement which was the subject of the Tomlin order, either in relation to the matters to which I have referred or indeed in relation to any other of the terms.
On 21 September 1989, in breach of the Tomlin order, the first appellant executed a charge in favour of the two men who are described in the title to the action as the second defendants (‘the mortgagees’).
It seems that the appellants were considerably in debt to the mortgagees and the purpose of that second charge was to secure the debt.
It happened that, for whatever reason, the charge was signed only by the first appellant, whereas both of them were entitled to the freehold.
At about this time the plaintiff became suspicious that the appellants were minded to sell the property at Westbourne Grove.
Accordingly he brought a further action, which is the present claim, based on allegations of breach of the agreement embodied in the Tomlin order on 10 June 1989.
Having launched the action, he sought a Mareva injunction restraining the appellants from dealing with the property.
The matter came before Mr. Anthony Coleman Q.C., sitting as a deputy High Court judge of the Queen's Bench Division, on 5 October 1989.
At that hearing, according to information which is before us but which was not before the judge, the first appellant was not present.
It seems that he speaks no English although he has lived in this country for some time; he is in fact Italian by birth.
The second appellant, who is Hungarian by birth and who does speak some English, was present at the hearing before the deputy High Court judge.
The appellants were represented by both counsel and solicitor.
During the course of the submissions made to the deputy judge the appellants through their counsel offered an undertaking in the terms of the order sought by the plaintiff.
But, in the event, an injunction was granted, which was in these terms:
‘It is ordered…that the defendants or one or other of them be restrained by themselves or their servants and agents from selling disposing or otherwise dealing with seeking to sell dispose or deal with the premises at 220, Westbourne Grove, London, W.11.
There were certain ancillary provisions attached to the order, including the requirement that the appellants swear an affidavit setting out the details of all their assets.
That apparently was never complied with.
It is in relation to that order of the court that the present proceedings arise.
On 4 December 1989 both the appellants executed a further charge on the property in favour of the mortgagees.
The mortgagees had been advised by their own solicitors that the charge executed by the first appellant in September was ineffective and they therefore sought a further mortgage to be executed by both appellants.
It is that further mortgage, which was in all major respects recreating the terms of the September mortgage, which is alleged to be in breach of the court's order and is the subject of the application for committal for contempt.
It appears that the plaintiff did not become aware of this breach of the order until 10 April 1990.
There was thereafter a not inconsiderable delay which the plaintiff explained was due to the delays in the correspondence with the Land Registry and also with the mortgagees' solicitors.
Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants today does not accept the reason for those delays, but, as that is not central to the issue before this court, I say no more about it.
In the result, it was not until 12 April 1991 that the plaintiff gave notice of motion for the committal of the appellants in respect of the contempt of court involved by the breach of the injunction.
There was no dispute in the proceedings before the judge, nor is there now, that the appellants were served with that notice of motion, as they had been earlier with the notice of the order made by the deputy judge.
On this occasion, however, they asked that their solicitors should be served additionally.
A date for the hearing of the plaintiff's application was fixed to take place on 6 June 1991 at the Watford County Court.
There were at the time parallel proceedings against the mortgagees to preserve the plaintiff's priority rights against the property by virtue of the caution entered at the Land Registry, and it was the mortgagees who requested an adjournment from 6 June 1991 to a later date.
That was fixed for 2 August 1991 and it is apparent that all parties were aware that that was the relevant date for the hearing of the motion.
When on that date the matter came before Judge Stockdale, there was no appearance before him by either of the appellants.
Furthermore, there was no affidavit explaining their absence.
The judge was satisfied, as he made clear, that they had been properly served with the proceedings throughout and no proper explanation of their absence was vouchsafed by their solicitor, who appeared at the hearing on their behalf.
In those circumstances, it was hardly surprising that the judge found the two appellants in contempt and made the order referred to at the outset of this judgment.
Save for one matter, to which I shall refer later, there is no criticism of the judgment or of the order the judge made on the material that was available to him at the time.
The application by Mr. Wadsworth on behalf of the appellants to adduce fresh evidence before this court is for the purpose of explaining the appellants' apparently defiant behaviour towards the judge, and the first question we have to address our minds to is whether that evidence should be admitted.
Mr. Wadsworth submits to us that contempt of court is an offence of a criminal character, albeit it is a civil proceeding.
He relies for that upon the dicta of Lord Denning M.R. in In re Bramblevale Ltd. [1970]Ch. 128, 137A.
Mr. Wadsworth submits in those circumstances that, in considering the question of whether fresh evidence should be admitted, the court should act analogously to the practice of the Criminal Division of this court.
He submits that the test should be the same.
Perhaps, rather surprisingly, there is no authority as to the proper approach by the court when further evidence is sought to be filed in relation to a matter of contempt.
Mr. Wadsworth relies on Reg. v. Lattimore (1975) 62 Cr.App.R. 53.
That case does not help in the issue that is before us as it is only an example of the practice in the Criminal Division of this court and is referred to normally for Lord Scarman's analysis of the interrelation of the relevant statutory provisions, but it demonstrates that the practice in the criminal division is governed by statute.
Furthermore, an appellant cannot appear before that court, except on matters of law, unless he has leave to do so by a High Court judge.
However, it is submitted that the court should look at that practice rather than the civil practice in relation to the admission of fresh evidence.
Mr. Wadsworth submits that would be the just approach compared with the obligation on a litigant in civil proceedings, as set out in Ladd v. Marshall [1954]1 W.L.R. 1489.
It would be necessary, if the evidence were to be admitted under that doctrine, that the three conditions laid down in Ladd v. Marshall should be fulfilled.
Certainly in the case of the first of those conditions the present appellants would find themselves in considerable difficulty.
So one turns to look at the statute that governs the practice on the criminal side, section 23 of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968:
‘(1) For the purposes of this Part of this Act the Court of Appeal may, if they think it necessary or expedient in the interests of justice…(b ) order any witness who would have been a compellable witness in the proceedings from which the appeal lies to attend for examination and be examined before the court, whether or not he was called in those proceedings; and (c ) subject to subsection (3) below, receive the evidence, if tendered, of any witness.
Mr. Wadsworth submits that we should approach the present application on the basis of those words in the introduction to section 23, namely the court ‘may, if they think it necessary or expedient in the interests of justice,’ make the necessary order.
In the present case, I for my part take that view.
If this decision were to be upheld, the appellants stand to lose their liberty and, in my judgment, it would not be right that such a result should occur when the evidence is excluded only on the basis of the rather stricter rules laid down in Ladd v. Marshall .
Where the subject is in danger of losing his liberty it is desirable that the wider terms of section 23(1) of the Act of 1968 should by analogy be applied.
I therefore proceed to examine the further evidence that has been tendered on that basis.
Some of that evidence, it might be said in parenthesis, appears to be adverse to the appellants.
The evidence which is directed to the appellants' intentions in relation to this matter of contempt is, first, that the appellants claim that the terms of the injunction made by the deputy judge in October 1989 were not explained to them.
I for my part have some difficulty in accepting that.
On that occasion, although one of them only was present, both counsel and solicitor were in court acting on their behalf, and I find it very difficult to accept that neither counsel nor solicitor at the conclusion of the hearing explained in the clearest terms to the second appellant precisely what it was that she and the first appellant were to be restrained from doing.
However, having said that, there is some support for the submission made on behalf of the appellants in this regard, and that is to be found in the letter of 10 October 1989 which was written to them, following that hearing, by their solicitor.
The first paragraph reads:
‘I write to confirm that on 5 October 1989 you were represented at the hearing to oppose the plaintiff being granted an injunction preventing you from selling the property.
I understand there was extensive argument and that the judge finally decided to grant the plaintiff the injunction.’
(My emphasis.)
It then goes on to deal with the question of costs.
So there was some basis for supposing that the appellants had been informed in writing, that their obligation was only not to sell the property, rather than the wider terms which in fact applied to the injunction.
Secondly, it is submitted, and evidence is adduced to support it, that the breach complained of was only technical.
As appears from the chronology which I have already recited the purpose of the December charge being executed in favour of the mortgagees was simply to replace the defective charge that had been given in September.
The matter of course is not without significance, because no title would have passed to the mortgagees as a result of the September document and did so by the December charge which, on any showing, is agreed to be in breach of the order of the deputy judge.
However, the appellants' case in respect of that matter is that they simply did not realise that they were doing anything wrong.
As far as the letter above referred to is concerned, they had been advised that the restraint upon them was only to prevent them selling and this, of course, was not a sale.
However, they apparently failed to consult their own solicitors on the matter and simply conformed to the request of the mortgagees as a formality.
For my part I think it is right to accept that that was in the eyes of the appellants a formality.
The third matter disclosed by the additional evidence was, as the appellants claim, their lack of understanding of the legal process or the terminology of the documents involved.
Once again there is difficulty in accepting this contention.
It is apparent, from the history given in the affidavits, that the appellants are both very experienced people in business.
I again would find it difficult to understand how (a) they could not have understood these documents; and (b) that, if they did not understand them, they took no steps to consult their advisers.
The fourth matter upon which the appellants rely, and this is a matter of considerable importance, is that they claim to have been misled by the solicitor who was acting for them during the course of 1991 and particularly in respect of these committal proceedings.
According to the evidence put before us by way of affidavit, the appellants when served with the notice of motion had consulted their solicitor.
It will be recalled that the proceedings had been adjourned from June to August, and about that time of year it appears that the first appellant was offered employment in Italy.
Having regard to his indebtedness, reflected by the various charges on this property, he was anxious to take up that employment.
They therefore consulted their solicitor to see if it was necessary for them to remain in this country for the purpose of attending the hearing in August.
Whilst, according to them, some reference was made to the possibility of imprisonment, the second appellant was assured by the solicitor that there was no risk of that and no real need for them to appear before the judge.
Of course, the consequences of that advice were calamitous.
They went to Italy to take up their work and they have remained there ever since.
I mention in passing that the couple have an eight- or nine-year-old child to look after.
The fifth matter of complaint, which goes partly to the intention of the appellants and to the difficulty they found themselves in before the judge was that their solicitor never explained these matters to the judge, that is to say the technical nature of the breach, the details of the two charges that had been made, and the advice that their solicitor himself had given to the appellants when they came to consult him.
A note was taken of the submissions that were made before the judge which show that he asked the solicitor representing them if the appellants knew of the date of the hearing, and the solicitor said that they did, as indeed was the case.
The judge went on to say that they had notices of committal and that they had removed themselves from the jurisdiction.
It was open to the solicitor, if the appellants be right, to explain to the judge why they were absent, because it was on his advice.
The judge then went on to ask if there was an affidavit from the appellants.
Once again the solicitor representing them said that there was not and that his clients had put him in difficulties, as he had only been given instructions a week before.
This, on any basis, could not have been right.
Finally, the solicitor told the judge that the appellants did not understand the order.
On that kind of information, it is hardly surprising that the judge came to the conclusion that he did.
In the evidence before us the appellants have emphasised that throughout they had no intention to flout the authority of the court.
The question for us is whether the evidence now available establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that they did intend to act in contempt of the court's authority.
We are in some difficulty in resolving that matter, for two reasons.
First, that the plaintiff in the action and the person who launched the proceedings for contempt was not represented before the court.
I do not complain about that so far as he is concerned because no doubt it would be an additional and unnecessary expense for him.
But it does put the court in some difficulty in considering the reliability of the evidence before us.
Secondly, from the observations that I have made in dealing with the evidence before the court, it is clear that the evidence is not all one way.
But, having regard to all the circumstances, and particularly the nature of the second mortgage, I for my part would find it impossible to say that I was convinced that the appellants had the necessary intention to act in contempt of court.
For that reason I would for my part discharge this committal order.
It should be said that there are certain other features of the case to which attention ought to be drawn.
It is clear that the judge was unaware of the additional matters I have listed.
There has been, as I have emphasised, no criticism of his judgment on the material that was before him and besides those to which I have already drawn attention, there are two other matters to which I should make reference.
First, there is now, and indeed there was at the time of the committal hearing, no equity in the property.
When the housing market collapsed, it appears that this property was affected because it became the subject of a forced sale.
In the result, the proceeds from that sale were not enough to discharge the first mortgage, let alone the subsequent ones.
Therefore, although there was a breach of the court's order, there was no practical loss to the plaintiff as a result of the acts of the appellants.
The next point taken by Mr. Wadsworth is not unimportant.
He points out that, in any case, there was no penal notice endorsed on the order made by the deputy judge in October 1989.
He accepts that, under the County Court Rules 1981 (S.I.
1981 No. 1687 (L.20)), specifically Ord. 29, rr. 1, 2, 3, and 6, where there has been an injunction enjoining someone to abstain from a particular act, the judge still has a discretion notwithstanding the absence of a penal notice to make an order of committal if he is satisfied that the persons who are the subject of the notice were made aware of the existence of the order.
That specifically is referred to in Ord. 29, r. 6, and is supported by the decision of this court in Sofroniou v. Szgetti [1991]F.C.R. 332.
The real point of Mr. Wadsworth's submission is the question: did the judge exercise that discretion reposed in him by the orders?
Certainly it was never specifically referred to but a reading of the judgment would, I apprehend, ground an argument that the judge, having found that the appellants were in contempt and knew at all relevant times of the existence of the order against them, was in a position to exercise the discretion that he was given.
However, for the reasons that I have explained, there is no need for this court to come to any conclusion one way or the other on that matter.
The third matter relied on by Mr. Wadsworth by way of criticism of the judge's order relates to the plaintiff's delay, but I do not find it necessary to expand that any further in the circumstances.
It is plain that if the judge had been appraised of all these matters now before the court, he would have come to the same conclusion as we have, namely that the necessary intention had not been proved on the part of the appellants.
Finally, the question arises whether this application should have been made to the Court of Appeal.
No criticism of the appellants is to be made in that respect because, alive to the problem, they had applied to the registrar for directions; it was as a result of his directions, which I do not question for a moment, that the appeal came before this court.
But, in proceedings of this nature the general rule is that, where a committal order has been made, any further application in respect of it should be made to the judge who made the order, whether that application is in the nature of an apology by the contemnor or an application to reopen the proceedings by reason of the availability of fresh evidence or some other ground where no error of the court at the hearing is alleged.
The County Court Rules, Order 37, are wide enough in their terms for the further application to have been made before the county court judge.
The procedure before the county court is of course swifter and cheaper than an application before this court.
Mr. Wadsworth considered this matter in the present case, and he was of the view that the criticism being made in the notice with regard to the Order 29 point of the County Court Rules was sufficient for it to be necessary for him to bring these proceedings by way of appeal before this court.
It is not necessary to give a final opinion as to that.
I will only say that proceedings should be brought before the court by way of appeal in contempt matters only in exceptional cases.
For those reasons, I would discharge this order.
Taylor L.J.
I agree.
I am satisfied that the fresh evidence on which the appellants seek to rely, and which Farquharson L.J.
has summarised, ought to be admitted.
We are here concerned with the liberty of the subject and, by analogy, with the rules applicable in criminal cases.
I am of opinion that, if the interests of justice make it necessary or expedient to receive the evidence, we should admit it.
It is regrettable that the judge heard nothing from the appellants' side, despite the fact that they were represented — no oral evidence, no affidavit evidence, not even an address in mitigation.
Had he heard the evidence now placed before us, he may not have been wholly convinced by it but, in my view, he could not have been sure that the appellants had knowingly breached the court order and, therefore, he could not have been sure that they were in contempt.
For that reason I would discharge the judge's order.
Sir Donald Nicholls V.-C.
I, too, would allow this appeal.
The cardinal feature of this appeal is that before the judge the appellants, case went substantially by default.
The judge cannot be faulted either on the course he took or on the decision he reached on the material before him.
He was faced with an application for an adjournment, for a reason which is not clear.
He rightly decided to proceed.
He was also right, and that is not in dispute on this appeal, to conclude that the execution by the appellants of the charge dated 4 December 1989 was a breach of the order of the court of 5 October.
Further, on the material before him, he was entitled to conclude that the appellants must have known that the execution of the charge was in breach of the order.
Neither of them was present before the judge, nor was any affidavit evidence to a contrary effect presented on their behalf.
Affidavit evidence from the appellants, which ought to have been before the judge, has now been put before this court and an application has been made for leave to adduce this as additional evidence on the hearing of the appeal.
I am in no doubt that, having regard to the way this matter proceeded in front of the judge, it would not be right to refuse to receive this evidence.
Under R.S.C., Ord. 59, r. 10(2) this court has power to admit further evidence on special grounds.
In my view, under this rule the court retains sufficient flexibility to enable it, when justice so requires, to admit further evidence on the application of a person found guilty of contempt of court even when the well known Ladd v. Marshall [1954]1 W.L.R. 1489 criteria are not satisfied.
That said, however, the course which should normally be followed, if circumstances such as those before us ever arise again, is for the defendant to apply to the county court for a rehearing under Order 37 of the County Court Rules, and to adduce his affidavit evidence in support of that application.
That will be the convenient and sensible course because what such a defendant is seeking is not so much to correct an error in the judge's decision, for which appeals to this court are designed, but to have for the first time a hearing at which his evidence is considered.
I agree that, on the basis of the new evidence, the judge's order committing these two defendants to prison should be set aside.
The affidavit evidence of the defendants is to the effect that they did not understand that executing a further charge was prohibited by the order.
Like Taylor and Farquharson L.JJ.
I do not find that evidence in all respects convincing.
It raises almost as many questions as it provides answers, but it has not been challenged before us.
Accordingly, the conclusion has to be that a knowing breach of the order by the appellants has not been proved.
Appeal allowed.
Legal aid taxation of appellants' costs.
Solicitors: Constant & Constant.
[Reported by Christopher Champness Esq., Barrister]