

[FAMILY DIVISION]CROYDON LONDON BOROUGH COUNCIL v. A. and Others 1992 Jan. 24
Hollings J.
Children — Care proceedings — Prohibited steps order — Local authority seeking interim care order — Justices making prohibited steps orders — Representatives not given opportunity to make submissions as to appropriateness of order — Order prohibiting contact between parents — Whether court entitled to interfere with justices' exercise of discretion — Whether justices entitled to make orders — Children Act 1989 (c. 41), s. 8
Two boys were born in February 1990 and October 1991 respectively to unmarried parents.
In May 1991 the older boy suffered non-accidental injuries, in respect of which the father pleaded guilty to causing actual bodily harm and was subsequently placed on probation.
In December 1991 the local authority was granted emergency protection orders in respect of both boys and placed them with foster parents.
The local authority, being anxious to place the mother with the children in a mother and baby home with a view to rehabilitation, sought an interim care order relating to both boys and informed the justices that it was their intention to keep the mother and children together for assessment and at the same time protect the children from the father.
The hearing took two days, at the end of which the justices announced that the decision and reasons for decision would be given on the following morning.
The justices declined to make the  interim care order and made two prohibited steps orders under section 8(1) of the Children Act 1989 without giving the parties an opportunity to make representations as to whether such orders were appropriate.
The first order prohibited the father from having any contact with the children and prohibited the mother from allowing the father to have contact with the children.
The second order prohibited the mother from having verbal, personal contact or contact by correspondence with the father and similarly the father to have no contact with the mother.
On appeal by the local authority:—
Held ,(1) that on an appeal to the High Court from a decision of justices under the Children Act 1989 fresh evidence could be adduced only with leave in exceptional circumstances, and the court would not interfere with the exercise of the justices' discretion unless it considered that their decision was plainly wrong or that they had erred in principle; and that, further, an interm order would not lightly be interfered with in view of its temporary nature and the often provisional character of the evidence (post, p. 271A–B).
G. v. G. (Minors: Custody Appeal)[1985]1 W.L.R. 647, H.L. (E.) applied.
(2) Allowing the appeal, that before making the prohibited steps orders the justices should have informed the parties of their intention and given them an opportunity to make submissions as to whether such orders were appropriate; that the justices had had no jurisdiction to make an order prohibiting the parents from having contact with each other because such contact was not a step which could be taken by a parent in meeting his responsibility towards his child and thus was outside the terms of section 8(1) of the Children Act 1989; that, on the evidence they accepted, the justices had been plainly wrong to refuse to make the interim care orders; and that, accordingly, the court would substitute interim care orders relating to both children (post, pp. 271B–D, H — 272A, F, H — 273A).
The following case is referred to in the judgment:
G. v. G. (Minors: Custody Appeal)[1985]1 W.L.R. 647;[1985]2 All E.R.
225, H.L. (E.)
M. v. M. (Minors: Custody Appeal)[1987]1 W.L.R. 404, C.A.
No additional cases were cited in argument.
Appeal from Croydon Family Proceedings Court.
On 13 December 1991 emergency protection orders were made in respect of two children, D., born on 20 February 1990, and R., born on 12 October 1991, and they were placed with foster parents.
On 19 December 1991 the local authority sought interim care orders.
The justices made prohibited steps orders (i) preventing the father from having any contact with the children and prohibiting the mother from allowing the father to have contact with the children and,(ii) prohibiting the mother from having any verbal or personal contact or contact by correspondence with the father, and the father from having any form of contact with the mother.
The local authority appealed against the orders and sought an interim care order on the grounds that (1) the justices had erred in law when they had made the order preventing the parents from having contact with each other as contact between adults was not a step which could be taken by a parent in meeting his responsibilities towards his child and thus fell outside the terms of section 8(1) of the Children Act 1989;(2) there had been no application for a section 8 order and before exercising powers under section 10(1) (b ) of the Act of 1989 the justices should have invited the parties to make representations, and the failure to do so was a material irregularity;(3) the justices, having found as a fact that the parents had been in continuous contact and there were grounds for believing that the children would suffer harm, had been plainly wrong in refusing to make the interim care order in respect of both children in that they had failed to have regard to the facts that both parents had colluded over injuries to D., the mother had lied when she had stated that there had been no contact with the father, the father had been in breach of a bail order there had been a violent incident on 23 November 1991 which had involved both parents, the mother had refused to be accommodated with the children in a mother and baby home, and the mother had changed her mind about the adoption of R.; and (4) in all the circumstances the order which would have been in the best interests of the children and which the justices should have made was an interim care order.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Richard Clough for the local authority.
Dorian Day for the mother.
Jean McCreath for the father.
Karen Davies, solicitor, for the guardian ad litem.
Hollings J. This is an appeal against the order of the Croydon Family Proceedings Court made on 20 December 1991 in respect of two children of unmarried parents, D., a boy born on 20 February 1990, now aged two, and R., a boy born on 12 October 1991.
The local authority, the Croydon London Borough Council, had applied to the justices in circumstances to which I will refer for an interim care order.
In the result the justices on the second day of the hearing, the evidence having been taken the day before and the justices having indicated that they had reached a decision but would give their reasons the next day, made not an interim care order but two prohibited steps orders.
The first order was one prohibiting the father from having any contact with the children and prohibiting the mother from allowing him to have contact with the children.
There is no criticism as regards its validity in law.
The second prohibited steps order prevented the mother from having any verbal or personal contact or contact by correspondence with the father and in the same way prohibited the father from having any form of contact with the mother.
The justices said that they did this, rather than making an interim care order, to ensure the bonding of the children with their mother for their long term benefit.
That is expressed in the memorandum of their reasons.
Those orders were to remain in force until the next hearing on 31 January 1992.
The local authority now appeals from the making of those prohibitive steps orders on a number of grounds and seeks an order from this court by allowing the appeal and granting an interim care order under which the local authority would intend to keep the mother and children together and have them placed, as indeed they are now, at a mother and baby home.
The facts need to be set out, and I am guided in setting out these facts by the useful chronology with which I have been provided.
There was at an early stage evidence that D. had been subjected to violent injury.
On 11 May 1991 he was taken to hospital suffering from 18 bruises and a bite mark.
This was supplemented by evidence of anonymous calls by neighbours alleging violence in the family home.
There was a case conference on 15 May 1991.
A place of safety order was obtained and D. was put on a child protection register.
This, of course, was before R. was born.
Care proceedings were started in the juvenile court and placement at a Dr. Barnardo's establishment was started.
In respect of the injuries to D. the father was arrested and remanded in custody.
On 17 July 1991 D. began staying access with his mother, and the mother was telling the social services and the guardian ad litem who had been appointed in the juvenile court proceedings that her relationship with the father was over.
It was intended that there should be assessment of the mother, but by August 1991 she had missed three assessment appointments.
On 15 August 1991 when she visited social services with D., it was found that he had two scratches on his cheek and a bruise and the mother would not say how those were caused.
On 12 September 1991 there was a hearing of the care proceedings, a supervision order was made in respect of D. and he was returned to the mother.
On 27 September 1991 the father was released on bail on condition that he did not go, first of all, within half a mile of, then, later, to the mother's address.
On 12 October 1991 R. was born.
On 23 November 1991 there was a violent incident which was investigated by the police in the flat below the mother's flat, which involved the father and other people.
The father received stab wounds.
The father was in breach of bail conditions.
On 13 December 1991 emergency protection orders were made and the children were placed with foster parents.
On 16 December 1991 the father pleaded guilty to assault occasioning actual bodily harm to D. and he was remanded on bail until 24 January 1992 for sentence.
A psychiatric report was ordered.
Today he was placed on probation for two years.
On 19 December 1991 the local authority made their application for an interim care order and I have said what the order was.
After the hearing the mother asked the local authority to accommodate the two boys for the time being and that was done by placement in foster care.
Early this week the boys were placed with the mother in the mother and baby home with the intention of rehabilitation to the mother.
What the local authority wished to do under the interim care order was assess the mother with these children and protect the children so far as the father was concerned.
The notice of appeal sets out a number of grounds, but before dealing with the appeal on the merits, I was asked at the outset to rule on what the nature of an appeal from the justices under the Children Act 1989 is, whether it is an appeal in which fresh evidence could be called, that is a full rehearing in the sense that the Crown Court could hear appeals from the juvenile court under the old law.
I was referred to R.S.C., Ord. 55, r. 3 which refers to the appeal being by way of rehearing, but that of course is the same phrase as is used in R.S.C., Ord. 59 which states that appeals to the Court of Appeal are by way of rehearing and, to put it shortly, without quoting from the note to that rule, it is plain that all that means is that the Court of Appeal has a wide ranging power to consider and deal with the way in which the court below came to its decision but it is not empowered to hear evidence, except in certain exceptional circumstances: see, too,Rayden and Jackson on Divorce and Family Matters , 16th ed. (1991), p. 1388, para. 49.2.
Likewise therefore this appeal is not one which entitles any party to call evidence unless there are exceptional circumstances and leave is given: see M. v. M. (Minors: Custody Appeal)[1987]1 W.L.R. 404.
Also the appeal is governed by the principles set out by the House of Lords in G. v. G. (Minors: Custody Appeal)[1985]1 W.L.R. 647.
The decision in G. v. G. is of course now well known, but I reiterate it, since the matter has been raised in this case, that is that even if the appellate court would itself have preferred a different conclusion it must leave the decision of first instance undisturbed unless it could say the decision was wrong.
The headnote accurately summarises the effect of the speeches in the House of Lords.
The upshot of it is that the appellate court, where the matter is one of discretion, as this is of course, will not interfere with the discretion of the court below unless it considers that the court was plainly wrong or it has erred in principle, that it has taken into account something it should not have done or has failed to take into account something it should have done, and on that narrow basis I must proceed with this appeal.
I bear in mind also that this is an interim matter and interim orders are not lightly interfered with because of the temporary nature of those orders and because so often the evidence is provisional.
The notice of appeal sets out a number of grounds.
The first is that in making a prohibited steps order prohibiting the parents from having any contact with each other the justices erred in law as contact between adults is not a step which could be taken by a parent in meeting a parent's responsibility for a child and thus falls outside the terms of section 8(1) of the Children Act 1989, by which a prohibited steps order means an order that no step which could be taken by a parent in meeting his parental responsibility for a child and which is of a kind specified in the order shall be taken by any person without the consent of the court.
Indeed, it is conceded by the representatives of the parties to this appeal that an order made in the terms made by the justices was not open to them in as much as it did not impinge upon the parental responsibility of the parent concerned and impinged only upon contact between the parents themselves.
To that extent that part of the order is plainly wrong and must be set aside.
Of course, it is part and parcel of the whole decision of the justices.
They considered that order necessary in conjunction with the second part of their order relating to contact by the father with the children.
To that extent it could well be said, and indeed I do find and hold, that the effectiveness of the first part of the order takes away the substance, as it were, of the whole order.
For that reason alone I feel able to say that the decision of the justices was wrong and that therefore this court is able to substitute its own discretion.
That is a ground which has not been urged upon me by counsel in this case and I do not rely upon that ground only in dealing with this matter.
Before I go on to deal with the other submissions which have been made, particularly those by Mr. Clough, who appears for the local authority, to support his submission that the order was wrong on the merits, there is one further aspect of the justices' order and that is the second ground of appeal where it is said that the justices ought to have given the parties the opportunity of addressing them on the question as to whether prohibited steps orders rather than an interim care order, or rather than no order at all, should or could be made.
On the second day of the hearing when the reasons were given the parties' legal representatives were there with the exception of the representative of the guardian ad litem.
Of course, if all had been there the second day the justices could well, and should in my judgment, have invited them to consider the intention that they then had to substitute prohibited steps orders for the sought after care order.
It might have been said that since one representative was absent they could not do anything about it, but the fact of the matter is they plainly had come to their decision the day before.
They should then have told the representatives, all of whom were present the day before, what they intended to do.
Whether they would have been swayed by representations on behalf of any of the parties one knows not, but it is a defect in the proceedings which strengthens the application on the part of the local authority for reconsideration of the justices' decision.
I now turn to the merits.
As I have indicated earlier in this judgment, the justices made these orders expressly to ensure the bonding of the children with their mother for their long term benefit.
It is submitted that there was no need to make a different order from an interim care order in order to achieve that end, because the stated intention of the local authority was to maintain the relationship between the mother and the children, as has been evidenced by what has happened since, and that the interim care order in itself would not have affected bonding, indeed the whole of the exercise was to maintain the bonding of the children with the mother.
That, it is admitted, was a misunderstanding, if not more, on the part of the justices.
It is further urged upon me that the justices, having found as a fact that the parents had been in continuous contact with each other, and the justices being satisfied that there were grounds for believing that both the children were likely to suffer significant harm, which was a specific finding that they made, they were plainly wrong in refusing to make an interim order in that they first of all failed to have regard to the fact that the parents had colluded over the cause of D.'s injuries, and there was evidence to that effect; secondly, that the mother had lied to social services, Dr. Barnardo's and the guardian about having had at the relevant times no contact with the father — and that is indeed what the mother has done, she has lied; and, thirdly, that the father had been in breach of a term of the bail conditions which had been imposed upon him, not only on 23 December 1991 but ever since his release in as much as he had visited and contacted the mother.
They failed also, it is said, to have regard to the violent incident on 23 November 1991 when violence was used and also failed to have regard to the fact that the mother had refused an offer to be accommodated with her children in the foster home.
There is a further submission that they failed to have regard to the mother changing her mind about having R. adopted.
That ground has not been strongly urged and I leave it out of account, but so far as the other grounds are concerned I am satisfied that there is validity in that criticism and those are matters which ought to have been taken into account and, being matters which are relevant, in my judgment, that is a reason why this appellate court can and should intervene.
The mother through her counsel has sought to support the decision of the justices except in so far as it is conceded that the prohibited steps order in relation to the two adults was wrong, and likewise although in the court below the guardian ad litem had reluctantly supported the interim care order, the guardian ad litem today seeks to uphold the justices' decision.
The father, for reasons put forward by Miss McCreath connected with his own situation and his wish to as it were be forgiven for his past behaviour, and in the hopes of showing that he can in the future notwithstanding his past behaviour be contemplated as somebody to play a röle in the life of his children, supports the making of an interim care order or does not oppose it because he acknowledges that there should be supervision by the plaintiffs.
For all those reasons I am satisfied that although the justices plainly were very concerned and believed that this was the right course to take, I do not think they were justified in refusing the local authority's application for an interim care order.
An interim care order gives more flexibility to the plaintiffs as well as the other advantages of a care order and although, as I said at the outset, one rarely interferes with an interim order, in the present case I am less disinclined to interfere because of the initial invalidity of part of the order made by the justices.
For those reasons I allow the appeal and I substitute an interim care order.
Appeal allowed.
Legal aid taxation.
Solicitors: Principal Solicitor, Croydon London Borough Council; Barnes Harrild & Dyer, Croydon; Atkins Hope; Richard White & Michael Sherwin, Croydon.