

[FAMILY DIVISION: PLYMOUTH]
DEVON COUNTY COUNCIL v. S. AND OTHERS
1992 March 4
Thorpe J.
Children — Care proceedings — Family proceedings court — Local authority seeking care order in terms agreed by all parties — Justices conducting full hearing — Justices making order in different terms from those agreed — Whether full hearing appropriate — Whether parties entitled to be heard on proposed variations of agreed order
The parents of a girl born in 1986 had lived together since 1982.
In 1991 the girl made allegations that her father had abused her sexually.
The local authority obtained an emergency protection order and placed the girl with foster parents.
The local authority applied for an interim care order under section 31 of the Children Act 1989 for the girl to continue in foster care, having reasonable contact with her mother but no contact with her father.
All the parties accepted that the proposed order was in the girl's best interests.
The justices heard oral evidence and, after a hearing lasting nearly three hours, made the agreed order.
On the application for a full care order the local authority proposed, again with the agreement of all parties, to continue the interim arrangements, with a view to exploring the possibility of placing the girl with her older half-sister as carer in due course.
The justices heard oral evidence, and after a hearing lasting more than six hours they deferred the statement of their decision and reasons for 10 days.
On the resumed hearing the justices made an order in terms different from those agreed in that the girl's contact with her older half-sister was to be supervised and the prohibition of contact between the girl and her father was expressed to continue until after the review by the local authority six months later.
On appeal by the local authority:—
Held , allowing the appeal, that although justices had an overriding duty to investigate the proposals advanced by the parties notwithstanding that they had been fully agreed, the profundity of that investigation should reflect the reality that there was consensus between the parties, particularly when one party was a local authority with statutory duties and another the child's guardian ad litem, and any period during which justices reserved their decision or reasoned judgment should be kept to a minimum; that if justices, having fulfilled their duty to make an independent investigation of terms proposed by consent, came to the conclusion that other terms should be imposed on the parties, they should indicate the terms they were minded to impose and give the parties an opportunity to make submissions on them; and that, in all the circumstances, the order should be varied to provide that there would be no contact with the father on the basis that the local authority would continue to perform its statutory duty to review each six months and that the half-sister would be afforded reasonable contact (post, pp. 277B–F, 278C–D).
Per curiam.
In proceedings before the family proceedings court, where the parties agree on the order which they seek, it would be of assistance to the court to submit a proposed draft order.
That would have the advantages of specifying with precision what the parties have agreed, thus avoiding misunderstanding, and of enabling the justices to define with greater precision points at which they may have tentatively determined to depart from the agreed proposals (post, pp. 277H — 278B).
No cases are referred to in the judgment or were cited in argument.
APPEAL from Exeter Family Proceedings Court.
The local authority, Devon County Council, applied to Exeter Family Proceedings Court for a care order under section 31 of the Children Act 1989 in respect of a girl born on 26 November 1986.
The girl's parents and guardian ad litem agreed to the proposed order, which included a term that the girl should have no contact with her father, and which envisaged the possibility of placing the girl with her older half-sister as her full-time carer.
On 3 February 1992 the justices made an order containing terms (1) that there should be no contact between the father and the girl until after the review by the local authority in six months time;(2) that the mother should have reasonable supervised contact with the girl; and (3) that there should be supervised contact between the girl and her older half-sister.
By their reasons the justices stated that the girl would continue to be liable to sexual abuse if allowed to return to her family as the mother refused to recognise the responsibility of the father for that abuse and that the mother would not protect the girl from the father on whom the mother was emotionally dependent; that they had considered that the girl might be cared for by her half-sister but had concluded that it would be difficult to prevent contact between the girl and her father; that they had formed the view that contact between the girl and her father would be harmful at the present time and therefore the local authority should refuse such contact until the review by the local authority in six months time; and that there should be supervised reasonable contact between the girl and her mother and between the girl and her half-sister.
By a notice of motion dated 14 February 1992 the local authority appealed against those parts of the order which directed that there should be no contact between the father and the girl until after the local authority review and that there should be supervised contact between the girl and her half-sister, on the grounds that (1) the justices had been wrong in law in failing to invite the parties to comment on the agreed proposals for contact;(2) the justices had been wrong in law in failing to indicate to the parties the nature of the orders for contact which they proposed to make, thereby depriving the parties of the opportunity to make submissions relating to those proposals;(3) the justices had wrongly exercised their discretion in authorising the local authority to refuse contact to the girl by the father for only six months when they had found as a fact, inter alia, that the father had abused the girl over a period of at least 18 months;(4) the justices had been wrong to impose the condition of supervision on contact between the girl and her half-sister when there had been no application for such contact to be supervised, the evidence was that the half-sister had been enjoying unsupervised contact and that there was no evidence that there was any risk of the girl coming into contact with her father while having contact with her half-sister, and the justices had heard evidence that the local authority were considering placing the girl with her half-sister and by their order they had precluded the local authority from making such a placement and had fettered the discretion of the local authority; and (5) the order was therefore contrary to the girl's best interests.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
David Tyzack for the local authority.
Rebecca Ogle for the mother.
P. C. Maxlow-Tomlinson, solicitor, for the father.
Kay Firth-Butterfield, solicitor, for the guardian ad litem.
THORPE J. This is an appeal brought by the local authority against the decision of the justices sitting at Exeter Family Proceedings Court on 3 February 1992.
The history of the litigation is helpfully summarised in a chronology submitted by Mr. Tyzack for the local authority, Devon County Council.
In about 1982 mother and father commenced cohabitation.
The family then included mother's two sons by a previous marriage.
On 26 November 1986 their only child was born, a daughter, T., the subject of these proceedings.
In August 1991 she disclosed to her older half-sister that she had been sexually abused by her father.
Her half-sister took her to the police.
The appropriate procedures for investigation were followed and the opinion of the consultant paediatrician who examined her was that she had been chronically abused sexually.
The management decision was that she should return home, but on condition that father moved out and had no further contact with her.
In November 1991 the Social Services Department of the local authority had reason to believe that this condition was being repeatedly and grossly breached.
Accordingly, an emergency protection order was obtained and T. was removed from her mother's care and placed with foster parents.
A statutory meeting was convened on 26 November 1991 and an application for an interim care order under section 31 of the Children Act 1989 was brought before the justices on 29 November 1991.
The management that the local authority proposed was straightforward.
They wanted an interim care order.
They wanted to continue the foster placement.
They proposed that mother should have reasonable contact and that father should have no contact.
That management proposal was accepted by all members of the family as well as the guardian ad litem and the justices were effectively being asked to make a straightforward interim order by consent.
Nonetheless, the justices determined that they would hear oral evidence and the hearing lasted for 2¾ hours.
At its conclusion they made the order that all parties accepted to be the appropriate order.
The hearing of the application for a full care order was listed for 22 January 1992.
There had been no significant change in the interim nor any change in the local authority's proposed future management.
They simply wanted to convert the interim care order into a substantive care order.
The terms of the proposed order were agreed between all parties.
There was no issue in dispute for the justices to determine.
All parties who are represented before me were represented before the justices.
Once again the justices determined to hear oral evidence.
The hearing commenced at 10 a.m. and continued until 5 p.m. with an adjournment of one hour for lunch.
Thus, six hours were devoted to the investigation of a situation which was fully agreed.
At 5 o'clock the justices indicated that they were retiring to consider their conclusions and to draft the reasons that they intended to state to support those conclusions.
After three quarters of an hour the advocates were informed that they had decided to defer any statement of their reasons and their conclusion as to the appropriate orders for a period of approximately 10 days until 3 February 1992.
The advocates were informed that the justices would meet at 10 a.m. on that day to continue their deliberations and their drafting, that the exercise would be completed by 12 noon, and that the advocates should attend at that later hour to receive the court's judgment.
In the event the justices had not completed their task by 12 noon and it was at 12.45 p.m. that they returned to court to state their reasons.
I should like to pay tribute to the care with which the justices record the family history and the chronology.
They also carefully record their conclusions.
They support their conclusions with their reasoning and set out their order.
No doubt to the consternation of the parties and their representatives the order announced by the bench was substantially different from the order that they had been invited to make by the consenting parties.
Of those parties perhaps the one most aggrieved by the determination was the local authority and accordingly on 14 February 1992 they issued the notice of motion which brings the appeal into this court today.
There are two complaints advanced by the local authority.
The more substantial is that the justices directed that T.'s contact with her older half-sister should be supervised.
That had never been mooted at any previous stage and ran completely counter to the management plan which was to explore the possibility of placing T. with her older half-sister as her full-time carer.
Obviously such a plan required exploration and the local authority necessarily required flexibility to place T. with her older sister for trial periods of staying contact before reaching any conclusion as to whether she was indeed a potential permanent carer.
That possibility has been given greater prominence by subsequent development since T.'s mother has recently left this area and joined T.'s father in his new life in another county.
The second complaint made by the local authority is that the justices specifically said by paragraph (1) of their contact order that there should be no contact between T. and her father until after the local authority review in six months' time.
Such an expressed provision carries the inference that contact may well become appropriate after the six-month interval and was quite contrary to the conclusion of the local authority that contact between T. and her father was quite inappropriate in any  circumstances presently foreseeable.
The first thing to be said in relation to the merits of the appeal is that none of the parties to the appeal, all represented here today, opposes it.
I have nonetheless determined to deliver a short judgment because it seems to me that there are lessons to be learned from this case which, I am told by Mr. Tyzak, is the first case to come before this particular bench under the Children Act 1989.
I, accordingly, would offer the following observations.
First, and foremost, whilst undoubtedly there is an overriding duty in the court to investigate the proposals advanced by the parties, even when those proposals are fully agreed, the profundity of that investigation must reflect the reality that there is consensus amongst the parties to the litigation, particularly when the parties include a public authority with statutory duties and a guardian ad litem on behalf of the child.
It seems to me quite inappropriate that 2¾ hours of investigation and oral evidence should have been devoted to the hearing of the interim application on 29 November 1991.
It seems to me equally, if not more, inappropriate that the court should have devoted six hours to the investigation of the application for the full order including oral evidence.
I appreciate that for justices the obligation to provide a reasoned judgment at the conclusion of an application under the Children Act 1989 is one that no doubt presents all sorts of practical difficulties, but inevitably the period during which they reserve should be kept to the minimum in accordance with the whole philosophy of the Act which seeks to abridge time for procedural steps.
It seems to me to magnify the difficulty of that particular operation if it has to be conducted under any sort of time pressure which the arrangements for the hearing on 3 February 1992 seemed to entail.
The second and very obvious point that needs to be stated is that if the justices, having fulfilled their duty to make independent investigation of the terms proposed by consent, reach the initial conclusion that those terms are in some respect deficient then before imposing other terms on the parties they must indicate the nature of their departure and give all the parties a fair opportunity to make submissions on their tentative conclusion.
In extension of that consideration in this particular case it is to be noted that the imposition of the condition for supervision on T.'s half-sister's access was restrictive of a freedom previously enjoyed.
She was not a party to the proceedings and she was not represented before the court.
Finally, I would like to consider the difference of practice on the presentation of agreed terms to this court and to the family proceedings court.
In this court it is the invariable practice for the advocates to endeavour to reduce the agreed terms to a draft order before laying the compromise before the court for consideration.
It seems to me that there are very great strengths in that practice.
It is commonplace for what seems to be a general accord to disintegrate once the drafting exercise is attempted for the simple reasons that the specific expression of detailed terms may reveal misunderstandings between the parties or areas of previously unexplored contention.
If the terms survive the drafting process the resultant consent order will be not only clear, but specific and any party binding him or herself to it will know precisely what has been accepted and what is the commitment.
Apparently, it has never been the practice to submit to justices a proposed draft order reflecting the terms that have been agreed between the parties.
I consider that it could only be of assistance to them if they had that foundation with which to commence their overview of the requirements of the case and the discharge of their statutory duty under the Children Act 1989.
Obviously nothing in what the parties may write binds them and nothing in what the parties write confines the boundary of their independent review.
But it seems to me to have the twofold advantages of first specifying with precision what it is that the parties have agreed, thus avoiding the possibility of misunderstanding or mistake, and, secondly, it enables the justices to define with greater precision points at which they may tentatively determine to depart from the agreed package.
That should concentrate their mind on the need to give any affected party the opportunity to make submission on any such departure and also to facilitate the communication of the nature of the departure to the affected party.
Returning to this appeal it must, of course, be allowed.
In substitution for the contact order there will be:
‘(1) There will be no contact between the father and T. on the basis that the local authority will continue to perform its statutory duty to review each six months.
(2) Mother to be afforded reasonable supervised contact.
(3) Half-sister to be afforded reasonable contact.
Otherwise the justices' order stands.
Appeal allowed.
No order for costs save legal aid taxation.
Solicitors: Sharpe Pritchard for William Burkinshaw, County Solicitor, Exeter; J. & S. P. Pope, Exeter; Stones, Exeter; Michelmore Davies & Bellamy, Sidmouth