

[CHANCERY DIVISION]DEANPLAN LTD. v. MAHMOUD and Another [1987 D. No. 1732]1991 Dec. 16, 18, 19, 20;
1992 Feb. 17
Judge Paul Baker Q.C.
sitting as a High Court judge
Landlord and Tenant — Covenant — Release by accord and satisfaction — Assignees covenanting directly with landlord to perform covenants — Landlord releasing defaulting occupying assignee from all liabilities in return for immediate surrender of lease and goods — Whether release by accord and satisfaction — Whether operating as release of intermediate assignee from obligations under direct covenant
By a lease dated 19 May 1972, the plaintiff landlord demised factory premises for a term of 20 years.
The lease contained the normal covenant for payment of rent and the usual qualified covenant against assignment, with a proviso that every assignment should contain a covenant by the assignee directly with the landlord to observe and perform the covenants and conditions of the lease.
In February 1974 the original lessee assigned the lease to the second defendant, a company, which duly entered into the required covenant directly with the landlord.
In 1986 the landlord granted permission for the defendant company to assign to M., the first defendant, who likewise covenanted directly with the landlord to pay the rent and observe the other covenants, and an assignment was entered into whereby the lease was assigned to M. for the residue of the term.
M. soon fell into arrears with the rent.
The landlord, after obtaining judgment in the county court for part of the rent owed, later took out a distress warrant for arrears said to amount to £17,866, and the bailiffs entered the premises and took walking possession.
Negotiations followed as a result of which M. signed a document, whereby he surrendered the lease in consideration of the landlord accepting goods, listed in an inventory made by the bailiffs, ‘in full and final settlement of all claims and demands against me under the terms of the lease.’
The landlord ratified the document and accepted the goods, which were subsequently sold for £309, and the surrender of the lease.
M. duly gave up possession.
On the landlord's action to recover the balance of the rent still unpaid from the defendant company:—
Held , dismissing the action, that a release by accord and satisfaction of one covenantor operated as a release of all other covenantors undertaking the same obligation; that the landlord's acceptance of the immediate surrender of the lease and the goods listed in satisfaction for releasing M. from all his liabilities under the lease was clearly a release by accord and satisfaction; that there were no words of reservation or circumstances rebutting that construction; and that the landlord had therefore released not merely M. but also the defendant company, as an intermediate assignee who had undertaken the same obligation (post, pp. 483B–H, 484C).
Nicholson v. Revill (1836) 4 Ad. & E. 675 and In re E.W.A. (A Debtor)[1901]2 K.B.
642, C.A. applied.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Allied London Investments Ltd. v. Hambro Life Assurance Ltd. (1983) 269 E.G. 41;[1985]1 E.G.L.R. 45, C.A.
Baynton v. Morgan (1888) 21 Q.B.D. 101, D.C.;(1888) 22 Q.B.D. 74, C.A.
E.W.A. (A Debtor), In re [1901]2 K.B.
642, C.A.
Good, Ex parte, In re Armitage (1877) 5 Ch.D. 46, C.A.
House Property and Investment Co.
Ltd. v. Bernardout [1948]1 K.B.
314;[1947]2 All E.R.
753
Matthey v. Curling [1922]2 A.C. 180, C.A. and H.L. (E.)
Nicholson v. Revill (1836) 4 Ad. & E. 675
North v. Wakefield (1849) 13 Q.B.
536
Selous Street Properties Ltd. v. Oronel Fabrics Ltd. (1984) 270 E.G. 643
Warnford Investments Ltd. v. Duckworth [1979]Ch. 127;[1978]2 W.L.R. 741;[1978]2 All E.R.
517
Watters v. Smith (1831) 2 B. & Ad. 889
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
British Russian Gazette and Trade Outlook Ltd. v. Associated Newspapers Ltd. [1933]2 K.B.
616, C.A.
Cutler v. McPhail [1962]2 Q.B.
292;[1962]2 W.L.R. 1135;[1962]2 All E.R.
474
Jenkins v. Jenkins [1928]2 K.B.
501, D.C.
Oriental Financial Corporation v. Overend, Gurney & Co. (1871) L.R. 7 Ch.App. 142
Richmond v. Savill [1926]2 K.B.
530, C.A.
Action
On 7 July 1987 the plaintiff, Deanplan Ltd., issued a writ and statement of claim, claiming from the first defendant, Mr. Salah Mahmoud, and/or alternatively from the second defendant, C.T.
(London) Ltd., the sum of £11,566 as arrears of rent and interest thereon.
On 16 November 1987 solicitors acting for the first defendant wrote saying that he hoped to sell the property, and the proceedings were adjourned generally.
On 26 February 1988 the plaintiff took out a distress warrant in respect of outstanding rent, then said to amount to £17,866, and on 2 March 1988 bailiffs attended to execute the warrant.
On 2 March 1988 the first defendant surrendered the lease in consideration of the plaintiff accepting goods listed in an inventory, which were later sold for £309, in full and final settlement of all claims and demands against him under the lease.
By a consent order dated 1 July 1988 the proceedings against the second defendant were stayed, pursuant to an agreement between the plaintiff and the second defendant, entered into by the second defendant in ignorance of the plaintiff's agreement with the first defendant, under which the second defendant paid the plaintiff £18,000 and costs.
By an order dated 26 January 1989, the stay on proceedings against the second defendant was lifted, and on 16 December 1991, on a counterclaim by the second defendant, the plaintiff agreed to the rescission of the agreement and to repayment of the £18,000, leaving as the sole issue the question whether the agreement of 2 March 1988 between the plaintiff and the first defendant was a defence to the plaintiff's claim against the second defendant.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Constance Whippman for the plaintiff landlord.
Nicholas Harrison for the second defendant.
17 February 1992.
Judge Paul Baker Q.C.
read the following judgment.
The issue in this case is whether an original lessee, or an intermediate assignee of a lease, who has given a direct covenant to pay the rent and observe the covenants, is released from liability following an agreement between the lessor and the occupying assignee of the lease under which the lessor takes a surrender of the lease and some of the assignee's goods in return for releasing the assignee from all claims under the lease?
In short, does the release by accord and satisfaction of one covenantor release other covenantors undertaking the same obligation?
The issue would appear to be a novel one so far as the researches of counsel go.
Before addressing it, I must set out the facts, which are not in dispute to any significant degree.
By a lease dated 19 May 1972 and made between the plaintiff landlord, Deanplan Ltd., and C.W.C. Tempest Ltd.
(‘Tempest’) and some sureties, the landlord demised a factory unit on its industrial estate, known as Eley's Estate, Eley Road, Enfield, to Tempest for a term of 20 years from 25 March 1972 at a rent of £3,850 for the first five years, with reviews at five-yearly intervals thereafter.
There were certain additional rents for insuring and servicing the common parts.
The lease contained the normal covenants for the payment of rent, full repairing covenants, a user covenant confined to the business of ‘home improvement contractors,’ and the usual qualified covenant against assignment, to which is appended the following proviso:
‘Provided always that every assignment or underlease or tenancy of any kind relating to the premises shall if required by the landlord contain a covenant by the assignee underlessee or tenant and the lessee or tenant as the case may be directly with the landlord to observe and perform the covenants and conditions in this lease contained and covenants directly with the landlord in the terms of sub-clauses (A) and (B) hereof and covenants that any sub-underleases whether mediate or immediate shall contain covenants with the landlord in the terms of such sub-clauses.
The lease contained the usual proviso for forfeiture for non-payment of rent and failure to perform other covenants and concluded with a covenant by the sureties in the normal form.
By a licence made on 18 February 1974 between the landlord of the first part and Tempest of the second and the second defendant, C.T.
London Ltd.
(‘C.T.’),
of the third part, the landlord granted its licence to assign the lease to C.T.
and consented to the user being changed to that of the business of ‘light engineering works.’
C.T.
covenanted with the landlord that:
‘as from the date when the tenant's estate and interest in the lease shall be assigned to it pursuant to the licence hereinbefore contained and thenceforth during the residue of the term granted by the lease the assignee will pay the rent thereby reserved and observe and perform the covenants and conditions on the part of the lessee therein contained and in particular without prejudice to the foregoing the assignee will not assign or transfer underlet or part with possession of the premises demised by the lease without the consent in writing of the landlord for that purpose had and obtained.
On the same day, 18 February 1974, the lease was assigned by Tempest to C.T.
in consideration of the sum of £8,000 paid by C.T.
to Tempest.
By a licence made on 8 January 1986 between the landlord and C.T.
and Mr. Salah Mahmoud, the first defendant, the landlord granted its licence to assign the lease to Mr. Mahmoud and Mr. Mahmoud covenanted with the landlord to pay the rent and observe the covenants during the residue of the term.
On the same day, an assignment was entered into between C.T.
and Mr. Mahmoud, and the first clause of that assignment is:
‘In consideration of the sum of £4,000 paid by the vendor to the purchaser’— that is by C.T.
to Mahmoud —‘the vendor as beneficial owner hereby assigns unto the purchaser the property…to hold…for all the residue now unexpired of the term created by the lease…
Going down to clause 3:
‘The purchaser hereby covenants with the vendor by way of indemnity only that the purchaser and the persons deriving title under him will henceforth and at all times duly pay all rents becoming due under the lease and observe and perform all covenants agreements and conditions therein contained on the part of the tenant or persons deriving title under it to be observed and performed and also will at all times keep the vendor its successors in title and assigns effectively indemnified against all proceedings costs claims expenses and liabilities in respect thereof.
So, Mr. Mahmoud was paid £4,000 to take the lease.
At the date of this assignment, the annual rent payable under the lease was £9,800.
The rent as from 25 March 1987, the final review date, was agreed between the landlord and Mr. Mahmoud at £12,600.
Mr. Mahmoud was not a satisfactory tenant and soon fell into arrears with the rent.
The rent from June 1986, just six months after taking over, was not paid on time.
On 29 January 1987 the landlord recovered judgment in the Romford County Court for part of the outstanding rent.
Matters did not improve, so on 7 July 1987 the present action was commenced, by which time the arrears amounted to £11,566.
The claim was simply for arrears of rent and interest.
There was no claim for possession pursuant to the proviso for forfeiture.
C.T.
was joined as second defendant, but the statement of claim disclosed no cause of action against C.T., as it failed to plead the covenant contained in the licence of 18 February 1974.
C.T.
was not the original lessee, so was not liable under the covenant to pay rent in the lease itself after assigning over.
A summons under R.S.C., Ord. 14 was due to be heard on 23 November 1987.
On 16 November Mr. Mahmoud through his solicitors stated that he was selling the property and
‘it is hoped that contracts will be exchanged prior to[23 November 1987].
If so, our client states that all arrears of rent will be paid when the sale takes effect which we understand will be very shortly.
In consequence, with consent of all parties the Order 14 summons was adjourned generally.
Nothing came of the proposed sale.
In January 1988, the landlord wished to gain access to allow its insurers to inspect and affix sprinklers.
Mr. Mahmoud made difficulties about this, whereupon the landlord demanded entry under the clause allowing entry to view the condition of the premises.
There was no response to this, nor was there any payment of rent or news of any proposed assignment.
On 26 February 1988 the landlord took out a distress warrant in respect of the outstanding rent, then said to amount to £17,866.
On 2 March 1988 two bailiffs attended to execute the warrant.
According to Mr. Mahmoud, he admitted them because they pretended to have come on behalf of the insurers.
Be that as it may, they gained access and proceeded to make an inventory of the goods there, mostly supplies of cloth, particularly linings.
Mr. Joseph Kasner, a director of the landlord, who later saw the interior of the premises, says that they were four-fifths empty, the goods only occupying about one-fifth of the premises.
He estimated the goods to be worth about £3,000.
Mr. Mahmoud thought they were worth something like £60,000, although he admitted that to realise that sum would require careful and skilled marketing.
When half of the goods were subsequently put up for sale by auction, they realised £309.
That, however, is to anticipate.
On the day that the bailiffs entered and took walking possession, 2 March 1988, there ensued negotiations by telephone between Mr. Mendelson, the landlord's solicitor, and Mr. Mahmoud, whose proposals and comments were relayed to Mr. Mendelson by one of the bailiffs.
The upshot was a written document, signed by Mr. Mahmoud and, as I understand it, by the other bailiff.
It is addressed to the landlord and dated 2 March 1988, and it reads:
‘Dear Sirs, Re: Factory premises at Eley's Estate, Eley Road, Edmonton, London.
I hereby surrender the lease of the above premises dated 19 May 1972 in consideration of you accepting the goods set out in the inventory below in full and final settlement of all claims and demands against me under the terms of the said lease and specified in the notice of distress dated 2 March 1988.
That is signed by Mr. Mahmoud and a Mr. D. J. Bennett.
The inventory consists of three pages listing items of cloth.
The document was accepted and ratified by the landlord, as one can see from paragraph 6 of the reply which states:
‘The plaintiff admits for the purposes of this action, that on 2 March 1988 it agreed to accept a surrender of the lease from the first defendant and that by its agents G. Moore, certified bailiffs, and as advised by the third party it recorded this surrender in a memorandum of 2 March 1988.
Mr. Kasner's explanation in his evidence to me for thus acting and accepting the proposal was the following:
‘I had a phone call from Mr. Mendelson.’— the solicitor —‘He asked me if I would agree to accept half of the stock of Mr. Mahmoud on condition that I would not go to court against him.
I said I agreed.
I didn't care very much whether it was a half or a seventh.
The goods were of no value to me.
I wanted to show him I wanted the premises.
If I did not take the goods out, he would stay there.
I said I would not take any further proceedings.
I did not intend to discharge C.T.
I gave the solicitors instructions to pursue C.T.
after the surrender.
I acted in good faith.
In consequence of the agreement, Mr. Mahmoud gave up possession to the landlord.
Within a day or so the goods had been divided between the landlord and Mahmoud and removed from the premises.
C.T.
had no part in these negotiations and did not immediately become aware of their outcome.
On 22 April 1988 the landlord, through its solicitors, demanded payment of the balance of the rent, giving credit for the £309.
In their letter, the solicitors did not disclose that there had been a release of all claims against Mr. Mahmoud.
On the basis of that letter, C.T.
came to a compromise with the landlord by which they paid £18,000.
They then sought to recover this sum and costs from Mr. Mahmoud under the covenant for indemnity contained in the assignment of 8 January 1986.
Thereupon, they were informed of the agreement of 2 March 1988.
In these proceedings, C.T.
counterclaimed for a rescission of the compromise and repayment of the £18,000 on the basis of misrepresentation.
During the first day of the hearing and following amendments of the counterclaim, which I allowed, the landlord conceded that the compromise agreement between it and C.T.
should be set aside, leaving as the sole issue whether the agreement reached on 2 March 1988 between Mr. Mahmoud and the landlord, and its performance by Mr. Mahmoud, is a defence to the claim of the landlord against C.T.
Accordingly, the issue arises as stated at the outset of this judgment.
Before passing to it, I should say that I heard oral evidence from Mr. Mahmoud, called on behalf of C.T., and from Mr. Joseph Kasner, the director of the landlord.
I have already made some reference to it.
I was much more impressed by Mr. Kasner's evidence than by that of Mr. Mahmoud, but I do not think that they differ on any material point.
It is obvious that Mr. Mahmoud was impecunious.
Mrs. Whippman's submissions on behalf of the plaintiff landlord, are simple and straightforward.
In the 1974 licence to assign C.T., then itself about to take an assignment of the lease, entered into a direct covenant with the landlord to pay the rent and observe and perform the covenants and conditions on the part of the lessee contained in the lease during the residue of the term.
That amounted to a separate and independent cause of action.
The only defence available to C.T.
would be that the covenants had been performed, either by itself or some other covenantor or assignee.
If C.T.
had to perform them, it had a remedy over and against its assignee by an express covenant for indemnity contained in the assignment to Mr. Mahmoud in 1986.
She put the case as high as this: that a discharge by accord and satisfaction is not a performance, so that C.T.
would be liable for the whole of the unpaid rent.
The landlord was not bound to give credit for the value of the goods sold (£309), although it was proposing to do so.
Mr. Harrison's careful and closely argued submissions opened by pointing out what he described as the ‘commercially absurd consequences of the landlord's case.’
Suppose a landlord claims against an assignee for rent and is met by a counterclaim for damages for breach of the landlord's covenants: suppose, further, that the claim and counterclaim are compromised on the footing that neither party pays the other anything.
According to the landlord's case, so said Mr. Harrison, the landlord would be entitled to sue the original lessee for the rent, notwithstanding the compromise.
The original lessee could then recover from the assignee under the indemnity.
This possibility demands a careful analysis of the basis of the liability of the original lessee and of an intermediate assignee who enters into a direct covenant with the landlord.
For the purposes of the analysis, there is no difference between those two cases.
Mr. Harrison accepts that the liability of the original lessee and other direct covenantees is a primary liability and not a collateral or secondary liability, e.g. by way of surety.
He further accepts that the obligations of the original lessee and an assignee are not joint.
However — and this is the crucial point — while the liability of each is several only, it is not cumulative; payment by one discharges the other.
Normally, one only meets a non-cumulative several liability where it is annexed to joint liability.
But there is no reason why it should not exist independently of joint liability.
In any event, it is instructive to consider the effect of an accord and satisfaction reached with one joint and several contractor on the liability of the other.
Mr. Harrison submits that the discharge of one joint and several debtor by accord and satisfaction discharges all the others, unless there is an intention to the contrary which may require express reservation of rights against the others.
If this were not done, the benefit to the released debtor would be nullified by the operation of the indemnity covenant.
Moreover, the covenant to perform on the part of the original lessee is merely a covenant to perform in so far as another party, similarly liable, has not performed or otherwise discharged the obligation.
These arguments apply just as much where there is a non-cumulative several liability, not annexed to a joint liability, as they do where it is so annexed.
Both counsel in support of their respective submissions referred me to a number of authorities, to which I must now turn.
I will deal first with those concerned with covenants in leases and then turn to those concerned with other joint and several obligations.
I was also referred to passages in Professor Glanville Williams's monograph on Joint Obligations (1949), and to the treatment of the same subject in Chitty on Contracts 26th ed. (1989), vol. 1, paras.
1301–1314, especially para. 1307.
The first case in the former group — landlord and tenant cases — is the decision of the Court of Appeal in Baynton v. Morgan (1888) 22 Q.B.D. 74.
The plaintiff landlord had demised premises to the defendant for 21 years.
The premises had been assigned.
The assignee surrendered a small part of the premises to the landlord and then assigned the remainder of the premises to an assignee who became bankrupt, hence this claim for rent against the original lessee.
It was held that the liability of the original lessee was not extinguished by the partial surrender.
It had been argued that after assignment the liability of the original lessee became one of suretyship which was discharged following an alteration of the original contract without the consent of the guarantor.
The court rejected this argument.
The liability of the original lessee was, and remained, a primary liability.
It was not affected by the surrender of part of the premises, however large, although it would be terminated by a surrender of the whole, as then the term would have come to an end.
The surrender of part did not amount to an eviction of the assignee, it resulted from an agreement between the assignee and the landlord: one can see details of that in the report of the Divisional Court decision (1888) 21 Q.B.D. 101, 102.
By assigning, the defendant, the original lessee, had given the assignee power to assign again, which would include the power to surrender, in whole or in part, to the landlord.
There was an unresolved discussion in the case as to whether the lessee continued liable for the entire rent or merely for an apportioned part of it, which is all that the plaintiff claimed.
There was some discussion as to hardship, but that could cut both ways according to whether a large or small part was surrendered, so that hardship was not a matter which could be taken into account.
Those were the main points discussed.
There was nothing bearing on the present question, whether a release by accord and satisfaction of a claim for rent against an assignee would release the original lessee and other covenantors.
The next case,Matthey v. Curling [1922]2 A.C. 180, does contain some discussion which is material.
The decision itself is not of assistance.
During the currency of a lease a house was requisitioned by the military authorities.
Shortly before the end of the term and while it was still requisitioned it was destroyed by fire.
The issue concerned the liability of the lessee under the repairing and insuring covenants.
Defences of eviction by title paramount, frustration and impossibility of performance were raised by the lessee and rejected.
The lease had been assigned and the relationship as between the original lessee and the assignee was also discussed, though it did not play a very prominent part in the case.
However, in the judgment of Younger L.J.
in the Court of Appeal, this passage occurs, at p. 208:
‘And here it is convenient to refer pointedly to the fact that it is Mr. Matthey, the original lessee, and not the Richardson executors, his assignees, who is defendant to the action and respondent on this appeal, as well as to the further fact that it was these executors, and not Mr. Matthey, who were the real and only actors in the matters to which I have just been referring.
In my judgment, however, this is not of any importance as touching the liability of the defendant under his covenants.
The transactions just referred to of the executors, his assignees, in relation to the lease bind him, in my judgment, in a question with the plaintiff as if they had been carried out by himself.
The position of a lessee after assignment towards his lessor in relation to the covenants in his lease is concluded in this court, and I doubt not in all courts, by the decision of Baynton v. Morgan , 22 Q.B.D. 74.
The lessee is not a surety for the assignee, any more than is the assignee the agent of the lessee.
The lessee in a lease — the defendant so covenanted in this case — covenants in effect that he or his assignee will perform the covenants and observe the conditions contained in it; and when, as in the present instance, the defendant sets up no performance by himself of the covenants sued on, his defence must be either that his assignee has performed them or that his assignee is in some way as between himself and the lessor absolved from performance.
Baynton v. Morgan shows, amongst other things, that this last contention may not always be relied on by the lessee; and accordingly the position of the defendant is not put otherwise than favourably to himself if it is said that the measure of his liability here, that of a lessee after an assignment, is the performance or non-performance of the covenants in question by his assignees when he cannot and does not aver any performance by himself.
In that passage, Younger L.J.
recognises that an original lessee may have a defence if the assignee not performing has in some way been absolved from performance.
As he goes on to point out, the contention may not always be relied on.
For example, the assignee may be absolved through the operation of the bankruptcy laws: the classic case where an original lessee may have to pay.
But there may be cases where the landlord absolves his tenant from performance in ways which release the other covenantors.
Lord Atkinson in the House of Lords, at p. 235, also discusses Baynton v. Morgan , 22 Q.B.D. 74, but not in a way which assists in the present case.
Next is House Property and Investment Co.
Ltd. v. Bernardout [1948]1 K.B.
314.
The assignee of a lease fell into arrears with the rent and the landlords brought an action against him in 1941.
He counterclaimed for damages for breach of the covenant for quiet enjoyment and another claim relating to the drains.
Before the action came on for trial the defendant applied for an adjustment of his liabilities under the Liabilities (Wartime Adjustment) Act 1941.
I need not go into the procedure under the Act.
The upshot was an arrangement endorsed by the court under which the rent was reduced, the defendant paid a fixed sum and abandoned his counterclaim and the lease was disclaimed.
The effect of such an order under the Act is the same as a discharge in bankruptcy.
In an action against the original lessee for the balance of the outstanding rent, it was held that he was not absolved as a consequence of the order made in the suit against the assignee.
One of the points taken on behalf of the lessee was that the proceedings before the county court amounted to a compromise.
Singleton J. disposed of it as follows, at p. 319:
‘The next point taken by Mr. O'Connor’— for the lessee who was being sued —‘was that in any event there was a compromise before the county court judge.
He reminded me there was a counterclaim for £2,444 and that by the order the plaintiffs in this action were released from any possible liability on the counterclaim.
He submitted that the order itself had made a compromise because it contained the words ‘counterclaim withdrawn’ and because it dealt with the rent so that the plaintiffs had no further claim in respect of it.
In reply to that argument, Mr. Quass submitted that there was no evidence of any compromise at all.
I take the view that, having regard to the recitals and to the terms of the order, one can read into the order itself the element of compromise, but again I do not think it is important for the decision of this case; because the compromise, if compromise it was, was between the plaintiffs and Jack Bernardout, and I do not think it enures for the benefit of Joseph Bernardout, the defendant in these proceedings.
I would not regard those remarks as indicating that a compromise with an assignee could never result in relieving the lessee from liability.
It will be noted in that case that the assignee, having obtained relief under the statute, was in the position of one who had the protection of the bankruptcy laws.
That would give no relief to co-covenantors; quite the contrary.
In Warnford Investments Ltd. v. Duckworth [1979]Ch. 127 Sir Robert Megarry V.-C. held that the disclaimer of a lease by the liquidator of a company to which the lease had been assigned did not relieve the original lessee from liability to pay the rent throughout the remainder of the term.
The original lessee was not merely a guarantor or surety.
The lease was only determined as between the company and the landlord.
The case has no direct bearing on the issues before me, but Sir Robert Megarry V.-C. 's judgment contains a full analysis of the original lessee's liability, admirably summarised, if I may say so, in the following paragraph, at p. 137:
‘Generally speaking, an original lessee prima facie remains liable to the reversioner for the payment of the rent throughout the term, even after it has been assigned.
This is a direct and primary liability, though after an assignment it is normally accompanied by rights of indemnity against the first assignee, and also, where there have been further assignments, against the assignee in whom the lease is for the time being vested.
The decision of Walton J. in Allied London Investments Ltd. v. Hambro Life Assurance Ltd. (1983) 269 E.G. 41 is more germane.
In a licence to assign a lease the potential assignee, a company, had covenanted with the landlord to pay the rent and perform the covenants in the lease, and that covenant had been reinforced by a covenant given by a surety.
The assignment duly took place.
The following passages from the judgment of Walton J., at p. 41, describe what happened thereafter:
‘In due course, the assignee underlet the premises comprised in the lease in two portions.
Thereafter, there were allegations of non-payment of rent, wants of repair, and so forth, and ultimately there were no fewer than eight actions on foot: three by the plaintiff against the assignee; one by the assignee against the plaintiff; two actions by the assignee against its underlessees — one against each — and two actions, one by each of its underlessees, against the assignee.
This legal bonanza was obviously too good to last and ultimately matters were brought to a head in a series of compromises, as a result of which the lease was forfeited but the plaintiffs abandoned all its money claims in the relevant action other than for arrears of rent, and — and for the present purposes this is the crucial matter — the plaintiff released the surety unconditionally from his personal guarantee contained in the licence of 3 December 1973.
In the action before Walton J. the landlord was suing the original lessee for the arrears of rent.
The lessee claimed that the release of the surety also released the lessee from liability.
This argument was rejected by Walton J. on the now familiar ground that the lessee's covenant was a primary liability, not that of a surety.
In the course of his review of the authorities, Walton J. made extensive citations from Baynton v. Morgan , 22 Q.B.D. 74 a case he described, 269 E.G. 41, 45, as ‘completely decisive of the present case,’ and also cited the passage from the judgment of Younger L.J.
in Matthey v. Curling [1922]2 A.C. 180, 208 which I have already read, concluding, 269 E.G. 41, 46:
‘These two cases, then, make it perfectly clear that when he is sued, as in the present case, on the covenants contained in the original lease, the original tenant's only possible defences are either:(1) that he has performed the covenants; or (2) that the relevant assignee has performed the covenants; or (3) there has been some other operation conducted upon the lease — for example surrender of the whole — which has put a complete end to the liability to pay rent.
Short of these three defences, there is no defence.
Although the plaintiffs in that case had reached a compromise with the assignee and the surety, it specifically did not involve releasing the assignee from the liability to pay the arrears of rent.
It was that liability for which the original lessee was concurrently liable.
Hence, that case is clearly distinguishable from the case before me, where the liability of the assignee has been discharged.
The decision of Walton J. went to the Court of Appeal, but solely on a question of the date of the commencement of the interest on the arrears.
The appeal was dismissed [1985]1 E.G.L.R. 45.
Finally in this group of cases, I was referred to the decision of Hutchison J. in Selous Street Properties Ltd. v. Oronel Fabrics Ltd. (1984) 270 E.G. 643, described in the headnote, justifiably, as ‘an important and wide-ranging decision,’ the report of which extended over two issues of the Estates Gazette.
For my purposes, it suffices if I say that one of the questions was whether an original lessee is liable to pay a rent which has been increased by a variation in the terms of the lease reached between the assignee and the landlord.
Hutchison J. held that he was so liable, relying inter alia on Baynton v. Morgan , 22 Q.B.D. 74 and Allied London Investments Ltd. v. Hambro Life Assurance Ltd. , 269 E.G. 41.
He founded himself on the principle that an alteration of the terms of the lease agreed between the landlord and the assignee binds the original lessee because the assignee has been put into the shoes of the original lessee and can do all such things as the original lessee could have done.
That does not affect the issue with which I have to deal.
That concludes the review of the cases concerned with covenants in leases, and none deal with the issue here of a release of a covenantor by accord and satisfaction operating as the release of another covenantor.
The dictum of Younger L.J.
in Matthey v. Curling [1922]2 A.C. 180, 208 recognises the possibility.
I now turn to the cases on joint and several debts in other branches of the law.
The earliest is Watters v. Smith (1831) 2 B. & Ad. 889.
The plaintiff had sued one member, Hunter, of a committee of the management of a hospital which had engaged him.
Before the pleadings had got beyond the declaration the case was compromised.
Under it, the member paid part of the debt and costs to be taken for the debt and costs in the action.
The plaintiff then sued another member of the committee for the balance.
It was held that the other members of the committee were not discharged.
Lord Tenterden C.J. saw the question thus, at p. 893: ‘whether the plaintiff intended to discharge the whole debt, or only to relieve the party proposing to pay a proportion of the debt.’
Lord Tenterden C.J. went on to point out that the defendant in the first action would not have been relieved from having to contribute to the defendant in the second case if the latter had been compelled to pay a larger portion than his share.
As might be expected, the judgment of Parke J. sets out the principles with precision, at p. 894:
‘It is not necessary to consider what would have been the effect of the payment of £20 if it had been made in full satisfaction of the demand against Hunter.
If the case rested upon this, it might be a bar to the action on the authority of Longridge v. Dorville (1821) 5 B. & Ald. 117.
But I think that question does not arise here from the facts.
Looking at the terms of the agreement as contained in the letter from Hunter's attorney, and the receipt, it is manifest that the payment was not made in discharge of the plaintiff's rights against all other parties; and the result of the whole is, that it does not operate as a release, or matter which could have been pleaded as an accord and satisfaction, but amounts merely to an engagement not to sue Hunter, which can only be pleaded by himself; if the action, therefore, had been brought against two parties, it would not have been a discharge to both.
Or, it may be considered as a release to one, qualified by a reservation of the plaintiff's rights against the other, as in Solly v. Forbes (1820) 2 Br. & B. 38.
Taunton J. adds the point that a release given to one of two joint contractors enures to the benefit of both.
I emphasise the reference to ‘accord and satisfaction’ in the judgment of Parke J., and it is also referred to in that of Taunton J. This case, however, was one of joint contractors.
The next case,Nicholson v. Revill (1836) 4 Ad. & E. 675, concerned joint and several contractors.
Mr. Harrison relies on it for the statement in the judgment of Lord Denman C.J., at p. 683: ‘The debtee's discharge of one joint and several debtor is a discharge of all.’
The ‘debtee’ is an old word for the creditor or payee.
It is necessary, in my judgment, to look at the facts somewhat closely to see what amounts to a discharge and how far the reasoning can be applied to the case, not of joint and several debtors, but of several debtors alone, albeit all liable for the same debt.
The case was tried on special demurrer, that is a demurrer based on specific objections to the form of the pleadings.
The pleadings are somewhat convoluted but must be referred to because they contain the facts, as is normal in a demurrer.
They open with a declaration based on two promissory notes made on 1 January 1832 by the defendant, John Revill the younger, promising to pay £110.13s.4d. 25 months after date and £56.13s.8d. 31 months after date.
The plea or defence to this was that the notes were made jointly and severally by the defendant's father, John Revill, and by Samuel Revill, as well as by the defendant, and that before the action the plaintiff, without the defendant's knowledge or consent, struck out the name of Samuel Revill on the notes and wholly discharged him from liability.
In the judgment, Lord Denman C.J. states that the court need not inquire what the effect of a demurrer to that plea would have been, thus hinting that if the plaintiff had then demurred, the defence might not have been found sufficient.
At all events, the plaintiff pleaded over and, in the replication or reply, went on to state many additional facts.
From this it appeared that the father was the principal debtor in the sum of £299.
Initially, a note was given by the three parties as security for payment of the sum.
The note was unpaid and an action brought against the three was compromised by the giving of three notes, one of 1 January 1832 for 13 months in the sum of £52.18s.8d. and the other two now sued on.
The first note was not paid when it fell due.
On 28 January 1834, before the payment dates of the second and third notes, Samuel Revill offered and the plaintiff accepted £100 in discharge of his liability on the three notes.
It will be seen that the plaintiff obtained part payment on the second note, the difference between £52.18s.8d. and £100, i.e. £47.1s.4d, before it was due.
Hence, there is an element of consideration and the transaction can be regarded as an accord and satisfaction.
It was not simply a payment of part of the debt.
Having received that payment, the plaintiff handed over to Samuel Revill the first note and endorsed on the second — the note for £110.13s.4d. —‘received on account of Samuel Revill £47.1s.4d.; this sum, with the amount of the first note, make £100.’
He struck out Samuel Revill's name on the second note.
The rejoinder by the defendant to this pleading alleged that the notes were given by Samuel Revill and himself as sureties and were given for the securing of part of the father's debt and for no other consideration or purpose.
Pausing there and turning to the judgment, Lord Denman C.J. stated, at p. 682, that the court did not proceed on any doctrine as to relation of principal and surety.
Hence, I take it that they were laying down principles in relation to joint and several debtors generally.
Going back to the rejoinder, it further alleged that the discharge of Samuel Revill was without the knowledge, privity or consent of the defendant.
The rejoinder concluded with the verification; that is the normal way of ending a pleading alleging new facts by way of confession and avoidance.
It amounts to an undertaking to prove those facts before the jury in due course.
The plaintiff's surrejoinder purported to be a traverse, as is evident from its conclusion to the country, the way of ending a pleading which raises no new facts and puts the other party to proof.
The pleading was, however, objectionable on various formal grounds which formed the basis of the special demurrer.
In accordance, however, with the normal practice, the court considered the whole case and did not confine itself to the objections in point of form to the surrejoinder.
Judgment was given on the substance of the case in the following terms, at pp. 682–683, picking up the point that I have already mentioned:
‘But we do not proceed on some of the grounds mentioned at the bar, such as the effect of the plaintiff's alteration of the instrument as making it void, or that the defendant thereby lost his right to contribution from the joint makers of the note; nor on any doctrine as to the relation of principal and surety.
We give our judgment merely on the principle laid down by Eyre C.J. in Cheetham v. Ward (1797) 1 Bos. & P. 630, as sanctioned by unquestionable authority, that the debtee's discharge of one joint and several debtor is a discharge of all.
For we think it clear that the new agreement made by the plaintiff with Samuel Revill, to receive from him £100 in full payment of one of the three notes and in part payment of the other two, before they became due, accompanied with the erasure of his name from those two notes, and followed by the actual receipt of £100, was in law a discharge of Samuel Revill.
I take this to be a decision that a release by accord and satisfaction reached with one joint and several debtor discharges all.
I should refer to the final paragraph in the judgment, p. 683:
‘This view cannot perhaps be made entirely consistent with all that is said by Lord Eldon in the case Ex parte Gifford (1802) 6 Ves.
Jun. 805, where his Lordship dismissed a petition to expunge the proof of a surety against the estate of a co-surety.
But the principle to which we have adverted was not presented to his mind in its simple form; and the point certainly did not undergo much consideration.
For some of the expressions employed would seem to lay it down that a joint debtee might release one of his debtors, and yet, by using some language of reservation in the agreement between himself and such debtor, keep his remedy entire against the others, even without consulting them.
If Lord Eldon used any language which could be so interpreted, we must conclude that he either did not guard himself so cautiously as he intended, or that he did not lend that degree of attention to the legal doctrine connected with the case before him, which he was accustomed to afford.
We do not find that any other authority clashes with our present judgement, which must be in favour of the defendant.
The views in that last paragraph, that the creditor could not reserve his rights against others, has not prevailed.
Lord Eldon's views have proved more acceptable, as is evident from the next case:North v. Wakefield (1849) 13 Q.B.
536.
This case also concerned a joint and several promissory note, to which the defendant pleaded that the co-debtor had been released by deed on making a composition with the creditors, but the deed contained a proviso that it should not operate to prejudice the rights of others.
It was argued for the defendant, on the authority of Nicholson v. Revill , 4 Ad. & E. 675, that a creditor could not release one joint and several debtor and hold another liable by reserving remedies.
Patteson J. for the court said, at pp. 540–541:
‘Now the deed contained an express clause that the release to Goddard should not operate to discharge any one jointly or otherwise liable to the plaintiff for the same debts.
It is plain, therefore, that it did not release the defendant.
The reason why a release to one debtor releases all jointly liable is, because, unless it was held to do so, the co-debtor, after paying the debt, might sue him who was released for contribution, and so in effect he would not be released; but that reason does not apply where the debtor released agrees to such a qualification of the release as will leave him liable to any rights of the co-debtor.
Ex parte Good, In re Armitage (1877) 5 Ch.D. 46 is a case where, on the somewhat special facts, a receipt given to one party did not release the other party.
The Court of Appeal held that the receipt could not be construed as a release.
The interest of the case for the present purposes is the comment in the court below of Sir James Bacon C.J. on Nicholson v. Revill , 4 Ad. & E. 675.
I read from p. 55:
‘Now, in point of law, it is not to be disputed that a release to one of several joint debtors releases them all.
The case of Nicholson v. Revill is one of the many instances in which this rule of law has been applied, and the reason upon which the rule is founded is as clear and plain as the rule itself.
It is to prevent circuity of action, inasmuch as if the released debtor were still liable to an action for contribution by his co-debtor (who had been sued and had paid), he would not in fact be released:North v. Wakefield , 13 Q.B.
536, 541.
But this principle has no application to the present case; for Armitage, being by the resolution of the creditors released from all his debts, could neither sue himself nor could his trustee sue on his behalf, even if the supposed partnership had existed, although the rights of the joint creditors against the other joint debtor would be unaffected by the bankruptcy by section 50 of the Bankruptcy Act 1869.
That reasoning applies as much to several debtors each liable for the same debt as to debtors jointly and severally liable for such a debt.
Finally, I come to what is probably the most important case of all, the decision of the Court of Appeal in In re E.W.A. (A Debtor)[1901]2 K.B.
642.
A and B were liable on a joint and several guarantee to a bank for the account of a company.
The guarantee was limited to £6,000.
Subsequently, the bank obtained judgment for that sum against A and B jointly and severally.
The judgment not being satisfied, the bank presented a bankruptcy petition against B alone for the whole debt.
Terms were arranged on which the petition might be withdrawn upon payment of £3,000.
A document signed by the bank's solicitors acknowledged receipt of the sum of £3,000 in full discharge of all claims by the bank against B in connection with the company and all guarantees given by him to the bank in connection with that company and in settlement of any outstanding questions as to the amount due to the bank.
There was no reservation of rights against A in that letter.
The petition was withdrawn or dismissed.
The bank then served a bankruptcy petition on A for the other half.
The Court of Appeal held that he had been discharged by the release given to B. The sole reasoned judgment is given by Collins L.J., with whom Rigby L.J.
agreed.
Collins L.J.
posed the question as follows, at p. 648:
‘The question really turns on this, whether or not this document has the effect of accord and satisfaction in getting rid of the joint and several liability of B under the judgment.
If it has that effect, it is not disputed that the rule of law applies, namely, that the release of one of two joint debtors has the effect of releasing the other.
After dismissing an argument that the doctrine as to release did not apply to a judgment debt, Collins L.J.
went on, at pp. 648–649:
‘But now I come to what was really the main point argued before us.
It is clear that, although a document in terms purports to release one of two joint debtors, yet it may contain in terms a reservation of rights against the other joint debtor.
Where you find those two provisions you construe the document, not as a release, but merely as an undertaking not to sue a particular individual, and the result is that the right to proceed against the co-debtor is reserved and can be put in force against him.
Whenever you can find from the terms of the document an agreement for the reservation of rights against the co-debtor, then, I agree, the document cannot be construed as an accord and satisfaction of the joint debt, and, therefore, as a release of the co-debtor.
But it appears to me that, on the face of this document, there is no intention shown so to limit its effect, and that it is framed in the widest possible terms so as to cover, not only this particular debt, but all other claims by the bank in connection with the Professional and Trades Papers Ltd., for it is admitted that the foundation of the judgment was the guarantee, and at the time this document was drawn up there was this joint liability on the judgment to the extent of £6,000.
And there is this circumstance to be observed, that this document expressly states that the cash and bills are accepted ‘in full discharge of all claims by the Capital and Counties Bank Ltd. against [B]in connection with the Professional and Trades Papers Ltd’.
Having regard to some of the evidence before me, I should notice the following towards the bottom of pp. 649–650:
‘Why, then, should any limitation be placed upon the effect of this discharge of ‘all claims’?
If there is no limitation, the effect of the document is that it releases the claim against both co-debtors.
If this legal consequence had been pointed out to the bank at the time, they might have said that that was not what they intended, but that is a factor common probably to all cases in which a release is given to one of two joint debtors.
The person giving it may not realise the full legal consequences of it as regards the release of a co-debtor; but that is not, in my opinion, a sufficient ground for reading into the document something that is not expressed in it; and unless you find in it something qualifying the general words, it appears to me that the legal consequences of the general words of discharge must follow, notwithstanding that those consequences may go beyond what the person giving the document would have intended if they had been pointed out to him at the time, and he had had an opportunity of addressing his mind to them.
Collins L.J.
also rejected the argument that surrounding circumstances qualified the prima facie meaning of the document.
He distinguished Ex parte Good , 5 Ch.D. 46 in that there the other debtor had already been made bankrupt and hence no claim could be made against him.
Romer L.J., at p. 652, did not dissent but expressed a doubt.
That decision has been roundly criticised as ‘extraordinary’ by Professor Glanville Williams in his Joint Obligations , p. 117, para. 55.
His point is that there was simply an agreement to accept a lesser sum in satisfaction of the whole amount and so could not amount to accord and satisfaction.
I, of course, have to accept the decisions of the Court of Appeal as binding on me, whatever I or others may think of them.
I would, however, make the following comments.
First, it does not appear that any point other than the construction of the document was argued: see the argument at pp. 645 and 646.
Secondly, the proceedings were by way of bankruptcy petition.
It by no means follows that if B had been made bankrupt the dividend would have amounted to the sum obtained, so that the bank might have got less.
From this long review of the cases, I draw the following conclusions.
First, a release of one joint contractor releases the others.
There is only one obligation.
A release may be under seal or by accord and satisfaction.
A covenant not to sue is not a release.
It is merely a contract between the creditor and the joint debtor which does not affect the liabilities of the other joint contractors or their rights of contribution or indemnity against their co-contractor.
It is a question of construction of the contract between the creditor and joint debtor in the light of the surrounding circumstances whether the contract amounts to a release or merely a contract not to sue.
Secondly, the same principles apply to a contract between the creditor and one of joint and several debtors.
If one joint and several covenantor is released by accord and satisfaction, all are released.
Some have seen this as illogical, and so it would be if the only reason for the rule that the release of one joint contractor releases the other is that there is only one obligation.
Professor Glanville Williams sees the reason for the extended rule to have been an early uncertainty as to the nature of a joint and several obligation: see Joint Obligations , p. 135.
Two other reasons can be adduced.
First, where the obligations are non-cumulative, i.e. the obligation of each is to perform in so far as it has not been performed by any other party, the acceptance of some other performance in lieu of the promised performance relieves the others.
The covenantee cannot have both the promised performance and some other performance which he agrees to accept.
Secondly, unless the co-covenantors were released following an accord and satisfaction, they could claim a right of contribution or indemnity.
Thus, by suing the co-contractor the creditor commits a breach of the contract with the released covenantor, for such an action will inevitably lead to the very claim from which the release has been purchased by accord and satisfaction.
Thirdly, the reasoning in the preceding paragraph applies equally to a number of separate covenantors each liable to perform the same obligation as in the case before me.
Indeed, the dictum of Younger L.J.
in Matthey v. Curling [1922]2 A.C. 180, 208 already averted to is consistent with this.
Returning to the facts of the present case, we start with a document signed by Mr. Mahmoud and accepted by the landlord.
The release from the obligations under the lease is purchased by an immediate surrender of the term and his handing over of one half of his goods.
So, it would seem to be a clear case of accord and satisfaction.
Furthermore, there are no words reserving rights against any other parties, nor can the document be read as a covenant not to sue.
Is there anything in the surrounding circumstances which would rebut the prima facie meaning of the agreement?
In some cases it has been found in the exemption from liability of the released party to be sued by his co-contractors, as where the released party is already bankrupt.
Ex parte Good , 5 Ch.D. 46 is an example of that.
In the present case Mr. Mahmoud was not bankrupt when he signed the documents and was open to a claim for an indemnity, which has in fact been made.
It might be said that at the time of the signing of the document he was in no position to resist both the seizure of all his goods under a distress and the forfeiture of his lease with no practical possibility of relief.
If the landlord had chosen to act in that way, the liability of C.T.
for the balance of the rent could not be resisted.
The landlord, however, did not choose to press his rights in that way, but chose to enter into a bargain with Mr. Mahmoud so as to get possession speedily without the delay that further proceedings would entail.
The landlord had, in my judgment, to accept the consequences of that.
It is certainly no good his saying that he never intended to release his rights against C.T.
Therefore, the result is that I dismiss the claim as against the second defendant.
Action dismissed with costs.
Solicitors: B. Erlich; Rowe & Maw