

[COURT OF APPEAL]
REGINA v. CALLENDER
1992 March 26;
April 3
Russell L.J., Roch and Wright JJ.
Crime — Theft — Obtaining pecuniary advantage by deception — Opportunity to earn remuneration in ‘office or employment’— Whether including services by self-employed accountant — Theft Act 1968 (c. 60), s. 16(2) (c)
The appellant, who described himself as a self-employed accountant, falsely claimed to be an associate member of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants and a graduate or member of the Institute of Marketing.
He was engaged by B. to prepare his periodical accounts for VAT returns and to render income tax returns at the end of the year.
The appellant was convicted of obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception, contrary to section 16(1) of the Theft Act 1968.
On appeal against conviction, on the ground that the services provided by the appellant were not services within an ‘office or employment,’ in respect of which the opportunity to earn remuneration had been obtained, within the meaning of section 16(2) (c) of the Act:—
Held , dismissing the appeal, that the phrase ‘office or employment’ in section 16(2) (c ) of the Act was not confined to the narrow limits of a contract of service but was to be construed in a wider sense as a matter of ordinary language; and that, accordingly, the provision of services by the appellant as a self-employed accountant was properly described as employment within the ambit of section 16(2) (c )(post, p. 506B–D, E–G).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Edwards v. Clinch [1982]A.C. 845;[1981]3 W.L.R. 707;[1981]3 All E.R.
543, H.L. (E.)
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v. Coggins & Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd. [1947]A.C. 1;[1946]2 All E.R.
345, H.L. (E.)
Ready Mixed Concrete (South East) Ltd. v. Minister of Pensions and National Insurance [1968]2 Q.B.
497;[1968]2 W.L.R. 775;[1968]1 All E.R.
433
Reg. v. McNiff [1986]Crim.L.R. 57, C.A.
Reg. v. Treacy [1971]A.C. 537;[1971]2 W.L.R. 112;[1971]1 All E.R.
110, H.L. (E.)
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Cozens v. Brutus [1973]A.C. 854;[1972]3 W.L.R. 521;[1972]2 All E.R.
1297, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Horseferry Road Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate, Ex parte Siadatan [1991]1 Q.B.
260;[1990]3 W.L.R. 1006;[1991]1 All E.R.
324, D.C.
Reg. v. Miller [1983]2 A.C. 161;[1983]2 W.L.R. 539;[1983]1 All E.R.
978, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Slator (1881) 8 Q.B.D. 267, D.C.
APPEAL against conviction.
The appellant, Roger Albert Callender, was convicted on 9 November 1990 in the Crown Court at Maidstone (before Mr. S. Lyons, sitting as an assistant recorder, and a jury) of one count of obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception contrary to section 16(1) of the Theft Act 1968 and five counts of obtaining property by deception contrary to section 15(1) of the Act.
He was sentenced to three months' imprisonment on each count to run concurrently, suspended for two years, and ordered to pay compensation in the total sum of £211.25.
He appealed against the conviction on the section 16(1) offence on the ground, inter alia, that the assistant recorder was wrong in law in holding and in so directing the jury that services offered by him as a self-employed accountant were capable of amounting to services provided under an ‘office or employment’ within the meaning of section 16(2) (c ) of the Act.
At the conclusion of the hearing Russell L.J.
announced that the appeal would be dismissed for reasons to be given at a later date.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Robert Leonard (assigned by the Registrar of Criminal Appeals) for the appellant.
Simon Russell Flint for the Crown.
3 April.
WRIGHT J. read the following judgment of the court.
On Thursday, 26 March, this court dismissed this appellant's appeal against conviction.
We now set out our reasons.
On 5 November 1990 he appeared before Mr. S. Lyons, sitting as an assistant recorder, and a jury in the Crown Court at Maidstone and pleaded not guilty to an indictment containing nine counts alleging deception.
After a trial lasting five days he was eventually convicted, under count 1, of obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception, contrary to section 16(1) of the Theft Act 1968, in that he dishonestly obtained for himself the opportunity to earn remuneration in an office or employment as an accountant to a man called Burt, by falsely representing that he was a member of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants and held qualifications from the Institute of Marketing.
He was also convicted of five counts of obtaining property by deception, namely sums of money by way of fees from Mr. Burt and another man named Hughes, contrary to section 15(1) of the Theft Act 1968, the deception being that he had done certain accountancy work for those persons who were both small businessmen, when in truth he had not.
On each of the six counts on which he was convicted he was sentenced to three months' imprisonment on each count concurrent, suspended for two years.
He was acquitted, under count 6, of obtaining pecuniary advantage by deception in the same terms as that laid under count 1, save that the victim of the deception was said to be Mr. Hughes, and of two further counts of obtaining property by deception.
He now appeals against his conviction on count 1 on a point of law and if successful he further seeks to appeal against his conviction on the remaining five counts on a basis of mixed fact and law, the trial judge having certified the case fit for appeal on that ground.
The facts of the matter are relatively simple.
The appellant described himself as a self-employed accountant.
In or about June 1987, Mr. Burt met the appellant, whom he said he had heard of from his doing accountancy work for others, and he understood from the appellant, having been shown a curriculum vitae and other documents, that he was an associate member of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants, and a graduate or member of the Institute of Marketing.
Mr. Burt said in evidence that he had relied upon these representations and that he would not have ‘employed’ him — the word he used in evidence — had he known that he was not qualified.
In truth and in fact, the appellant had not obtained the qualifications referred to and his curriculum vitae was false in those respects.
The appellant and Mr. Burt agreed that the appellant, for reward, would do Mr. Burt's periodical accounts for VAT returns and render income tax returns at the end of the year.
From time to time the appellant presented invoices to Mr. Burt claiming that accounts had been kept and returns submitted.
He was paid by Mr. Burt on the strength of those invoices.
In fact he did not do the work for which he was paid and, indeed, after December 1987 there was no record of any quarterly VAT returns whatsoever having been made.
Between May and October 1988 the appellant was approached by Mr. Hughes who gave evidence that he also understood that the appellant was a qualified accountant.
It may well be, having regard to their verdict on count 6, that the jury were not satisfied about that alleged representation.
However that may be, Mr. Hughes engaged the appellant to sort out a year's tax against payment to be made on a monthly basis.
Again the appellant failed to carry out his part of the bargain, but from time to time he extracted money from Mr. Hughes against the claim that returns had been made, and various work had been done.
No record existed of any returns either to the Inland Revenue or to the Customs and Excise authorities.
The appellant claimed that they had been sent to the wrong office.
These facts led to the conviction of the appellant on counts 8 and 9.
In the case of both Burt and Hughes, the jury acquitted the appellant of those counts which alleged a false representation that he intended to do accountancy work for each of them.
It may well be that the jury took the view that at the outset of the relationship with each businessman the appellant may genuinely have intended to do the work but subsequently failed to do so.
The appellant, in evidence during the trial, had insisted that he had made it clear to Mr. Burt that he was not a fully qualified accountant, although he had passed some examinations.
He further maintained that the work had been carried out as agreed.
Plainly on those matters he was disbelieved upon his oath by the jury.
At the end of the evidence, after the appellant had left the witness box, Mr. Leonard, who appeared for the appellant in the court below and before this court, moved to quash counts 1 and 6 of the indictment.
The grounds were that the work which the appellant offered to carry out when he presented himself to Mr. Burt and Mr. Hughes as a qualified accountant (and the remuneration that he gained the opportunity to earn as a result) were services to be provided by him as a self-employed fee-earning accountant, and therefore were to be provided neither under a contract of employment nor by virtue of his holding of an office within the meaning of section 16(2) (c ) of the Theft Act 1968.
The assistant recorder refused to quash the two counts and left them to the jury on the basis that the services that the appellant did provide, in the ordinary meaning of the words, amounted to employment.
Hence this appeal.
The first point raised by Mr. Leonard on behalf of the appellant, and contained within grounds 1 and 5 of his grounds of appeal was that the assistant recorder was wrong in law in holding and in so directing the jury that the services offered were capable of amounting to services provided under an office or employment within the meaning of the Act of 1968 and, further, that he was wrong in refusing to quash the counts on those grounds.
Consequentially upon that contention, the appellant raised two further matters of complaint.
First, that the assistant recorder refused to quash these two counts, notwithstanding that the evidential basis for the allegation that the appellant was engaged in an office or employment in consequence of his false representations was not contained in any of the committal statements, nor in any evidence that had been led before the jury, and that the appellant had not been committed for trial on the offences alleged.
The assistant recorder held that he had been so committed notwithstanding (so it is said) an express concession by the prosecution that he had not.
Further, the appellant complains that by ruling in the way that he did on the main issue, the assistant recorder effectively left before the jury evidence prejudicial to the appellant which was relevant to counts 1 and 6 only: had he ruled in favour of the appellant on the motion to quash then he would have had to consider the matter and (by inference) would have exercised his discretion to discharge the jury and order a new trial on the remaining counts.
However, it was agreed at the outset of this appeal by Mr. Leonard that these two latter matters would only arise for consideration in the event that his contentions upon his first and principal ground of appeal were upheld in this court; and in the circumstances we heard argument from both sides upon that ground separately and distinct from the remainder of the matters raised in this appeal.
Section 16 of the Theft Act 1968, so far as is relevant, provides:
‘(1) A person who by any deception dishonestly obtains for himself or another any pecuniary advantage shall on conviction on indictment be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
(2) The cases in which a pecuniary advantage within the meaning of this section is to be regarded as obtained for a person are cases where —…(c ) he is given the opportunity to earn remuneration or greater remuneration in an office or employment…
The words ‘office’ and ‘employment’are not further defined anywhere in the Act, and, somewhat surprisingly, appear rarely to have fallen for consideration by this court.
Nevertheless, it is accepted that, appearing as they do in a penal statute, they fall to be construed narrowly rather than widely.
The only occasion upon which they appear to have been considered by this court was in Reg. v. McNiff [1986]Crim.L.R. 57, in respect of which we have been helpfully provided with a transcript of the judgment.
It is plain, we think, that that case falls to be considered in the light of its own particular facts, and does not purport to give any general guidance as to the meaning of the words under consideration.
In that case, the opportunity to earn remuneration arose when the appellant obtained the grant of a tenancy of a public house owned by and tied to a large brewery company.
He did not, it is to be noted, obtain employment as a manager.
This court held that the tenant or prospective tenant of a tied public house, whatever else he may have been, was not in the ‘employment’ of the brewery.
It was contended by the Crown that the holder of a justice's licence, which by virtue of his appointment as tenant the appellant might have been able to obtain, was the holder of an ‘office’ within the meaning of the Act; but this court did not find it necessary to decide that point on the facts of the case.
Mr. Leonard contended that the expression ‘office or employment’ is a term of art to be construed in accordance with its established legal meanings in other contexts.
He relies upon the well known concept that a professional man such as an accountant, self-employed and running his own business, is not to be regarded as the servant or employee of the man who makes use of his services.
The relationship of master and servant as defined by Lord Porter in the well known case of Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v. Coggins & Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd. [1947]A.C. 1, 17, never, he contends, comes into existence between them.
He drew to our attention the views of the academic writers in which the point is raised and discussed; thus in Professor Griew's book The Theft Acts 1968 and 1978 , 6th ed. (1990), p. 186, para. 10.15, the author suggests that the use of the word ‘employment’ may limit the operation of the subsection to:
‘the relationship that used to be called that of master and servant.
Although it is tempting to regard (for example) a freelance author as ‘employed’ by publishers to write a book, or a solicitor as ‘employed’by his client to perform professional services, neither of them, it would seem, earns his remuneration ‘in’an employment.
The independent contractor may not be within the reach of the paragraph.
The editors of Arlidge & Parry on Fraud (1985), p. 97, para. 3.39, express doubt as to whether the term ‘employment’ is intended to include any form of paid work or is confined to contracts of employment in the strict sense.
They go on to submit that the term should in principle be read in its narrower sense although this might leave what they describe — we think euphemistically — as a ‘small lacuna’ in the law.
On the other hand Professor J. C. Smith in The Law of Theft , 6th ed. (1989), p. 115, para. 222, writes:
‘If this [the limitation to the relationship of master and servant]is so, it is unfortunate; but it may be that the provision is not so severely limited.
…[there are]instances of the ‘employment’ of independent contractors.
Even the solicitor and the author may be said to be employed — in the ‘simple language…used and understood by ordinary literate men and women’— and if they are employed, their remuneration is surely earned ‘in employment.’
The quotation that Professor Smith there cites is from the speech of Lord Diplock in Reg. v. Treacy [1971]A.C. 537, 565 — a case of blackmail contrary to section 21 of the Theft Act 1968.
The quotation referred to by Professor Smith when set out in full, reads:
‘The Theft Act 1968 makes a welcome departure from the former style of drafting in criminal statutes.
It is expressed in simple language as used and understood by ordinary literate men and women.
It avoids so far as possible those terms of art which have acquired a special meaning understood only by lawyers in which many of the penal enactments which it supersedes were couched.
Lord Diplock went on to test the question arising in the case by asking what the words of the relevant section of the Act of 1968 meant in ordinary conversation.
Mr. Leonard's comment on this authority is that the use by the draftsman of the simple language so praised by Lord Diplock does not avoid the necessity for construing this particular phrase in accordance with strict legal principles.
We have come to the clear conclusion that Parliament, in adopting the phrase ‘office or employment,’ intended section 16(1) of the Act of 1968 to have a wider impact than one confined to the narrow limits of a contract of service.
A small indication is the use of the word ‘remuneration,’ which is a wide term, and the absence of any reference to salary or wages.
We take the view that the interpretation of the words in question involves the consideration of their meaning as a matter of ordinary language.
That meaning, in our judgment, is not to be arrived at by reference to the more limited and technical interpretations given to these words in the context of the law of master and servant, as in Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v. Coggins & Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd. [1947]A.C. 1, or in the context of pensions and National Insurance law, as in Ready Mixed Concrete (South East) Ltd. v. Minister of Pensions and National Insurance [1968]2 Q.B.
497, or in the context of income tax, as in Edwards v. Clinch [1982]A.C. 845.
In this last named authority, relied upon by Mr. Reynolds in support of his contentions as to the true interpretation of the word ‘office,’ it is noteworthy that Lord Wilberforce, at p. 860, commented that over the years words of ordinary meaning had acquired, in the context of tax legislation, a signification coloured by legal construction in a technical context, and that return to the pure source of common parlance was no longer possible.
There can, we think, be no doubt whatever that the ordinary dictionary meaning of ‘employed’ and ‘employment’is considerably wider than that enshrined in the various authorities that we have referred to.
The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary , defines ‘employ’ as ‘To find work or occupation for’and in the passive sense ‘often merely to be occupied.’
‘Employment’ is defined as ‘That on which (one) is employed; business; occupation; a commission.’
It seems to us that it is a perfectly proper use of ordinary language and as such to be readily understood by ordinary literate men and women to say of a person in this appellant's position that his services as an accountant were ‘employed’ by his customers, and that this state of affairs is properly to be described by the word ‘employment.’
As such the facts in this case fall within the ambit of section 16(2).
We cannot close our eyes to the fact that if the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant in relation to this ground of appeal are soundly based, then there is, not a small lacuna, but a yawning gap in the protection for the public afforded by section 16 of the Act of 1968 through which a large number of dishonest persons can — by arranging matters so that they come within the definition of ‘self-employed’— escape conviction and punishment for the kind of deceitful conduct of which the jury, by their verdicts in the instant case, found this appellant to be guilty.
That is a conclusion to which we would be reluctant to come unless we were constrained to do so by higher authority directly in point, of which we are satisfied there is none.
In such circumstances we reject the contentions advanced on behalf of the appellant on this first ground of appeal.
It is conceded by Mr. Leonard that having come to this conclusion, it is unnecessary now to consider further any of the other grounds of appeal which do not arise, and we refrain from doing so.
This appeal must be dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
Certificate under section 1(2) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960 that point of law of general public importance involved in decision, namely, ‘Whether the words ‘office or employment’ in section 16(2) (c) of the Theft Act 1968 extend to the engagement of an independent contractor pursuant to a contract for services.’
Leave to appeal refused.
Solicitors: Crown Prosecution Service, Kent.
[Reported by Mrs. Clare Barsby, Barrister]