

[COURT OF APPEAL]REGINA v. LIFE ASSURANCE UNIT TRUST REGULATORY ORGANISATION LTD., Ex parte ROSS 1991 June 20, 21, 24;
July 5
1992 April 13, 14, 15;
June 11
Mann L.J.
and Hidden J.
Glidewell, Stocker and McCowan L.JJ.
Natural Justice — Opportunity to meet charge — Right to be heard — Company carrying on investment business as appointed representative of insurers — Lautro as self-regulating organisation investigating company's affairs — Lautro issuing notice prohibiting acceptance by insurers of business from company until investigation completed — Whether company having right to be heard before issue of notice — Financial Services Act 1986 (c. 60), ss. 8, 44(2)
Lautro was a recognised self-regulating organisation for the purposes of section 8 of the Financial Services Act 1986.
One of its members was an insurance company which had appointed W. Plc. as its ‘appointed representative’ within the meaning of section 44(2) of the Act.
It was a condition of that appointment that a former director of W. Plc. had no further contact with its affairs.
However the activities of that former director came to the attention of Lautro and it decided to carry out an investigation into W. Plc. 's affairs.
On 30 October 1990 the board of Lautro considered a preliminary report of the investigation and decided to exercise its intervention powers to prohibit the insurance company and its associate companies from accepting any new investment business from the public through W. Plc. or any of its representatives until the investigation had been completed.
A copy of the notice served on the group of insurance companies was sent to W. Plc. but it was given no opportunity to make representations and it had no right of appeal under Lautro's 1988 Rules.
The insurance company decided not to exercise its right of appeal and served notice on W. Plc. terminating the agency agreement.
The notice had serious financial consequences for the applicant, who had become the finance director of W. Plc. after the retirement of the former director.
The applicant sought judicial review of Lautro's decision to issue the notice on the ground, inter alia, that it was contrary to natural justice.
The Divisional Court dismissed the application.
On appeal by the applicant:—
Held , dismissing the appeal, that notwithstanding the wording of section 8(2) of the Finance Act 1986 W. Plc. was not a member of the self-regulating organisation Lautro for the purposes of the Act and had no right of appeal to Lautro under the provisions of Lautro's 1988 Rules; that Lautro had a duty to act fairly not only to its members but, in appropriate circumstances, to those appointed representatives on which, in accordance with its rules, an intervention notice was to be served; but that, in determining whether those affected by an intervention notice should be permitted to make representations before the notice was served, Lautro had to balance their interests against the interests of investors pending a full inquiry; and that, having decided to serve the notice as a matter of urgency, Lautro should not be burdened with the necessity to decide whether time permitted it to receive representations before it served the notice (post, pp. 575C–G, 576A–C, 577C–D, 579E — 580A, D — 581B, 582E).
Reg. v. Liverpool Corporation, Ex parte Liverpool Taxi Fleet Operators' Association [1972]2 Q.B.
299, C.A. and Cheall v. Association of Professional Executive Clerical and Computer Staff [1983]2 A.C. 180, H.L. (E.) considered.
Per curiam .
Lautro's Rules have now been amended but when the intervention notice was served on 31 October 1990, they were defective in not giving a right of appeal to a person or body in the position of W. Plc., and in not giving such a person the right to have the decision to serve the notice rescinded.
Lautro should reconsider its practice of issuing a press notice and consider deferring the issue of a press notice until after the person affected has had an opportunity to apply for the notice to be rescinded, to make representations to that effect, and Lautro's board has ruled in the application (post, pp. 581F–G, 582A).
Decision of the Divisional Court, post, p. 553B et seq., affirmed.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment of Glidewell L.J.
in the Court of Appeal:
Cheall v. Association of Professional Executive Clerical and Computer Staff [1983]2 A.C. 180;[1983]2 W.L.R. 679;[1983]1 All E.R.
1130, H.L. (E.)
Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 C.B.N.S. 180
Lloyd v. McMahon [1987]A.C. 625;[1987]2 W.L.R. 821;[1987]1 All E.R.
1118, C.A. and H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Liverpool Corporation, Ex parte Liverpool Taxi Fleet Operators' Association [1972]2 Q.B.
299;[1972]2 W.L.R. 1262;[1972]2 All E.R.
589, C.A.
Reg. v. Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, Ex parte Datafin Plc. 
[1987]Q.B.
815;[1987]2 W.L.R. 699;[1987]1 All E.R.
564, C.A.
Ridge v. Baldwin [1964]A.C. 40;[1963]2 W.L.R. 935;[1963]2 All E.R.
66, H.L. (E.)
Wiseman v. Borneman [1971]A.C. 297;[1969]3 W.L.R. 706;[1969]3 All E.R.
275, H.L. (E.)
Wood v. Woad (1874) L.R. 9 Exch. 190
The following additional cases were cited in argument in the Court of Appeal:
Attorney-General of Hong Kong v. Ng Yuen Shiu [1983]2 A.C. 629;[1983]2 W.L.R. 735;[1983]2 All E.R.
346, P.C.
Durayappah v. Fernando [1967]2 A.C. 337;[1967]3 W.L.R. 289;[1967]2 All E.R.
152, P.C.
Lewis v. Heffer [1978]1 W.L.R. 1061;[1978]3 All E.R.
354, C.A.
Reg. v. Birmingham City Council, Ex parte Ferrero Ltd. (1991) 89 L.G.R. 977, C.A.
Reg. v. British Pharmaceutical Industry Association Code of Practice Committee, Ex parte Professional Counselling Aids Ltd.,
The Times, 7 November 1990
Reg. v. Wear Valley District Council, Ex parte Binks [1985]2 All E.R.
699
The following additional cases, although not cited, were referred to in the skeleton arguments in the Court of Appeal:
Albert and Le Compte Case , 10 February 1983, Publications of the European Court of Human Rights Series A No. 58
Benthem Case , 23 October 1985, Publications of the European Court of Human Rights Series A No. 97
Bodén v. Sweden (1987) 10 E.H.R.R. 367
Cinnamond v. British Airports Authority [1980]1 W.L.R. 582;[1980]2 All E.R.
368, C.A.
Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for Civil Service [1985]A.C. 374;[1984]3 W.L.R. 1174;[1984]3 All E.R.
935, H.L. (E.)
Enderby Town Football Club Ltd. v. Football Association Ltd. [1971]Ch. 591;[1970]3 W.L.R. 1021;[1971]1 All E.R.
215, C.A.
Furnell v. Whangarei High Schools Board [1973]A.C. 660;[1973]2 W.L.R. 92;[1973]1 All E.R.
400, P.C.
Kaplan v. United Kingdom (1980) 4 E.H.R.R. 64
Kônig Case , 28 June 1978, Publications of the European Court of Human Rights Series A No. 27
Reg. v. Chief Constable of the Thames Valley Police, Ex parte Cotton [1990]I.R.L.R. 344
Reg. v. Miah [1974]1 W.L.R. 683;[1974]2 All E.R.
377, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Schildkamp [1971]A.C. 1;[1970]2 W.L.R. 279;[1969]3 All E.R.
1640, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Brind [1991]1 A.C. 696;[1991]2 W.L.R. 588;[1991]1 All E.R.
720, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Secretary of State for Transport, Ex parte Pegasus Holdings (London) Ltd. [1988]1 W.L.R. 990;[1989]2 All E.R.
481
Transocean Marine Paint Association v. European Community Commission (Case 17/74)(1974) 2 E.C.R. 1063, E.C.J.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment of Mann L.J.
in the Divisional Court:
Attorney-General of Hong Kong v. Ng Yuen Shiu [1983]2 A.C. 629;[1983]2 W.L.R. 735;[1983]2 All E.R.
346, P.C.
Cheall v. Association of Professional Executive Clerical and Computer Staff [1983]2 A.C. 180;[1983]2 W.L.R. 679;[1983]1 All E.R.
1130, H.L. (E.)
Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 C.B.N.S. 180
Lewis v. Heffer [1978]1 W.L.R. 1061;[1978]3 All E.R.
354, C.A.
Reg. v. Birmingham City Council, Ex parte Ferrero Ltd. (1991) 89 L.G.R. 977, C.A.
Reg. v. Liverpool Corporation, Ex parte Liverpool Taxi Fleet Operators' Association [1972]2 Q.B.
299;[1972]2 W.L.R. 1262;[1972]2 All E.R.
589, C.A.
Reg. v. Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, Ex parte Datafin Plc. 
[1987]Q.B.
815;[1987]2 W.L.R. 699;[1987]1 All E.R.
564, C.A.
Ridge v. Baldwin [1964]A.C. 40;[1963]2 W.L.R. 935;[1963]2 All E.R.
66, H.L. (E.)
Wiseman v. Borneman [1971]A.C. 297;[1969]3 W.L.R. 706;[1969]3 All E.R.
275, H.L. (E.)
Wood v. Woad (1874) L.R. 9 Exch. 190
The following additional cases were cited in argument in the Divisional Court:
Durayappah v. Fernando [1967]2 A.C. 337;[1967]3 W.L.R. 289;[1967]2 All E.R.
152, P.C.
Reg. v. British Pharmaceutical Industry Association Code of Practice Committee, Ex parte Professional Counselling Aids Ltd.
The Times, 7 November 1990
Reg. v. Wear Valley District Council, Ex parte Binks [1985]2 All E.R.
699
Application for judicial review.
On an application for judicial review made pursuant to leave granted by Otton J. on 15 January 1991, the applicant, David Hugh Ross, the finance director and a shareholder of Winchester Group Plc.
(‘Winchester’), sought inter alia, an order of certiorari to quash a notice of exercise of intervention powers by the board of the Life Assurance and United Trust Regulatory Organisation Ltd.
(‘Lautro’) dated 30 October 1990 issued to the Norwich Union Life Insurance Society and its associate companies, Norwich Union Assets Management Ltd., Norwich Union Pensions Management Ltd. and Norwich Union Trust Managers Ltd.
The grounds for relief were, inter alia, that Lautro failed to comply with the rules of natural justice and to act fairly in that it failed before the service of the notice to inform the applicant or Winchester of the allegations being made therein, failed to allow Winchester or its controllers, directors, senior management or authorised company representatives the opportunity of answering or responding to the allegations made against them, failed to take into account the interest of Winchester, its controllers, directors, senior management or authorised representatives when deciding to exercise the notice; that Lautro acted unreasonably and came to a decision such that no person or body properly directing itself on the relevant law and acting reasonably could have reached in that it acted with bias against Winchester and its officials, issued the notice at a time its investigations were incomplete and on the basis of findings which were erroneous and provisional, and failed to conclude its investigations before serving the notice; and that Lautro acted ultra vires and in error of law in that the rights of appeal applied to any person subject to the rules of Lautro whether or not members.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Mann L.J.
Andrew Collins Q.C.
and Cherie Booth for the applicant.
Michael Beloff Q.C.
and Richard Gordon for Lautro.
Dominic Dowley for Norwich Union Life Insurance Society.
5 July 1991.
Mann L.J.
read the following judgment.
There is before the court an application for judicial review.
Leave to move was given by Otton J. on 15 January 1991 after an oral hearing.
The applicant is David Hugh Ross, who is the finance director of, and a shareholder in, the Winchester Group Plc.
(‘Winchester’).
The respondent is Life Assurance United Trust Regulatory Organisation Ltd.
(‘Lautro’), which is a recognised self-regulating organisation for the purposes of the Financial Services Act 1986.
The decision impugned is a decision by the board of Lautro on 30 October 1990 to exercise its intervention powers so as to prohibit Norwich Union Life Insurance Society (‘Norwich’) and three associated companies from accepting any new investment business from Winchester or from soliciting investment business from the public through Winchester or any of its representatives.
The relief sought is an order of certiorari, and the principal ground on which relief is sought is that in relation to Winchester the board of Lautro had on 30 October failed to observe the rules of natural justice.
Two other questions were debated before us.
Leave had been sought to add those questions by way of amendment to the grounds for relief, but that leave was refused by Macpherson J. on 7 June 1991, when he indicated the questions could be raised before this court with our leave.
The questions are independent of any evidence and we allowed them to be asked and argued.
They are first, whether Winchester was a member of Lautro and second, whether Winchester, either as a member or as a non-member, had any right of appeal against the decision of 30 October 1990 which had been denied to them.
Mr. Beloff, who appeared for Lautro, conceded that in this court Lautro had to be regarded as a body whose decisions were susceptible to judicial review.
The concession was inevitable, having regard to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Reg. v. Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, Ex parte Datafin Plc. 
[1987]Q.B.
815.
At the hearing before Otton J. counsel for Lautro took a preliminary point as to whether the applicant had a sufficient interest to make an application for judicial review.
The judge was satisfied that the applicant had ‘a sufficiently arguable case, that he has a sufficient interest’ and in the event the question of the applicant's locus standi was not pursued before this court.
Although it would have avoided the possibility of argument had Winchester made the application, I am content to proceed upon the assumption that the applicant has a sufficient interest.
The matrix in which this application is to be considered has three components.
They are the Financial Services Act 1986, the Lautro Rules and the facts.
I shall consider the components in that convenient order.
Financial Services Act 1986
The Financial Services Act 1986 is by its long title an Act to regulate (amongst other things)‘the carrying on of investment business.’
Part I of the Act is divided into 14 chapters and deals with the ‘regulation of investment business.’
It is common ground that Norwich and Winchester carry on ‘investment business’ by reason of their engagement in one or more of the activities which fall within the paragraphs in Part II of Schedule 1 to the Act: section 1(2).
Section 3 prohibits any person from carrying on an investment business unless he is an ‘authorised person’ under Chapter III or an ‘exempted person’under Chapter IV of Part I of the Act.
Section 4 provides that a contravention of section 3 is to be a criminal offence, and the penalties for contravention are made substantial.
Chapter III deals with ‘authorised persons.’
Section 7 provides that a member of a recognised self-regulating organisation is to be an authorised person by virtue of his membership of that organisation.
However, an insurance company which is authorised under the Insurance Companies Act 1982 (as is Norwich), and which is a member of a self-regulating organisation (as is Norwich of Lautro) is an authorised person not by virtue of that membership but by virtue of section 22 of that Act.
This qualification has no significance for present purposes.
The concept of a self-regulating organisation is dealt with in section 8 of the Act of 1986.
The first two subsections provide:
‘(1) In this Act a ‘self-regulating organisation’ means a body (whether a body corporate or an unincorporated association) which regulates the carrying on of investment business of any kind by enforcing rules which are binding on persons carrying on business of that kind either because they are members of that body or because they are otherwise subject to its control.
(2) In this Act references to the members of a self-regulating organisation are references to the persons who, whether or not members of the organisation, are subject to its rules in carrying on the business in question.
Lautro is an organisation within that concept.
A self-regulating organisation becomes a recognised organisation when it is declared to be such by the Secretary of State: section 9(1).
The Secretary of State has, by virtue of an Order made under section 114, transferred the function of recognition, together with most of its other functions under Part I of the Act, to the Securities and Investments Board Ltd.
(‘S.I.B.’)
(Financial Services Act 1986 (Delegation) Order 1987 (S.I.
1987 No. 942)).
S.I.B.
has declared Lautro to be a recognised self-regulating organisation.
It was a precondition of that recognition that Lautro should have appeared to S.I.B.
to satisfy the requirements of Schedule 2 to the Act: section 10(2).
Those requirements in Schedule 2 include:
‘1(1) The rules and practices of the organisation must be such as to secure that its members are fit and proper persons to carry on investment business of the kind with which the organisation is concerned.…
‘2.
The rules and practices of the organisation relating to —(a ) the admission and expulsion of members; and (b ) the discipline it exercises over its members, must be fair and reasonable and include adequate provision for appeals.…
‘3.…(3) The organisation must, so far as practicable, have powers for purposes corresponding to those of Chapter VI of Part I of this Act.
I shall come to Chapter VI, but pause upon Chapter IV, which deals with ‘exempted persons.’
Section 44(1) provides that an ‘appointed representative’ is to be an exempted person in respect of business carried on by him as such a representative.
The expression ‘appointed representative’ is dealt with in section 44(2), which provides:
‘For the purposes of this Act an appointed representative is a person —(a ) who is employed by an authorised person (his ‘principal’) under a contract for services which —(i) requires or permits him to carry on investment business to which this section applies; and (ii) complies with subsections (4) and (5) below; and (b ) for whose activities in carrying on the whole or part of that investment business his principal has accepted responsibility in writing; and the investment business carried on by an appointed representative as such is the investment business for which his principal has accepted responsibility.
The liability of the principal is elaborated in subsections (7) and (8).
It is common ground that Winchester was an appointed representative of Norwich and as such but not otherwise was an exempted person.
Chapter VI is entitled ‘Powers of intervention.’
Those powers are reflected in the Lautro Rules.
They had to be, for an apparent reflection was a precondition of recognition by S.I.B.
Although the powers of intervention contained in the Act remain in the hands of the Secretary of State, or rather those of S.I.B.
as his delegate, they are not exercisable in relation either to an authorised person who is a member of a self-regulating organisation or to certain appointed representatives: section 64(4).
It is for this reason that I do not consider the intervention powers contained in the Act of 1986, for it is the powers contained in the Lautro Rules that here are relevant.
The Lautro Rules 1988
The Rules are formidable in number and complexity, but no doubt necessarily so.
Fortunately it is only to a few that I need refer.
Part II deals with membership and it is common ground that Norwich was eligible to be, and became, a member of Lautro.
There was argument as to whether Winchester was a member of Lautro.
To that argument I shall come.
A member is obliged to comply with the Rules and in particular he is obliged to comply with rule 2.12(1) under which:
‘A member shall —(a) establish and maintain rules and procedures (‘compliance procedures’) by reference to which each officer, employee, company representative and appointed representative of the member can ensure that he complies with these Rules and the Principles in his dealings with investors;…
The reference to ‘the Principles’ is a reference to statements of principle issued by S.I.B.
under section 47A of the Act of 1986.
Another material obligation is that imposed by rule 3.5(1), which requires a member, as a price of his continuing membership, to be satisfied that the controllers, directors and senior management of an appointed representative are of good character, competent and otherwise suitable to manage the marketing of investments on the member's behalf.
Part VII deals with monitoring and disciplinary procedure.
Chapter II of the Part contains the intervention powers which are important for the purposes of this application.
Rule 7.3(1) provides:
‘Subject to the following provisions of this rule, the board may, in any case where it appears to them that it is desirable in the interests of investors, exercise any of the powers conferred by paragraphs (2) to (7) below.
Rule 7.3(2) confers powers in wide terms as follows:
‘The board may prohibit a member in the course of the member's relevant investment business from —(a) entering into transactions of any specified kind either at all or to any specified extent or in specified circumstances;(b) soliciting business or business of a specified kind from, or except from, persons of a specified kind or in, or except in, specified circumstances;(c) carrying on business in, or except in, a specified manner.
Rule 7.3(11) provides:
‘A member to whom a notice under this rule is given may appeal against that notice to the Appeal Tribunal in accordance with Chapter VIII of this Part…
Rule 7.3(12) provides for the service of a copy of a notice upon a person who is referred to in the notice not being a member concerned.
Such a person is not given a right of appeal to the Appeal Tribunal.
The Appeal Tribunal is constituted under Chapter VIII of Part VII and its members are appointed by the board of Lautro.
Rule 7.23(1) provides that ‘a person’ may appeal to the Appeal Tribunal against various specified matters and amongst those matters is ‘a notice under Chapter II of this Part of these Rules.’
To the significance of ‘a person’ I shall come.
The facts
Forty-two affidavits were filed in this application (mostly by the applicant when acting in person), and to those affidavits are exhibited a large number of documents.
We did not have occasion to examine the affidavits and documents in any detail because the parties had helpfully agreed a statement of salient facts.
Winchester Group Ltd. was incorporated as a private company on 24 August 1989.
The directors of that company were Victor Anthony Tee, Philip Adrian Medland and Robert Louis Kissane.
The company did not then trade.
On 11 January 1990 all three of the directors resigned and were replaced by the applicant as sole director.
On 9 March 1990 Norwich wrote to the applicant, offering in principle to appoint the company as an ‘appointed representative,’ but on the basis that Mr. Tee was not a director, shareholder or employee.
The appointment was confirmed on 12 March.
The company then became a public limited company under the style ‘The Winchester Group Plc.’
on 11 May 1990.
At about this time Mr. Tee did have some connection with Winchester, but the extent of that connection and what was to remain of it are matters in dispute between the parties.
That dispute cannot be resolved by this court and we were not asked to do so.
Suffice it to say that the applicant asserts Mr. Tee was in no way concerned with the running of Winchester's business.
However, the proximity of Mr. Tee to Winchester, as it was perceived by Norwich, did cause concern to Norwich, and on 11 May they wrote to the applicant, requesting that he ensured ‘that [Mr. Tee]does not attend Winchester Group's premises or is in any way involved with the running of the business.’
Norwich was then experiencing difficulty in securing a satisfactory reference for Mr. Tee from the Royal Life Insurance Ltd., for whom Mr. Tee had managed a branch in the city of Winchester and which was currently the subject of an internal audit.
Unfortunately Mr. Tee was not the only person who had, or had had, an apparent connection with Winchester and whose activities excited attention.
In September 1990 Mr. Kissane was arrested and charged with fraud arising out of activities when he was employed by Royal.
The circumstances, or alleged circumstances, of Mr. Tee and of Mr. Kissane came to the knowledge of Lautro.
In addition on 15 October S.I.B.
informed Lautro of an apparent connection between a Mr. Randhir Singh and Winchester.
Mr. Singh had recently been arrested on fraud charges arising out of his employment by Abbey Life Assurance Co.
Ltd.
On 15 October the Chief Executive of Lautro notified Norwich of Lautro's intention to conduct a full investigation into the business carried on by Winchester.
The investigation was conducted by Mr. Ian Anthony Wells, a senior enforcement officer of Lautro.
On 22 October documents were removed from Winchester's offices by Mr. Wells, in company with the compliance officer of Norwich, and the documents were examined by Mr. Wells over the next few days.
After a short while Mr. Wells felt able to tell the Chief Executive Officer of Lautro that
‘in his opinion there was evidence to show that there had been serious breaches of the Lautro Rules in respect of the business conducted on behalf of Norwich Union by Winchester.
On 29 October representatives of Norwich were informed at a meeting of Mr. Wells' opinion and grounds for it and that the board of Lautro would meet on the following day to consider a written report by Mr. Wells upon the business undertaken by Winchester.
The board did so meet and resolved to exercise its powers of intervention under rule 7.3(2) of the Lautro Rules.
The board also approved a press release which summarised, but in some detail, the terms of the notice.
The notice was, as is required by rule 7.3(9) of the Lautro Rules, served upon Norwich and the three associated companies.
It embodies the decision impugned and apart from the definitions I must set it out in full.
It reads as follows:
‘2.
Information considered by the board.
At its meeting on 30 October 1990, the board received a report from Ian Wells, a senior enforcement officer, on the progress of an investigation he was carrying on into the affairs and business of the Winchester Group, an appointed representative of Norwich Union.
That investigation had been initiated under rule 7.9(1) (b) of the Rules on the direction of the Chief Executive to the chief enforcement officer in the light of evidence that had come to Lautro's attention suggesting that Norwich Union might have been in breach of various of the rules in failing adequately to monitor the business and operations of the Winchester Group and to ensure compliance with the Code of Conduct.
Attached to that report, were inter alia the following items —(1) an internal report dated 18 September 1990 prepared by Norwich Union in connection with the question whether a Mr. Victor Tee — the holder of 51 per cent.
of the Winchester Group's issued share capital — was of good character and otherwise suitable to manage the marketing of investment contracts on behalf of Norwich Union and also whether he was a fit and proper person to be appointed as a company representative;(2) a letter dated 18 October 1990 directing the chief enforcement officer to undertake the said investigation;(3) correspondence relating to the Winchester Group passing between the Chief Executive and the general manager of Norwich Union since 15 October 1990;(4) a copy of a letter dated 12 October 1990 from Abbey Life to the Securities and Investments Board relating to the connections between the Winchester Group and Mr. Randhir Singh, a former Abbey Life appointed representative, now awaiting trial on mortgage fraud charges;(5) a copy of a letter dated 31 July 1990 from the Winchester Group offering Mr. Singh the position of recruitment officer.
‘3.
The board also received an oral report from the chief legal officer about a meeting with representatives of Norwich Union which had taken place on the morning of 29 October 1990.
‘4.
The restrictions to be imposed on Norwich Union.
In the light of the foregoing material and pending the conclusion of the investigation that has been undertaken at the request of the Chief Executive, the board resolved that, in the interests of investors, Norwich Union should for the time being and with immediate effect be prohibited from:(1) accepting any new investment business from the Winchester Group or any company representative of the Winchester Group and in particular entering into any investment contract with any investor introduced by the Winchester Group or any such company representative; and (2) soliciting investment business from members of the public through the Winchester Group or any of its company representatives.
Provided always that nothing in these restrictions shall preclude Norwich Union from processing any proposal or application form made and dated prior to 31 October 1990 submitted through the Winchester Group or any of its company representatives and entering into any investment contract on the basis of any such a proposal or application form so long as Norwich Union has first satisfied itself that:—(a) any such proposal or application form is genuinely made and dated prior to 31 October 1990;(b) any such proposal or application form is accompanied by a fact find form; and (c) that the fact find form has been fully completed; and (d) that the information shown thereon is sufficient to show that the proposed investment contract which is the subject of the proposal or application form is in the best interests of the investor concerned.
‘5.
These restrictions are imposed by virtue of powers vested in the board under rule 7.3 of the Rules.
‘6.
Reasons for the intervention.
The board considered that although the investigation ordered by the Chief Executive on 18 October 1990 is not yet complete the imposition of the restrictions referred to above is necessary in the interests of investors given the evidence before it highlighting serious deficiencies in Norwich Union's internal systems for monitoring the performance of the Winchester Group and in particular ensuring that the Winchester Group complied with the Code of Conduct.
In this context, the material before the board indicated —(1) that investors were persuaded by company representatives employed by the Winchester Group to cancel their existing policies and to ‘switch’ to Norwich Union without their best interests and any disadvantages attendant upon so doing necessarily being considered;(2) that other undesirable selling practices — for instance‘overselling’whereby investors are persuaded to take out a range of policies which they may not be able to afford in the long term — have been employed by company representatives selling on behalf of the Winchester Group;(3) that the fact find forms completed by the Winchester Group for forwarding to Norwich Union were inadequate for the purposes of ensuring that products were only sold to investors on a ‘best advice’basis;(4) that the connections between Mr. Tee and Mr. Kissane (a former director of the Winchester Group now awaiting trial on charges of theft of client moneys) and also between the Winchester Group and Mr. Randhir Singh were such as to call into question the extent to which the controllers, directors and senior managers of the Winchester Group could be regarded as being of good character and competent or otherwise suitable to manage the marketing of investment contracts on behalf of Norwich Union and also whether the Winchester Group could be safely regarded as a fit and proper person for the purposes of enjoying appointed representative status;(5) that policies had been sold by eight persons engaged by the Winchester Group who had not been appointed as company representatives of Norwich Union or in any other way authorised to sell investment contracts on behalf of Norwich Union and that other individuals who had been appointed as company representatives had not been registered as such with Lautro;(6) that certain company representatives engaged by the Winchester Group appeared to be channelling client moneys through their own personal bank accounts.
‘7.
In deciding to impose the restrictions set out in paragraph 4 above, the board also gave weight to the fact that according to Norwich Union's letter to the Chief Executive of 18 October 1990, that company had no contractual power to suspend the Winchester Group pending the conclusion of the investigation in the absence of Lautro intervening under rule 7.3.
‘8.
Procedural.
The prohibitions set out in paragraph 4 above shall take effect as from the date herein and shall be binding upon Norwich Union until such time as this notice is rescinded or varied by the board or is the subject of an order made by the Appeal Tribunal of Lautro.
Nothing in the prohibition set out above shall be taken to be a direction to Norwich Union to terminate the appointment of the Winchester Group or any other person as an appointed representative.
A member upon whom the board serves a notice under rule 7.3 may appeal against the notice to the Appeal Tribunal of Lautro by giving notice of appeal within 21 days.
A copy notice was sent to Winchester because they were a person referred to in it: see rule 7.3(12).
The first that Winchester knew of the decision in regard to which they had had no opportunity to make any prior representations, was when the copy announced itself upon their fax machine on 31 October.
Winchester at once sought a meeting with Lautro.
This took place on 6 November and was attended by representatives of Norwich.
Winchester's complaints that they had had no opportunity to make any representation and that they lacked particulars of the allegations which were made against them, met with no response from Lautro.
It is not material to any issue before the court, but I should record that on 26 March 1991 the board of Lautro considered whether intervention remained justified in the light of information that had come to their knowledge since 30 October 1990.
The board decided that the information reinforced their earlier conclusion that the exercise of intervention powers was necessary and desirable in the interests of investors.
Norwich did not appeal, as they had a right to do, against the notice of 30 October 1990.
On 11 January 1991 Norwich gave three months' notice of the termination of their agency agreement of 13 March 1990, by virtue of which Winchester had become an appointed representative, and hence an exempted person.
That notice expired according to its terms on 11 April.
Winchester were entitled legitimately to conduct their investment business only by reason of their status as the authorised representative of Norwich.
The inhibition placed upon Norwich has unquestionably had, as Lautro must have known it would have, a seriously damaging effect upon that investment business and hence upon Winchester, their shareholders, staff, employees and investors.
Mr. Beloff was not disposed to challenge this proposition although he said there might be room for dispute as to whether some of the damage which has in fact been suffered was caused by Norwich's termination of the agency agreement.
Accepting that qualification, I regard it as plain that the effect of an intervention notice cast in the terms which were here employed and which were reflected in a accompanying press release, must be most damaging to the authorised representative with whom further business is inhibited until (if ever) the notice is withdrawn.
Winchester's position is, and has been since they first saw the copy notice, that the allegations in it were unfounded and that some or all of the factual material on which the allegations were based was inaccurate.
Lautro accepts that some of the facts were mistaken and that there may be qualifications to some of the allegations.
Some at least of those corrections and qualifications were amongst the matters considered by the board on 26 March 1991.
Mr. Beloff accepts that there remain issues between Lautro and Winchester and he further accepts that there may be room for argument as to whether the material now available would, if it had been produced before 30 October, have made a difference to the decision taken on that day.
For his part Mr. Collins, who appeared for the applicant, does not pursue the argument which is contained in the grounds for relief to the effect that the decision was ‘perverse.’
In those circumstances it is unnecessary for me to discuss the rival contentions of fact or to reach any conclusion upon whether, if Winchester had been enabled to make representations before 30 October, those representations would have made any difference.
Suffice it to say they might have done.
Mr. Collins said that once it was accepted that Lautro operated in the public domain in the public interest, then certain consequences had also to be accepted.
Amongst those consequences, he said, was the imposition of a duty to act fairly towards those who are directly affected by an intervention decision.
He drew our attention to two passages in the judgments in the Court of Appeal in Ex parte Datafin Plc. 
[1987]Q.B.
815.
Sir John Donaldson M.R. said, at p. 842:
‘The only circumstances in which I would anticipate the use of the remedies of certiorari and mandamus would be in the event, which I hope is unthinkable, of the panel acting in breach of the rules of natural justice — in other words, unfairly.
Lloyd L.J.
said, at p. 845:
‘It has been said that ‘it is excellent to have a giant's strength, but it is tyrannous to use it like a giant.’
Nobody suggests that there is any present danger of the panel abusing its power.
But it is at least possible to imagine circumstances in which a ruling or decision of the panel might give rise to legitimate complaint.
An obvious example would be if it reached a decision in flagrant breach of the rules of natural justice.
These observations were made in regard to the Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, but I have no doubt that they are equally applicable to Lautro.
Indeed this was not disputed, but the application to Lautro of the next step in the argument was contentious.
That next step is as to whether natural justice makes any requirement that Winchester had a right to be heard before the decision on 30 October was made.
Mr. Collins asserted that they had either such a right or at least a right that Lautro should consider whether to hear them.
Mr. Beloff denies both of those rights.
Mr. Collins said that any person whose interest are directly affected by a decision of a body acting in the public domain must ordinarily be given the opportunity of knowing what is alleged against him and of making representations to the decision taker.
Where that right is not granted by the framework within which the decision taker operates then it should be supplied as an implied grant by the law.
This proposition was supported by reference to well known authorities:Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 C.B.N.S. 180;Wood v. Woad (1874) L.R. 9 Exch. 190;Ridge v. Baldwin [1964]A.C. 40 and Wiseman v. Borneman [1971]A.C. 297.
From amongst the numerous citations which could be made from the judgments and speeches in those cases, I am content to take the judgment of Byles J. in Cooper's case, 14 C.B.N.S. 180.
That was a case in which a district board took it upon themselves to pull down Mr. Cooper's house, which they regarded as unsatisfactory, and to burden him with the cost of demolition without having first given him any type of notice.
The judge said, at p. 194:
‘It seems to me that the board are wrong whether they acted judicially or ministerially.
I conceive they acted judicially, because they had to determine the offence, and they had to apportion the punishment as well as the remedy.
That being so, a long course of decisions, beginning with Dr. Bentley's case [Rex v. Cambridge University (1722) 1 Stra. 557], and ending with some very recent cases, establish, that, although there are no positive words in a statute requiring that the party shall be heard, yet the justice of the common law will supply the omission of the legislature.
Mr. Collins' formulation employed the phrase ‘directly affected.’
That employment was necessary because Winchester was not the subject of the decision of 30 October 1990.
The subject was Norwich even although it was the conduct of Winchester and of persons said to be associated with them which was in issue.
In support of his employment Mr. Collins referred us to Reg. v. Liverpool Corporation, Ex parte Liverpool Taxi Fleet Operators' Association [1972]2 Q.B.
299.
In that case the corporation in the exercise of its licensing powers under section 37 of the Town Police Clauses Act 1847 (10 & 11 Vict. c. 89) limited the number of hackney carriages in that area to 300.
In 1970 and 1971 the applicant association, representing the interests of the 300 existing licence holders, was assured by the town clerk that there would be consultation if an increase in the number of licensed vehicles was to be contemplated.
However, in 1971 a sub-committee of a committee of the council recommended that there be increases, but later the chairman of the committee gave a public undertaking that the numbers would not be increased above 300 until a private Bill then being promoted had been enacted.
Notwithstanding this undertaking the sub-committee subsequently resolved an increase in licences before the passage of the Bill had been completed.
The applicants challenged the validity of that resolution and their challenge was upheld by the Court of Appeal.
Lord Denning M.R. said, at pp. 307–308:
‘First I would say this: when the corporation consider applications for licences under the Town Police Clauses Act 1847, they are under a duty to act fairly.
This means that they should be ready to hear not only the particular applicant but also any other persons or bodies whose interests are affected.
In Rex v. Brighton Corporation, Ex parte Thomas Tilling Ltd. (1916) 85 L.J.K.B. 1552, 1555 Sankey J. said: ‘Persons who are called upon to exercise the functions of granting licences for carriages and omnibuses are, to a great extent, exercising judicial functions; and although they are not bound by the strict rules of evidence and procedure observed in a court of law, they are bound to act judicially.
It is their duty to hear and determine according to law, and they must bring to that task a fair and unbiased mind.’
It is perhaps putting it a little high to say they are exercising judicial functions.
They may be said to be exercising an administrative function.
But even so, in our modern approach, they must act fairly: and the court will see that they do.
To apply that principle here: suppose the corporation proposed to reduce the number of taxicabs from 300 to 200, it would be their duty to hear the taxicab owners' association: because their members would be greatly affected.
They would certainly be persons aggrieved.
Likewise suppose the corporation propose to increase the number of taxicabs from 300 to 350 or 400 or more: it is the duty of the corporation to hear those affected before coming to a decision adverse to their interests.
The Town Clerk of Liverpool was quite aware of this and acted accordingly.
His letters of 24 July 1970, and 28 October 1970, were perfectly proper.
The other thing I would say is that the corporation were not at liberty to disregard their undertaking.
They were bound by it so long as it was not in conflict with their statutory duty.
He then proceeded to elaborate on that point.
Roskill L.J., although endorsing, at p. 311H, the reasons given by the Master of the Rolls, otherwise based his judgment entirely upon the undertaking.
Sir Gordon Willmer also proceeded by reference to the breach of undertaking.
I do not find in this decision a sufficient support for the wide proposition for which Mr. Collins contends.
I think that the case is based upon what nowadays would be described as a legitimate expectation of being heard.
It was so treated by the Privy Council in Attorney-General of Hong Kong v. Ng Yuen Shiu [1983]2 A.C. 629.
Their Lordships, at p. 637, regarded the case as illustrating the proposition:
‘The expectations may be based upon some statement or undertaking by, or on behalf of, the public authority which has the duty of making the decision, if the authority has, through its officers, acted in a way that would make it unfair or inconsistent with good administration for him to be denied such an inquiry.
In my judgment, Mr. Collins' contention runs counter to an important policy consideration.
It is this.
If the law is to imply an obligation to hear representations, then it must also specify with precision to whom that obligation is owed.
If persons beyond the subject of the decision are included, then specificity becomes impossible.
In Cheall v. Association of Professional Executive Clerical and Computer Staff [1983]2 A.C. 180, 190, Lord Diplock said:
‘Decisions that resolve disputes between the parties to them, whether by litigation or some other adversarial dispute-resolving process, often have consequences which affect persons who are not parties to the dispute; but the legal concept of natural justice has never been extended to give such persons as well as the parties themselves rights to be heard by the decision-making tribunal before the decision is reached.
These remarks were made in a different context to this, but I regard them as apposite.
I think it important that a regulatory body should know with precision from whom (if anyone) they have to invite or receive representations without first having to form an impugnable judgment as to who those persons are.
My conclusion makes it unnecessary for me to proceed further upon the natural justice argument.
However, in deference to the arguments addressed to the court I should consider the question as to whether there is any room for the implication of any duty upon the board of Lautro to hear anyone .
The Lautro Rules give no right to anyone to make a representation before an intervention decision is made.
The absence of such a right reflects a similar absence from the provisions in the Act of 1986 which are applicable to authorised persons who are not members of a recognised self-regulating organisation: see section 70.
Such silence, says Mr. Collins, attracts what Lord Reid said in Wiseman v. Borneman [1971]A.C. 297, 308:
‘For a long time the courts have, without objection from Parliament, supplemented procedure laid down in legislation where they have found that to be necessary for this purpose.
But before this unusual kind of power is exercised it must be clear that the statutory procedure is insufficient to achieve justice and that to require additional steps would not frustrate the apparent purpose of the legislation.
See also Lords Guest and Wilberforce, at pp. 310 and 317.
The purpose of an exercise of intervention powers under the Lautro Rules, or of an exercise under Part I of the Act of 1986, is the protection of investors.
The achievement of that purpose must on occasion require action which has urgently to be taken, and the entertainment of representations may not be compatible with the urgency.
Mr. Collins recognised that this could be so, but said that a least there must be a duty to consider whether time admits of the receipt of representations and in this case there was no such consideration by Lautro.
In my judgment, once it is recognised, as inevitably it must be, that a self-regulating organisation may have to act with urgency in order to achieve its purpose, then it would be undesirable to cumber it with the necessity to make a judgment as to whether time admits of an opportunity to make representations.
That was the approach of the Court of Appeal in Reg. v. Birmingham City Council, Ex parte Ferrero Ltd. (1991) 89 L.G.R. 977 where the judgments were handed down on 23 May 1991.
That case concerned the exercise of powers under Part II of the Consumer Protection Act 1987.
Under those powers an enforcement authority can by notice prohibit a person from supplying goods which the authority suspects of contravening a safety provision.
There is an appeal against a notice to a magistrates' court, but there is no express provision for representations prior to service of the notice.
The court held that such a provision should not be implied.
Taylor L.J.
(with whom Fox and Russell L.JJ. agreed) said, at pp. 991–992:
‘But if the supposed duty to consult were to depend upon the facts and urgency of each case, enforcement authorities would be faced with a serious dilemma.
What amounts to urgency is incapable of precise definition, and would be open in many cases to honest and reasonable differences of opinion.
There would be a danger that although the authority reasonably suspected goods were dangerous, they would feel bound to delay serving a notice until they consulted the trader, whereas, without a duty to consult, they would have served forthwith.
Valuable time would be lost and danger could result.
I regard these observations as applicable to the position of a self-regulating organisation.
It appears to me that the omission from the Lautro Rules reflects an omission from the Act, and in my judgment the omission was made with a deliberation in each case which makes an implication impossible.
For the sake of completeness I should mention a further argument which was advanced by Mr. Beloff as to why the rules of natural justice should not apply.
It was to the effect that the decision of 30 October 1990 was provisional in the sense that it was, in its terms, a prohibition ‘for the time being’ pending the conclusion of the investigation: see paragraph 4.
Its provisionality attracts, said Mr. Beloff, the observations of Lord Denning M.R. in Lewis v. Heffer [1978]1 W.L.R. 1061, 1072–1073, where he said:
‘But then comes the point: are the N.E.C. to observe the rules of natural justice?
In John v. Rees [1970]Ch. 345, Megarry J. held that they were.
He said, at p. 397: ‘suspension is merely expulsion pro tanto.
Each is penal, and each deprives the member concerned of the enjoyment of his rights of membership or office.
Accordingly, in my judgment the rules of natural justice prima facie apply to any such process of suspension in the same way that they apply to expulsion.’
Those words apply, no doubt, to suspensions which are inflicted by way of punishment: as for instance when a member of the Bar is suspended from practice for six months, or when a solicitor is suspended from practice.
But they do not apply to suspensions which are made, as a holding operation, pending inquiries.
Very often irregularities are disclosed in a government department or in a business house: and a man may be suspended on full pay pending inquiries.
Suspicion may rest on him: and so he is suspended until he is cleared of it.
No one, so far as I know, has ever questioned such a suspension on the ground that it could not be done unless he is given notice of the charge and an opportunity of defending himself and so forth .
The suspension in such a case is merely done by way of good administration.
A situation has arisen in which something must be done at once.
I agree with Mr. Collins that the application of these remarks to the decision of 30 October 1990 would be a quite unreal application.
The decision had an immediate, and maybe devastating, effect upon Winchester: see as to this Geoffrey Lane L.J.
in Lewis v. Heffer , at p. 1078H.
In my judgment and for the reasons which I have given, the challenge based upon the implication of a requirement of natural justice must fail.
However, as I have indicated, Mr. Collins deployed two further arguments.
The first was that Winchester was a member of Lautro.
The second was that Winchester had a right of appeal under the Lautro Rules which they had not been afforded the opportunity of exercising.
I shall consider the arguments separately.
The first rests upon section 8(2) of the Act of 1986 which I have already cited, and which gives an extended meaning to the concept of membership for the purposes of the Act of 1986.
Mr. Collins said that Winchester was ‘subject’ to the Lautro Rules 1988 and was therefore a member of Lautro.
If this was so the consequence would be that although an exempted person by reason of being an appointed representative, Winchester were also an authorised person.
The structure of the Act of 1986 may initially be thought to be one in which the categories of authorised person and exempted person are mutually exclusive categories.
However, section 64(4) (b ) might seem to contemplate that an appointed representative can also be subject to the rules of a self-regulating organisation and thus under the statute a member of it.
Paragraph (b ) excludes from S.I.B. 's intervention powers a person who is:
‘an appointed representative whose principal…is a member of such an organisation…and is subject to the rules of such an organisation…in carrying on the investment business in respect of which his principal…has accepted responsibility for his activities;…
This is not an easy paragraph to construe, but, assuming that it contemplates what seems to be curious, then I have to ask myself whether Winchester was ‘subject’ to the Lautro Rules 1988.
Mr. Collins relies upon rule 2.12(1) which I have already quoted.
That rule does not purport to subject Winchester to the Rules.
Its purpose is to impose an obligation upon Norwich to secure that Winchester complies with the Rules.
Whether that is sufficient for the purposes of section 8(2) of the Act of 1986 I venture to doubt.
However, assuming that it is and that Winchester became for the purposes of the Act of 1986 a member of Lautro, then the assumption does not lead to any relevant conclusion.
Membership for the purposes of the Act of 1986 could be relevant only if that of itself conferred some right of appeal which has been denied to Winchester.
This leads to Mr. Collins' second argument.
I have quoted rule 7.3(11), which gives a right of appeal to a ‘member’ to whom a notice under that rule is given.
Even if a ‘member’ for the purposes of the Lautro Rules (an assumption which Mr. Beloff said was false), Winchester was not such a member as is referred to in rule 7.3(11).
Such a member was Norwich.
Mr. Collins seeks to avoid this difficulty by referring to rule 7.23(1), which provides ‘a person may appeal to the Appeal Tribunal…against a notice under Chapter II of this Part of these Rules,’ that is to say, against a prohibition notice.
Mr. Collins said that ‘a person’ includes any person whether a member or not, and in particular is apt to include a person, such as was Winchester, who is referred to in a prohibition notice.
I cannot accept this suggestion.
I regard rule 7.23 as restating, by way of convenient compilation, rights of appeal which are given elsewhere in the Rules.
At least one of those rights is given to a person who is not a member, that is to say, to the disappointed applicant for membership: see rules 7.23(44) and 7.23(1) (b)(i).
I regard it as impossible to use the words ‘any person’ to enlarge the category of appellants against a prohibition notice beyond the recipient of the notice.
There is no requirement in the Act of 1986 that a right of appeal should be given to a person who is not the recipient of an intervention notice.
The most that can be said is that S.I.B.
could not have recognised Lautro without being satisfied that the Lautro Rules appear to contain ‘adequate provision for appeals:’ see paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 to the Act.
The Rules do contain adequate provisions for appeal by the person upon whom a notice is served.
They must be treated as adequate because they reflect the statutory provisions in regard to appeals by persons upon who intervention notices are served by S.I.B.
in the exercise of the intervention powers delegated to it by the Secretary of State (as to which see section 97 of the Act).
What can be said is that the Rules of 1988 do not reflect section 99 of the Act, which in conjunction with section 97 enables a person upon whom a copy of an intervention notice has been served by S.I.B.
as being a person referred to in that notice, to refer the matter to which the notice relates to the Financial Services Tribunal in order that they may report thereon to the S.I.B.
There is no kindred provision in the Lautro Rules upon which Winchester could have relied.
Why that is so I do not know.
I find it hard to believe that such a plain omission was not deliberate, but here maybe is a matter for consideration by Lautro, S.I.B.
or both of them.
However, the omission cannot affect the validity of the decision of 30 October 1990, and Mr. Collins did not seek to impugn the propriety of S.I.B. 's recognition of Lautro as a self-regulating organisation.
It was not open to him to do so in this application.
For the reasons which I have given, I would dismiss this application for judicial review.
Hidden J. I agree.
Application dismissed.
No orders for costs.
Solicitors: Carter Faber; Slaughter and May; Boodle Hatfield.
[Reported by Mrs. Gurinder Gosal, Barrister]
Appeal from the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division.
By a notice of appeal dated 13 August 1991 the applicant appealed against that decision of the Divisional Court on the grounds, inter alia, that it had erred (1) in holding that there was no obligation on Lautro to give the applicant an opportunity to make representations prior to the issue of that notice;(2) in asserting that there was a principle of law that a regulatory body should know with precision from whom they must invite representations;(3) in perceiving any difficulty in identifying persons who should have been given advance notification, so as to be treated fairly, of any proposals by Lautro to issue a notice since such notification should at least be given to anyone who would be directly affected by such a notice and/or whose conduct was in issue;(4) in regarding as apposite the remarks of Lord Diplock in Cheall v. Association of Professional Executive Clerical and Computer Staff [1983]2 A.C. 180, 190A since the non-application of the legal concept of natural justice to all persons effected by but not parties to a dispute was not and had never been in issue; and (5) in failing to have regard to the absence of any rights of appeal according to the rules of Lautro in deciding whether the principle of natural justice applied.
Andrew Collins Q.C.
and Cherie Booth for the applicant.
Michael Beloff Q.C.
and Richard Gordon for Lautro.
11 June 1992.
The following judgments were handed down.
Glidewell L.J.
This is an appeal against a decision of the Divisional Court (Mann L.J.
and Hidden J.) which, in a judgment given on 5 July 1991, refused Mr. Ross relief on his application for judicial review.
The applicant, Mr. David Hugh Ross, is the finance director of, and a shareholder in, the Winchester Group Plc.
(‘Winchester’).
The respondent body is the Life Assurance Unit Trust Regulatory Organisation Ltd.
(‘Lautro’).
In these proceedings the applicant seeks to challenge a notice of exercise of intervention powers issued by the board of Lautro to Norwich Union Life Insurance Society (‘Norwich Union’), and three associated or subsidiary companies, dated 30 October 1990.
I shall call this ‘the intervention notice.’
Mr. Ross also challenges the refusal by the board of Lautro to permit him, or Winchester to appeal against the intervention notice to the appeal tribunal constituted under Lautro's rules.
The relief claimed against Lautro was originally an order of certorari to quash the intervention notice, and a declaration that the notice was unlawful.
By leave of the Divisional Court, the applicant was permitted to argue two further issues: first, whether Winchester was a member of Lautro, and secondly whether Winchester, either as a member or as a non-member of Lautro, had any right of appeal against the intervention notice of 30 October 1990.
Self-regulation under the Financial Services Act 1986
The Financial Services Act 1986 introduced a régime for the control of persons and bodies carrying on various kinds of financial business, or offering financial services by what has come to be known as self-regulation.
It is necessary to start by considering the structure of the Act of 1986, so far as is relevant.
Section 3 of the Act provides:
‘No person shall carry on…investment business in the United Kingdom unless he is an authorised person under Chapter III or an exempted person under Chapter IV of this Part of this Act.
Section 4 makes it an offence to carry on investment business in contravention of section 3.
By section 7(1): ‘a member of a recognised self-regulating organisation is an authorised person by virtue of his membership of that organisation.’
Section 8 provides:
‘(1) In this Act a ‘self-regulating organisation’ means a body (whether a body corporate or an unincorporated association) which regulates the carrying on of investment business of any kind by enforcing rules which are binding on persons carrying on business of that kind either because they are members of that body or because they are otherwise subject to its control.
(2) In this Act references to the members of a self-regulating organisation are references to the persons who, whether or not members of the organisation, are subject to its rules in carrying on the business in question.
(3) In this Act references to the rules of a self-regulating organisation are references to the rules (whether or not laid down by the organisation itself) which the organisation has power to enforce in relation to the carrying on of the business in question or which relate to the admission and expulsion of members of the organisation or otherwise to its constitution.
By section 114 of the Act, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry is empowered to transfer many of his functions under the Act of 1986 to a body corporate which is able and willing to discharge those functions.
In the exercise of that power, the Secretary of State has transferred many such functions to Securities and Investments Board Ltd.
(‘S.I.B.’).
Where I refer to sections of the Act which confer powers upon the Secretary of State which are now exercised by the S.I.B., I shall refer to that body.
By sections 9 and 10 of the Act, a self-regulating organisation (‘S.R.O.’)
may apply to S.I.B.
for an order declaring it to be a recognised S.R.O.
for the purposes of the Act.
In order to secure recognition, an S.R.O.
must have rules which comply with the requirements of Schedule 2 to the Act.
For present purposes, the relevant requirements in that Schedule are:
‘1(1) The rules and practices of the organisation must be such as to secure that its members are fit and proper persons to carry on investment business of the kind with which the organisation is concerned.…
‘2.
The rules and practices of the organisation relating to —(a ) the admission and expulsion of members; and (b ) the discipline it exercises over its members, must be fair and reasonable and include adequate provision for appeals.
There is a special régime for insurance companies which are authorised to conduct business under sections 3 or 4 of the Insurance Companies Act 1982.
By section 22 of the Financial Services Act 1986, an insurance company authorised under those sections of the Act of 1982 to carry on insurance business which is investment business within the meaning of the Act of 1986, is an authorised person by virtue of the authorisation under the Act of 1982, and not by virtue of membership of an S.R.O.
However, section 129 of and Schedule 10 to the Act of 1986 have the effect of making an insurance company which is a member of a recognised S.R.O.
subject to the rules of that S.R.O.
in the conduct of investment business.
By section 44(1) of the Act of 1986, an appointed representative, as defined in section 44(2), is an ‘exempted person.’
By section 44(2):
‘For the purposes of this Act an appointed representative is a person —(a ) who is employed by an authorised person (his ‘principal’) under a contract for services which —(i) requires or permits him to carry on investment business to which this section applies; and (ii) complies with subsections (4) and (5) below; and (b ) for whose activities in carrying on the whole or part of that investment business his principal has accepted responsibility in writing; and the investment business carried on by an appointed representative as such is the investment business for which his principal has accepted responsibility.
The remainder of section 44 governs the relationship between an appointed representative and his or its principal.
The relationship between them is essentially one of contract, and section 44 contains a number of requirements as to the contents of such a contract.
The effect of the section is to make the principal responsible to investors for the business carried on by the appointed representative.
Thus under the self-regulatory structure created by the Act of 1986, the S.I.B.
may accord recognition to an S.R.O., and may in appropriate circumstances revoke that recognition.
A recognised S.R.O.
controls those authorised persons who are members of it by requiring them to comply with the rules of the organisation.
The authorised person as principal controls its appointed representatives who are exempted persons within section 3 of the Act of 1986 by virtue of them being representatives whose authorisation may be terminated.
In the present case Lautro is a recognised S.R.O.
Norwich Union is an authorised person by virtue of section 22 of the Act of 1986, but is a member of and is subject to control under the rules of Lautro.
Winchester was, at the material time, an appointed representative of Norwich Union, and therefore an exempted person.
It is common ground that the business carried on by Winchester as an appointed representative of Norwich Union was investment business within the meaning of the Act of 1986.
As I have said, it is claimed on Winchester's behalf that in addition to being an exempted person, it was also a member of Lautro itself, and thus in addition an appointed person.
I shall return later to this argument, which is in issue.
Lautro's rules at the relevant time
Lautro's rules were revised in February 1992.
One of the revisions relates to a matter which arises in this appeal, and I shall refer to it later.
However, on 30 October 1990, when the intervention notice was issued, Lautro's then current rules included the following provisions which are relevant to the present appeal.
Rule 2.12. (1) provided:
‘A member shall (a) establish and maintain rules and procedures…by reference to which each officer, employee, company representative and appointed representative of the member can ensure that he complies with these Rules and the Principles in his dealings with investors;…
By rule 3.4(1):
‘The member shall ensure that a person is not appointed as a company representative of that member except on terms which impose on him a duty to act in the performance of his functions as a company representative in such a way as to comply with the code of conduct;…
By rule 3.5(1):
‘A body corporate or an unincorporated association shall not be appointed as, or be permitted to continue as, a member's appointed representative unless the member is satisfied on reasonable grounds that the controllers, directors and senior management of that body or association are of good character and are competent and otherwise suitable to manage the marketing of investment contracts on the member's behalf.
Rule 7.3 covers the intervention powers of Lautro.
By rule 7.3(2):
‘The board may prohibit a member in the course of the member's relevant investment business from —(a) entering into transactions of any specified kind either at all or to any specified extent or in specified circumstances;(b) soliciting business or business for a specified kind from, or accept from, persons of a specified kind or in, or except in, specified circumstances;(c) carrying on business in, or except in, a specified manner.
It was under this provision that the intervention notice was issued.
By rule 7.3(9) to (12):
‘(9) The powers conferred on the board by the previous provisions of this rule shall be exercisable by notice given to the member concerned; and the notice shall state the date on which it is to take effect.
(10) The board may, on their own motion or on the application of the member concerned, by notice rescind or vary the notice given under paragraph 9 above; and if the board refuse such an application by the member they shall give the member notice of the refusal.
A notice (under this paragraph) shall state the date on which it is to take effect.
(11) A member to whom a notice under this rule is given may appeal against that notice to the Appeal Tribunal in accordance with Chapter VIII of this Part and the notice shall state that that right exists and the time within which it may be exercised; and —(a) a notice under paragraph (9) above shall state the reasons why it appears to the board to be desirable for the protection of investors for them to exercise their powers in the manner and in relation to the member in question; and (b) a notice under paragraph (10) above shall state why the notice under paragraph (9) is being rescinded or varied.
(12) Where the reasons stated in a notice under this rule relate specifically to matters which (a) refer to a person identified in the notice other than the member in question; and (b) are in the opinion of the board prejudicial to that person in any office or employment, the board shall, unless they consider it impracticable to do so, serve a copy of the notice on that person.
Chapter VIII of the Rules provides for the setting up of, and the procedure of an Appeal Tribunal to which a member on whom an intervention notice is served may appeal.
It will be seen that where Lautro is advised to serve or is considering the service of an intervention notice on a member, the rules do not place any obligation on it to give that member any advance warning of the intended action, nor to give him any opportunity to make representations before the intervention notice is served.
However, under rule 7.3(10) the member may, once the notice is served, apply to the board to rescind it, and under rule 7.3(11) may appeal against the notice to the Appeal Tribunal.
Thus a member of Lautro upon whom an intervention notice is served is in much the same position as a defendant to an action at law against whom an ex parte injunction is obtained.
He may apply immediately it is served to set it aside, and also or instead of making such application, he may appeal against the imposition of the injunction.
It will be seen, however, that although the Rules required that if the notice related to and was prejudicial to a person other than a member, a copy of the notice must be served upon him, such a person not only did not have any prior opportunity of making representations why the notice should not be issued, but was not given, under the Rules, the right to apply to set it aside, nor any right to appeal against the notice.
It is this lack in the Rules of Lautro of any such rights for persons affected which forms the general basis of the applicant's complaint in these proceedings.
The facts
Many affidavits were filed in these proceedings, but for our purposes it has not been necessary to refer to them in any detail, because the facts are carefully summarised in the judgment of Mann L.J.
in the Divisional Court, and indeed the parties themselves have helpfully agreed a statement of facts.
The summary which follows is drawn from those two sources.
Winchester Group Ltd. was incorporated on 24 August 1989.
The directors then were Mr. V. A. Tee, Mr. P. A. Medland and Mr. R. L. Kissane.
All were at that time employed in the Winchester office of the Royal Life Insurance Co.
Ltd.
The company did not trade at that time.
On 11 January 1990 all three of the then directors resigned, and the applicant was appointed as the sole director, with Miss Susan Bird as secretary.
Only two shares were issued to the applicant and Miss Bird, which they held as nominees.
In an affidavit sworn on 17 December 1990, Mr. Tee deposes: ‘I am 51 per cent.
shareholder in the Winchester Group Plc.
…’ Presumably one of the two issued shares was held by the shareholder as nominee for Mr. Tee.
Mr. Kissane played no part in the company after his resignation.
By a letter dated 9 March 1990, Mr. White, National Sales Manager of the Norwich Union, wrote to the applicant, saying that in principle he was:
‘willing to appoint the Winchester Group as appointed representatives of the Norwich Union on the basis of the two directors, Susan Lesley Bird and David Hugh Ross, as shown on the application form dated 9 February 1990.
The letter concluded:
‘The appointment of the Winchester Group is on the basis that Mr. Victor Tee is no longer a director, a shareholder or an employee and we will inform you as soon as we have received a response to our request to the Royal Life Insurance Ltd. for a reference.
Until the outcome of these inquiries Mr. Tee must not be associated in any way with the Winchester Group.
On 13 March 1990 Winchester was formally appointed as appointed representative of Norwich Union by a letter of that date.
The letter did not contain any reference to Mr. Tee.
It is right to say that the applicant asserts that since that time Mr. Tee has not been associated with the running of Winchester's business, although of course on his own evidence he was the majority shareholder in that company.
It seems that Norwich Union did not obtain a satisfactory reference for Mr. Tee from the Royal Life Insurance Ltd.
Moreover, as the Divisional Court put it, ante, p. 557B:
‘…
Mr. Tee was not the only person who had, or had had, an apparent connection with Winchester and whose activities excited attention.
In September 1990 Mr. Kissane was arrested and charged with fraud arising out of activities when he was employed by Royal.
This fact, and the alleged connection between Mr. Kissane and Mr. Tee and Winchester came to the attention of Lautro.
Moreover, in October 1990 a Mr. Randhir Singh was arrested on fraud charges arising out of his employment by Abbey Life, and S.I.B.
informed Lautro that there was some apparent connection between Mr. Randhir Singh and Winchester.
As a result (and I am here quoting from the judgment of Mann L.J., ante, p. 557C–F):
‘On 15 October 1990 the Chief Executive of Lautro notified Norwich of Lautro's intention to conduct a full investigation into the business carried on by Winchester.
The investigation was conducted by Mr. Ian Anthony Wells, a senior enforcement officer of Lautro.
On 22 October documents were removed from Winchester's offices by Mr. Wells, in company with the compliance officer of Norwich, and the documents were examined by Mr. Wells over the next few days.
After a short while Mr. Wells felt able to tell the Chief Executive Officer of Lautro that ‘in his opinion there was evidence to show that there had been serious breaches of the Lautro Rules in respect of the business conducted on behalf of Norwich Union by Winchester.’
On 29 October representatives of Norwich were informed at a meeting of Mr. Wells' opinion and grounds for it and that the board of Lautro would meet on the following day to consider a written report by Mr. Wells upon the business undertaken by Winchester.
The board did so meet and resolved to exercise its powers of intervention under rule 7.3(2) of the Lautro Rules.
The board also approved a press release which summarised, but in some detail, the terms of the notice.
The notice was, as is required by rule 7.3(9) of the Lautro Rules 1988, served upon Norwich and the three associated companies.
And copies of it were also served on Winchester by fax on 31 October 1990.
The press release which was dated 31 October 1990 summarised the effect of the intervention notice, and contained the following passage:
‘The board took the view that the reports called into question whether certain of the controllers, directors and senior managers of the Winchester Group were fit and proper, competent and otherwise suitable to manage the marketing of investment contracts on behalf of Norwich Union.
On 1 November 1990, Norwich Union wrote to the applicant telling him the effect of the intervention notice, and saying:
‘We have therefore suspended the Winchester Group as an appointed representative of the Norwich Union to take effect immediately and to continue until such time as they hear further from us to the contrary.
Winchester at once sought a meeting with Lautro.
This meeting took place on 6 November 1990, and was attended also by representatives of Norwich Union.
Winchester complained that they had had no opportunity to make any representations, and that they lacked particulars of the allegations made against them, to which there was no direct response from Lautro.
However, Winchester did make attempts to rebut some of the allegations contained in the notice itself.
Winchester's position is, and always has been, that the allegations in the intervention notice were unfounded and that some at least of the factual material on which the allegations were based was inaccurate.
Lautro later accepted that some of the facts alleged were not correct and that some of the allegations must be qualified.
As a result of this acceptance that some of the facts were incorrect, the board of Lautro, on 26 March 1991, reconsidered the question whether intervention remained justified, but decided that it remained necessary and desirable in the interests of investors.
In the meantime, Norwich Union had made it clear that they were not exercising their right to appeal under the rules of Lautro.
They notified the applicant of their decision not to appeal by letter dated 23 November 1990.
On 11 January 1991 Norwich Union gave three months' notice of the termination of their agency agreement of 13 March 1990 with Winchester.
That notice therefore expired on 11 April 1991.
Winchester were only entitled to conduct their investment business lawfully by reason of being an authorised representative of Norwich Union.
Once its position as such authorised representative was first suspended, and then terminated, Winchester was unable to conduct any investment business.
As the Divisional Court commented, ante, p. 560C–E:
‘The inhibition placed upon Norwich has unquestionably had, as Lautro must have known it would have, a seriously damaging effect upon that investment business and hence upon Winchester, their shareholders, staff, employees and investors.
Mr. Beloff was not disposed to challenge this proposition although he said there might be room for dispute as to whether some of the damage which has in fact been suffered was caused by Norwich's termination of the agency agreement.
Accepting that qualification, I regard it as plain that the effect of an intervention notice cast in the terms which were here employed and which were reflected in an accompanying press release, must be most damaging to the authorised representative with whom further business is prohibited until (if ever) the notice is withdrawn.
The issues
In this appeal the following issues arise, or could have arisen.
I will set them out in the order in which I propose to deal with them.
(i) Does the applicant have a sufficient interest within R.S.C., Ord. 53, r. 3(7) to entitle him to apply for judicial review?(ii) Is the exercise by Lautro of its power to serve an intervention notice subject to judicial review?(iii) Is, or was, Winchester a member of Lautro?(iv) Whether or not Winchester was a member of Lautro, did it have a right to appeal under Lautro's rules to the Appeal Tribunal?(v) Did the failure by Lautro to give Winchester an opportunity to make representations before the service of the intervention notice invalidate that notice so that it should be quashed?
This is the major issue.
Conclusion on issues (i) and (ii)
At a hearing before Otton J. on 15 January 1991, when he gave leave to move, counsel for Lautro raised the question whether the applicant had a sufficient interest to entitle him to make the application.
The matter was not further pursued, and was not raised before us by Mr. Beloff.
My own view is that the proper applicant was probably Winchester rather than the applicant personally, but I regard this as a technicality.
The parties quite rightly treated the applicant as Winchester's representative for this purpose.
This point therefore disappears.
Mr. Beloff concedes that the decision of the Court of Appeal in Reg. v. Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, Ex parte Datafin Plc. 
[1987]Q.B.
815, establishes that the decisions of a body with the functions and constitution of Lautro render those decisions susceptible to judicial review.
Whether he will adhere to this concession if this matter proceeds any further, I do not know.
I turn to consider the respective submissions on the other three issues.
Issue (iii).
Is, or was, Winchester a member of Lautro?
Mr. Collins, for the applicant, bases his submission that Winchester was a member of Lautro first upon the wording of section 8(2) of the Financial Services Act 1986.
To repeat, that subsection provides:
‘In this Act references to the members of a self-regulating organisation are references to the persons who, whether or not members of the organisation, are subject to its rules in carrying on the business in question.
Mr. Collins then points out that by rule 2.12(1), Lautro requires its members to establish and maintain procedures by reference to which appointed representatives can ensure that they comply with Lautro's rules.
Thus, he submits, Winchester was subject to the rules of Lautro, and therefore it follows a member within the statutory meaning of that word.
Mr. Collins accepts that this involves a person or body being simultaneously an authorised person and an exempted person under section 3 of the Act of 1986.
However, he points out that another provision of the Act, namely section 64(4) (b ), seems to envisage this.
Section 64 of the Act of 1986 is the first section of Chapter VI which deals with the powers of intervention exercisable directly by the S.I.B.
in cases where there is no recognised S.R.O.
with powers of intervention.
Section 64(4) provides that Chapter VI is not to apply where there is a recognised S.R.O., and that the Chapter shall not apply to:
‘an appointed representative whose principal…is a member of (a recognised self-regulating organisation) and is subject to the rules of such an organisation…in carrying on the investment business in respect of which his principal or each of his principals has accepted responsibility for his activities;…
Mr. Collins submits that this wording implies that there may be appointed representatives who are subject to the rules of recognised S.R.O. 's.
Mr. Beloff in reply submits that the dichotomy between authorised persons and exempted persons is a major feature of the whole structure of the Act of 1986.
It is thus most unlikely that the legislature intended that one person or body should be capable of being in both categories.
He submits that though the wording of section 8(2) of the Act of 1986 is at first sight difficult, there can be persons, for example, who have voluntarily agreed to abide by the rules of a recognised S.R.O.
and who would thus fall within the statutory definition of membership of that organisation.
For an example of this, he refers us to a code of practice of the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, with which some firms who are not members of the association nevertheless voluntarily agree to comply.
Mr. Collins' reference to section 64(4) (b ) of the Act of 1986, Mr. Beloff submits, is based upon a misreading of that provision.
The phrase ‘is subject to the rules of such an organisation’ qualify the principal in that case, not the appointed representative.
As for rule 2.12. (1), Mr. Beloff submits that this supports his submission, not that of Mr. Collins, since what it does is to provide that the Norwich Union must have rules which will ensure that appointed representatives such as Winchester comply with the Lautro Rules.
Just as a sub-lessee may be required by his sub-lease to comply with some of the covenants in the head-lease, and is answerable to his sub-lessor if he should breach those covenants, so rule 2.12(1) provides a régime in which appointed representatives will be subject to the Norwich Union, not directly to Lautro.
With these arguments advanced by Mr. Beloff, I, for my part, agree.
I think it is clear that, despite the obscure wording of section 8(2) of the Act of 1986, Winchester and firms in its position are not, and were not, members of Lautro either by reason of actual membership or by reason of the statutory definition.
Issue (iv).
Did Winchester have a right of appeal apart from membership?
The argument here is based upon the wording of rule 7.23, which starts: ‘A person may appeal to the Appeal Tribunal…
’ This contrasts with rule 7.3(11) which starts: ‘A member to whom a notice under this rule is given may appeal…’
In his judgment on this aspect of the matter, Mann L.J.
said, ante, p. 566B–C:
‘Mr. Collins said that ‘a person’ includes any person whether a member of not, and in particular is apt to include a person, such as was Winchester, who is referred to in a prohibition notice.
I cannot accept this suggestion.
I regard rule 7.23 as restating, by way of convenient compilation, rights of appeal which are given elsewhere in the Rules.
At least one of those rights is given to a person who is not a member, that is to say, to the disappointed applicant for membership: see rules 7.23(44) and 7.23(1) (b)(i).
I regard it as impossible to use the word ‘any person’ to enlarge the category of appellants against the prohibition notice beyond the recipient of the notice.
I agree with this, and therefore reject Mr. Collins' argument under this head.
This brings me to the main issue.
Issue (v).
Was the intervention notice invalid because the procedure was unfair to Winchester?
The submissions made by Mr. Collins for Winchester on this issue can be summarised as follows:(i) in exercising its functions as a recognised S.R.O., Lautro was under a duty to act in accordance with the rules of natural justice: to act fairly in the circumstances;(ii) that duty was owed not merely to Lautro's member, Norwich Union, but to persons or bodies who would be prejudicially affected by its decisions, in particular to those whose earnings or profits would be affected;(iii) fairness required that a body in the position of Winchester should be notified that Lautro was considering issuing an intervention notice, and be given the opportunity to make representations before the decision to issue the intervention notice.
Mr. Collins refers us to several well known authorities in support of his propositions.
The earliest, the classic origin of the principle for which he contends, is Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works (1863) 14 C.B.N.S. 180.
This decision contained two well known dicta, the first of which is from Willes J., at p. 190:
‘I apprehend that a tribunal which is by law invested with power to affect the property of one of Her Majesty's subjects, is bound to give such subject an opportunity of being heard before it proceeds: and that that rule is of universal application, and founded upon the plainest principles of justice.
The second passage is in the judgment of Byles J., at p. 194:
‘a long course of decisions, beginning with Dr. Bentley's case [Rex v. Cambridge University (1722) 1 Stra. 557], and ending with some very recent cases, establish, that, although there are no positive words in a statute requiring that the parties shall be heard, yet the justice of the common law will supply the omission of the legislature.
Mr. Collins also refers us to Wood v. Woad (1874) L.R. 9 Exch. 190, and the decisions of the House of Lords in Ridge v. Baldwin [1964]A.C. 40 and Wiseman v. Borneman [1971]A.C. 297.
To these I would add a passage from the speech of Lord Bridge of Harwich in Lloyd v. McMahon [1987]A.C. 625, 702–703, in which he said:
‘My Lords, the so-called rules of natural justice are not engraved on tablets of stone.
To use the phrase which better expresses the underlying concept, what the requirements of fairness demand when any body, domestic, administrative or judicial, has to make a decision which will affect the rights of individuals depends on the character of the decision-making body, the kind of decision it has to make and the statutory or other framework in which it operates.
In particular, it is well established that when a statute has conferred on any body the power to make decisions affecting individuals, the courts will not only require the procedure prescribed by the statute to be followed, but will readily imply so much and no more to be introduced by way of additional procedural safeguards as will ensure the attainment of fairness.
As to the first of Mr. Collins' propositions, I have no doubt that Lautro was and is obliged to exercise its powers fairly.
Indeed, paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 to the Act of 1986, which I have already quoted, requires that Lautro's Rules relating to the admission and expulsion of members and the discipline it exercises over its members must be fair and reasonable and include adequate provision for appeals.
Thus Lautro is under a duty not merely at common law but by statute to be fair in these respects towards its members.
I find much more difficulty with the second proposition advanced by Mr. Collins.
In effect this raises the question, to whom is the duty of fairness owed?
Is it owed to persons and bodies who are not members of Lautro?
None of the authorities to which I have so far referred dealt with a situation in which a decision was made which directly affected one party, A, and at the same time indirectly affected a second party, B, so as to raise the question: is there any duty in the decision-making authority to be fair towards B?
In support of his proposition, Mr. Collins quotes a short passage from the judgment of Lord Denning M.R. in Reg. v. Liverpool Corporation, Ex parte Liverpool Taxi Fleet Operators' Association [1972]2 Q.B.
299, a decision of this court.
In that case the corporation was considering increasing the maximum number of licensed taxis in its area.
The association objected.
During the course of discussion, the chairman of the relevant committee publicly undertook that the number of licensed taxis would not be increased until a private Bill which contained relevant provisions had been enacted and come into force.
Despite that undertaking, before the legislation was enacted, the committee and the council decided to increase the number of licensed taxis.
On a renewed application for leave to move for what would now be called judicial review, this court granted the application.
All three members of the court took the view that the corporation was bound by its undertaking and could not resile from it without at least giving the association an opportunity to make representations.
This was therefore the reason for the decision.
However, in the course of his judgment Lord Denning said, at p. 307:
‘when the corporation consider applications for licences under the Town Police Clauses Act 1847, they are under a duty to act fairly.
This means that they should be ready to hear not only the particular applicant but also any other persons or bodies whose interests are affected.
Mr. Collins argues that this applies in the circumstances of the present case.
However, the question whether, apart from the undertaking, the association had a right to make representations was not in issue in that case.
Indeed, it was a question about which, at p. 311B, Roskill L.J.
expressed doubts.
I cannot therefore regard the two sentences from the judgment of Lord Denning, which I have quoted, as being an authority on the question which we have to consider.
The issue arises because of the self-regulatory structure which has been created under the Act of 1986.
As I have said, a recognised S.R.O.
controls those authorised persons who are members of it.
The authorised persons, as principals, control their appointed representatives who are thus exempted persons.
Thus the line of control in the present case is for Lautro to control the operations of Norwich Union, and Norwich Union in turn, by virtue of its contractual relationship, to control Winchester.
However, there is no doubt that decisions made by Lautro, particularly in relation to the issue of intervention notices, will frequently have a very considerable affect upon the appointed representatives, such as Winchester.
I agree with Mr. Beloff that there seems to be no direct authority on the question whether, and to what extent, the controlling authority owes a duty of fairness to the appointed representative thus indirectly affected by its decisions.
Mr. Beloff submits that the first question we have to answer is: is there any known rule of natural justice that a person who is not the subject of an administrative decision should nevertheless have the right to make representations before the decision is made?
In his judgment in the Divisional Court, Mann L.J.
said, ante, p. 563B–E:
‘In my judgment, Mr. Collins' contention runs counter to an important policy consideration.
It is this.
If the law is to imply an obligation to hear representations, then it must also specify with precision to whom that obligation is owed.
If persons beyond the subject of the decision are included, the specificity becomes impossible.
In Cheall v. Association of Professional Executive Clerical and Computer Staff [1983]2 A.C. 180, 190, Lord Diplock said: ‘Decisions that resolve disputes between the parties to them, whether by litigation or some other adversarial dispute-resolving process, often have consequences which affect persons who are not parties to the dispute; but the legal concept of natural justice has never been extended to give such persons as well as the parties themselves rights to be heard by the decision-making tribunal before the decision is reached.’
These remarks were made in a different context to this, but I regard them as apposite.
I think it important that a regulatory body should know with precision from whom (if anyone) they have to invite or receive representations without first having to form an impugnable judgment as to who those persons are.
Mr. Cheall was the secretary of the local branch of a trade union.
Disenchantement with the policy of that union led him to resign from it and to join another union, Association of Professional Executive Clerical and Computer Staff (‘A.P.E.X.’)
The decision by A.P.E.X.
to admit him as a member breached what was known as the Bridlington Agreement, which governed the relationships between trades unions.
The T.U.C. disputes committee, on a complaint by the other union, found that A.P.E.X.
had acted in breach of the Bridlington Agreement.
During the course of its consideration, the disputes committee did not invite, or receive, any representations from Mr. Cheall.
On receipt of the disputes committee's decision, A.P.E.X.
purported to terminate Mr. Cheall's membership.
He then sought a declaration that A.P.E.X.
was not entitled to do this.
Bingham J. dismissed Mr. Cheall's action; the Court of Appeal (by a majority) allowed his appeal, but the House of Lords, in turn, allowed an appeal against this court's decision and upheld Bingham J. One of the issues before the House of Lords was whether Mr. Cheall had been entitled to be heard by the disputes committee of the T.U.C. before it made its decision.
Their Lordships held that there was no principle of natural justice requiring the T.U.C. to hear him.
It was in that context that Lord Diplock expressed the opinion which I set out above.
However, I note that towards the conclusion of his speech, Lord Diplock said, at p. 191:
‘Different considerations might apply if the effect of Cheall's expulsion from A.P.E.X.
were to have put his job in jeopardy, either because of the existence of a closed shop or for some other reason.
But this is not the case.
I accept that very frequently a decision made which directly affects one person or body will also affect, indirectly, a number of other persons or bodies, and that the law does not require the decision-making body to give an opportunity to every person who may be affected however remotely by its decision to make representations before the decision is reached.
Such a principle would be unworkable in practice.
On the other hand, it is my opinion that when a decision-making body is called upon to reach a decision which arises out of the relationship between two persons or firms, only one of whom is directly under the control of the decision-making body, and it is apparent that the decision will be likely to affect the second person adversely, then as a general proposition the decision-making body does owe some duty of fairness to that second person, which, in appropriate circumstances, may well include a duty to allow him to make representations before reaching the decision.
This will particularly be the case when the adverse effect is upon the livelihood or the ability to earn of the second person or body.
In the present case I do not agree with Mann L.J., with all respect to him, that there is any great difficulty in defining the persons from whom, applying the principle to which I have just referred, the decision-making authority might be required to seek representations.
Indeed, rule 7.3(12) of Lautro's Rules required Lautro to serve a copy of the intervention notice on Winchester, since that notice referred to Winchester and was, in the opinion of Lautro, prejudicial to Winchester in its position as the appointed representative of Norwich Union.
Mr. Beloff submits that the requirement of notice to bodies, such as Winchester, was necessary to ensure that they did not breach the intervention notice, but in my view the limitation of the category of those entitled to be given notice to persons who will be prejudicially affected can only mean that it is the prejudice which brings with it the necessity to serve.
Thus in my view this Lautro rule has already defined, with some clarity, the persons who shall be served, and to whom in my opinion in appropriate circumstances Lautro owe a general duty to act fairly.
This brings me to Mr. Collins' third point: did fairness require that Winchester should be notified before the decision to serve the intervention notice was reached?
I notice that Lautro's rules at the time did not require Lautro to give their members, such as Norwich Union, the opportunity to make representations before serving an intervention notice.
The reason for this is, in my view, made clear in Lautro's rule 7.3(1), which I have not so far quoted.
That rule, which is the first of the rules dealing with Lautro's intervention powers, authorises the board: ‘In any case where it appears to them that it is desirable in the interests of investors…’ to exercise their powers of intervention.
Thus an intervention notice is appropriate when the board concludes, on the material before it, that the interests of investors require the practice about which the board is concerned to cease immediately pending further investigation of the allegations.
The decision whether or not to exercise this power, and to serve a notice before hearing the persons to whom it is directed or whom it will affect, must be one which the board must balance against what it regards as the interests of investors.
The board in this sense will be moved by similar considerations to those which affect a court in deciding whether to grant an injunction ex parte.
On this issue, Mann L.J.
said in his judgment, ante, pp. 563H — 564F.
‘The purpose of an exercise of intervention powers under the Lautro Rules, or of an exercise under Part I of the Act of 1986, is the protection of investors.
The achievement of that purpose must on occasion require action which has urgently to be taken, and the entertainment of representations may not be compatible with the urgency.
Mr. Collins recognised that this could be so, but said that at least there must be a duty to consider whether time admits of the receipt of representations and in this case there was no such consideration by Lautro.
In my judgment, once it is recognised, as inevitably it must be, that a self-regulating organisation may have to act with urgency in order to achieve its purpose, then it would be undesirable to cumber it with the necessity to make a judgment as to whether time admits of an opportunity to make representations.
That was the approach of the Court of Appeal in Reg. v. Birmingham City Council, Ex parte Ferrero Ltd. (1991) 89 L.G.R. 977 where the judgments were handed down on 23 May 1991.
That case concerned the exercise of powers under Part II of the Consumer Protection Act 1987.
Under those powers an enforcement authority can by notice prohibit a person from supplying goods which the authority suspects of contravening a safety provision.
There is an appeal against a notice to a magistrates' court, but there is no express provision for representations prior to service of the notice.
The court held that such a provision should not be implied.
Taylor L.J.
(with whom Fox and Russell L.JJ. agreed) said, at pp. 991–992: ‘But if the supposed duty to consult were to depend upon the facts and urgency of each case, enforcement authorities would be faced with a serious dilemma.
What amounts to urgency is incapable of precise definition, and would be open in many cases to honest and reasonable differences of opinion.
There would be a danger that although the authority reasonably suspected goods were dangerous, they would feel bound to delay serving a notice until they consulted the trader, whereas, without a duty to consult, they would have served forthwith.
Valuable time would be lost and danger could result.’
I regard these observations as applicable to the position of a self-regulating organisation.
It appears to me that the omission from the Lautro Rules reflects an omission from the Act, and in my judgment the omission was made with a deliberation in each case which makes an implication impossible.
I agree with these observations, but with a qualification.
This is that, in my view, if a decision-making body is to exercise powers such as those of serving an intervention notice without giving anybody the opportunity to make representations beforehand, its procedures should provide that those who might otherwise expect to have been allowed to make representations should at least be allowed to make immediate application to set the decision aside and to appeal against it.
In this respect the situation is very similar to that which obtains when a court grants an ex parte injunction.
In Wiseman v. Borneman [1971]A.C. 297, Lord Wilberforce said, at p. 318:
‘Thirdly it is true, as the judgments in the Court of Appeal point out, that ex parte applications are frequently made to the courts and granted without hearing the party affected: but merely to say this overlooks that procedure invariably exists, and is where necessary invoked, for enabling the party affected rapidly to seek annulment or amendment of the order made against him.
At the relevant time rule 7.3(1) of Lautro's Rules gave a member on whom an intervention notice was served the right to apply (immediately) for the board to rescind the notice, and rule 7.3(11) gave a right to the member to appeal against the notice and against any decision not to rescind it.
At that time the Rules gave no such rights to other persons served with the notice, such as Winchester.
In February 1992, however, Lautro's Rules were amended so as to give other persons served with an intervention notice the right to appeal against it: see new rules 7.28 and 7.3(12).
In my view, when the intervention notice was served on 31 October 1990, Lautro's Rules were defective in not giving such a right of appeal to a person or body in the position of Winchester, and in not giving such a person the right to seek to have the decision to serve the notice rescinded.
In other words, whilst the power to decide to serve an intervention notice without first hearing representations from persons affected was not in itself so unfair as to invalidate the notice, a lack of any means by which the person could immediately thereafter challenge the notice was in my opinion a breach of the requirements of fairness which the law should imply.
Rule 7.3(12) of Lautro's Rules requires service of a copy of an intervention notice upon a person or firm in the position of Winchester because the notice relates specifically to matters prejudicial to that person or firm.
If, in accordance with the view I have just expressed, such a person or firm were given the right to apply immediately the notice was served for it to be rescinded, this remedy might well be of no effect if a press notice was issued at the time of service of the intervention notice, as was done in this case.
If it transpired that the intervention notice was not justified, and Lautro rescinded it, a press notice might already have caused substantial damage to the person affected.
Although this is not a matter in respect of which we are asked to grant any relief, I believe that Lautro should reconsider its practice in this respect, and consider deferring the issue of a press notice until after the person affected has had the opportunity to apply for the notice to be rescinded and to make representations to that effect, and Lautro's board have ruled in the application.
For the reasons I have given, I conclude that if (but only if) Lautro did not afford to a person or firm served with an intervention notice in accordance with rule 7.3(12) the opportunity to apply to the board to rescind the notice, and/or to appeal against it, then the lack of such remedies would be unfair and the procedure unlawful.
However, Mr. Collins (if I have understood him correctly) has expressly limited his challenge to Lautro's failure to allow the making of representations before the service of the intervention notice.
As I have said, I do not consider that this of itself invalidated the notice.
If Mr. Collins had sought to base an argument on the omission from the rules which I have characterised as unfair, we should have had to consider whether the opportunity given to Winchester on 6 November 1990 to make representations to Lautro's board rectified this defect.
We were not, however, asked to consider this.
I am therefore not prepared to quash the intervention notice.
Although I consider that at the relevant time Lautro's Rules, and thus its procedure, were defective in the respects I have outlined, for the reasons I have given I conclude that Lautro were not required by law to afford to Winchester the opportunity to make representations as to why an intervention notice should not be served before deciding whether or not to serve such a notice.
I would therefore dismiss this appeal.
Stocker L.J.
I agree.
McCowan L.J.
I also agree.
Appeal dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Leave to appeal refused.
Solicitors: Carter Faber; Slaughter and May.
[Reported by Nigel J. Mason Esq., Barrister]