

[COURT OF APPEAL]
WOOD AND ANOTHER v. SMITH AND ANOTHER
[1987 W. No. 6652]
1992 Feb. 19, 20
Purchas, Butler-Sloss and Scott L.JJ.
Will — Attestation — Testator's signature — Testator writing name on will before setting out dispositive provisions — Will attested by two witnesses — Whether ‘signed’ by testator — Whether will validly executed — Whether testator having testamentary capacity — Wills Act 1837 (7 Will.
4 & 1 Vict. c. 26), s. 9(a) (b)(as substituted by Administration of Justice Act 1982 (c. 53), s. 17)
The testator made a valid will duly executed with the assistance of solicitors in 1978.
In 1982, two days before he died, he wrote a document in his own handwriting headed ‘My Will by Percy Winterbone’ but did not sign his name at the foot of the document.
The document was signed by two attesting witnesses.
When one of the witnesses pointed out that the testator had not signed the will the testator replied that he had signed it at the top and that it could be signed anywhere.
The executors of the earlier will sought the court's pronouncement for the validity of the 1978 will.
The purported legatees under the later handwritten document counterclaimed for the validity of that document as a codicil to the deceased's will.
The deputy judge refused probate of the 1982 document on the grounds that it had not been duly executed in that, although the amendment by section 17 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982 of section 9 of the Wills Act 1837 allowed a valid signature to be made otherwise than at the foot of the will, it had not altered the requirement that the testator should have made his will before signing it; and that, in any event, the testator had lacked testamentary capacity.
On appeal by the first defendant:—
Held , dismissing the appeal, that the object of the substituted section 9 of the Wills Act 1837 had been to simplify the requirements for the execution and witnessing of a will; that the complementary requirements, of a signature and of an intention that the signature should give effect to the will, demanded a practical approach; that a written name, not being a normal signature, was capable of being a signature for the purposes of section 9; but that where a testamentary document was signed before the dispositive provisions had been written, affirmative evidence was necessary to show that the testator had intended the signature to give effect to the provisions; that by writing his name and the dispositive provisions in one single operation the deceased had provided such evidence; and that, accordingly, the will had been duly executed; but that, on the evidence, the deputy judge had been entitled to conclude that the onus on the defendants of establishing the testamentary capacity of the deceased had not been discharged (post, pp. 588B–H, 589B–F, 592A–C).
Dicta of Mr. Andrew Park Q.C.
in In re White ,decd .
[1991]Ch. 1, 8–9 applied.
Decision of Mr. David Gilliland Q.C., sitting as a deputy High Court judge [1991]3 W.L.R. 514, affirmed in part.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Banks v. Goodfellow (1870) L.R. 5 Q.B.
549
Hoyle, In re [1893]1 Ch. 84, C.A.
Leeman v. Stocks [1951]Ch. 941;[1951]1 All E.R.
1043
White, decd., In re [1991]Ch. 1;[1990]3 W.L.R. 187;[1990]3 All E.R.
1
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Harwood v. Baker (1840) 3 Moo.
P.C. 282, P.C.
Parker v. Felgate (1883) 9 P.D.
171
APPEAL from Mr. David Gilliland Q.C., sitting as a deputy High Court judge in the Chancery Division.
By a writ dated 19 October 1987 the plaintiffs, Mary Wood and John Stuart Seveld, the executors named in a will dated 30 June 1978 of Percy Winterbone deceased who died on 20 April 1986, claimed against the defendants, Clive Smith and Gwendoline Harvey, as legatees named in a pretended codicil purportedly dated 18 April 1986, the pronouncement of the court in solemn form of the will dated 30 June 1978.
The defendants admitted the validity of the will of 30 June 1978 but contended that the deceased had duly executed a further testamentary paper being a first codicil on 18 April 1986 and counterclaimed for the pronouncement in solemn form for the codicil.
The deputy judge found for the plaintiffs and held that the 1986 document had not been validly executed and that the deceased had lacked testamentary capacity when it was made.
The first defendant appealed on the grounds, inter alia, that (1) the deputy judge had been wrong in law in holding that for the substituted section 9 (b ) of the Wills Act 1837 to be satisfied the testator had to make his signature after making the dispositive provisions; and (2) there was no sufficient evidence upon which the deputy judge could have found that the testator had not been of testamentary capacity at the time he had made and signed the alleged codicil on 18 April 1986.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Hedley Marten for the first defendant.
Thomas Dumont for the plaintiffs.
The second defendant did not appear and was not represented.
SCOTT L.J.
delivered the following judgment of the court.
This is an appeal against the judgment of Mr. David Gilliland Q.C., sitting as a deputy High Court judge in the Chancery Division, given on 27 June 1990.
The deputy judge had before him a probate action in which the first defendant, Mr. Clive Smith, sought to obtain probate of a manuscript document bearing the date 18 April 1986, and said to be a testamentary disposition made by the deceased, Mr. Percy Winterbone.
The deputy judge refused to admit the document to probate.
He did so on two grounds: first, that the document had not been duly executed in accordance with the requirements of section 9 of the Wills Act 1837, as substituted for the original section by section 17 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982; and, secondly, that the deceased lacked testamentary capacity.
The first defendant is the principal beneficiary under the document and, on this appeal, challenges the deputy judge's conclusions on both of the grounds I have mentioned.
The background facts, as found by the deputy judge, are these.
The deceased was born on 28 July 1903.
He died on 20 April 1986 at the age of 82.
He had never married and had no family or, at least, no family with whom he was in touch.
For a number of years prior to his death he lived at 150B, High Street, Margate, a property which he owned.
He had at one time used the property as a guest house and a number of people, who had at one time or another resided in the guest house, had become friends of his.
The deceased's closest friend at the time of his death appears to have been the first defendant, a man now in his forties, who, when giving evidence, described himself as an unemployed seaman.
The first defendant had known the deceased for some seven years and said in evidence that for the 3 or 3½ years before the deceased's death he had been looking after the deceased.
The first defendant did not live at 150B, High Street, but lived elsewhere in Margate.
On 21 February 1986 the deceased had a fall in his house and, as a result, suffered serious burns to his left shoulder and arm.
The first defendant, after consulting the deceased's doctor, took the deceased to the local hospital where the burn was attended to.
Arrangements were made for the deceased to take up residence in a residential home for the elderly known as Samuel Saye House, owned and managed by a Mr. and Mrs. Tinker.
On 22 February 1986 the deceased was transferred from the hospital to Samuel Saye House.
There he remained until 18 March 1986 when, no doubt because his condition had deteriorated, he was transferred back to hospital.
He died in hospital on 20 April 1986, two days after the date of the document to which I have referred.
The deceased's friends included three ladies whose names recur in the narrative.
There was Mrs. Gwendoline Harvey who lives in Erith.
Mrs. Harvey is the second defendant but has taken no part in the proceedings.
There was Miss Sharon Hughes with whom the deceased had been very friendly and who, it is said, he had at one time wanted to marry.
Miss Hughes had lived in a flat underneath the deceased's own rooms at 150B, High Street.
There was also Mrs. Patricia Gilmore, a friend of some 30 years standing.
Two other individuals whose names appear in the story should be identified.
There was Mr. Terence Morgan, an unemployed building worker.
Mr. Morgan was a friend of the first defendant and had become acquainted with the deceased through the first defendant.
He had, at the time of the deceased's death, known the deceased for about three years.
Finally, there was Miss Marita Calagarri, who described herself as an unemployed ship's cook.
She had met the deceased while looking for accommodation.
She visited the deceased on six or seven occasions while he was in hospital.
On 30 June 1978 the deceased signed a professionally drawn will.
The will had been prepared on the deceased's instructions by a firm of Margate solicitors, Girling Wilson and Harvey.
His signature was duly witnessed by two of the clerks in the firm.
By this will the deceased appointed Mrs. Mary Wood and Mr. John Seveld to be his executors.
They are the plaintiffs in these proceedings.
We have not been told what, if any, relationship they had to the deceased, or why they were appointed.
The dispositive contents of the will include:(i) pecuniary legacies of £1,000 each to the two executors, and of £2,000 to a Mr. Clarke, the deceased's stockbroker;(ii) provision for 150B, High Street and its contents to be retained to provide a residence during their respective lifetimes of two ladies, Mrs. Donelly and Mrs. Willett;(iii) a settled legacy of £10,000 to provide for the maintenance of 150B, High Street during the residence there of the two ladies;(iv) a settled legacy of £2,000 for a specified animal charity; and (v) a gift of residue in equal shares to two specified charities.
On 26 August 1988 this 1978 will was admitted to probate in the Brighton District Probate Registry.
The grant of probate was expressly ‘limited to expire upon the date upon which the codicil dated 18 April 1986 be proved.’
This was a reference to the document, the subject of these proceedings, the status of which was, on 26 August 1988, still undecided.
The deceased's estate includes the property, 150B, High Street, and investments valued in March 1986 at about £105,000.
There may also be funds in bank or building society accounts but we have not been given any details of these.
I now come to the two issues in the case.
Execution of the 18 April 1986 document
Evidence about the execution of this document was given by Mr. Morgan and Miss Calagarri.
The deputy judge accepted their evidence about what had happened and, in his judgment, rehearsed at some length the relevant evidence.
A summary of what took place is as follows.
The deceased, while Mr. Smith was, fortuitously and temporarily, out of the room, asked Mr. Morgan to hand him a piece of paper.
Mr. Morgan understood the deceased to want to make a will and handed him a piece of paper.
The deceased spent about 25 minutes writing on the piece of paper.
His handwriting was very shaky.
From time to time Miss Calagarri had to wipe the sweat from his forehead.
The content of this document, as written by the deceased is:
‘My Will by Percy Winterbone of 150, High Street, Margate.
I bequeath my house as above to Mr. Clive Smith together with half the value of my shares, the total of which are just under £17,000.
The other half to be divided as to three-quarters to Mrs. G. Hughes’— with a line through the word ‘Hughes’—‘Harvey of 37, Cobham House, Boundary Street, Erith.
Also to Clive Smith of 4, Trinity Square, Margate my car.
Also to Clive Smith the balance of cash in Nationwide Building Society and Westminster Bank.
During a pause in the writing, while the deceased was taking a drink of water, he asked Mr. Morgan if Mr. Morgan knew Miss Sharon Hughes' address.
Mr. Morgan said that he did not.
The deceased then continued writing.
When he had finished writing the deceased asked Mr. Morgan and Miss Calagarri to sign the document as witnesses.
Mr. Morgan said to the deceased that he, the deceased, had not yet signed.
The deceased replied that he had already signed at the top of the document.
He was referring to his name, ‘Percy Winterbone,’ in the sentence ‘My Will by Percy Winterbone of 150, High Street, Margate.’
The deceased added that he could sign the document anywhere.
Miss Calagarri then signed and passed the document to Mr. Morgan.
Mr. Morgan signed and handed the document back to the deceased.
The deceased then said that the date, 18 April, should be placed on the document.
So Miss Calagarri added the words ‘on 18 April 86’ just below Mr. Morgan's signature.
The deceased then asked Mr. Morgan to keep the document and said ‘if anything happens to me, you should give it to a solicitor after my funeral.’
All of this happened while Mr. Smith, the principal beneficiary, was fortuitously out of the room.
The preparation and signing of the document took about half an hour.
I have endeavoured to summarise the evidence as given by Mr. Morgan and Miss Calagarri.
As I have said, the judge accepted this evidence.
The deputy judge said [1991]3 W.L.R. 514, 521:
‘having observed carefully both Mr. Morgan and Miss Calagarri give their evidence I am quite satisfied that in relation to the question of execution the description of events which they have given is correct.
I do not think there is any question of them having embroidered on these events in any way.
The question is whether or not the document, prepared and signed as it was, satisfies the requirements of the substituted section 9 of the Wills Act 1837.
The substituted section 9 is in these terms:
‘No will shall be valid unless —(a ) it is in writing, and signed by the testator, or by some other person in his presence and by his direction; and (b ) it appears that the testator intended by his signature to give effect to the will; and (c ) the signature is made or acknowledged by the testator in the presence of two or more witnesses present at the same time; and (d ) each witness either —(i) attests and signs the will; or (ii) acknowledges his signature, in the presence of the testator (but not necessarily in the presence of any other witness), but no form of attestation shall be necessary.
It was contended before the deputy judge that the writing by the deceased of his name, as part of the phrase ‘My Will by Percy Winterbone,’ did not constitute a signature for the purposes of paragraph (a ) of section 9.
The deputy judge ruled against this contention.
He referred to authorities dealing with the requirements of section 40 of the Law of Property Act 1925 and, in particular, to Roxburgh J.'s decision in Leeman v. Stocks [1951]Ch. 941, and held that the writing by the deceased of his name was a sufficient signature for the purposes of paragraph (a ).
It was then contended that because the name, the signature as the judge had held it to be, had been written at the top of the document before the dispositive contents had been written, it could not have been intended ‘to give effect to’ the dispositive contents.
So paragraph (b ) of section 9 had not, it was argued, been complied with.
This argument found favour with the deputy judge.
He said [1991]3 W.L.R. 514, 524–525:
‘Parliament in my judgment has assumed and contemplated that the testator will have already made his will before he signs and the words in section 9 (b )‘give effect to the will’ in my judgment do more naturally suggest that there is a document already in existence which contains either dispositive provisions or something which can properly be described as a testamentary disposition.
At the time Mr. Winterbone signed this document it did not contain any disposition at all, nor did it even contain any appointment of executors.
If the document is to be regarded technically as a matter of law, as a codicil, of course it need not contain any appointment of executors, but the position still is that when it was signed by Mr. Winterbone it did not contain any effective disposition at all.
Accordingly in my judgment it is not correct to describe the document as a will at that stage nor can it be said in my judgment that by his signature Mr. Winterbone intended to give effect to the document as any kind of effective document.
A will in my judgment is a document which must at least purport to contain something which can be described as a testamentary disposition.
I am unable to agree with the approach here adopted by the deputy judge.
There can be no doubt but that the Parliamentary intention in substituting the new section 9 for the original section was to simplify the requirements for the execution and witnessing of a will.
The requirements of paragraph (a ) and paragraph (b ) are in my judgment complementary.
Paragraph (a ) requires a signature.
Paragraph (b ) requires that the signature be intended to give effect to the will.
These requirements demand a practical approach.
A signature is usually, but need not be, the signer's name.
The signature may consist of initials.
It may, in the case of a person who cannot write, be merely a mark.
It must be appended to the document either by the signer or by some person acting at the signer's direction and in the signer's presence.
I do not for my part think that any assistance at all can be gained from the authorities on section 40 of the Law of Property Act 1925.
The object of a signature in or on a section 40 memorandum in writing is to identify the party to the contract.
The memorandum must provide written evidence of the identity of the party: see In re Hoyle [1893]1 Ch. 84.
A signature can constitute that evidence, so too can the printing of the name on the memorandum.
Hence, cases like Leeman v. Stocks [1951]Ch. 941.
The object of a signature by a testator, by contrast, is to authenticate the written document in question as the will of the testator.
A normal signature, placed at the foot of a testamentary document would in most cases carry the implication that the testator intended the signature to give testamentary effect to the document.
Affirmative evidence rebutting that implication would, I think, be needed if it were to be contended that paragraph (b ) had not been satisfied.
On the other hand, the writing by a testator of his name on a testamentary document, as for instance by writing ‘My will by John Smith’ or perhaps by typing ‘The will of John Smith,’or in some other passage that left it uncertain whether in doing so he was intending to authenticate the document, would not, by itself, satisfy either paragraph (a ) or paragraph (b ) of section 9.
In such a case affirmative evidence that, in writing his name, the testator did intend to authenticate the document would be necessary.
Sufficient evidence of that intention would, in my judgment, both justify treating the written name as the signature and also satisfy the requirements of paragraph (b ).
It follows that I agree with the deputy judge that a written name, not being a normal signature, is capable of being a signature for paragraph (a ) purposes, but I do not agree that the signature must necessarily, if paragraph (b ) is to be satisfied, be appended to the document after the substantive testamentary contents have been written on the document.
There is one authority on the point that was not available to the deputy judge.
In In re White, decd .
[1991]Ch. 1 Mr. Andrew Park Q.C., sitting as a deputy High Court judge in the Chancery Division, was dealing with an execution difficulty rather different from that which arises in the present case.
Mr. Park said, at pp. 8–9:
‘I would have no difficulty over accepting as valid a will created in the following way.
First, the testator takes a blank piece of paper and signs it at the bottom.
Secondly, as part of the same continuing process, he writes above his signature ‘This is my last will and testament.
I leave everything to my wife.’
Third, he gets his signature attested by two witnesses.
In that case it is all one operation, and it could not matter that he wrote his signature on the document before the dispositive wording of the will.
I agree with Mr. Park that in the case postulated the will would have been validly executed.
I agree also that if the writing of the will and the appending of the signature are all one operation, it does not matter whereabouts on the document or when in the course of the writing the signature is appended.
In the present case the writing by the deceased of the contents of the 18 April 1986 document was completed in one operation.
What the position would have been if, say, half of the contents including the signature had been written on one occasion and the rest of the contents on another, later, occasion, with the deceased indicating on the later occasion to the two witnesses that he regarded his signature as authenticating the whole of the contents, does not arise for decision and need not be decided now.
I would say simply, having regard to certain observations by Mr. Park in his judgment at p. 8, shortly before the passage which I have cited, that I am not satisfied that the requirements of paragraphs (a ) and (b ) would necessarily not have been satisfied.
In the present case the deceased indicated in clear terms to Mr. Morgan and Miss Calagarri that he regarded his name, written by him as part of the phrase ‘My Will by Percy Winterbone,’ as being his signature.
This evidence in my judgment establishes his writing of his name as his signature for paragraph (a ) purposes.
The evidence establishes also that the deceased intended, by writing ‘My Will by Percy Winterbone,’ to give testamentary effect to the document he was in the course of writing.
That evidence satisfies, in my judgment, the paragraph (b ) requirements in respect of the contents of the document as a whole.
It follows that in my judgment, the requirements of section 9 have been satisfied and that the deputy judge ought to have ruled in favour of the due execution of the 18 April 1986 document.
Testamentary capacity
It is accepted that the deputy judge correctly directed himself on the issue of testamentary capacity when, after citing passages from the judgment of Cockburn C.J. in Banks v. Goodfellow (1870) L.R. 5 Q.B.
549, he said [1991]3 W.L.R. 514, 528:
‘Thus in the present case what I am concerned to ascertain is whether…
Mr. Winterbone had the capacity to comprehend the extent of the property to be disposed of and the nature of the claims of those he was excluding.
Mr. Smith, Mr. Morgan and Miss Calagarri each gave evidence as to the deceased's mental state and apparent competence on the occasion of 18 April 1986 when the contents of the testamentary document were written and the document was signed.
The deputy judge summarised Mr. Smith's evidence thus:
‘Mr. Smith's evidence comes down essentially to the position that Mr. Winterbone's mental powers were not materially impaired or materially different from the position they were in before he had his fall and went into either Samuel Saye House or Haine Hospital.
The deputy judge then referred to Mr. Morgan's evidence and said:
‘the general impression given by Mr. Morgan's evidence is that the testator was alert, knew what he was doing, and there was no question of any confusion as far as Mr. Morgan was concerned.
The deputy judge then commented on the evidence of the three witnesses in these terms:
‘All three of these witnesses are, it is fair to say without intending any disrespect to them, not educated persons in the sense that they are persons who would have had any experience of judging mental ability.
They are ordinary normal persons, and as far as they were concerned their evidence is that essentially Mr. Winterbone was perfectly normal like them but suffering physically from pain from his shoulder.
I have to consider is that evidence correct as far as they are concerned, in other words do they believe that this is what Mr. Winterbone was like?
Having observed them give their evidence I am satisfied that they are not in any way seeking to deceive the court or to persuade the court that Mr. Winterbone was better or worse than they have said that he was.
I consider that as far as they were concerned Mr. Winterbone appeared to them to be perfectly clear and lucid and that, as was said, he seemed to know what he was doing.
But it does not follow from that that their evidence is necessarily reliable on the question whether the testator was in fact capable of comprehending either the extent of his property or the claims of those who might have a claim upon his bounty and whom he was excluding.
The deputy judge had to take into account also the other evidence relevant to the issue of testamentary competence.
Dr. Rao was the consultant physician and geriatrician responsible for the deceased while the deceased was in the hospital.
Dr. Rao saw the deceased twice a week.
The deputy judge commented that Dr. Rao ‘clearly was very doubtful to say the least that Mr. Winterbone had the necessary testamentary capacity on 18 April.’
This comment was, in my judgment, fully justified by the evidence given by Dr. Rao.
Mr. Burgess is a solicitor who was in 1986 a partner in the firm of Marsland and Barber of Margate.
Mr. Burgess visited the deceased in hospital on 25 and 26 March 1986 in order to take instructions about a new will.
After the first visit Mr. Burgess made a note that, inter alia, the deceased ‘could clearly remember what his assets were.’
The note records also that the deceased told Mr. Burgess he had investments worth about £17,000.
Mr. Burgess did not know that in fact the deceased's investments were worth about £105,000.
On the second visit Mr. Burgess was given instructions different from those he had been given on the first visit.
His note of this second visit records, inter alia:
‘I was not happy with the situation.
Mr. Winterbone was not as coherent as on the previous day and was confused.
I did not think he was capable of making a will.
I was wary of Clive Smith as he seemed unduly anxious for Mr. Winterbone to make a will.
In cross-examination Mr. Burgess was asked why he had not accepted the deceased's instructions and prepared a new will.
Mr. Burgess answered: ‘My main reason was I did not consider that he was of a sound disposal mind.’
Mr. Burgess added, in answer to another question: ‘…
I considered that he was not coherent when I saw him and he was confused.’
The judge said this about that evidence:
‘Mr. Burgess in my judgment was clearly an experienced careful solicitor and I have no hesitation in accepting his evidence that he did form the view that on 26 March 1986 Mr. Winterbone was not capable of making a will for the reasons he stated — namely that he was incoherent and confused in the sense that he was unable to remember names and addresses and he was not at all clear in relation to the names of the people that he wished to benefit.
Mr. Tinker, the proprietor of Samuel Saye House gave evidence that, at the time the deceased left the house to go to hospital, i.e., 18 March 1986, he did not think the deceased was ‘capable of making a sound will.’
Miss Mantle was an attendant at Samuel Saye House while the deceased was there.
She too described the deceased as being ‘confused.’
The reference in the 18 April document to ‘my shares, the total of which are just under £17,000’— a repeat of similar information given by the deceased to Mr. Burgess on 25 March 1986 — was treated by the deputy judge as consistent with, if not corroborative of, the confused state of the deceased's mind to which some of the witnesses had referred.
On 21 February 1986, the day before the accident in which he fell and suffered burns, the deceased wrote a rational and businesslike letter to his stockbroker, Mr. Clarke.
In this letter the deceased referred to various of his investments and asked Mr. Clarke to let him know ‘the present value of each of my holdings.’
Mr. Clarke replied, by letter of 24 February 1986, enclosing ‘a…print of your portfolio…suggesting a current market value of a little under £105,000.’
The evidence suggested that this reply had come to the attention of the deceased.
The subsequent references by the deceased to £17,000 as the value of his portfolio were not the subject of any rational explanation.
The deputy judge inferred that the deceased was seriously confused as to the extent of his assets.
The inference was, in my judgment, justified.
In the course of writing out the 18 April document the deceased asked what ‘Sharon's,’ i.e. Miss Hughes's, address was.
Those present did not know.
The likely reason for the inquiry was that the deceased had in mind to name Miss Hughes as a beneficiary in the document he was writing.
He wrote down the surname ‘Hughes’ but then crossed it out and substituted ‘Harvey.’
The deputy judge commented: ‘there is doubt whether Mr. Winterbone did on 18 of April really know which beneficiaries he wished to leave his property to.’
This comment was, in my opinion, justified.
The deputy judge gave very careful consideration to all the evidence to which I have referred.
He directed himself as to the onus of proof by saying:
‘the burden is upon the defendant, Mr. Smith, to satisfy the court on the balance of probabilities that Mr. Winterbone did have the necessary capacity.
It is accepted by Mr. Marten for the first defendant that this was a correct direction.
The deputy judge concluded that the onus of establishing testamentary competence had not been discharged.
Mr. Marten has contended that the strength of the evidence of Mr. Smith, Mr. Morgan and Miss Calagarri outweighed the other contrary evidence.
The comparative weight of the evidence is, however, peculiarly the function of the trial judge who has heard the witnesses.
This court should not lightly interfere.
Speaking for myself, I do not feel the slightest inclination to interfere.
Having read the transcript of evidence and having reviewed the findings of fact made by the deputy judge, I can find nothing the matter with his conclusion that the onus of establishing testamentary capacity had not been discharged.
I would myself have come to the same conclusion as that which the deputy judge expressed [1991]3 W.L.R. 514, 528:
‘that on the evidence before the court the defendants have not satisfied the burden of proving on the balance of probabilities that [the testator]did truly have sufficient capacity to comprehend the extent of his property or the nature of the claims of those whom he was excluding.
There is one further matter that I would mention.
The first defendant is the principal beneficiary under the 18 April document.
Mr. Morgan is a friend of the first defendant.
Miss Calagarri was present at the deceased's bedside on 18 April because she had accompanied Mr. Morgan.
It is known that in the period following the deceased's admission to Samuel Saye House the first defendant and Mr. Morgan were very active in trying to make arrangements for the deceased to make a new will.
They knew from entries in the deceased's diary which had come to their attention that the new will would be in favour of the first defendant.
The solicitor contacted by the first defendant and Mr. Morgan for the purposes of the new will, Mr. Burgess, concluded that the deceased lacked testamentary competence and that he should not proceed in the matter.
This opinion was consistent with the opinion which Mr. Tinker had formed while the deceased was at Samuel Saye House and that Dr. Rao had formed in the period before the deceased's death.
In these circumstances, the evidence of the first defendant, Mr. Morgan and Miss Calagarri of testamentary capacity required to be looked at with special care and caution.
No adverse imputations need be or ought to be levelled at any of those witnesses.
Nonetheless I am not the least surprised that the deputy judge did not accept their expressed opinions about the deceased's capacity and rested his judgment on the other evidence.
The issue was one of fact.
The appeal on this issue of fact was, in my opinion, a hopeless one.
Appeal dismissed with costs, not to be enforced without leave of court.
Solicitors: Girlings, Margate; Lovell Son & Pitfield for Robinson & Allfree, Broadstairs.
[Reported by JAMES KELLY ESQ., Barrister]