

[FAMILY DIVISION]
KENT COUNTY COUNCIL v. C. AND ANOTHER
1992 July 29, 30
Ewbank J.
Children — Care proceedings — Family proceedings court — Local authority seeking care order — Rehabilitation programme proposed — Guardian ad litem opposing rehabilitation — Whether power to include in care order direction for guardian ad litem to monitor rehabilitation — Whether order for no contact between parent and child appropriate — Children Act 1989 (c. 41), s. 34(2)
A local authority applied for a care order relating to a girl who was nearly four years old.
It was agreed that the order should be made, but the local authority proposed a programme of rehabilitation, whereas the guardian ad litem was of the opinion that rehabilitation would not be successful and recommended that the child be placed with long term foster parents.
When making the care order, the justices, concerned about the divergent views regarding the proposed rehabilitation plan but having decided not to make an order that there be no contact between the mother and child under section 34(2) of the Children Act 1989 made a direction that the guardian ad litem 's involvement should be allowed to continue in order to investigate the progress of the rehabilitation so that, if appropriate, the child could seek an order for contact to be terminated.
On appeal by the local authority:—
Held , allowing the appeal, that once an order was made under section 31 of the Children Act 1989 placing a child in the care of a local authority, responsibility for the care of the child was firmly with the local authority and the family proceedings court could not retain a power of review over the care order by including directions; and that, accordingly, the direction relating to the continued involvement of the guardian ad litem would be deleted (post, p. 812B, G).
A. v. Liverpool City Council [1982]A.C. 363, H.L. (E.) applied.
Per curiam .
It is open to the family proceedings court to make an order under section 34(2) of the Act of 1989 for no contact between parent and child, if it thinks it is appropriate, though it would be ill-advised in most cases.
It would be better in the ordinary case, where the court thinks there should be no contact, to say that there is no order for contact (post, p. 811E–F).
The following case is referred to in the judgment:
A. v. Liverpool City Council [1982]A.C. 363;[1981]2 W.L.R. 948;[1981]2 All E.R.385, H.L. (E.)
No additional cases were cited in argument.
APPEAL from Margate and Ramsgate Family Proceedings Court.
On 3 June 1992 the justices made a care order in respect of L., a girl born in August 1988, which included a direction to the local authority that the guardian ad litem be allowed to have continued involvement so that he could investigate the rehabilitation process in order that L. could apply to have contact terminated if appropriate, such involvement to last for up to three months after the end of a placement at a mother and child unit.
The justices further stated that they wished to ensure that the case did not drift and that a secure, stable and permanent carer should be found for L., whether that carer be her mother or another family.
The justices made no order as to contact.
The local authority appealed against that part of the order by which the justices purported to direct that the guardian ad litem be allowed to have continued involvement with L. on the grounds, inter alia, that (1) the justices had no jurisdiction to attach a condition to the care order which had been agreed by the parties and approved by the justices;(2) in the alternative, the justices had no jurisdiction to make the direction, because (i) it had the effect of fettering the discretion of the local authority in the exercise of its functions under section 33 of the Children Act 1989, and (ii) the justices had no power to order the guardian ad litem to ‘have continued involvement’ once the proceedings had been concluded by the making of an order under section 41 of the Children Act 1989; and (3) the justices had no jurisdiction to make a direction which anticipated a further application before the court, the justices power to give directions in respect of future applications being confined to a prohibition of further specified applications under section 91(14) of the Children Act 1989.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Roger McCarthy for the local authority.
Martin O'Dwyer for the guardian ad litem.
Pierre Janusz for the mother.
EWBANK J. This is an appeal against an order made by the Margate and Ramsgate Family Proceedings Court on 3 June 1992.
The family proceedings court had before it an application by the local authority for a care order with respect to a child, L., who is now nearly four years old.
The child was represented by a guardian ad litem and her mother was also a party.
The local authority asserted that the threshold conditions, under which a care order could be made, had been met.
The threshold conditions are set out in section 31 of the Children Act 1989.
The mother and the guardian ad litem agreed that the conditions were met and accordingly there was no contest on the question of whether a care order should be made.
However, it was the local authority's plan that there should be a period of assessment of the relationship between L. and her mother, the mother's skills as a parent and her willingness to respond to counselling, and that a programme of rehabilitation should be entered into.
The guardian ad litem took a different view.
In his report, having considered all the circumstances of this sad case, he said:
‘I would have immense concerns if consideration were given to further assessing the relationship between L. and her mother and thus protract L.'s sense of impermanence.
It is my view that there is enough evidence available to suggest rehabilitation would not be possible.
The guardian ad litem recommended a care order and that L. should be placed permanently with another family.
The guardian ad litem had been to a well known and eminent consultant psychiatrist, who described L. as suffering from an ‘emotional disorder characterised by anxious, withdrawn and fearful behaviour accompanied by temper tantrums.’
He described how L. had been physically abused by her mother and step-father and he also described his concerns regarding the mother as a parent.
In concluding, the consultant child psychiatrist said:
‘The longstanding nature of the difficulties and the poor response to treatment of those difficulties reduces the likelihood that any treatment programme would be successful.
On balance, therefore, despite the mother's co-operation and her wish for improvement, it is likely that any rehabilitation plan would be likely to fail.
The court was concerned about the views of the guardian ad litem and considered whether they should, if they had the power, agree with a proposal that there should be a rehabilitation.
They took the view that under section 34(2) of the Children Act 1984 they had the power to order that there should be no contact between the mother and the child, thus preventing the local authority from carrying out the rehabilitation plan.
Having decided they had that power, they decided not to exercise it and made no order under that section.
But because of their concern they made a direction at the same time as they made the care order.
The direction reads:
‘we direct to the local authority that the guardian ad litem be allowed to have continued involvement with L. so that he can investigate the rehabilitation process so that the child could apply to have contact terminated if appropriate.
The guardian's involvement to last up to three months after the placement at [the mother and child unit].
The local authority appealed against the order made by the family proceedings court.
The local authority says that the justices had no power to add a direction of any sort to the care order and, in particular, they had no power to order that the guardian ad litem be allowed to have continued involvement with L., so that , effectively, he could apply if he felt that the rehabilitation process was not succeeding.
The first question which has been considered on this appeal is whether the justices were right in thinking that they had power in an appropriate case to order that there should be no contact between the mother and child under section 34(2) of the Act of 1989.
The general provision as to contact between a parent and a child in the event of a care order is set out in section 34(1) which provides that the local authority shall allow reasonable contact between the parent and the child.
Section 34(2), however, which overrides section 34(1), provides:
‘On an application made by the authority or the child, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate with respect to the contact which is to be allowed between the child and any named person.
Subsection (3) provides for applications made by various other people including other people with parental responsibility.
Section 34(5) enables the court to make such an order without any specific application.
The question which arises is whether the family proceedings court can make an order for no contact; that is whether it could properly be said to be an order which was ‘appropriate’ with respect to the contact between the child and the parent.
The argument against that interpretation, which appears to be the obvious interpretation, is that under section 34(8):
‘The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision as to—…(b ) the circumstances in which, and conditions subject to which, terms of any order under this section may be departed from by agreement between the local authority and the person in relation to whom the order is made;…
Such regulations have been made.
They are in the Contact with Children Regulations 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 891), and regulation 3 is the relevant regulation.
It is headed: ‘Departure from terms of court order on contact under section 34’ and it provides:
‘The local authority may depart from the terms of any order under section 34…by agreement between the local authority and the person in relation to whom the order is made…
It then provides certain conditions.
It is said that it would be pointless for the justices to make an order that there should be no contact when that order can be overridden and departed from by the local authority with the agreement of the parent.
It is said that the most the justices should do if they think that contact should not take place is to say that there should be no order as to contact, leaving it to the local authority and the parent by agreement to make any other provisions they wish.
It is said that it would be wrong that the justices should be put in a position of making an order on the merits of the case that there should be no contact, when the next day the local authority and the parent could depart from that order.
That seems to me to be a good argument for saying that in the ordinary way the justices ought not to make an order for no contact between the parent and the child, but I do not think it is a satisfactory argument in the interpretation of section 34(2) and (3).
I think it is open to the justices to make such an order, if they think it is appropriate, though it would be ill-advised in most cases.
It would be better in the ordinary case, where the justices think there should be no contact, to say there is no order for contact, which, in fact, is what the family proceedings court have done in the present case.
The fundamental point in the appeal, however, does not depend on that issue.
The court has made a direction to the local authority that the guardian ad litem be allowed to have continuing involvement with a view to making an application in due course if thought appropriate.
There is nothing in the Children Act 1989 which provides for the court to tack any direction on to a care order and I have to say that, in my judgment, the addition of a direction of any sort to a care order is a fetter on the local authority plans, authority and responsibility.
Under section 22(3) of the Children Act 1989 the local authority has the duty ‘to safeguard and promote the welfare’ of children in care and, in my judgment, responsibility for the care of the child is firmly with the local authority once a care order is made.
The responsibility and duties of the family proceedings court cease on the making of the care order, subject to the provisions of section 34 which make provision for contact orders being made by the court.
The pace and success of any rehabilitation programme, after a care order is made, are to be decided on by the local authority and only the local authority.
Neither the court nor the guardian ad litem has any function in the assessment of the rehabilitation programme.
It is open to various people, as set out in section 34, to make applications for contact and the local authority, under section 34(4), can apply for authority to refuse contact, but unless such an application is made the court is not involved.
In A. v. Liverpool City Council [1982]A.C. 363, 373, Lord Wilberforce said in relation to the High Court:
‘The court's general inherent power is always available to fill gaps or to supplement the powers of the local authority: what it will not do (except by way of judicial review where appropriate) is to supervise the exercise of discretion within the field committed by statute to the local authority.
That is still the position and the direction given by the family proceedings court runs contrary to that principle.
The guardian ad litem takes the view that this decision is against the interests of the child and that in some way the inconvenience of the decision ought to be got round.
He suggests, for example, that instead of making a care order an interim care order should have been made with a view to reviewing the progress of rehabilitation in six or nine months time.
This, in my view, would be contrary to the principle of the Children Act 1989.
First, under section 1(2) it is provided: ‘the court shall have regard to the general principle that any delay in determining the question is likely to prejudice the welfare of the child.’
Secondly, under section 32(1), there is specific provision for the timetabling of care proceedings.
It would be a deliberate flouting of the principles of the Act, with a view to achieving a result which ought not to be sought, to embark on that course.
A second suggestion made by the guardian ad litem is that he should be re-appointed on the question of contact between the child and the mother, and that the court should adjourn that question so that there would be a continuing issue relating to contact and the guardian ad litem could make an application for contact to be brought to an end if he felt that the rehabilitation process was failing.
This, too, seemed to be a manoeuvre to keep open an issue which ought to be closed.
Moreover, having regard to regulation 3 of the Contact with Children Regulations 1991, it could be overridden by the local authority.
There has been a brief discussion as to whether in fact the guardian ad litem has the power under section 34(2) to make an application in any event.
Section 34(2) provides for the application to be made by the authority or the child and the question has been raised whether the child, in that context, means the child himself if he is of sufficient age and understanding to make the application.
This is not an issue which I have thought necessary to decide.
This case, in effect, turns on whether the family proceedings court can keep the power of review over a care order by making directions in relation to the care order.
The simple answer is that it cannot do so, and the appeal is accordingly allowed and the direction in the order is deleted.
Appeal allowed.
No order for costs save legal aid taxation.
Solicitors: Director of Legal Services, Kent County Council, Maidstone; Daniel & Edwards, Ramsgate; Girlings, Margate.
Children Act 1989, s. 34(2): see post, p. 810G.