

[COURT OF APPEAL]
SECURITIES AND INVESTMENTS BOARD v. PANTELL S.A. AND OTHERS (NO. 2)
1992 March 31;
April 1, 2;
June 12
Neill, Scott and Steyn L.JJ.
Financial Services — Unauthorised investments — Third party — Solicitors acting for companies carrying on unauthorised investment business — Whether Securities and Investments Board's right of action for benefit of investors available against third parties — Whether action against solicitors to be struck out — Financial Services Act 1986 (c. 60), ss. 6(2), 61(1)
The S.I.B., acting under powers conferred by the Financial Services Act 1986, brought an action against the first and second defendants, two overseas companies, as persons who, not being authorised, carried on investment business in the United Kingdom and caused investors loss.
The S.I.B.
then joined as third, fourth and fifth defendants certain solicitors who had acted for the first two defendants and who, it was alleged, had been knowingly concerned, within the meaning of sections 6(2) and 61(1) of the Act of 1986, with the first two defendants' breaches of sections 3, 47, 56 and 57 of that Act.
The S.I.B.
sought orders under section 6(2) directing the solicitors to pay such sums as the court thought fit for the purpose of restoring the investors to the position in which they were before the transactions were entered into and under section 61(1) directing the solicitors to pay such sums as the court thought fit or to take such steps as the court might direct for the purpose of remedying the first defendant's contravention of sections 47 and 57.
The solicitors applied by summons to have the claims against them struck out on the ground that on a true construction of sections 6(2) and 61(1) the S.I.B.
was not entitled to the relief claimed against them and that accordingly the claim disclosed no reasonable cause of action.
The judge dismissed the solicitors' summons.
On appeal by the solicitors:—
Held , dismissing the appeal, that, if there had been a contravention of section 3 of the Act of 1986, an order could be made under section 6(2) against both the contravener and persons knowingly concerned in that contravention provided that such order was intended to restore all the parties to specific transactions to their respective former positions and that the steps ordered to be taken were reasonably capable of achieving that object; that, on a contravention of one of the provisions of section 6(1) (a ), an order could be made under the subsection against persons knowingly concerned in the contravention provided that the steps ordered to be taken were reasonably capable of remedying the contravention; that such restitutionary orders could be made notwithstanding that the persons knowingly concerned had received nothing under the impugned transactions, there being no distinction between the type of order that could be made under the subsections against a contravener and a person knowingly concerned; and that, accordingly, the judge had been right to dismiss the solicitors' summons to strike out the S.I.B. 's claims against them (post, pp. 907C–D, F–G, G–H, 909D–G, G–H, 910D, 913D–G, H — 914A, 915C–D).
Decision of Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C. [1991]3 W.L.R. 857;[1991]4 All E.R.
883, affirmed.
No cases are referred to in the judgments.
The following cases were cited in argument:
Alati v. Kruger (1955) 94 C.L.R. 216
Northern Bank Finance Corporation Ltd. v. Charlton [1979]I.R.
149
The following cases, although not cited, were referred to in the skeleton arguments:
Gorton v. Champneys (1823) 1 Bing. 287
Salaman v. Warner (1891) 65 L.T. 132
INTERLOCUTORY APPEAL from Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C.
By an amended statement of claim dated 7 April 1989 the Securities and Investments Board (‘S.I.B.’)
sought certain orders and declarations against the first defendant, Pantell S.A. (‘Pantell’), the second defendant, Swiss Atlantic Holdings Ltd. and three other defendants who were all solicitors.
By a summons dated 15 March 1991 the third, fourth and fifth defendants (‘the solicitors’) sought an order pursuant to R.S.C., Ord. 18, r. 19 that the amended statement of claim, alternatively that paragraphs 11 and 13 of the prayer to the amended statement of claim, be struck out as against them on the ground that they disclosed no reasonable cause of action; alternatively, an order pursuant to R.S.C., Ord. 14A that the court had no power under section 6(2) of the Financial Services Act 1986 to make the order sought in paragraph 11 of the prayer to the amended statement of claim and that the court had no power under section 61(1) of the Act of 1986 to make the order sought in paragraph 13 of the prayer to the amended statement of claim.
On 29 July 1991 Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C. [1991]3 W.L.R. 857 dismissed the solicitors' summons but gave them leave to appeal.
He also ordered that the S.I.B.
be at liberty to re-amend its amended statement of claim.
By a notice of appeal dated 6 September 1991 the solicitors appealed on the grounds that (1) the judge was wrong in law in holding that (a) under section 6(2) of the Act of 1986 the court had jurisdiction to order any person other than the contravener who appeared to the court to have been knowingly concerned in the contravention of section 3 of the Act to repay to investors sums paid by them to Pantell and (b) under section 61(1) of the Act the court had jurisdiction to order any person other than the contravener who appeared to the court to have been knowingly concerned in the contravention of any rules, regulations or provisions referred to in that section to repay to investors sums paid by them to Pantell;(2) the court had no jurisdiction under sections 6(2) and 61(1) to award claims for compensation for loss against persons knowingly concerned in such contraventions in contrast to sections 6(3) to (7) and sections 61(3) to (7);(3) the judge was wrong in law in holding that (a) the power of the court under section 6(2) to order a person knowingly concerned in the contravention to take such steps as the court might direct for restoring the parties to the transaction to the position in which they were before the transaction was entered into and (b) the power of the court under section 61(1) to order a person knowingly concerned in the contravention of the rules, regulations or provisions referred to in that section to take such steps as the court might direct to remedy it included power to make a financial award against such person directing payment by that person to individual investors of sums equivalent to the amounts paid by such investors pursuant to the said transaction, neither subsection empowering the court to order restitution by the repayment of moneys outside the possession or control of the person concerned; and (4) the judge erred in law (a) in his construction of sections 6(2) and 61(1) in failing to have regard to the principle ‘generalibus specialia derogant,’ in particular in holding that there could exist within each of sections 6 and 61 two parallel powers to order financial redress at the suit of the plaintiff, one derived from sections 6(3) and 6(4) and sections 61(3) and 61(4) respectively, which was subject to the limitations set out in those and subsequent subsections, and the other derived from section 6(2) and section 61(1), which was subject to no such limitations;(b) in rejecting the submission that sections 6 and 61 were essentially procedural and did not create new substantive legal rights and remedies; and (c) in failing to have regard to the fact that the orders sought under paragraphs 11 and 13 of the prayer to the amended statement of claim required payment to the plaintiff or alternatively into court of moneys recovered thereunder from the solicitors despite the absence of any provisions for such orders in the Act, his dismissal of the summons being inconsistent with his finding that there was no provision in sections 6(2) or 61(1) directing payment into court and that any order under the sections would have to direct repayment of the sum paid to each individual investor who had made the original payment.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Scott L.J. and Leslie Kosmin for the solicitors and Thomas Lowe for the S.I.B.
Jonathan Sumption Q.C.
David Oliver Q.C.
12 June.
The following judgments were handed down.
SCOTT L.J.
This is an appeal from the refusal of Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C. [1991]3 W.L.R. 857 to strike out the relief claimed in the action by the plaintiff, the Securities and Investments Board (‘S.I.B.’),
against the third, fourth and fifth defendants.
The appeal, brought with the leave of Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C., raises a question as to the nature and extent of the restitutionary relief that may be obtained by the S.I.B.
under sections 6(2) and 61(1) of the Financial Services Act 1986 against a firm of solicitors who acted for a person carrying on an unauthorised investment business.
For the purposes of the striking out application the facts alleged by the S.I.B.
in its statement of claim must be assumed to be correct.
For present purposes, the assumed facts are relatively straightforward.
From about April 1988 to March 1989 the first defendant, Pantell S.A., a company incorporated under the laws of Switzerland, carried on an unauthorised investment business in the United Kingdom.
It was neither an authorised person under Chapter III of the Act of 1986 nor an exempted person under Chapter IV.
In the course of carrying on this investment business Pantell S.A. distributed a series of advertisements in order to persuade persons in the United Kingdom to purchase shares in European American Corporation Inc., a company incorporated in Utah, U.S.A. (‘Euramco’).
These advertisements contained a number of false and misleading statements.
In addition, salesmen acting for Pantell S.A. made unsolicited telephone calls to persons in the United Kingdom in order to persuade them to purchase Euramco shares.
As a result of these misleading advertisements and unsolicited telephone calls a number of individuals in the United Kingdom over the period July 1988 to March 1989 purchased Euramco shares.
The allegations in the statement of claim do not make it clear who was the vendor of the Euramco shares that were purchased by the United Kingdom investors.
The vendor may have been Pantell S.A. The vendor may have been Swiss Atlantic Holdings Ltd., a U.K. company, on whose behalf Pantell S.A. was, under an agreement dated 1 March 1988, authorised to sell Euramco shares to the investing public on a commission basis.
Or the vendor may have been the second defendant, also called Swiss Atlantic Holdings Ltd., a company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands on 23 September 1988 and to which company all the assets of the U.K. Swiss Atlantic Holdings Ltd. had, following an agreement of 26 October 1988, been transferred.
Or it may have been that the shares were not purchased but were subscribed for and were issued to the investors by Euramco.
The statement of claim does not make clear the route or routes by which the U.K. investors acquired their shares.
This uncertainty is of relevance to some of the issues that arise on this appeal.
The fifth defendants are a firm of solicitors.
The third defendant is, or was, the partner in charge of the fifth defendants' London office.
The fourth defendant is, or was, an assistant solicitor at the fifth defendants' London office.
It is alleged in the statement of claim that at all material times since in or about 1988 the fifth defendants were retained and acted for, inter alia, Pantell S.A. and both of the Swiss Atlantic Holdings Ltd. companies.
The carrying on by Pantell S.A. of an unauthorised investment business in the United Kingdom was a contravention of section 3 of the Act of 1986.
The publishing of misleading advertisements was a contravention of section 47 of the Act.
Moreover the advertisements had not been approved by an authorised person.
This was a contravention of section 57 of the Act.
The purchase or sale or issue to subscribers of shares in consequence of unsolicited telephone calls was a contravention of section 56 of the Act.
The Act not only imposes criminal sanctions for contraventions of its various provisions but also provides remedies for investors who enter into share transactions as a result of the contraventions.
The remedies provided by the Act fall into three categories.
There are provisions enabling investors to recover loss they have suffered as a result of entering into the share transactions.
There are provisions enabling the contravener to be stripped of the profit made out of the transactions and for the profit to be distributed among the investors.
And there are provisions of a restitutionary character designed to restore the respective parties to the share transactions to their former positions.
The present case is concerned with the restitutionary provisions contained in the Act.
But it is necessary to refer also to the provisions dealing with the recoupment of losses and the disgorging of profits in order to enable the restitutionary provisions to be construed in the context of the Act as a whole.
Section 5 of the Act provides remedies for individual investors who have entered into investment agreements with persons carrying on unauthorised investment businesses.
Subsection (1) provides that any such agreement
‘shall be unenforceable against the other party [i.e. the investor]; and that party shall be entitled to recover any money or other property paid or transferred by him under the agreement, together with compensation for any loss sustained by him as a result of having parted with it.
The subsection combines, therefore, a restitutionary remedy and a compensatory remedy.
Subsection (3) gives the court a discretion to refuse to allow restitution if certain specified conditions are satisfied.
Subsections (4) and (5) provide:
‘(4) Where a person elects not to perform an agreement which by virtue of this section is unenforceable against him or by virtue of this section recovers money paid or other property transferred by him under an agreement he shall repay any money and return any other property received by him under the agreement.
(5) Where any property transferred under an agreement to which this section applies has passed to a third party the references to that property in subsections (1),(3) and (4) above shall be construed as references to its value at the time of its transfer under the agreement.
The restitutionary and compensatory provisions of section 5 do not in terms identify the person or persons against whom the remedies are available.
But it is difficult to see how the section 5 restitutionary remedy could be available against anyone other than the other party to the transaction in question or the party to whom, under the transaction in question, the investor's money or property had been paid or transferred.
Whether the compensatory remedy available ‘together with’ the restitutionary remedy, could be obtained against an accomplice who was neither a party to the transaction nor a person to whom money or property of the investor had been transferred is equally doubtful.
These difficulties do not, however, have to be resolved on this appeal.
The second comment to be made on section 5 is that subsection (5), in allowing financial restitution to be substituted in certain circumstances for restitution in specie, indicates that, in general, restitution in specie is contemplated.
It would not, in my opinion, be open to an investor to retain the purchased shares and, under section 5, to claim back the purchase money less the financial value of the retained shares.
Section 6 of the Act provides remedies which may be invoked by the Secretary of State or, by delegation from the Secretary of State, by the S.I.B.
The section is dealing with contraventions or apprehended contraventions of section 3, i.e. the carrying on of an unauthorised investment business.
Subsection (1) enables the Secretary of State, or the S.I.B., to obtain an injunction to restrain apprehended contraventions of section 3.
Subsection (2) contains the critical provision so far as the present case is concerned.
It provides a restitutionary remedy in the following terms:
‘If, on the application of the Secretary of State, the court is satisfied that a person has entered into any transaction in contravention of section 3 above the court may order that person and any other person who appears to the court to have been knowingly concerned in the contravention to take such steps as the court may direct for restoring the parties to the position in which they were before the transaction was entered into.
A number of comments may be made on this provision.
First, the restitutionary remedy is expressed to be available not only against ‘that person,’ i.e. the contravener of section 3 or perhaps an associate of the contravener, but also against ‘any other person…knowingly concerned in the contravention.’
The criteria to be applied in order to determine whether a person was ‘knowingly concerned’ are not specified.
Second, the discretion of the court (‘such steps as the court may direct for restoring the parties’) is conferred in very wide terms.
Contrast the more restricted remedy given to investors by section 5.
Third, although subsection (2) gives a very wide discretion to the court on the ‘steps’ to be taken, the purpose of any order must be ‘for restoring the parties to the position in which they were before the transaction was entered into.’
It seems clear to me that the expression ‘the parties’ means all the parties to the ‘transaction in contravention of section 3’and does not simply mean ‘the investors.’
The purpose of any order under subsection (2) must, in my opinion, be to restore all of the parties to their former positions.
It would not be a proper exercise of the subsection (2) power to make an order simply directed to the repayment to the investors of their money.
Fourth, subsection (2) is contemplating orders directed to reversing specific transactions: note the reference to ‘the position in which they were before the transaction was entered into.’
Subsections (3),(4) and (5) of section 6 enable the Secretary of State, or the S.I.B., to obtain orders against ‘a person…carrying on investment business in contravention of section 3’ requiring that person to disgorge profits thereby made (subsections (3)(a ) and (4)(a )) or to compensate investors for losses they have suffered (subsections (3)(b ) and (4)(b )).
Subsection (6) deals with the distribution among the investors of sums recouped from contraveners under subsections (4) and (5).
Subsection (7) gives the court power to require the contravener to furnish accounts or other information for the purposes of applications made under subsection (3).
The significance of the statutory provisions in subsections (3) to (7) is in the contrast to be drawn with the provisions of subsection (2).
The disgorgement of profits and compensatory remedies provided by subsections (3) to (7) are available only against the contravener.
They cannot be invoked against persons ‘knowingly concerned in the contravention.’
Second, the ancillary provisions of subsections (6) and (7) are only available for the purposes of the disgorgement of profits and compensatory remedies.
They are not available for the purposes of the subsection (2) restitutionary remedy.
This feature emphasises the point already made, namely, that the subsection (2) remedy is directed to the reversal of specific transactions and, unlike the subsections (3) to (7) remedies, does not contemplate orders made for the benefit of investors as a class.
In this action the S.I.B.
is seeking a remedy against the third, fourth and fifth defendants under section 6(2).
It is alleged that the solicitors were ‘knowingly concerned’ in Pantell S.A.'s contravention of section 3.
Section 47 of the Act prohibits the making of misleading statements for the purpose, inter alia, of inducing persons to purchase shares.
Section 56 prohibits persons carrying on an investment business from entering into agreements for, inter alia, the sale of or subscription for shares ‘in the course of or in consequence of an unsolicited call’(subsection (1)).
Section 57 imposes restrictions on the contents of advertisements inviting, inter alia, the purchase of or subscription for shares.
Sections 61 and 62 of the Act provide remedies for contraventions of these, and other, statutory prohibitions and regulations.
Section 62 provides a remedy in damages for investors who suffer ‘loss as a result of the contravention’(subsection (1)).
An action under section 62 is, like an action under section 5, a private action brought by the investor against the contravener.
Section 62 does not give the investor any right of rescission.
The investor's right of action under section 62 is confined to an action for damages.
However, an investor would, under the general law, have a right of rescission if induced to enter into a transaction by a misleading statement.
A statutory right of rescission of a transaction brought about by a breach of section 47 was not, therefore, necessary.
And both section 56 (unsolicited calls) and section 57 (restrictions on the contents of advertisements) contain express provisions enabling individual investors to bring actions for restitution and compensation.
These restitutionary provisions are in the same terms as the corresponding provisions of section 5.
Section 61 provides remedies which can be sought by the Secretary of State or, by delegation, the S.I.B.
Subsection (1) enables injunctions to be granted to restrain apprehended contraventions but enables also remedial steps to be ordered.
The contents of subsection (1) that relate to the remedial steps are as follows:
‘(1) If on the application of the Secretary of State the court is satisfied —(a ) that there is a reasonable likelihood that any person will contravene any provision of —(i) rules or regulations made under this Chapter;(ii) sections 47, 56, 57, or 59 above;…(c ) that any person has contravened any such provision or condition and that there are steps that could be taken for remedying the contravention, the court may grant an injunction restraining the contravention…or, as the case may be, make an order requiring that person and any other person…knowingly concerned in the contravention to take such steps as the court may direct to remedy it.
Subsections (3) to (7) of section 61 enable the Secretary of State, or the S.I.B., to apply for disgorgement of profits orders or compensation for loss orders for the benefit of investors as a class.
The terms of these subsections are exactly the same, mutatis mutandis, as the terms of subsections (3) to (7) of section 6.
In this action the S.I.B.
is seeking a remedy against the third, fourth and fifth defendants under section 61(1).
It is alleged that the solicitors were ‘knowingly concerned’ in Pantell S.A.'s contraventions of sections 47, 56 and 57 of the Act.
The third, fourth and fifth defendants deny that they were ‘knowingly concerned’ in Pantell S.A.'s contraventions of the Act, whether under section 3 or under sections 47, 56 and 57.
But they contend that, even if they were, the S.I.B.
is not, on the true construction of section 6(2) and section 61(1), entitled to the relief claimed against them in the statement of claim.
It is convenient, I think, at this point to go to the statement of claim and examine the relief claimed against the solicitors and the basis on which it is claimed.
The statement of claim has been amended and re-amended.
I will refer to it in its re-amended form.
Paragraph 23 of the statement of claim alleges the breaches by Pantell S.A. of sections 3, 47, 56 and 57.
Paragraph 24 alleges that the Euramco shares are ‘unmarketable and…effectively worthless’ and that, as a result of Pantell S.A.'s breaches of the Act, investors in the United Kingdom have suffered loss.
A schedule attached to the statement of claim gives the names and, in most cases, the addresses of the investors of whom the S.I.B.
is aware and the sums of money they are believed to have paid for their Euramco shares.
As I have already remarked, no details are given of the other party or parties to the transactions entered into by these investors.
Nor are details given of the number of Euramco shares that the respective investors purchased or subscribed for.
These details may, as yet, not be known to the S.I.B.
There is no allegation that any part of the money paid by the investors for the Euramco shares was paid to or received by the solicitors.
Paragraph 29 of the statement of claim alleges that the third and fourth defendants and through them, the fifth defendant were ‘knowingly concerned’ in the breaches of section 3, 47, 56 and 57 in four specified respects, namely,(i) in authorising the transfer of a sum of U.S. $250,000 out of an account in the name of the second defendant into which investors' money had been paid;(ii) in making arrangements during the postal strike in September 1988 for the collection from investors of their cheques and for the distribution of advertisements inviting investment in Euramco;(iii) in paying investors' cheques into Pantell S.A.'s bank account; and (iv) in attempting to set up an account at Barclays Bank's Holborn branch for another company, also called Pantell S.A.
The striking out application did not involve any close examination of paragraph 29 of the statement of claim.
The question whether the involvement of the solicitors in the manner pleaded in the four sub-paragraphs is sufficient to make them ‘knowingly concerned’ for the purposes of section 6(2) or section 61(1) of the Act has not been addressed.
We must assume, for present purposes, that the factual allegations pleaded in paragraph 29 are true and that the solicitors were, as a result, ‘knowingly concerned’ as alleged.
Paragraph 30 of the statement of claim in its original form pleaded that investors who had purchased Euramco shares had suffered loss as a result of the breaches of the Act by Pantell S.A. in which the solicitors had been knowingly concerned.
The paragraph reads like a prelude to a claim that the solicitors be made responsible for the loss.
But under sections 6 and 62 of the Act compensatory claims can be brought only against the contravener.
Compensation for loss cannot, under the Act, be claimed against persons ‘knowingly concerned’ in the breaches of the Act.
So it is not surprising to find the original paragraph 30 deleted by amendment and the substitution of new paragraphs 30 and 31 in its place.
The new paragraphs 30 and 31 are in these terms:
‘30.
From about July 1988 to March 1989 inclusive the first defendant entered into transactions with members of the United Kingdom investing public who paid out money thereunder in return for shares in Euramco as appears from the entries for that period in the schedule annexed hereto.
The said transactions and each of them were so entered into:–(i) in the course of the first defendant's contravention of section 3 of the Act for the period (July 1988 to March 1989) when the third to fifth defendants were knowingly concerned therein and/or (ii) as a result of contraventions of sections 47 and 57 in which the third to fifth defendants were knowingly concerned.
‘31.
Further the third to fifth defendants were also knowingly concerned in investment transactions entered into by the first defendant with members of the U.K. investing public in the course of and/or as a result of the aforesaid contraventions of the Act by the first defendant in which the third to fifth defendants were knowingly concerned in the respects set out in paragraph 29 herein.
Pending discovery and/or the administration of interrogatories the best particulars the plaintiff is able to give of such transactions is that the third to fifth defendants were knowingly concerned in each and every transaction of which the following payments and each of them represent the proceeds of such transactions namely:…
There then follow particulars of the payments.
It is apparent from these particulars that in relation to some of the payments the S.I.B.
does not know the identity of the investors.
The relief sought against the third, fourth and fifth defendants is set out in paragraphs 10 to 13 (inclusive) of the prayer for relief.
Paragraphs 10 and 12 seek declarations that these defendants were ‘knowingly concerned’ in the alleged contraventions of the Act.
Paragraph 11 seeks:
‘An order under section 6(2) requiring the third, fourth and fifth defendants to pay such sum as the court thinks fit to the plaintiffs or alternatively into court or alternatively to each and every investor who was a party to a transaction referred to in paragraph 30 or, alternatively, to each and every investor who was a party to a transaction referred to in paragraph 31 in such manner as the court may direct for the purpose of restoring persons who entered into transactions with the first defendant in the course of contravention of section 3 by the first defendant to the position in which they were before the transactions were entered into.
Paragraph 13 seeks:
‘An order under section 61(1) that the third, fourth and fifth defendants and each of them pay such sum as the court thinks fit to the plaintiffs or alternatively into court or alternatively to each and every investor who was a party to a transaction referred to in paragraph 30 or alternatively to each and every investor who was a party to a transaction referred to in paragraph 31 in such manner as the court may direct or alternatively that they take such other steps as the court may direct for the purpose of remedying the contravention by the first defendant of sections 47 and 57.
By summons, issued on 15 March 1991, the third, fourth and fifth defendants asked, first, for an order that the action be struck out against them on the ground that it disclosed no reasonable cause of action or, alternatively, that paragraphs 11 and 13 of the prayer be struck out.
In the alternative the summons sought an order that the court had no power under section 6(2) or section 61(1) of the Act of 1986 to make the orders sought in paragraphs 11 and 13 of the prayer.
Financial Services Act 1986, s. 6(2): see post, p. 901C–D.
S. 61(1): see post, pp. 902H — 903A.
The summons came before Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C.
He gave judgment on 29 July 1991 [1991]3 W.L.R. 857 dismissing the summons but granting leave to appeal.
The case for the third, fourth and fifth defendants before this court, as before Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson, is based upon the undisputed fact that none of the payments made by the investors was made to these defendants.
It is contended that a restitutionary order under section 6(2) can only be made against a party to the transaction in question who has, or had, something to restore.
A compensatory, as opposed to a restitutionary, order cannot be made under subsection (2), but only under subsections (3),(4) and (5), and only against the contravener.
A person ‘knowingly concerned’ in a transaction entered into in contravention of section 3 can only be subjected to a restitutionary order under subsection (2) if and to the extent that the person received money or property under the transaction in question.
Similar submissions are made regarding orders under section 61(1).
Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson was not prepared to accept these submissions.
He accepted [1991]3 W.L.R. 857, 863B–C that neither section 6(2) nor section 61(1) gave power to order the payment of compensation for loss, and agreed, at p. 864A, that both section 6(2) and section 61(1) were aimed at the statutory rescission of unlawful transactions.
He concluded, however, that it was not a necessary precondition of a restitutionary order under section 6(2) or of a remedial order under section 61(1) that the person against whom the order was made, whether the contravener or the person ‘knowingly concerned’ in the contravention, should have received the money or property ordered to be restored to the investor.
So he declined to strike out paragraphs 11 and 13 of the prayer or to make the alternative orders that were sought.
Mr. Sumption, counsel for the third, fourth and fifth defendants, has renewed before us the same arguments as he addressed to Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C.
He has concentrated on the limitations on the compensatory orders that can be sought by the S.I.B.
under section 6 and under section 61.
These compensatory orders can only be obtained against the contravener who, for section 6 purposes, has been carrying on the unauthorised investment business, or who, for section 61 purposes, has contravened one or other of the statutory provisions referred to in section 61(1) (a ).
The statutory remedy does not, where compensation for loss is to be sought, impose any liability on those ‘knowingly concerned’ in the contravention.
It follows that, if what is being sought in this action against the third, fourth and fifth defendants is compensation for the loss suffered by the investors arising out of their purchases of or subscription for Euramco shares, the action cannot be sustained.
With all of this I agree, as did Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C.
The next step in Mr. Sumption's argument is the difficult one.
An order requiring the third, fourth and fifth defendants, who were not parties to any Euramco transaction and who did not receive anything under any Euramco transaction, to repay the investors the money paid for the Euramco shares, is, he submits, a compensatory order, not a restitutionary one.
It is not restitutionary because these defendants have received nothing from the investors and so have nothing that they can restore.
This submission is the kernel of the defendants' case.
The legislative policy that led to persons ‘knowingly concerned’ being made liable to restitutionary orders but not liable to compensatory orders is very difficult to discern.
Nothing in the Report of Professor L. C. B. Gower on Review of Investor Protection (1984)(Cmnd. 9125), the recommendations of which were carried into effect by the Act of 1986, elucidates why the distinction was made.
But we must take the legislation as we find it.
While I agree that orders made under section 6(2) and section 61(1) must be restricted to their proper restitutionary purpose, it is not, in my opinion, right to emasculate the restitutionary remedy available against persons ‘knowingly concerned’ on the ground that they are not liable to be subjected to compensatory remedies.
After all, in many cases and, perhaps, in the case of Euramco transactions, a restitutionary remedy and a compensatory remedy will cover the same ground.
If the only loss of an investor whose shares are worthless is his purchase money, it will be a matter of indifference to him whether his money is restored by a restitutionary order or by a compensatory order.
Both would involve payment to him of the same sum of money.
The scope of the restitutionary remedy depends upon the statutory language used and it is, to my mind, immaterial that the restitutionary remedy and the compensatory remedy may overlap.
Mr. Sumption, in arguing that the restitutionary remedy under sections 6(2) and 61(1) did not permit an order against a non-recipient, submitted that the effect of the statutory provisions was simply to provide machinery whereby the S.I.B.
could enforce the rescission to which investors, either under the Act or under the general law, were entitled.
Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson described this submission as ‘plainly ill founded’ and said that it was ‘no answer to the S.I.B. 's claim against the solicitors that an individual investor would have no right of action against the solicitors.’
I respectfully agree.
Individual investors, unlike the S.I.B., are given no statutory right of action against third parties ‘knowingly concerned.’
The section 6(2) and section 61(1) remedies are more than mere machinery.
In considering the various questions of construction that arise in this case it is convenient, in my opinion, to consider section 6(2) and section 61(1) separately.
The purpose of each is different and the scope of each, in relation to the pleaded facts of the present case, is also different.
Section 6(2)
The precondition of an order under section 6(2) is that ‘a person has entered into [a]transaction in contravention of section 3.’
The purpose of an order under section 6(2) must be to restore the parties to the transaction to the position in which they were before the transaction was entered into.
So an order ought not, in my opinion, to require a contravener to repay to an investor the purchase price of shares sold to the investor unless there is also provision for the return of the shares by the investor.
Rescission under section 6(2), as under the general law, must go both ways.
Otherwise only one of the parties is being restored to his former position.
In my judgment, provided the specified precondition is met, the only limitations on the type of order that can be made under section 6(2) that are justified by the statutory language are that the order must be intended to restore all the parties to the transaction to their respective former positions and that the steps directed by the order to be taken must be reasonably capable of doing so.
An order requiring the contravener to repay the purchase price of the shares would not be capable of restoring the parties to their respective former positions unless the obligation to repay were made conditional on the tender of the share certificates.
So an order confined to directing the repayment of the price would not, in my judgment, be a proper order for the S.I.B.
to seek or for the court to make under section 6(2).
Subject, however, to the limitations to which I have referred I do not see why any restriction should be placed on the type of order that could be made under section 6(2).
The width of the statutory language, ‘such steps as the court may direct,’ is striking and there is, in my opinion, no good reason why it should be restricted.
Nor, in my opinion, does the statutory language warrant any distinction between the type of order that can be made against the contravener and the type of order that can be made against a person ‘knowingly concerned’ in the contravention.
The circumstances of a particular case may, as a matter of discretion, justify a more stringent order against a contravener than would be justified against a person ‘knowingly concerned,’ but that is not the point.
In particular, the fact that a person ‘knowingly concerned’ has not himself received anything under the transaction in question does not, in my judgment, restrict the power of the court to make a section 6(2) order against that person.
It may be that the contravener himself has not received anything under the transaction in question.
It is not hard to construct a case in which a contravener induces an investor to enter into a share purchase transaction with a third party associate under which the price for the shares is paid to the third party.
The court has power under section 6(2) to order the contravener to ‘take such steps as the court may direct’ to restore the parties to the transaction to their former position.
Mr. Sumption's argument would, if right, be as applicable to the contravener as to a person ‘knowingly concerned.’
The contravener could not be made liable under section 6(2) except to the extent of the money or property he had himself received from the investor.
I am unable to accept this argument, whether it is applied to the contravener himself or to persons ‘knowingly concerned.’
The points I have endeavoured to make regarding the scope of orders that can be made under section 6(2) have implications for the present case.
Thus, the remedy the S.I.B.
can seek under section 6(2), whether against the contravener or anyone else, ought, in my opinion, to be directed to specific transactions.
A class recovery, such as that possible under subsections (3) to (7), is not available under sub-section (2).
The reason for this lies in the limitations to which I have already referred.
An order for payment of money or for the transfer of assets cannot be an order intended to restore parties to transactions to their former positions unless it is known in relation to each transaction in question (a) who were the parties (b) what the nature of the transaction was and (c) what assets or money each party to the transaction had paid or transferred to the others.
This seems to me to be the minimum information necessary if the order is to be capable of restoring the parties to their former positions.
A second point is that each investor must, in my opinion, be willing that there should be a rescission of the investment transaction in question and be willing to return any shares or money he has received under the transaction.
The present case is an example of why this requirement is necessary.
It is not pleaded that Euramco has gone into liquidation.
The shares in Euramco are not, apparently, marketable.
But it is at least possible that one or more of the investors might want to keep the shares for whatever remote speculative value the shares might have.
It would be wrong, in my judgment, to order under subsection (2) the repayment of the price of shares unless it were known that the investor was willing to give up the shares.
If an investor wants to keep the shares acquired under the transaction in question but to recover the difference in value between the shares and the price paid, the remedy to achieve this is not, in my judgment, a restitutionary one but is compensatory and cannot be obtained under subsection (2).
Section 61(1)
Similar points arise in relation to section 61(1) as those which I have made regarding section 6(2).
But the implications for the present case are not entirely the same.
There are two relevant preconditions before an order ‘to take steps,’ etc. can be made under section 61(1).
One is that a person has contravened one or other of the statutory provisions referred to in subsection (1)(a ).
In the present case it is alleged that Pantell S.A. has contravened sections 47, 56 and 57.
The second precondition is that ‘there are steps that could be taken for remedying the contravention.’
The court is empowered, if these two preconditions are satisfied, to make an order for ‘such steps as the court may direct to remedy [the contravention]’ to be taken.
The steps directed by the order to be taken must, therefore, be intended to remedy and be reasonably capable of remedying the contravention.
Otherwise the order would not be a proper one to be made.
The alleged contraventions of section 47 consist of the making of misleading statements for the purpose of inducing persons to enter into investment transactions.
Entering into investment transactions that have been induced by misleading statements is not a contravention of section 47 but the result of a contravention.
Can the reversal of the result of the contravention be regarded as a step taken to remedy the contravention?
Can an order for repayment to an investor of money paid by the investor pursuant to an investment transaction induced by a contravention of section 47 be described as an order to take steps to remedy the contravention?
I have doubts about this but, even if it can, the order could not, in my opinion, be made without the consent of the investor and the return by the investor of the purchased shares.
The alleged contraventions of section 57 consist of the publication of investment advertisements whose contents had not been approved as required by the Act.
Where that has happened an order may be made under section 61(1) directing steps to be taken to remedy the contravention.
I do not follow how an order for the repayment of money to investors could ever be described as an order for a step to be taken to remedy a contravention of section 57.
Section 56 is breached by entering into an investment transaction in the course of or as a consequence of an unsolicited call.
Unlike sections 47 and 57 where, at best, the entry into the investment transaction may be a result of the contravention but will not be the contravention itself, the contravention of section 56 does consist of the entry into the transaction.
So the reversal of the transaction can reasonably be regarded as a step to remedy the contravention.
As a general proposition, however, orders cannot, in my judgment, be made under section 61(1) unless they direct the taking of steps which, if taken, are reasonably capable of remedying the contravention in question.
The purpose of the order must be the remedying of the contravention.
But, subject to the limitations as to purpose and effect that I have mentioned, there is no reason, in my opinion, to place any further limitations on the steps that, under section 61(1), can be directed to be taken.
Nor is there, in my opinion, any difference between the type of orders that can be made against the contravener and the type of orders that can be made against persons ‘knowingly concerned in the contravention.’
The fact that a person against whom an order is sought has received nothing under the transaction resulting from or, as the case may be, constituting the contravention may be relevant to discretion but is not, in my judgment, relevant to the power of the court to make the order.
I must now examine the case that has been pleaded against the third, fourth and fifth defendants in the light of the analysis of section 6(2) and section 61(1) that I have attempted.
1.
It is not, in my judgment, a valid objection to the S.I.B. 's pleaded case that these defendants have not themselves received any of the money of the investors that it is proposed that they should be ordered to repay.
On the main point on this appeal the defendants, in my judgment, fail.
2.
It is, however, in my judgment, a valid objection to the section 6(2) order sought by paragraph 11 of the prayer that it appears to be directed to restoring only the investors to their former positions.
The paragraph should, in my judgment, be amended so as to make clear that what is being sought is an order for steps to be taken restoring all the parties to the respective transactions to their former position.
3.
Paragraph 11 is objectionable also, in my opinion, in that it appears to contemplate the possibility of a class remedy.
A section 6(2) order should be directed to individual transactions with payment being directed to be made to individual investors upon the individual investors retransferring their Euramco shares or delivering up their Euramco share certificates.
4.
While it is, in my opinion, possible for a restitutionary order to be made in order to remedy a breach of section 56, such an order could not, in my opinion, be regarded as remedying a contravention of section 57.
Whether it could be regarded as remedying a contravention of section 47 I regard as doubtful.
This point did not, however, form part of the attack on the pleadings below and does not have to be decided on this appeal.
5.
To the extent that restitutionary orders can be made under section 61(1), however, the objections referred to under paragraphs 2 and 3 above apply also to the section 61(1) order sought by paragraph 13.
None of these objections to which I have referred is, in my opinion, a present ground for striking out.
None was the basis of the application below and none figures in the notice of appeal.
So I think the S.I.B.
should have an opportunity of reconsidering the form of restitutionary or remedial order it will seek against these defendants.
The only striking-out ground urged upon us was the ground referred to under paragraph 1 above.
On that point I am against the defendants and, accordingly, would dismiss this appeal.
Since I have, on the one hand, declined to accept that non-recipients such as the third, fourth and fifth defendants are necessarily free from liability under section 6(2) and section 61(1) and, on the other hand, have criticised the form of order sought by the S.I.B.
under paragraphs 11 and 13 of the prayer, I ought, I think, to give an indication of what, in my opinion, would be a permissible form of order that could be sought against a non-recipient.
An order could, in my opinion, be sought imposing on the contravener and, in default of payment by the contravener, on the person or persons ‘knowingly concerned’ liability to repay to the investor the purchase price of the shares comprised in a particular investment transaction, with payment to be made against the delivery up by the investor of the share certificates and, if necessary, a signed form of transfer.
The carrying out of such an order would, I think, have to be adjourned to chambers and procedure similar to specific performance procedure could then be employed.
If the contravener paid up there would be no liability on the persons knowingly concerned.
If not, the persons ‘knowingly concerned’ would have to pay and, on payment, would become subrogated to the primary claim against the contravener.
There would be a variety of variations in the order that the circumstances of a particular transaction might require.
Financial restitution, if restitution in specie were not possible, could be provided for by the section 6(2) order (cf. section 5(5)).
A lien over the shares to be restored by the investor could be granted to persons ‘knowingly concerned’ in order to secure their right to be reimbursed by the person primarily liable to repay the investor.
I would repeat that, in my opinion, the only limitations on the type of order that can be made are those imposed by its statutory purpose and intended effect.
STEYN L.J.
In the process of interpreting a statute there is one consideration which overshadows all others in importance.
That is the need to consider the words of the statute, and the contending interpretations, in the light of the contextual scene or setting.
In a difficult case that setting will include the genesis of the statutory provision, countervailing considerations of policy and public interest and the common law and statutory framework in which the provision will operate.
These propositions are self-evident.
But they merit special emphasis in the approach to be adopted to the construction of a statute, such as the Financial Services Act 1986, which in some respects introduced radical new solutions for old problems.
The main issue is a question of principle regarding the correct interpretation of section 6(2) of the Act.
The question is in what circumstances the court may, on the application of the S.I.B., order persons who were knowingly concerned in the unauthorised carrying on of investment business under section 3 of the Act to take steps to restore the parties to the transaction to the position in which they were before the transaction was entered into.
The genesis of these provisions was the widespread belief that the operations of share-pushers were damaging to the integrity of the markets, and contrary to the public interest.
It was argued that the law should do more to ensure, not fairness, but honesty, in the carrying on of investment business in the United Kingdom.
That view is reflected in a Government White Paper which was published in January 1985: Financial Services in the United Kingdom: A New Framework for Investor Protection (1985)(Cmnd. 9432).
The White Paper argued that the existing investor protection laws were outdated and incomplete.
Many facets of the problem had to be addressed.
But two points were of particular importance.
First, in the context of share-pushing there was the reality that the share-pusher was often beyond the reach of English law.
But it was equally clear that the share-pushing operations were often made possible only because of the assistance of third parties such as bankers, accountants and solicitors.
Secondly, share-pushing raised in acute form a problem which bedevils much of civil law.
That is the fact that the cost and expense of legal proceedings against a share-pusher will often be beyond the pockets of individual investors.
The civil law provides a framework for the redress of individual grievances.
But it also fulfils a wider social purpose in setting standards for the markets and in discouraging aberrant behaviour.
But if resort to civil remedies is impracticable for most individual investors the sanctions of the civil law cannot play their proper role.
A central provision of the Act is section 3, which provides that no person shall carry on investment business in the United Kingdom unless he is an authorised person or an exempted person as defined.
The importance which the legislature attached to the observance of the regulatory system is demonstrated by section 4, which makes a contravention of section 3 an offence, punishable on conviction on indictment by a term of two years' imprisonment or a fine or both.
But the prohibition on the carrying on of unauthorised investment business is also underpinned by new civil remedies.
Section 5 renders an agreement made with an unauthorised person unenforceable at the option of the innocent party.
Section 6(1) empowers the court to restrain by injunction apprehended breaches of section 3.
Section 6(2) is for present purposes the critical provision.
It provides:
‘If, on the application of the Secretary of State, the court is satisfied that a person has entered into any transaction in contravention of section 3 above the court may order that person and any other person who appears to the court to have been knowingly concerned in the contravention to take such steps as the court may direct for restoring the parties to the position in which they were before the transaction was entered into.
Subsection (3) creates remedies for the recovery of profits and compensation for loss, and subsections (4) to (7) contain procedural provisions applicable to the remedies under subsection (3).
Under section 6 the new civil remedies may be granted by the court on the application of the S.I.B.
Proceedings by the S.I.B.
under section 6(2) is a type of representative action for the benefit of investors.
The decision whether to bring such proceedings is a matter for the discretion of the S.I.B.
The advantage of the new representative action is that action can be taken on behalf of the body of investors, large and small, at the expense of the S.I.B.
Investor protection is therefore buttressed by a potentially powerful new procedure.
Section 6(2) must now be examined in some detail.
Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C. held, and both sides accept, that section 6(2) created a form of statutory rescission and restitution.
I respectfully agree.
On the other hand, a comparison with rescission and restitution at common law or in equity should not necessarily lead one to approach the construction of section 6(2) with the a priori disposition that the legislature wished to reproduce exactly the rules governing rescission and restitution at common law or in equity.
Section 6(2) empowers the court to order a person who has entered into a transaction in contravention of section 3 to take such steps as the court may direct for restoring ‘the parties’(that is the contravener and the investor) to the position in which they were before the transaction was entered into.
This part of section 6(2) is not in issue in the present case.
It is not in doubt that as against Pantell S.A. the court has jurisdiction to make an order under section 6(2) for the restoration of the status quo ante.
It was, however, argued that at common law and in equity rescission can only be granted if full restitution can be made by both parties.
It was suggested that this ‘principle’ is only subject to minor qualification: see Goff and Jones, The Law of Restitution , 3rd ed. (1986), pp. 169–171.
I express no view on this point.
But, in so far as it may be relevant, I do not accept that the independent new remedy under section 6(2) is so confined.
Under consideration are transactions entered into in the course of carrying on unauthorised investment business.
The definition of ‘investment business’ is to be found in section 1(2) of the Act, read with Schedules 1 and 2 to the Act.
The transactions covered are in broad terms financial agreements.
It seems to me that the purpose of an order under section 6(2) is to restore the parties to the financial position in which they were before the transaction was entered into.
The mere fact, for example, that the investor had sold on the shares would not by itself render the statutory remedy of rescission inapplicable.
In such a case the counter-restitution could be achieved by a financial adjustment based on the value of the shares.
Rescission will only be impossible when financial adjustment is obstructed by circumstances going beyond the difficulty of valuation of investments which have been sold on: see Birks, An Introduction to the Law of Restitution (1985), p. 423.
Having heard argument on this point, I have briefly recorded my view.
But the matter is strictly irrelevant at this stage since there is no factual basis for saying that in the present case restoration will be impossible or even difficult.
That brings me to the real issue, namely the circumstances in which an order under section 6(2) can be made against third parties who were knowingly concerned in the contravention, that is the unauthorised carrying on of investment business.
‘Knowingly concerned’ is not defined.
In my judgment it is clear that proof of actual knowledge is essential but not enough.
Mere passive knowledge will not be sufficient: actual involvement in the contravention must be established.
By way of shorthand I will refer to third parties who, with the requisite knowledge, were concerned in the carrying on of unauthorised investment business as responsible third parties.
The question is whether, apart from the requirement of proof that the third party was knowingly concerned in the contravention, there is any jurisdictional restriction on the court's power to make an order under section 6(2) against responsible third parties.
No doubt in the exercise of its discretion a court may take into account a number of factors, such as for example the conduct and wishes of individual investors, which might in a given case militate against the making of an order.
But the issue to be decided on this appeal is one relating to the jurisdiction of the court.
The starting point must be the ordinary meaning of the words of section 6(2).
The language is general.
It provides that the court may make an order against both the contravener and responsible third parties for the restoration of ‘the parties’(that is the contravener and the investor) to the status quo ante.
Apart from proof that the third party was knowingly concerned in the contravention, I find no further expressed restriction in section 6(2) on the jurisdiction of the court to make an order against a responsible third party.
If section 6(2) is interpreted in this way, the liability of the contravener can be regarded as a primary liability; the liability of the responsible third party is an accessory liability.
On this view section 6(2) empowers the court to impose an order against both the contravener and the responsible third party, the effect of which is to make them jointly and severally liable.
In my judgment the language of section 6(2) is wide enough to create such a jurisdiction.
Moreover, it is right to take into account that one mischief sought to be addressed by legislation was the fact that third parties often assisted share-pushing operations.
Giving effect to the full width of the ordinary meaning of the words therefore promotes the purpose of the legislation.
But it is necessary to examine the arguments advanced on behalf of the solicitors.
First, it was emphasised that ex hypothesi the responsible third parties — and in particular the solicitors in this case — were not themselves contraveners.
So be it.
But if they were knowingly involved in the carrying on of unauthorised investment business that provides the rationale for orders against them under section 6(2).
Secondly, it was emphasised that ex hypothesi the responsible third parties — and in particular the solicitors in this case — were not parties to the transaction and received nothing under it.
It was suggested that, because the third parties received nothing under the transaction, it would be unworkable to make an order requiring them to restore ‘the parties’(that is the contravener and the investor) to the status quo ante.
I disagree.
Let us suppose that the contravener sold to an investor 1000 shares at a price of £100,000.
Let us further assume that the shares were and are worth only £50,000.
It would be perfectly proper in an appropriate case to order the contravener to pay £100,000 to the investor, subject to the investor restoring the shares to the contravener, together with an order that the responsible third party should on a joint and several basis pay £50,000 to the investor.
For the avoidance of doubt I make clear that the investor would not be entitled to recover more than £100,000.
Such an order would restore ‘the parties’ to the financial position in which they were before the transaction was entered into.
And there may be other ways in which in practice composite orders against a contravener and a third party, on a joint and several basis, can be structured.
I am satisfied that it cannot be said that section 6(2) is unworkable if the words of that provision are given their wide general meaning.
The third argument was that it would be unfair, if a responsible third party was compelled to make payment under an order pursuant to section 6(2) without a right of indemnity or contribution against the contravener.
I do not propose to consider whether there might be an implied right of this nature, or whether a court order under section 6(2) may deal with reimbursement as between a third party and the contravener.
After all, if there is no such right of indemnity, and none may be created by order of the court, there may be a sound policy reason for it, namely that the court will not aid somebody who was knowingly involved in carrying on unauthorised investment business.
Fourthly, it was pointed out that under section 6(3) no order can be made against third parties.
Like Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C.
I find that puzzling.
A possible explanation may be that the remedies under section 6(3) may be wider than the remedy under section 6(2).
Section 6(2) contemplates restoration of what was received, or the value of it; subsection (3)(a ) and subsection (4)(a ) contemplate restoration of the value surviving; and subsection (3)(b ) and subsection (4)(b ) are wide enough to cover in principle compensation in respect of loss of an opportunity to make a profit.
But the fact that the legislature refrained from creating a jurisdiction to make orders against a third party under section 6(3) and (4) does not justify a cutting down of the ordinary meaning of section 6(2).
Fifthly, it was emphasised that the procedural provisions in subsections (4),(5) and (6) do not apply to the remedy under subsection (2).
The remedy under subsection (2) will usually be a narrower one, and usually there will be less scope for dispute.
That may explain why procedural provisions regarding the operation of subsection (2) are not spelled out.
In any event, this point cannot possibly justify departing from the clear import of the language of the statute.
One is entitled to ask what sensible purpose the provision for orders against third parties could serve if there is not a jurisdiction to make orders against the solicitors in this case.
On behalf of the solicitors Mr. Sumption argued that the power to make orders under section 6(2) was extended to persons concerned in the contravention because money ordered to be repaid, or contracts or securities ordered to be delivered up, or guarantees ordered to be cancelled may be in the hands of third parties, such as agents, assignees or chargees.
It was further said that the reason for limiting the application of subsection (2) to those third parties who are knowingly concerned in the contravention is that an order addressed directly to a third party (as opposed to the contravener acting by his servants or agents) would only be necessary where the third party had an interest of his own in the subject-matter of the order.
This interpretation emasculates the remedy against third parties almost completely.
The emphasis is on restoration of things in specie and physical things.
This narrow interpretation may be ingenious but in my judgment it flies in the face of the ordinary meaning of the language and of the purpose of the statute.
That is particularly so if one bears in mind that the transactions in question are financial agreements, and that the manifest aim of section 6(2) is to restore the parties in financial terms to the status quo ante.
For my part I am satisfied that there exists a jurisdiction to make orders under section 6(2) against the solicitors, if they were knowingly concerned in the alleged contraventions.
I am in respectful agreement with the reasoning of Scott L.J.
on the brief submissions which were made on section 61(1) of the Act.
I have nothing to add on that aspect of the case.
I also agree with Scott L.J. 's observations about the form of order that would be proper to be made.
In my view the appeal should be dismissed.
NEILL L.J.
I agree that this appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given by Scott and Steyn L.JJ.
I also agree with the guidance given by Scott L.J.
as to the forms of order which it is permissible to make where an order is sought against a person or persons ‘knowingly concerned.’
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Leave to appeal refused.
Solicitors: Barlow Lyde & Gilbert; Booth & Blackwell
[Reported by Christopher Champness Esq., Barrister]