

[COURT OF APPEAL]
Ex parte COVENTRY NEWSPAPERS LTD.
1992 June 25, 26;
July 24
Lord Taylor of Gosforth C.J.,
Simon Brown and Roch JJ.
Practice — Discovery — Public interest immunity — Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) ordering Police Complaints Authority to disclose documents to appellant — Implied undertaking to use documents only for appeal — Appellant's conviction quashed — Police Officers involved in appellant's case bringing libel action against newspaper publishers — Publishers seeking access to documents in order to plead justification — Claim of public interest immunity by Police Complaints Authority — Whether implied undertaking adding to claim of public interest immunity — Balance of public interests — Whether implied undertaking to be varied
B. was convicted of unlawful wounding and his appeal against conviction was dismissed.
He made a complaint that the record of his interview in relation to that offence contained fabricated admissions.
Shortly before his complaint was received by West Midlands Police the Court of Appeal allowed an appeal in an unrelated case in which electrostatic depression analysis of interview notes had exposed police malpractice.
Shortly thereafter, two officers of the West Midlands Serious Crime Squad involved in interviewing B. were permitted unsupervised inspection of the Crown Court file in his case.
The original interview notes were subsequently found to be missing and the two officers were suspended from duty pending the outcome of the investigation.
They were reinstated by the deputy chief constable on the grounds that the investigation by the Police Complaints Authority had produced no evidence that they had removed anything from the Crown Court file.
A newspaper owned by the applicants published an article suggesting that the interview notes had been removed by two officers of that squad and that allegations about tampering with files could never be proved because the vital evidence contained in the file had disappeared.
The two reinstated officers issued a writ for libel against the applicants on the basis that the article carried the defamatory innuendo that their vindication by the authority and the deputy chief constable was worthless.
Similar claims by the reinstated officers against other news media had been settled on payment of agreed damages amounting to £40,000.
The Home Secretary referred B.'s conviction to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) under section 17(1) (a ) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968.
The court ordered disclosure to B., for use on the hearing of the reference, of all witness statements and documents in the possession of the authority as a result of the investigation, on his implied undertaking not to use the disclosed documents otherwise than for the purposes of pursuing his criminal appeal on the reference, assurances having been given to informants that statements would not ordinarily be used otherwise than for the investigation of the complaint or for any criminal or disciplinary proceedings which might follow.
Counsel for the applicants was present in court throughout the hearing of the reference.
The disclosed documents proved vital to the presentation of B.'s case, his appeal was allowed and his conviction was quashed.
Thereupon the applicants, who had been unable to plead justification as defence in the libel action, applied to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division), as the court to whom the implied undertaking had been given by B., to vary the undertaking to permit B., who was anxious to co-operate, to disclose to them the authority's documents in the interests of justice to enable them to plead justification with full particularity and in the expectation that admissible evidence would become available to support the plea at trial of the action.
On the application so to vary the implied undertaking, the applicants undertaking to the court to hold them for the strictly limited purpose of defending the libel proceedings brought against the applicants by the two reinstated officers, and on the question of the effect of public interest immunity:—
Held (1) that the public interest in preserving confidentiality underlying the particular implied undertaking by B. added little if anything to the public interest which gave rise to the basic claim of public interest immunity attaching to the authority's documents; so that, if that immunity ought properly to be overridden in the light of countervailing public interest arising, that countervailing interest would also outweigh such limited value as still attached to B.'s implied undertaking (post, pp. 926H — 927A).
(2) Granting the application, that the central objective of the category of public interest immunity involved was the maintenance of an honourable, disciplined, law-abiding and uncorrupt police force; that therefore, in view of the public disquiet understandably aroused by proven malpractice of some members of the disbanded West Midlands Serious Crime Squad, and of the extensive publicity already attaching to the authority's documents following B.'s successful appeal, it could not be said that those who had co-operated in the authority's investigation would regret that co-operation, or that future generations of potential witnesses would withhold it, if the court were to release the documents to the applicants to enable them to defeat if they could an allegedly corrupt claim in damages; that the imperative public interest in the case was that the applicants had a proper opportunity of obtaining the evidence they sought so that the grave allegations which they made, and were the same allegations that had troubled the Court of Appeal sufficiently to allow B.'s appeal, could be properly tested in the courts; and that, accordingly, B.'s undertaking would be varied to allow him to hand over to the applicants those of the authority's documents which were incorporated in his appeal bundle, the applicants for their part undertaking to use those documents only for the purposes of defending the present libel proceedings pursued against them (post, pp. 927G — 928A, B).
Per curiam .
Nothing decided in the present case is intended in the least degree to diminish the high importance rightly recognised to attach to the concept of the implied undertaking as a necessary way of underpinning the integrity of the discovery process (post, p. 926F).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Bibby Bulk Carriers Ltd. v. Cansulex Ltd. [1989]Q.B.
155;[1989]2 W.L.R. 182;[1988]2 All E.R.
820
Crest Homes Plc. v. Marks [1987]A.C. 829;[1987]3 W.L.R. 293;[1987]2 All E.R.
1074, H.L. (E.)
Derby & Co.
Ltd. v. Weldon , The Times, 20 October 1988
Derby & Co.
Ltd. v. Weldon , The Times, 15 November 1988
Hehir v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1982]1 W.L.R. 715;[1982]2 All E.R.
335, C.A.
Home Office v. Harman [1983]1 A.C. 280;[1982]2 W.L.R. 338;[1982]1 All E.R.
532, H.L. (E.)
Makanjuola v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1992]3 All E.R.
617, C.A.
Neilson v. Laugharne [1981]Q.B.
736;[1981]2 W.L.R. 537;[1981]1 All E.R.
829, C.A.
Peach v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1986]Q.B.
1064;[1986]2 W.L.R. 1080;[1986]2 All E.R.
129, C.A.
Reg. v. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Osman [1991]1 W.L.R. 281;[1992]1 All E.R.
108; 93 Cr.App.R. 202, D.C.
Reg. v. Parchment (unreported), 17 July 1989, C.A.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Attorney-General v. Guardian Newspapers Ltd.
(No. 2)[1990]1 A.C. 109;[1988]3 W.L.R. 776;[1988]3 All E.R.
545, H.L. (E.)
Attorney-General v. Newspaper Publishing Plc. [1988]Ch. 333;[1987]3 W.L.R. 942;[1988]2 All E.R.
276, C.A.
Burmah Oil Co.
Ltd. v. Governor and Company of the Bank of England [1980]A.C. 1090;[1979]3 W.L.R. 722;[1979]3 All E.R.
700, H.L. (E.)
Customs and Excise Commissioners v. A. E. Hamlin & Co. [1984]1 W.L.R. 509;[1983]3 All E.R.
654
Sankey v. Whitlam (1978) 142 C.L.R. 1
Thorpe v. Chief Constable of Greater Manchester Police [1989]1 W.L.R. 665;[1989]2 All E.R.
827, C.A.
APPLICATION
The applicants, Coventry Newspapers Ltd.,(‘C.N.L.’), defendants in a libel action brought against them by David Woodley and Roger Clifford, sought (1) a declaration that C.N.L. were at liberty to receive from Michael Thomas Bromell copies of all such witness statements, notes, notebooks and other documents which had come into existence in the course of an investigation by the Police Complaints Authority into the conduct of David Woodley and Roger Clifford as had been read to or by the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) or had been referred to in open court during the hearing of Reg. v. Bromell (unreported), 22 June 1992, C.A., on a reference, dated 10 May 1991, of his case by the Home Secretary under section 17(1) (a ) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968; and/or (2) variation of the implied undertaking pursuant to which Michael Thomas Bromell had received the documents under the order of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) on 9 July 1991, so as to permit him to disclose copies of all such documents described in (1) above to C.N.L. for the purpose of defending the libel action.
The facts are stated in the judgment of the court.
Desmond Browne Q.C.
and Mark Warby for the applicants.
Stephen Richards for the Police Complaints Authority.
24 July.
LORD TAYLOR OF GOSFORTH C.J. read the following judgment of the court.
This is an application by Coventry Newspapers Ltd.,(‘C.N.L.’), the publishers of the ‘Coventry Evening Telegraph,’ who are defendants in a libel action.
It is an unusual application to come before this court.
Its practical object is to gain access to certain documents disclosed by the Police Complaints Authority (‘P.C.A.’) by order of this court for use in a criminal appeal, so that C.N.L. may use them in the libel action.
The background to it is this.
On 22 June 1992 this court heard and allowed an appeal on a Home Secretary's reference pursuant to section 17(1) (a ) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968.
The appellant was Michael Thomas Bromell who had been convicted on 16 October 1987 at Warwick Crown Court of unlawful wounding and had been sentenced to seven years' imprisonment.
His original appeal against conviction, pursuant to section 1 of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968, was dismissed by this court on 14 October 1988.
The Home Secretary's reference was made following complaints by the appellant of police malpractice, an investigation by the P.C.A. and the quashing of convictions in other cases involving one of the officers of whose conduct the appellant complained.
So far as is relevant, the sequence of events was as follows.
Following the failure of his appeal, the appellant wrote on 15 July 1989 complaining that Detective Constable Woodley, who had interviewed him in relation to the offence of which he was convicted, had fabricated admissions in the record of interview.
An appeal against conviction in Reg. v. Parchment (unreported), 17 July 1989 succeeded in this court.
It was the first case in which electrostatic depression analysis evidence had exposed police malpractice by analysis of the interview notes.
The success of the appeal would therefore have been alarming news for any officer who had tampered with the original notes of interview in any other case.
On 26 July 1989 the appellant's official complaint arrived at West Midlands Police Headquarters and Superintendent Fancott was asked to conduct inquiries.
On 28 July 1989 Detective Constable Woodley and another officer named Clifford visited Warwick Crown Court and were permitted unsupervised inspection of the court file concerning the appellant's case.
On 3 August 1989 officers pursuing inquiries on behalf of the P.C.A. also visited Warwick Crown Court and found that the original interview notes regarding the appellant's case were missing from the court file.
On 11 August, on being informed of this, the chief constable, Mr. Geoffrey Dear, suspended the officers Woodley and Clifford and ordered an inquiry to be supervised by the P.C.A. On 9 February 1990 it was announced by the deputy chief constable that the investigation had produced no evidence that the officers Woodley and Clifford had removed anything from the court file.
Detective Constable Woodley was cleared of suspicion and he and Clifford were returned to duty.
On 17 April 1991 C.N.L. published in the ‘Coventry Evening Telegraph’ an article headlined ‘Why the Chief cracked down on his crime staff.’
The article referred to the suggestion that the interview notes had been removed by two officers from the Serious Crime Squad and suggested that allegations about tampering with files could never be proved because the vital evidence contained in the file had disappeared.
On 7 June 1991 the two officers Woodley and Clifford issued a writ against C.N.L. for libel.
Meanwhile, on 10 May 1991, the appellant's case was referred to this court by the Home Secretary.
On 9 July 1991 Lord Lane C.J. ordered that all witness statements and documents in the possession of the P.C.A. relating to the appellant's appeal should be disclosed to him.
That was done and counsel for the appellant told us that the disclosed documents had proved vital to the presentation of the appellant's case.
As already stated, that appeal succeeded in this court on 22 June 1992.
There immediately followed the hearing of the present application, argued most ably before us by Mr. Browne on behalf of C.N.L. and by Mr. Stephen Richards for the P.C.A.
Before describing more precisely the nature of the application and the difficult and important questions of public interest which it raises, it is convenient first to indicate why C.N.L., say that they now need to see these documents for justice to be done in the libel proceedings.
The essential basis of the police officers' claim in those proceedings is that the article complained of carried the clearly defamatory innuendo that their vindication by the P.C.A. and the deputy chief constable was worthless.
Each of the officers, we are told, has already recovered in total over £40,000 damages in settlement of similar claims brought variously against ‘The Independent,’‘The Guardian’ and the British Broadcasting Corporation.
This is the one action remaining.
Thus far C.N.L. have been unable to plead justification in defence to the claim.
And without such plea, none of the background to the case to which we have briefly alluded can ever be placed before the jury: the only issues arising would be whether or no the publication was defamatory and, if so, what should the damages be.
Now, however, having regard to what was learnt by C.N.L.'s counsel whilst sitting in court during the successful appeal, they are for the first time in a position to raise a plea of justification.
But they would greatly prefer to do so with the benefit of seeing the actual documents.
Only then will they be able to plead the defence both with full particularity and in the expectation that admissible evidence will become available to support the plea at trial.
The appellant, in a sentence, represents C.N.L.'s only possible source of the documents at this stage.
And he, let it be said at once, is anxious to co-operate.
C.N.L.'s altogether less satisfactory course would be to plead a defence of justification as best they can in the hope that at some later date the documents may be obtained in response to a subpoena duces tecum issued to the P.C.A. itself.
That course would doubtless prompt an application by the P.C.A. to set aside the subpoena on grounds of public interest immunity.
Thus would be decided whether or not C.N.L. should ever see the documents.
If upon the hearing of such setting aside application C.N.L. were to succeed, and P.C.A. were then to co-operate by handing over the documents before, rather than at, trial, C.N.L. could start using the material to prepare their evidence for trial — albeit by then, of course, the trail would have cooled still further.
If, however, C.N.L. were to fail, they would have exposed themselves to the additional financial perils involved in advancing an insupportable plea of justification.
C.N.L. have, theoretically, one other alternative: they could at this late stage, without benefit of the P.C.A. documents, mount their own unaided inquiry into the police officers' conduct and thus seek independently to obtain all the same evidence that the P.C.A. so painstakingly uncovered some three years ago.
But that, as they suggest, is a well-nigh impossible task at this distance in time.
That then is the context in which this application arises.
What is its precise nature and why is it before this court?
In form it is an application at the suit of C.N.L. as a third party for the court to release the appellant from his implied undertaking pursuant to which discovery of the P.C.A. documents was given under the court's order of 9 July 1991 — released that is to the extent of permitting him to disclose the documents to C.N.L., they for their part undertaking to the court to hold them for the strictly limited purpose of defending the libel proceedings brought against them by Woodley and Clifford.
But for such proposed order the appellant would clearly be unable to hand over the documents: he would be subject to an implied undertaking, analogous to that arising on discovery in civil proceedings, not to use the disclosed documents otherwise than for the purposes for which discovery was given, here the pursuance of the criminal appeal which is now, of course, successfully concluded.
P.C.A. assert the undertaking and C.N.L. acknowledge it.
What is in issue here is whether it should now be varied.
The issue of public interest immunity arises because, quite apart from the considerations underlying the implied undertaking, the particular class of documents here in question is clearly recognised on authority to be subject to such a claim.
The P.C.A. invoke this immunity as perhaps their main reason for asserting that the implied undertaking should not be varied in this case.
In short, therefore, public interest immunity arises as an issue ancillary to the implied undertaking.
Thus the question raised by the application is whether we should vary the appellant's implied undertaking and free the documents for limited further disclosure having regard not only to the public interest underlying the implication of the undertaking in the first place, but also the public interest giving rise to the recognised immunity generally attaching to this class of documents.
As to why the application is before this court, that quite simply is because it was to this court that the implied undertaking was given; we alone, therefore, have power to vary it.
Whilst, however, it clearly follows that we have jurisdiction to entertain this application, it is a good deal less clear that we should be prepared to do so.
There are obvious disadvantages in such a course.
Not merely is the Criminal Division of the Court of Appeal hardly the most suitable tribunal to determine complex questions of civil law — the pressures on the court's time aside — but the very fact that this is the Criminal Division carries with it the consequence that whatever we decide cannot be the subject of appeal: see section 33 of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968.
Nevertheless, having recognised and explored those disadvantages, we have thought it right not only de bene esse to hear this application, but now to decide it.
As explained, this is C.N.L.'s only hope of acquiring these documents at the present stage.
And at least this court has one advantage over others: we know the extent to which disclosure of the P.C.A. documents was made during the course of the appeal hearing.
True, the extent of public disclosure is but one of the considerations in play — and, as we shall shortly indicate, not in our judgment the most material one in the circumstances of this case.
But clearly it is another factor that would make it the less satisfactory for us simply to refuse the application without more.
That said, however, the decisive reason why we now think it right to determine this application on its substantive merits is that we have all three of us arrived at a very clear conclusion upon the case and, moreover, a conclusion reached with particular regard to the very special facts of the case.
This is not a case where we need decide difficult questions of law or lay down principles of general application.
If it were, our decision ought obviously to be amenable to appeal.
We come therefore, to the substantive application and to note first the legal principles governing the public interest immunity attaching to this class of documents.
That such immunity exists is plain.
It was established by the Court of Appeal in Neilson v. Laugharne [1981]Q.B.
736 and, despite a number of subsequent expressions of judicial regret and reservation (see particularly Hehir v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1982]1 W.L.R. 715 and Peach v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1986]Q.B.
1064), has not since been doubted.
The most recent authority in point is the decision of the Court of Appeal in Makanjuola v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1992]3 All E.R.
617 and this provides a useful starting point for consideration of the precise nature of the public interest here in question.
Mrs. Makanjuola was suing the police for damages for alleged sexual assault and buggery and to that end was seeking discovery of all relevant documents resulting from an investigation under section 49 of the Police Act 1964 and the police disciplinary proceedings which followed.
Her application was refused, the Court of Appeal regarding the case as effectively determined by Neilson v. Laugharne [1981]Q.B.
736.
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. said, at p. 620:
‘Although it was submitted that the balancing operation had to be conducted in each case and that accordingly we were not bound by Neilson v. Laugharne [1981]Q.B.
736, I consider that it at least binds us to start from the position that in a similar case public interest immunity will apply and that any rebalancing should only be undertaken if there are additional factors which need to be taken into account.
Bingham L.J.
stated, at p. 622: ‘we in this court must apply the ratio of Neilson's case to any case not distinguishable from it in principle,’ and summarised, at p. 622, as follows the public interest which the court in Neilson's case had accepted as justifying the immunity:
‘the maintenance of an honourable, disciplined, law-abiding and uncorrupt police force.
The protection of that public interest required that allegations of improper or criminal conduct by police officers should be investigated and appropriate action taken.
To that end it was necessary that members of the public or other police officers should be encouraged to give any relevant information they had to the appropriate authority without fear of harassment, intimidation or use of any statement in any other proceedings.
It was therefore desirable in the public interest that statements made to the appropriate authority investigating a complaint against a police officer should not be liable to be produced or disclosed or referred to in any proceedings save disciplinary or criminal proceedings officially brought against the police officer in question.
To hold otherwise would frustrate the statutory purpose of an investigation under the Act.
Rejecting the plaintiff's argument that the section 49 statements had lost their confidentiality following two disciplinary hearings which she herself had attended, Bingham L.J.
added, at p. 623:
‘The public interest which the court upheld in Neilson's case was not based on confidentiality…but on the need to reassure informants that statements would not be usable for any but section 49 purposes.
This need remains as strong after disciplinary proceedings as before, perhaps even stronger.
Statements do not in my view lose the immunity upheld in Neilson's case simply because proceedings contemplated when the statements were made in fact occur.
The court recognised, however, that circumstances may arise which require not merely the carrying out of a fresh balancing exercise but the disclosure of documents within this otherwise immune class because of some yet more potent countervailing public interest.
The public interest in establishing innocence in criminal proceedings is classically recognised as one such.
But no one, and certainly not Mr. Richards, in argument before us suggests that there cannot be others.
He does, however, urge that disclosure orders ought not to be made save in the most exceptional circumstances lest otherwise the public interest underlying the immunity be insidiously destroyed.
And that submission we would accept: as Bingham L.J.
observed in Makanjuola's case, pp. 623–624:
‘such occasions [when a judge may properly rule that a document ordinarily immune in the public interest should in the public interest be disclosed]will be exceptional and the fluctuating fortunes of parties in litigious combat will rarely justify a judge in disturbing an immunity firmly rooted in the public interest.
The first ground on which C.N.L. here seek to escape the rigour of the principle established in Neilson v. Laugharne [1981]Q.B.
736 and so firmly reiterated in Makanjuola v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis is by invoking the decision of the Court of Appeal in Peach v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1986]Q.B.
1064.
The plaintiff there was claiming damages for her son's death brought about, she alleged, by a blow from a police truncheon.
Discovery of section 49 documents was granted;Neilson v. Laugharne [1981]Q.B.
736 was distinguished on the basis that the dominant purpose of the section 49 inquiry in Peach v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1986]Q.B.
1064 was to investigate a violent death that was a matter of public concern and in circumstances where it was apparent from the beginning that an inquest would be held and a prosecution might follow.
Fox and Stephen Brown L.JJ. noted, at pp. 1080 and 1089, that the relevant statements were not taken on the basis that they were merely ‘to be used for a private investigation to see if the police had acted improperly in any way’— one of the two main reasons for Lord Denning M.R.'s decision in Neilson v. Laugharne , the other being that the plaintiff there was merely ‘fishing.’
Purchas L.J.
observed that the section 49 investigation had started during the course of a full C.I.D.
investigation already in train and had become co-terminous with it and in no way dominant.
His conclusion was, at p. 1089:
‘In my judgment, in the class of documents with which we are now faced there is an overwhelming bias in favour of the public interest being served by the disclosure of those documents and that, therefore, there is no justification for creating a new class of privileged documents which would be the effect of extending the class in respect of which Neilson v. Laugharne [1981]Q.B.
736 remains an authority to the class of documents with which the court is concerned in this appeal.
The only reference to that decision in Makanjuola's case was Bingham L.J. 's description of it as a case where statements were made ‘for a hybrid purpose’ so that‘a different rule’applied.
Mr. Browne's first contention is that the P.C.A. documents in the present case fall into essentially the same category as those in Peach's case [1986]Q.B.
1064 and are thus strictly outside the class of documents attracting public interest immunity as decided in Neilson v. Laugharne [1981]Q.B.
736.
His arguments for such a conclusion are, first, the narrow one that the appellant's complaint of 15 July 1989 was about the police officers' fabricating the interview notes — whereas the inquiry was principally into the possibility of their having, following his complaint, removed them from Warwick Crown Court.
Second that, as in Peach v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1986]Q.B.
1064, the inquiry into the applicant's complaint was simply part of a substantially wider investigation, in this instance into the practices of the West Midland Serious Crime Squad, a matter of the very gravest public concern.
At one stage of the argument Mr. Browne suggested that the investigation here was not under the provisions of section 85 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the analogue of section 49 of the Act of 1964, but rather under section 88.
That, however, proved to be a misunderstanding based upon a somewhat elliptical written Parliamentary answer.
There was indeed a section 88 investigation here, carried out by Mr. Shaw, an assistant chief constable of West Yorkshire Police, but that was separate from, although no doubt assisted by, the investigation into the appellant's complaint.
Both investigations were supervised by the P.C.A. under the provisions of section 89.
Neither of Mr. Browne's arguments can we accept.
The first we reject because it is unrealistically narrow — the inquiry into the possible removal of the interview notes from Warwick Crown Court being a necessary consequence of the appellant's initial complaint and, as it seems to us, integral to it; the second, because the parallel investigations into other complaints against the West Midlands Police — no fewer than 103 we were told — and Mr. Shaw's broader inquiry into the general integrity of the squad and its practices, cannot alter the fundamental nature of Superintendent Fancott's inquiry.
That was and remained an investigation into the appellant's complaint of misconduct by the individual officers involved in his prosecution, there being no other ‘dominant’ purpose for it.
We furthermore accept Mr. Richards's submission that the gravity of the misconduct under investigation cannot be the determinative factor as to whether public interest immunity attaches to the documents —Makanjuola v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1992]3 All E.R.
617 itself is an indication of that.
It follows that in our judgment C.N.L. cannot successfully bring themselves within the ratio of Peach v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1986]Q.B.
1064 so to escape the prima facie claim to immunity which this class of documents ordinarily attracts.
It does not, however, follow that the obvious public concern felt about the conduct of the West Midlands Serious Crime Squad is irrelevant to the balancing operation which this court is now required to undertake, and to that we shall return.
Mr. Browne's next argument centres upon the extent to which these documents are now, as he contends, already in the public domain following the hearing of the appellant's criminal appeal.
His submission in this regard is that they have now been ‘read to or by the court, or referred to, in open court’ within the meaning of R.S.C., Ord. 24, r. 14A — introduced with effect from 1 October 1987 following Home Office v. Harman [1983]1 A.C. 280 as part of the friendly settlement resulting from Miss Harman's successful application before the European Commission of Human Rights.
In these circumstances, he submits, relying principally upon the judgments of Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C. in Derby & Co.
Ltd. v. Weldon The Times, 20 October 1988 and The Times, 15 November 1988, rule 14A provides that the implied undertaking lapses.
So, submits Mr. Browne, inviting analogy first between discovery in civil and in criminal proceedings, and then between the implied undertaking on the one hand and public interest immunity on the other, this court should now conclude that the immunity too has lapsed: in other words that there no longer remains any public interest in withholding these documents from further dissemination.
This submission appears to us unsound on several grounds.
First, because rule 14A in any event expressly provides for the court to order otherwise if appropriate.
More fundamentally, however, because the suggested analogy at once breaks down when it is recognised that the public interest immunity presently in question is not, or at least not principally, confidentiality-based.
Rather, as was pointed out in Makanjuola v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis , it is intended to reassure informants that their statements will only be used for the investigation of complaints and for such criminal or disciplinary proceedings as directly follow.
It is accordingly unnecessary to address the fine points of interpretation which rule 14A undoubtedly raises in the context of civil discovery for, even if Mr. Browne's arguments upon them are correct, that cannot avail him here.
Nor, for the same reason, can he succeed upon his broader submission that the publicity now given to these documents has so eroded their privacy that the public interest in their future non-disclosure should be found to have evaporated.
Publication of the disclosed material during the recent criminal appeal hearing, even had it been total, would no more rid it of its prima facie immunity than had it been aired in disciplinary or criminal proceedings brought against the police officers concerned, the situation expressly envisaged in Makanjuola's case.
In short, all depends upon the precise nature of the public interest sought to be protected and this is not one of those cases — unlike, for example ,Reg. v. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Osman [1991]1 W.L.R. 281 — where the extent to which the documents have entered the public domain will critically affect the question whether immunity from further disclosure should be held to survive.
It is accordingly unnecessary to indicate the actual extent of disclosures made at the appeal hearing or the consequences that that might have had upon a differently based immunity claim.
Once again, however, that is not to say that the public's post-appeal awareness of the essential contents of the P.C.A. documents must be regarded as wholly immaterial to the balancing exercise this court is now required to perform and to that too we shall return.
Mr. Browne's third main argument focuses upon what he maintains is the urgent need for the disclosure of these documents in the interests of justice for the fair and proper disposal of the libel proceedings between these possibly corrupt police officers and C.N.L. This, too, Mr. Browne submits, represents an important public interest — indeed, he contends, the pre-eminent public interest arising here.
Before dealing with this submission, which seems to us a powerful one indeed, it is necessary to consider shortly the added dimension to this case brought about by the appellant's implied undertaking.
Mr. Browne's arguments upon this part of the case are a fortiori to those he advances with regard to public interest immunity, more particularly with regard to the impact of the recent use of the documents in open court upon public interest immunity.
It is the argument founded upon analogy with R.S.C., Ord. 24, r. 14A and it seems to us in this context a little stronger.
The reason is this.
Rule 14A appears clearly to postulate confidentiality as the central consideration underlying the implication of the undertaking in the first place.
Once that confidentiality is dissipated by the use of the documents in open court, prima facie the undertaking lapses.
But the argument still cannot carry Mr. Browne all the way.
Because even if the element of confidentiality in the documents is entirely lost, the rule nevertheless clearly caters to other considerations: it expressly empowers the court ‘for special reasons’ to order the undertaking to continue.
Even, therefore, were the rule 14A analogy exact, the future of this undertaking remains in the court's discretion.
We turn to Mr. Richards's argument.
Essentially it is this: that only very exceptionally should the implied undertaking be varied to permit disclosed documents to be used for ulterior purposes, not least when the application is made by a third party and for the purposes of proceedings wholly unconnected with those in which discovery was ordered.
He invites our attention in particular to Home Office v. Harman [1983]1 A.C. 280,Crest Homes Plc. v. Marks [1987]A.C. 829 and Bibby Bulk Carriers Ltd. v. Cansulex Ltd. [1989]Q.B.
155.
This court, submits Mr. Richards, with impressive citation from those high authorities, should think long and hard before waiving the appellant's undertaking merely so as to improve C.N.L.'s position in their libel action.
The fortuitous intervention of a criminal appeal during the course of those proceedings ought not, he contends, to persuade us to permit any departure from the usual strict approach taken rightly to implied undertakings.
Mr. Richard's argument would, we accept, be formidable indeed had the implied undertaking with which we are concerned been one given in the usual way in civil proceedings.
Certainly nothing that we decide in the present case is intended in the least degree to diminish the high importance rightly recognised to attach to the concept of the implied undertaking as a necessary way of underpinning the integrity of the discovery process.
But characterisations of discovery such as that of Lord Keith of Kinkel in Home Office v. Harman [1983]1 A.C. 280, 308B, as ‘a very serious invasion of the privacy and confidentiality of a litigant's affairs,’ although of the clearest application to discovery given in private civil litigation, appear to us altogether less obviously apt in relation to an order such as that made by this court in the appellant's appeal.
Orders for discovery rarely are made in criminal appeals and, when made, generally go, if not to the prosecution, then, as here, to a statutory body.
Such bodies surely need little in the way of encouragement before making full and frank disclosure.
In short, we have reached the conclusion that the public interest underlying this particular implied undertaking adds little, if anything, to that giving rise to the basic immunity claim attaching to these documents.
If that immunity ought properly to be overridden in light of the countervailing public interest arising, then in our view that countervailing interest will outweigh too such limited value as still attaches to the implied undertaking.
How strong then is the countervailing public interest arising here in favour of allowing C.N.L. to make use of these documents?
If, as both C.N.L. and the wider public now have every reason to suspect, these documents appear to point clearly towards corruption on the part of named police officers, it is surely not to be tolerated that those same officers should continue to mulct the press in damages whilst the courts disable their adversaries from an effective defence by withholding the documents from them.
That we believe would be repugnant alike to justice, to the public, and, we would suggest, to those who gave their co-operation to the P.C.A. — C.N.L.'s intended witnesses — the very people whose interest is said to underlie the immunity.
We recognise, of course, the general reluctance of those invited to assist in the investigation of police complaints to be drawn into proceedings beyond those which strictly flow from the complaint itself.
We understand indeed from Mr. Richards that reassurance is nowadays routinely given to those whose co-operation is sought: they are told that their statements will not ordinarily be used otherwise than for the investigation of the complaint and for any disciplinary or criminal proceedings that may follow.
It is, of course, to reinforce that reassurance and, in turn, to win the co-operation of potential witnesses, that this public interest immunity exists.
All that we recognise.
But what we cannot accept is that those who have been prepared to co-operate thus far with the P.C.A., now knowing as a result of this court's widely publicised recent judgment of the grave suspicions presently surrounding the police officers concerned, would truly prefer to remain anonymous and watch these officers prosper in their libel action, than that their statements should be disclosed to C.N.L. with a view to their being proofed and, if necessary, called as witnesses in defence.
As was suggested in argument, that would indeed be to swallow the elephant and strain at the gnat.
Nor can we believe that were we to allow this application, potential future witnesses would be deterred from co-operating in investigations yet to come or the police feel inhibited from giving future reassurance as to the consequences of such co-operation in the self-same terms as at present.
That reassurance, be it noted, expressly admits of exceptions.
What better case for an exception than this?
And it is, moreover, a different case from those in which disclosure of this class of document is generally sought.
The documents here are proposed for use not as a sword but as a shield; this is hardly a floodgate situation.
We summarise our reasoning thus.
Given the central objective of this category of public interest immunity as ‘the maintenance of an honourable, disciplined, law-abiding and uncorrupt police force,’ given the grave public disquiet understandably aroused by proven malpractice on the part of some at least of those who served in the now disbanded West Midlands Serious Crime Squad, given the extensive publicity already attaching to the documents here in question following the appellant's successful appeal, it seems to us nothing short of absurd to suppose that those who co-operated in this investigation — largely other police officers and court officials — will regret that co-operation, or that future generations of potential witnesses will withhold it, were this court now to release the documents to C.N.L. to enable them to defeat if they can an allegedly corrupt claim in damages.
We accordingly vary the appellant's undertaking to allow him to hand over to C.N.L. those P.C.A. documents that were incorporated in his appeal bundle, C.N.L. for their part undertaking to use those documents only for the purposes of defending the libel proceedings currently being pursued against them.
We add only this.
This court is in no way prejudging any defence of justification which may hereafter be raised in those libel proceedings.
All that we are concerned to ensure is that the present applicants have a proper opportunity of obtaining the evidence they seek so that the grave allegations which they make — the very same allegations that troubled this court sufficiently to allow the appellant's appeal — can be properly tested in the courts.
Justice in our judgment demands no less.
This, we conclude, is the imperative public interest in the case.
Order accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Solicitors: Oswald Hickson Collier & Co.; Treasury Solicitor.