

[CHANCERY DIVISION]
DEPOSIT PROTECTION BOARD v. DALIA AND ANOTHER
[Ch. 1992 D. No. 3808]
1992 June 12, 15;
July 3
Sir Donald Nicholls V.-C.
Banking — Deposits — Deposit taking business — Fund to compensate depositors in insolvent bank — Original depositors assigning sums to third parties after presentation of petition to wind up bank — Whether assignee of part of original deposit ‘depositor’— Banking Act 1987 (c. 22), s. 58(1) — Banking Act 1987 (Meaning of Deposit) Order 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 1776), art.
2(1)
The Banking Acts 1979 and 1987 respectively established and continued the Deposit Protection Board and the Deposit Protection Fund, from which the board was obliged to pay a depositor in an authorised bank which became insolvent an amount equal to three-quarters of the amount of his deposit, in accordance with section 58(1) of the Act of 1987, limited to a maximum deposit of £20,000.
There was no definition of ‘depositor’ in the Act of 1979 or 1987.
By section 59(1) (a ) of the Act of 1987 the event upon which a bank was deemed to have become insolvent for the purpose of compensation becoming payable was the making of the winding up order rather than the presentation of the petition.
On 5 July 1991 the Bank of England presented a petition for an order that an authorised bank be wound up on the ground that it was insolvent.
Some depositors, in order to maximise recovery from the fund, assigned sums of £20,000 to friends and relations.
On 30 July 1991 the Banking Act 1987 (Meaning of Deposit) Order 1991 was made, which provided that the definition of ‘deposit’ in section 5 of that Act excluded a sum to which a person became entitled, otherwise than by operation of law, after presentation of a winding up petition or, where a petition had already been presented, after 30 July 1991.
A winding up order in respect of the bank was made in January 1992.
On the board's summons to determine whether the assignees of deposits under assignments made between 5 and 30 July, were to be treated as depositors entitled to compensation from the fund pursuant to section 58(1) of the Act of 1987:—
Held , that on a true construction of section 58 of the Banking Act 1987 and of the Order of 1991 an assignee, whether legal or equitable, under an assignment made before 30 July 1991 of the whole or part of a deposit with an authorised bank was a ‘depositor’ for the purposes of the compensation provisions in section 58(1); and that, accordingly, an assignee of part of a deposit was to be treated as entitled to the assigned part of the deposit and as having made a deposit of an amount equal to that part (post, pp. 952F–H, 953A, 954B–C, 955F–G).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Brice v. Bannister (1878) 3 Q.B.D. 569, C.A.
Britt v. Buckinghamshire County Council [1964]1 Q.B.
77;[1963]2 W.L.R. 722;[1963]2 All E.R.
175, C.A.
Hanlon v. The Law Society [1981]A.C. 124;[1980]2 W.L.R. 756;[1980]2 All E.R.
199, H.L. (E.)
Jones v. Farrell (1857) 1 De G. & J. 208
Kirkness v. John Hudson & Co. Ltd .
[1955]A.C. 696;[1955]2 W.L.R. 1135;[1955]2 All E.R.
345, H.L. (E.)
Weddell v. J. A. Pearce & Major [1988]Ch. 26;[1987]3 W.L.R. 592;[1987]3 All E.R.
624
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Attorney-General v. Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover [1957]A.C. 436;[1957]2 W.L.R. 1;[1957]1 All E.R.
49, H.L. (E.)
Black-Clawson International Ltd. v. Papierwerke Waldhof-Aschaffenburg A.G. [1975]A.C. 591;[1975]2 W.L.R. 513;[1975]1 All E.R.
810, H.L. (E.)
Britt v. Buckinghamshire County Council [1964]1 Q.B.
77;[1963]2 W.L.R. 722;[1963]2 All E.R.
175, C.A.
Courtauld v. Legh (1869) L.R. 4 Ex. 126
Lennon v. Gibson and Howes Ltd .
[1919]A.C. 709, P.C.
McGreavy, In re [1950]1 All E.R.
442, C.A.
MacManaway, In re [1951]A.C. 161, P.C.
Steel Wing Co. Ltd., In re [1921]1 Ch. 349
Stephens v. Cuckfield Rural District Council [1960]2 Q.B.
373;[1960]3 W.L.R. 248;[1960]2 All E.R.
716, C.A.
ORIGINATING SUMMONS
By an originating summons dated 15 April 1992 the plaintiff, the Deposit Protection Board, sought relief against the defendants, Mrs. Varsha Dalia and Barclays Bank Plc., namely (1) that it might be determined whether a person entitled by reason of assignment of part of a deposit (as defined by section 5(1) of the Banking Act 1987) was a depositor holding a protected deposit entitled to a compensation payment from the plaintiff pursuant to section 58(1) of the Banking Act 1987;(2) that an order be made that the first defendant should represent that class of persons claiming to be entitled to compensation payments from the plaintiff pursuant to section 58(1) of the Banking Act 1987 by reason of assignment of part of a deposit held with Bank of Credit and Commerce International S.A.; and (3) that an order be made that the second defendant should represent that class of persons being contributory institutions within the meaning of section 52(1) of the Banking Act 1987.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
John Jarvis Q.C.
and Jonathan Nash for the plaintiff.
Lord Irvine of Lairg Q.C.
and Philip Sales for the first defendant.
Michael Brindle Q.C.
and Bankim Thanki for the second defendant.
3 July.
The following judgment was handed down.
SIR DONALD NICHOLLS V.-C.
To alleviate hardship when a bank becomes insolvent the Banking Act 1979 set up the Deposit Protection Fund.
Money from the fund was payable to depositors on the insolvency of a recognised bank or licensed institution.
A depositor was to be paid three-quarters of the amount of his deposit, but limited to a maximum deposit of £10,000.
The fund was continued under the Banking Act 1987.
The maximum amount for a protected deposit was increased to £20,000.
So a depositor owed £20,000 by an authorised institution which has failed can look to the Deposit Protection Board for £15,000.
A depositor owed £100,000 or £50,000 or any other amount over £20,000 can likewise look to the board, but his claim also is limited to the same top figure of £15,000.
The Bank of Credit and Commerce International S.A., usually known simply as ‘B.C.C.I.,’ was an authorised institution under the Act of 1987.
On 5 July 1991 the Bank of England presented a petition to the court for an order that B.C.C.I. be wound up.
One of the grounds relied on was that the company was insolvent.
Provisional liquidators were appointed and B.C.C.I. ceased trading in England.
Depositors ceased to be able to withdraw their money.
Fearing the worst, some depositors took steps to maximise the amount of the payments from the deposit protection fund.
An enterprising firm of accountants, having taken expert legal advice, wrote around to B.C.C.I. depositors telling them of a scheme the accountants had prepared.
The scheme was that a depositor should formally transfer and assign part of his or her deposit to family members or close friends ‘who can be trusted.’
For instance, a depositor with a deposit of £100,000 would transfer £20,000 to each of five relations or friends.
Instead of the compensation payable to him being limited to £15,000 as the maximum amount of compensation payable to any one depositor, each of his five assignees could look to the fund for payment of £15,000 in respect of the £20,000 share of the deposit assigned to him.
By this means the total compensation payable by the fund would be increased to £75,000.
Depositors were urged to hurry, ‘for you only have until Monday evening 29 July.’
This was because the winding up petition was due to come before the court again on 30 July.
Some 50 or so depositors, possibly more, signed transfers in July 1991 in respect of sums totalling several million pounds.
There were over 200 assignees.
One depositor alone, whose deposits exceeded half a million pounds, executed 26 assignments of £20,000 each.
The scheme was quickly stopped in its tracks.
Parliament never intended that the limit on the amount of compensation payable to individual depositors could be side-stepped by dispositions made after formal steps had been taken to initiate the winding up process.
On 30 July 1991 the Banking Act 1987 (Meaning of Deposit) Order 1991 was made.
It provided that in future the definition of ‘deposit’ in the Act excluded a sum to which a person became entitled, otherwise than by operation of law, after presentation of a winding up petition.
In the case of B.C.C.I., where a winding up petition had already been presented, the changed definition took effect from 31 July.
So the loophole, if such it was, was closed although subsequently some months elapsed before a winding up order was eventually made on 14 January 1992.
The question before me is whether these assignments did have their intended effect for compensation purposes.
The first defendant is an assignee joined in the proceedings to represent all assignees.
At the outset I should emphasise that in the proceedings the only question raised is one of law, to be answered on the assumption that the assignments were genuine and valid transactions and that there was no arrangement or understanding that an assignee would hold for the assignor any compensation received by him from the fund.
The Deposit Protection Board, which administers the fund, has reserved the right to pursue such matters if this should become necessary.
I must also emphasise that the answer I give to the question before me will be of general application.
Its effect will not be confined to assignments made in circumstances similar to those which existed regarding B.C.C.I. in July 1991.
The Order of 1991 has dealt with how similar assignments will operate in future.
I have to look at the matter more broadly, and consider also the effect of a valid assignment made before winding up became an imminent prospect.
The deeds of assignment
The assignments were on a printed form of deed.
The document recited the ‘vendor's’ deposit in a specified account with B.C.C.I. The operative part provided that in consideration of £1 ‘the vendor by this deed sells, assigns and transfers the sum of [£20,000]of the deposit to the purchaser.’
The depositor also signed a letter addressed to B.C.C.I., whereby B.C.C.I., was given notice of the ‘absolute’ assignment in question.
The bank was instructed that the sum of £20,000 from the deposit account was now held by the assignee, who was described as ‘the purchaser,’ and that he should now be identified by the bank ‘as a depositor.’
The letter added:
‘If, for administrative reasons, you are unable to arrange for the completion of formalities to designate a separate deposit account in the name of the purchaser, I/we confirm that I/we hold the abovementioned sum on trust for the purchaser.
Before me it was common ground that the assignments were not statutory assignments in conformity with section 136 of the Law of Property Act 1925, but that they were effective as equitable assignments.
The legislation
The deposit protection scheme is now regulated by Part II of the Act of 1987.
Institutions authorised by the Bank of England to carry on a deposit-taking business in this country are required to make contributions to the Deposit Protection Fund as levied from time to time by the Deposit Protection Board.
The amount of the contribution of each institution varies according to the size of its deposit base.
At present there are over 500 contributing institutions, of which the second defendant is one.
The overall sum required to meet the payments due under the scheme to B.C.C.I. depositors is in the region of £78m.
The sum in issue on this summons is about £3.7m.
Sections 58 to 62 of the Banking Act 1987 are concerned with payments out of the fund.
Section 58 is the section which makes provision for the payment of compensation to depositors.
Subsection (1), so far as material, provides:
‘Subject to the provisions of this section, if at any time an institution becomes insolvent and at that time —(a ) it is an authorised institution…the board shall as soon as practicable pay out of the fund to each depositor who has a protected deposit with that institution an amount equal to three-quarters of his protected deposit.
Subsection (2) contains a comparable provision applicable when an administration order is made under the Insolvency Act 1986.
I pause to make an initial observation.
The Act contains no definition of ‘depositor.’
In this context that word would, I believe, naturally be read as meaning the person who made the deposit in question.
To qualify for compensation the deposit made by him must be a protected deposit.
Section 59 defines when a company becomes insolvent for the purposes of section 58.
It was this provision that gave rise to the loophole sought to be exploited by B.C.C.I. depositors.
Under section 59(1) (a ) the relevant event in the case of a winding up by the court is the making of the winding up order, not the presentation of the winding up petition.
Section 60 defines the expression ‘protected deposit.’
I must quote the first two subsections:
‘(1)…in relation to an institution in respect of which a payment falls to be made under section 58(1) above any reference in this Act to a depositor's protected deposit is a reference to the total liability of the institution to him immediately before the time when it becomes insolvent, limited to a maximum of £20,000, in respect of the principal amounts of and accrued interest on sterling deposits made with United Kingdom offices of the institution.
(2)…in relation to an institution in respect of which a payment falls to be made under section 58(2) above any reference in this Act to a depositor's protected deposit is a reference to the liability of the institution to him in respect of—(a ) the principal amount of each sterling deposit which was made by him with a United Kingdom office of the institution before the making of the administration order and which under the terms on which it was made is or becomes due or payable while the order is in force; and (b ) accrued interest on any such deposit up to the time when it is or becomes due and payable as aforesaid; but so that the total liability of the institution to him in respect of such deposits does not exceed £20,000.
Subsection (2), concerned with payments when administration orders are in force, provides clear support for the view that the draftsman had in mind what I have described as the natural meaning of the word depositor in this context.
Subsection (2)(a ) refers to the principal amount of each sterling deposit ‘made by him.’
This assumes that a depositor is the person who will have made the deposit in question.
It assumes that the person to whom the institution has a liability (‘the liability of the institution to him’) is one and the same person as the person who made the deposit (‘in respect of…each sterling deposit which was made by him’).
Subsection (1) is consistent with this.
The same assumption appears in section 60(6).
This subsection excluded certain deposits for compensation purposes.
It provides:
‘In determining the total liability of an institution to a depositor for the purposes of subsection (1) above, or the liability or total liability of an institution to a depositor for the purposes of subsection (2) above, no account shall be taken of any liability in respect of a deposit if…(c ) the institution is a former authorised institution and the deposit was made after it ceased to be an authorised institution or a recognised bank or licensed institution under the Banking Act 1979 unless,at the time the deposit was made , the depositor did not know and could not reasonably be expected to have known that it had ceased to be an authorised institution, recognised bank or licensed institution.’
(Emphasis added.)
The words I have emphasised assume that the depositor who made the deposit will be the same person as the depositor to whom a compensation payment is to be made under section 58.
When an institution has ceased to be an authorised institution, liability of the institution to him for compensation purposes depends upon his state of mind ‘at the time the deposit was made.’
Trusts
Thus far one might think that, in applying the £20,000 limit on which the three-quarters compensation is to be paid, attention is to be focused simply on all the outstanding United Kingdom sterling deposits made by a particular depositor.
They are to be aggregated because the £20,000 limit is on ‘the total liability of the institution to him’ in respect of such deposits.
However, to look only at the persons who were the actual depositors would not be satisfactory.
Some special provision has to be made for depositors who are nominees or trustees.
Section 61 addresses this problem, by modifying sections 58 and 60 in certain cases.
Section 61(2) provides that persons who are entitled to a deposit as trustees shall be treated as ‘a single and continuing body of persons distinct from the persons who may from time to time be the trustees.’
Further, if the same persons are entitled as trustees ‘to different deposits’ under different trusts, they are treated as a separate and distinct body with respect to each trust.
Section 61(3) deals with one particular type of trust: bare trusts.
It provides:
‘Where a deposit is held for any person or for two or more persons jointly by a bare trustee, that person or, as the case may be, those persons jointly shall be treated as entitled to the deposit without the intervention of any trust.
‘Bare trustee’ means, in short, a person who holds the deposit on trust for another person who has the exclusive right to direct how it shall be dealt with: section 106.
This subsection covers two situations.
It covers the simple case where A holds a deposit as nominee for B. In this type of case the scheme of the legislation is that one ignores the trust and has regard exclusively to the identity of the beneficiary.
B is to be ‘treated as entitled to the deposit without the intervention of any trust.’
In my view this provision makes sense only if the twofold consequence to which it leads is that, by reason of being so treated, B is to be regarded as the depositor (1) for the purpose of receiving compensation under section 58 and also (2) for the purpose of the definition of protected interest in section 60.
That is the consequence which is intended to flow from the provision that, although not the depositor, B is to be treated as entitled to the deposit.
Section 61(3) also covers the case where A holds a deposit on trust for B and C jointly.
They are to be treated as jointly entitled to the deposit without the intervention of a trust.
Cases of jointly entitled depositors are covered by subsection (6):
‘where two or more persons are jointly entitled to a deposit…each of them shall be treated as having a separate deposit of an amount produced by dividing the amount of the deposit to which they are jointly entitled by the number of persons who are so entitled.
The wording here (‘is treated as having a separate deposit’) is different from subsection (3)(‘treated as entitled to the deposit’), but in my view the intended effect is clear and is the same in both cases.
Subsection (7) deals with cases where a deposit has been made out of a clients' account or the like.
The subsection echoes the language of subsection (3) by providing that the clients shall be treated ‘as entitled to’ the appropriate proportion of the deposit.
Subsection (8) deals with the special case where an authorised institution is itself a trustee and holds sums which, but for the exclusion in section 5(3) (a ), would be a deposit.
The subsection negatives the section 5 provision by directing that each of those who made deposits with the institution are to be ‘treated as having made a deposit.’
Two important points are discernible in these compressed provisions.
First, one thread running through them is that where A is the person who made the deposit but B is the person beneficially entitled to the deposit, B is the material person for the purposes of the protection scheme.
The draftsman employed several different forms of words to achieve this result.
One form is that B is to ‘be treated as entitled to the deposit’ made by A, as in subsection (3).
The draftsman used words to the like effect in subsection (7).
Secondly, the section is concerned with the beneficial interests existing when a payment falls to be made.
This is as one would expect.
If A deposits money with a bank, and sometime later makes a declaration of trust in respect of the whole of the sum deposited in favour of his child, B, absolutely, subsection (3) will apply if the bank subsequently becomes insolvent.
I can see nothing in section 61 to suggest that these trust provisions apply only if the trust existed at the time the deposit was made.
Statutory assignments
Against this background I turn to the question of assignments.
I start by noting that the relationship between banker and customer is one of debtor and creditor and is based on contract.
The credit balance in a customer's bank account is a chose in action.
It can be the subject of an assignment.
Assignment of the right to payment of the sum of money in a bank account is to be distinguished from the more usual means by which a customer transfers money to someone else.
Normally he will write a cheque, or withdraw the money and hand it over.
Exceptionally he may not do so.
Money may be deposited on terms that make early withdrawal disadvantageous.
Then it may be in the parties' interests to leave the money in the account but transfer the benefit of the account to the third party by some other means; for instance, by the depositor constituting himself a trustee of the account for the benefit of the third party, or by him assigning the money in his account to the third party.
I shall consider first the simple case where A makes an out-and-out assignment to B of the whole of his interest in a deposit or deposits.
He does so in writing, and he gives written notice to the bank as required by section 136 of the Law of Property Act 1925.
In my view in the case of such a statutory assignment the person to whom compensation is payable under section 58 is B. He is the person who has become entitled to the deposit in place of A. The expression ‘depositor’ in that section is apt to embrace him as the assignee of A, and the ‘protected deposit’referred to is the liability of the bank to him in respect of the United Kingdom sterling deposit or deposits to which he is entitled.
The factor which has weighed most with me in reaching this conclusion is the scheme of the Act as shown by its treatment of trusts.
To confine ‘depositor’ in all circumstances to the person who made the deposit would be inconsistent with the object section 61 seeks to achieve.
Thus the natural meaning of the word ‘depositor’ must give way to the extent necessary to enable the underlying purpose of the Act to be achieved.
Under the Act if A holds a deposit on trust for B absolutely, B becomes the material person.
He is to be ‘treated as entitled to the deposit without the intervention of any trust.’
As already noted, the twofold consequence is that B is regarded as the depositor for the purpose of receiving compensation and also for the purpose of the definition of protected deposit in section 60.
In my view it is inconceivable that Parliament intended that an assignee of the whole of a deposit under a statutory assignment should be in a worse position, for the purposes of the deposit protection scheme, than the beneficiary under a declaration of trust.
Parliament cannot have intended that the right to compensation should turn on fine legal distinctions between an assignee's rights to a deposit under an absolute assignment and a beneficiary's rights under a declaration of trust.
In each case the entire beneficial interest in the deposit belongs to B to the exclusion of A who made the deposit.
Indeed, the assignee ought, if anything, to be in a better position.
As a statutory assignee the legal right to the money in the account passes to him, he is entitled to all legal remedies to recover the money and he can give a good discharge to the bank without the concurrence of the assignor.
The bank must pay him and not the assignor.
A beneficiary under a declaration of trust is not so well-placed: the bank will continue to deal with the trustee, and in the ordinary course the deposit will be repaid by the bank to the trustee, not the beneficiary.
I recognise that the draftsman may not have had assignments in mind at all.
That would be understandable.
Assignments of money in a bank account, except by way of charge, are not everyday transactions.
The absence of express provision in the section means that the court, treading circumspectly, must look at the underlying purpose of the legislation and construe the draftsman's language with that purpose in mind.
Here the essential purpose is to pay compensation to those entitled to deposits in an insolvent bank.
If the original depositor has assigned his interest to an assignee, so that the assignee has become entitled to look to the bank for repayment, achievement of the legislative purpose requires the assignee to be the person entitled to compensation.
That is necessarily implicit in the legislative scheme, and section 58 must be so read and understood.
The correctness of this approach is confirmed by the treatment afforded to trusts.
Equitable assignments
I turn next to consider the position where part only of a deposit has been assigned.
It was common ground before me that such an assignment cannot be a statutory assignment but is equitable only, even when written notice has been given to the debtor bank.
In my view, for compensation purposes the position of an assignee in such a case is the same as discussed above regarding a statutory assignee.
There is no reason in principle why, for the purposes of the deposit protection scheme, an assignee of part of a deposit should be treated any differently from an assignee of the whole of a deposit.
Indeed it would be absurd if the following two cases were not treated the same:(1) A has two deposits each of £10,000, and he assigns one deposit to B and the other to C; and (2) A has one deposit of £20,000, and he assigns one-half to B and the other half to C.
I have in mind that in certain respects statutory assignments and equitable assignments have different legal consequences.
These differences are not material for present purposes.
An equitable assignee is entitled to look to the bank for payment.
If the bank pays the assignor after receiving notice of the assignment he must pay again:Jones v. Farrell (1857) 1 De G. & J. 208 and Brice v. Bannister (1878) 3 Q.B.D. 569.
The assignee may have to join the assignor in any proceedings he brings against the bank, but this is a pragmatic procedural requirement and does not affect the assignee's substantive right to the assigned part of the debt.
On this the authorities are conveniently summarised by Scott J. in Weddell v. J. A. Pearce & Major [1988]Ch. 26, 38–43.
I mention one further point.
The trust provisions in section 61 draw no distinction of consequence between a declaration of trust relating to the whole deposit and one related to a defined part of a deposit.
That is not surprising.
In the present case the assignors declared themselves to be trustees of the assigned parts of the deposits if B.C.C.I. was unable to designate separate deposit accounts in the assignees' names.
I am unable to see why equitable assignments, with this fall-back declaration of trust, ought to be treated in any way differently for compensation purposes than if in place of assignments there had been simple declarations of trust.
Had there been, there could have been no room for doubt.
The Order of 1991
I am confirmed in my conclusions by the terms of the Order of 1991.
Article 2(1) of the Order reads:
‘For the purposes of sections 60, 61 and 62 of the Banking Act 1987 the definition of deposit in section 5 of that Act shall be treated as excluding any sum to which a person becomes entitled (otherwise than by operation of law), or comes to be treated as entitled for the purposes of sections 58 and 60 of that Act, after a petition is presented by the winding up of the institution, or, in the case of an institution in respect of which such a petition has been presented before the date on which this Order comes into force, 30 July 1991.
The effect of article 3 is to make comparable provision for voluntary winding up.
This Order was the legislative response to the accountants' scheme for B.C.C.I. depositors.
If assignees do not qualify to be treated as depositors for compensation purposes, the Order was unnecessary.
Clearly the Order was prepared in some haste, but it cannot be brushed aside as having been made out of an excess of caution.
That appraisal of the Order might have more force if the Order had provided simply that from 31 July any sum to which a person became entitled other than by operation of law would not qualify as a deposit.
That course was not adopted.
The Order excluded an entitlement arising, otherwise by operation of law, after presentation of a winding up petition.
Markedly, and deliberately, the Order left untouched a deposit ‘to which a person becomes entitled (otherwise than by operation of law)’ pre-presentation of a winding up petition.
An assignment of a deposit, in whole or in part, made while a bank is trading normally was not struck down.
This difference in treatment between pre- and post-petition assignments is so stark that the inevitable conclusion is that pre-petition assignments were not intended to be outlawed.
The Order proceeded on the basis that ‘depositor’ does embrace a person who did not make the deposit but subsequently became entitled to it, by operation of law or otherwise.
The Order was content that pre-petition assignees should still qualify for compensation under the scheme.
A further feature is to be noted.
As one would expect, and consistently with what I have said regarding the purpose and scheme of the Act, the Order treated assignments and trusts on the same footing.
The Order applied both to interests arising under assignments (‘any sum to which a person becomes entitled’) and to interests arising under trusts (‘or comes to be treated as entitled’).
The latter phrase harks back to the bare trust provision in section 6(3).
Interests arising, whether under assignments or trusts, were struck down if the entitlement arose after presentation of a winding up petition.
In both cases they were left untouched for compensation purposes if the entitlement arose pre-petition.
I must mention why this Order is a legitimate aid to construction of the statute.
It is an unusual Order.
It was not made in exercise of a power to prescribe rules or procedures to be followed in carrying out the Act.
The Order was made in exercise of a power conferred on the Treasury by section 7 of the Act.
The Treasury has power, after consultation with the Bank of England, to amend the meaning of deposit for the purposes of all or any of the provisions of the Act.
Thus the effect of the Order was to amend one of the statutory provisions.
In such a case the subordinate legislation may be used in order to construe the parent Act: see Hanlon v. The Law Society [1981]A.C. 124, 193,per Lord Lowry.
In the same case Lord Scarman, at p. 186, referred approvingly to observations of Harman L.J.
in Britt v. Buckinghamshire County Council [1964]1 Q.B.
77, 88:
‘There is a power given by the Act itself to the minister to modify another section of the Act so that when the minister does produce that modification…that regulation becomes in fact part of the Act.
It is like an amending section of the Act.
So that in my judgment that regulation can be referred to because it is embodied in the Act itself and, having a quasi-parliamentary validity, is a good indication of the wishes of the legislature, just as much as if it were enacted in the Act itself.
Thus in so far as the provisions of the Act of 1987 are ambiguous, guidance can be sought from the Order of 1991 in the same way as guidance can be sought from a later enactment for the construction of an earlier one:Kirkness v. John Hudson & Co. Ltd .
[1955]A.C. 696.
Other provisions in the Act
How, then, do provisions such as subsections (2) and (6) of section 60 of the Act of 1987 work?
I recognise that all the pieces of this statutory jigsaw do not fit neatly together.
This, however, does not assist on the point now under consideration.
Whatever answer is given on the assignment point, there will be some untidiness within the statute.
Section 60(2), for example, has to be made to work in a case where the person entitled to be paid compensation is a beneficiary under a bare trust and not the person who made the deposit.
How section 60(2) is to be construed and applied in such a case, or in the equivalent case of an assignment, is a question that need not be decided in the instant case.
That question can be left for a future occasion when it gives rise to a live issue.
Not customers
I was pressed with an argument that the assignees were not customers of B.C.C.I. The purpose of the Act was to provide some protection for persons who had chosen to become customers of the bank and who were accepted by the bank as customers.
The Act was not intended to protect non-customers.
I do not think this presentation advances the arguments.
To substitute ‘customer’ for ‘depositor’does not provide an answer on the matters mentioned above.
The legislative history
The parties made submissions based on the legislative antecedents of the Act currently in force.
In particular, section 27 of the Protection of Depositors Act 1963 defined ‘depositor’ as ‘a person entitled, or prospectively entitled, to repayment of a deposit, whether made by him or not.’
This definition was not carried forward into the later Acts, although both the Act of 1979 and the current Act did reproduce some of the provisions regarding depositors which were contained in the Act of 1963.
I shall not pursue these points.
They provide little assistance compared with the guidance given by the scheme of the Act itself.
Conclusion
For these reasons I shall make a declaration to the effect that for the purposes of Part II of the Act of 1987, an assignee of part of a deposit as defined in section 5 is to be treated as entitled to the assigned part of the deposit and as having made a deposit of an amount equal to that part.
Declaration accordingly.
Solicitors: Clifford Chance; Ashurst Morris Crisp; Lovell White Durrant.